LIBRARY  OF  THE 
UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS 
AT  URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


973.74 
Un3 
v . 8 


The  person  charging  this  material  is  re- 
sponsible for  its  return  to  the  library  from 
which  it  was  withdrawn  on  or  before  the 
Latest  Date  stamped  below. 

Theft,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books 
are  reasons  for  disciplinary  action  and  may 
result  in  dismissal  from  the  University. 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LIBRARY  AT  URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


^ J ,0 

NOV  2 9198) 

NOV  05  198i 


N0O3  992 


199) 

1991 


L161  — 0-1096 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion08unit 


THE 


remote  storage 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION 


A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFICIAL  RECORDS 


OF  THE 


UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR,  BY  BVT.  LIEUT. 
COL.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  THIRD  U.  S.  ARTILLERY, 

AND 

PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS  APPROVED  JUNE  16,  1880. 


SERIES  I— VOLUME  VIII. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE, 

1 883. 


PREFACE. 


<9  7 3, 


h 


<>j 


By  an  act  approved  June  23,  1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 
u to  enable  the  Secretary  of  War  to  begiu  the  publication  of  the  Official 
Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  both  of  the  Union  and  Confed- 
erate Armies,”  and  directed  him  “to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 
all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  properly  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

Appropriations  for  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  10,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  ot  War,  of 

10.000  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Records  (Union  and  Con- 
federate) of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  so  far  as  the  same  may  be  ready 
for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year”;  and  that  “ of  said  number, 

7.000  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  2,000 
copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  1,000  copies  for  the  use  of  the 
Executive  Departments.”  * 

This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  publication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

* Volume  I to  V distributed  under  act  approved  June  16,  1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  188*2,  provides  that — 

“ The  volumes  of  the  official  records  of  the  war  of  the  rebellion  shall  be  distribu  ted 
as  follows : One  thousand  copies  to  the  executive  departments,  as  now  provided  by 
law.  One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War  among  officers  of 
the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three  hundred  copies  shall 
be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Congress.  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceeding  twenty-six,  and  each 
Representative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of  such  addresses,  and  the 
volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are  published,  until  the  pub- 
lication is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  shall  inform  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those  heretofore  published  they 
have  forwarded  to  such  addresses.  The  remaining  copies  of  the  eleven  thousand  1o 
be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  distributed  as  provided 
herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of  publication  with  ten  pt  r 
cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be  covered  into  the  Treasury. 
If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the  same  address  the  Secretary  of 
War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 
the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other  libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals. 
The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the  first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress 
what  volumes  of  the  scries  heretofore  published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such 
libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals.  He  shall  also  inform  distributees  at  whoso 
instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 


ill 


IY 


PREFACE. 


The  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement: 

The  1st  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond- 
ence, orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed,  ; 
is  to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  campaigns 
and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme- 
diately followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c., 
not  embraced  in  the  “ reports  ” proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  2d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns,  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
prisoners. 

The  3d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in  Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments ; the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
correspondence  between  the  National  and  the  several  State  authorities. 

The  4th  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
between  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

ROBERT  N.  SCOTT, 

Major , Third  Art .,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col. 

War  Department,  August  23,  1880. 


Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War . 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  the  Indian  Territory.  Novem 
her  19,  1861-April  10,  1862  


Page. 

1-834 


y 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1-317 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  J anuary  3-26, 

1861  318-325 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861 326-330 

CHAPTER  IY. 

Operations  in  Floi  ida.  J anuary  6- August 
31,  1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  Y.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 
ary 9-May  20, 1861 474-488 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19,  1861 489-501 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11,  1861 502-636 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

1861  637-691 


VOLUME  II. 

CHAPTER  IX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31, 1861.  1-1012 


VOLUME  III. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19,  1861. 

VOLUME  IV. 


Page. 

1-749 


CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-Fehruary  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-November  19,  1861  175-565 


CHAPTER  XIH.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1,  1861-Jan- 
uary  11, 1862 506-721 


VOLUME  V. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 1861-March  17, 1862. 


Page. 

1-1106 


VOLUME  VI. 


CHAPTER  XV.  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

August  21,  1861- April  11,  1862 1-435 


CHAPTER  XVI.  Page. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 
abama, Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 
isiana. September  1,  1861-May  12, 1862.  436-894 


VOLUME  VII. 

CHAPTER  XVII.  Page. 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabama,  and  S.  W.  Virginia.  Nov.  19, 1861-Mar.  4, 1862.  1-946 


VI 


CHAPTER  XVIII 


OPERATIONS  IN  MISSOURI,  ARKANSAS, 
THE  INDIAN  TERRITORY 


SAS.  AND 


November  19,  1861-April  10,  1862. 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS.* 

Nov.  19,  1861.— Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 
Department  of  the  Missouri. 

19,  1861-Jan.  4,  1862. — Operations  in  the  Indian  Territory. 

20,  1861.— Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 

Department  of  Kansas. 

Skirmish  at  Butler,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Little  Santa  F6,  Mo. 

21  1861. — Destruction  of  United  States  stores  at  Warsaw,  Mo. 

22’  1861.— Department  of  the  Indian  Territory  established,  under  the  command 
of  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Pike,  C.  S.  Army. 

24,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Lancaster,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Johnstown,  Mo. 

26,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Independence,  Mo. 

28,  1861. Missouri  admitted  as  a member  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America. 

Brig.  Gen.  Benjamin  M.  Prentiss,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 
District  of  North  Missouri. 

29,  1861.— Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Schofield,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 

Missouri  Militia. 

30,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Grand  River,  Mo. 

Dec.  1,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Shanghai,  Mo. 

2,  1861.— Brig.  Gen.  James  W.  Denver,  U.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  the  com- 

mand of  all  the  troops  in  the  State  of  Kansas. 

3,  1861.— Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  all  the 

forces  between  the  Missouri  and  Osage  Rivers. 

Action  at  Salem,  Mo. 

3-12,  1861.— Scout  through  Saline  County,  Mo. 

5-  9,  1861.— Expedition  through  the  Current  Hills,  Mo. 

9,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Union  Mills,  Mo. 

11,  1861.— Skirmish  near  Bertrand,  Mo. 

12,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Charleston,  Mo. 

18,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Blackwater  Creek,  or  Milford,  Mo. 

Scout  from  Rolla  towards  Houston,  Mo. 

23,  1861.— Expedition  to  Lexington,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Dayton,  Mo. 

24,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Wadesburg,  Mo. 

* Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  noted  in  this  “ Summary  ” no  circumstantial  reports 

are  on  file. 

1 R R— VOL  VIII 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL 


Dee.  25,  1861. 


•>6,  1861. 


27,  1861. 

28,  1861.: 


29,  1861 


Jan.  >'<!-'  3*  1862 


3,  1862. 
5-12,  1862. 


6),  1862. 


8,  1862. 


9,  1862. 
10,  1862. 


TV  17,  1862. 
20-24,  1862. 
22,  1862. 


29,  1862.— 


29-Feb.  3 
-Feb.  3,  1862. 

8,  1882.- 


9,  1862. 
12,  1862. 

14,  1862.- 

15,  1862.- 


16,  1862. 

17,  1862. 

18,  1862. 
1*-19,  1862. 

19,  1862. 
22,  1862. 
23,  1862.— 


23-24,  1862. 
23-25,  1862. 

24,  1862.—1 


25,  1832.— 

26,  1862.— 


28,  1862.— 
28-April  8 


■MaT.  3-  7,  1862. 


— Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  U.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  oi 
Southwestern  District  of  Missouri. 

Expedition  to  Danville,  Mo. 

—Martial Taw  proclaimed  in  Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  and  in  and  about  al 
; .jjailroads  in  the  State  of  Missouri 
— Skirmish  near  Hallsville,  Mo. 

— Actidh  at  Mqunt  Zion  Church,  Mo. 

— Descent  upon  Commerce,  Mo.,  and  attack  on  steamer  City  of  Alton 
—Expedition  from  Morristown  to  Dayton  and  Rose  Hill.  Mo.,  skirmish 
en  yv.tr,  and  destruction  of  Dayton. 

— Skirmish  at  Hunnewell,  Mo. 

—Operations  in  Johnson  and  La  Fayette  Counties,  Mo  , and  skirmish 
at  Columbus,  Mo. 

Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 
the  Saint  Louis  District. 

—Skirmish  at  Charleston,  Mo. 

Action  at  Roan’s  Tan- Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo. 

— Skirmish  at  Columbus,  Mo. 

—The  Trans-Mississippi  District  of  Department  No.  2 organized,  under 
command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  C.  S.  Army 
—Expeditions  ro  Benton,  Bloomfield,  and  Dallas,  Mo. 

—Operations  in  and  about  Atchison,  Kans. 

— Skirmish  at  Knobnoster,  Mo. 

Occupation  of  Lebanon,  Mo. 

Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 
Trans-Mississippi  District. 

1862. — Expedition  to  Blue  Springs,  Mo. 

—Call  for  71,000  men  from  the  State  of  Missouri  for  Confederate  service. 
-Affair  at  Bolivar,  Mo. 

Martial  law  declared  throughout  the  State  of  Ivanna? 

-Skirmish  at  Marshfield,  Mo. 

-Skirmish  at  Springfield,  Mo. 

-Skirmish  at  Crane  Creek,  Mo. 

-Skirmish  near  Flat  Creek,  Mo, 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Schofield,  U. 

the  District  of  Saint  Louis,  Mo. 

Action  at  Potts’  Hill,  Sugar  Creek 
Action  at  Sugar  Creek,  Ark. 

Action  at  Bentonville,  Ark. 

Expedition  to  Mount  Vernon,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  West  Plains,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Independence,  Mo. 

Fayetteville,  Ark.,  occupied  by  Union  forces. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  Army  of 
the  Mississippi,  assembling  at  Commerce,  Mo. 

Reconnaissance  to  Pea  Ridge  Prairie,  Mo.,  and  skirmish. 
Reconnaissance  from  Greenville,  Mo.,  and  skirmish. 

Skirmish  at  Mingo  Creek,  near  Saint  Francisville,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  New  Madrid,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Keetsville,  Barry  County,  Mo. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  at  Mad- 
rid Bend. 

Affair  at  Osage  Springs,  Ark. 

1862.— Operations  at  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  and  Island  No. 
scent  upon  Union  City,  Tenn. 

Reconnaissance  to  Berry vi lie,  Ark. 


Army,  assumes  command  of 


Ark. 


10,  and  ile- 


:hap.  xvili.j 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


3 


Mar.  4-11,  1862. — Scout  through  Laclede,  Wright,  and  Douglas  Counties,  Mo. 

6-  8,  1862.— Battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  or  Elkhorn  Tavern,  Ark. 

7,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Fox  Creek,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Bob’s  Creek,  Mo. 

7- 10,  1862.— Operations  in  Saline  County,  Mo. 

8-  9,  1862. — Operations  about  Rolla,  Mo. 

9,  1862. — Skirmish  on  Big  Creek,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Mountain  Grove,  Mo. 

10,  1862. — Skirmish  in  La  Fayette  County,  Mo. 

11,  1862.— The  Departments  of  Kansas,  of  the  Missouri,  and  in  part  of  the 

Ohio,  merged  into  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  under  Major- 
General  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army. 

12,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Aubrey,  Kans. 

13,  1862. — Action  at  Spring  River,  Ark. 

14,  1862. — Capture  of  New  Madrid,  Mo. 

15,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Marshall,  Mo. 

16,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Marshall,  Mo. 

18- 30,  1862.— Operations  in  Johnson,  Saint  Clair,  and  Henry  Counties,  Mo.,  in- 

cluding skirmish  near  Leesville,  (19th) 

19- 20,  1862. — Expedition  to  Carthage,  Mo. 

19-23,  1862. — Operations  in  Johnson  County,  Mo. 

21,  1862. — Affair  at  McKay’s  Farm,  Mo. 

22,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Post  Oak,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Little  Santa  F^,  Mo. 

23,  1862. — Expedition  to  Little  River,  Mo. 

24,  1862. — Scout  in  Saint  Clair  and  Henry  Counties,  Mo. 

25,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Monagau  Springs,  Mo. 

25-28,  1862. — Expedition  in  Moniteau  County,  Mo.,  and  skirmish  en  route . 

26,  1862.— Action  on  the  Post  Oak,  at  mouth  of  the  Brier,  Mo. 

Action  at  Humansville,  Mo. 

Skirmish  near  Gouge’s  Mill,  Mo. 

29,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  near  Warrensburg,  Mo. 

30,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Clinton,  Mo. 

31,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Pink  Hill,  Mo. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Mackall,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Major- 
General  McCown  in  command  at  Madrid  Bend,  Mo. 

April  1,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Little  Sni,  Mo. 

Skirmish  at  Doniphan,  Mo. 

2,  1862. — Skirmish  near  WalkersvYlle,  Mo. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  W.  Denver,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 
District  of  Kansas. 

2-  4,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Cape  Girardeau  to  Jackson,  Whitewater,  and 
Dallas,  Mo. 

8,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Warrensburg,  Mo. 

Skirmish  near  Warsaw,  Mo. 

Scout  through  Gadfly,  Newtonia,  Granby,  Neosho,  and  the  valley 
of  Indian  Creek,  Mo.,  and  skirmishes. 

Skirmish  at  Medicine  Creek,  Mo. 

9,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Jackson  Mo. 

Brig.  Gen.  Mosby  M.  Parsons,  Mo.  S.  G.,  assumes  command  of  Mis- 
souri State  Guard  (Confederate). 

9-16,  1862. — Scout  to  Shiloh  Camp,  on  Hoyle’s  Run,  near  Quincy,  Mo.,  and 
skirmishes ; scout  to  Little  Niangua,  Hickory  County,  Mo. ; and 
scout  from  Humansville  to  Montevallo,  Vernon  County,  Mo. 

10,  1862.— Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  D.  Sturgis,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  District  of  Kansas. 


4 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai>.  XVIII 

NOVEMBER  19,  1861-JANUARY  4,  1862— Operations  in  the  Indiai 

Territory. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 

Nov.  19,  1861. — Engagement  at  Round  Mountain. 

Dec.  9,  1861.— Engagement  at  Cliusto-Talasali  (Bird  Creek  or  High  Shoal). 

26,  1861. — Engagement  at  Chustenahlah. 

27,  1861. — Skirmish  with  Creeks  and  Seminoles. 

29,  1861-Jan.  4,  1862. — Scout  after  Hopoeithleyohola. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Col.  Douglas  H.  Cooper,  First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment,  com 
manding  Indian  Department,  of  operations  November  19,  1861-Januar\ 
4,  1862. 

No.  2.— Capt.  M.  J . Brinson,  Ninth  Texas  Cavalry,  of  engagement  at  Round  Mount- 
ain. 

No.  3.  Capt.  R.  A.  Young,  First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment,  of  engagement 
at  Round  Mountain 

No.  4.— Col.  D.  N.  McIntosh,  First  Creek  Regiment,  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Ta- 
lasah. 

No.  5.  Col.  John  Drew,  First  Cherokee  Mounted  Rifles,  of  engagement  at  Chusto- 
Talasah. 

No.  6.— Col.  William  B.  Sims,  Ninth  Texas  Cavalry,  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Ta- 
lasah. 

No.  7. — Capt.  Joseph  R.  Hall,  First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment,  of  engage- 
ment at  Chusto-Talasah. 

hio.  8.  Capt.  Jackson  McCurtain,  First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment,  of  engage- 
ment at  Chusto-Talasah. 

No.  9.— Capt.  William  B.  Pitchlynn,  First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment,  of  en- 
gagement at  Chusto-Talasah. 

No.  10.— Col.  James  McIntosh,  Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles,  commanding  division, 
of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah,  Cherokee  Nation,  with  letters  found  in 
Hopoeithleyohola’s  camp. 

No.  11.  Col.  W.  C.  Young,  Eleventh  Texas  Cavalry,  of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah, 
Cherokee  Nation. 

J^o-  ^ieut.  Col.  John  S.  Griffith,  Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry,  of  engagement 
at  Chustenahlah,  Cherokee  Nation. 

No.  13.  Lieut.  Col.  Walter  P.  Lane,  Third  Texas  (South  Kansas-Texas)  Cavalry,  of 
engagement  at  Chustenahlah,  Cherokee  Nation. 

No.  14.— Capt.  William  Gipson,  Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles,  of  engagement  at 
Chustenahlah,  Cherokee  Nation. 

No.  15.  Capt.  H.  S.  Bennett,  Lamar  Cavalry  Company,  of  engagement  at  Chustenah- 
lah, Cherokee  Nation. 

ho.  16.  Col.  James  McIntosh,  Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles,  commanding  division, 
of  skirmish  with  Creeks  and  Seminoles. 

No.  17.  Col.  Stand  Watie,  Second  Cherokee  Mounted  Rifles,  of  skirmish  with  Creeks 
and  Seminoles. 

No.  18.  Maj.  E.  C.  Boudinot,  Second  Cherokee  Mounted  Rifles,  of  skirmish  with 
Creeks  and  Seminoles. 


HAP.  XVIII.  1 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 

No.  1. 


5 


levort  of  Col.  Douglas  H.  Cooper , First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regi- 
ment, 'commanding  Indian  Department , of  operations  November  19, 
1861  -January  4,  *1862. 

Headquarters  Indian  Department, 

Fort  Gibson , Cherokee  Nation , January  20,  1862. 

Sir  * Having  exhausted  every  means  in  my  power  to  procure  an  m- 
erview  with  Hopoeithleyohola,  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  a peaceful 
settlement  of  the  difficulties  existing  between  his  party  and  the  consti- 
uted  authorities  of  the  Greek  Nation,  finding  that  my  written  over- 
ures  made  through  several  of  the  leading  captains,  were  treated  with 
silence,  if  not  contempt,  by  him,  and  having  received  positive  evidence 
hat  he  had  been  for  a considerable  length  of  tune  in  correspondence, 
f not  alliance,  with  the  Federal  authorities  m Kansas,  I resolved  to 
id vance  upon  him  with  the  forces  under  my  command,  and  either  com- 
pel submission  to  the  authorities  of  the  nation  or  drive  him  and  his 

>artv  from  the  country.  . 

Accordingly,  on  the  15th  day  of  November  last,  the  troops,  consist- 
ing s*  companies  of  the  First  Regiment  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 
Mounted  Rifles ; a detachment  from  the  Fourth  [Ninth]  Regiment  Texas 
Cavalry  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Quayle;  the  Creek  regiment,  under 
Col  1>.  N.  McIntosh,  and  the  Creek  and  Seminole  battalion,  under 
Lieut.  Col.  Chilly  McIntosh  (the  Creek  war  chief),  and  Maj.  John 
Jumper  (Chief  ot‘  Seminoles),  in  all  about  1,400  men,  were  moved  up 
the  Deep  Fork  of  the  Canadian  towards  the  supposed  camp  of  Hopo- 
eithlevohola’s  forces.  The  camp,  which  had  been  abandoned,  was  found 
and  the  trail  from  it  followed,  with  varied  prospects  of  success,  until 
the  19th  of  the  month  named,  on  which  day  some  ot  the  disaffected 
party  were  seen  and  a few  prisoners  taken.  From  those  prisoners 
information  was  obtained  that  a portion  of  Hopoeithleyohola  s party 
were  near  the  Red  Fork  of  the  Arkansas  River,  on  their  route  towards 
Walnut  Creek,  where  a fort  was  being  erected,  and  which  had  for  some 
time  been  their  intended  destination  in  the  event  of  not  receiving 
promised  aid  from  Kansas  before  being  menaced  or  attacked. 

After  crossing  the  Red  Fork  it  became  evident  that  the  party  was 
lear  and  the  command  was  pushed  rapidly  forward.  About  4 o cloc^ 
i.  m.  some  camp  smokes  were  discovered  in  front  a short  distance  and 
he  enemy’s  scouts  seen  at  various  points.  A charge  was  ordered  to 
be  made  by  the  detachment  of  Texas  cavalry,  under  command  ot  Lieu- 
tenant-Col'ouel  Quayle,  upon  the  camp,  which,  however,  was  found  to 
liave  been  recently  deserted.  Other  scouts,  being-  discovered  beyond 
the  camp,  were  pursued  by  the  Texas  troops  about  4 miles,  when  they 
disappeared  in  the  timber  skirting  a creek,  upon  which  it  was  after- 
wards ascertained  the  forces  of  Hopoeithleyohola  were  then  encamped. 
While  searching  for  the  fugitives  the  troops  were  fired  upon  by  the 
concealed  enemy,  and  1 man  was  killed.  The  enemy 
appeared  in  large  force,  and  our  troops,  rallying  and  fuming,  suc- 
ceeded in  making  a stand  for  a short  time,  when  the  efforts  of  the 
vastly  superior  force  of  the  enemy  to  outflank  and  inclose  them  caused 
tliGTii  to  retire 

During  the’ retreat  towards  the  main  body  of  our  forces  a constant 
fire  was  kept  up  on  both  sides.  Many  of  the  enemy  were  killed,  and 
on  our  part  1 officer  and  4 men  and  1 man  wounded.  So  soon  as  tne 


6 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  IvANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xviii 

firing  was  heard  at  the  position  of  the  main  body  the  Choctaw  an< 
Chickasaw  regiment  was  formed  and  advanced  towards  the  enemy 
Ihe  exceeding  darkness  of  the  night  rendered  the  relative  positioi 
ot  our  friends  and  foes  uncertain  and  restrained  the  firing  on  our  par 
until  the  enemy  was  within  GO  yards  of  our  line.  Even  then  the  ordei 
to  lire  was  withheld  until  Col.  James  Bourland,  of  Texas  (my  volunteei 
aide  on  the  ocpasion),  and  myself  rode  to  the  front,  and  the  formei 
culled  to  those  approaching,  asking  if  any  Texans  were  there  which 
was  answered  by  the  crack  of  the  enemy’s  rifles.  A brisk  fire  wa« 
then  opened  by  companies  I and  K,  under  Captains  Welch  and  Youn«* 
and  by  companies  D,  E,  and  G,  under  Captains  Hall,  Reynolds,  and  Me 
Curtain,  as  they  successively  took  position.  After  a short  but  sharr 
conflict  the  firing  of  the  enemy  ceased,  and  under  cover  of  the  dark 
ness  he  made  good  his  retreat.  About  50  Choctaws  and  Texans  were 
then  sent  out  under  Actg  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  R.  W.  Lee,  to  examine  the 

**  ^r?Dt  tiie  When  it  was  found  that  the  enemy  had 

left  the  field  and  retreated  m the  direction  of  their  camps 
During  the  action  the  line  was  re-enforced  by  portions  of  Captains 
Lnnson  s,  T.  G.  Berry  s,  J.  E.  McCool’s,  and  Stewart’s  companies,  of  the 
Texas  regiment,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Quayle,  and  by  a few  Creeks 
under  Lieut.  Col.  Chilly  McIntosh,  Captain  Severs,  and  Lieutenant  Berry' 

* i encounter  we  had  2 men  severely  wounded  and  1 sli  o-htlv. 

; jany  ^l0rses  ^ere  sh^t-  ^ur  escaped  mainly  in  consequence  of 
being  dismounted  and  by  firing  either  kneeling  or  lying  down.  Our 
entire  loss  m the  engagement  was  1 captain  ana  5 men  killed,  3 se- 
1 slightly  wounded,  and  1 missing.  Prisoners  taken  since 

r?n  ib-lf  i concur  m stating  the  loss  of  the  enemy  to  ha  ve  been  about 
1 10  killed  and  wounded. 

Soon  after  daylight  on  the  20th  the  main  camp  of  the  enemy  was  en- 

iW  be W1  that  t]\7  had  l)reciI)itately  abandoned  it,  leav- 

g behind  the  chief  s buggy,  12  wagons,  flour,  sugar,  coflee,  salt,  &c. 

besides  many  cattle  and  ponies.  II opoeithleyohola’s  force  in  this  en- 
gagement has  been  variously  estimated  at  from  800  to  1,200  Creeks  and 
Seminoles  and  200  to  300  negroes.  na 

conduct  ?f  J)01tl1  °fficers  and  men  within  the  scope  of  my  obser- 
vation was  marked  by  great  coolness  and  courage.  I would  particu- 

amftwhoTinrl'T  0t  h/8h  commendation  the  conduct  of  Col.  James  Hour- 
land  (who  kindly  volunteered  his  valuable  services  on  this  occasion  and 

flo^nonttteT)5  Ai?  f'nSSt-ifdjt-  Gen-R.W.  Lee;  Maj.  Mitchell  La- 
Mouiite  lPidJ  t'  acting  adjutant  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 

ftiul  J tick- 
and 

Quayle  and  Captains 
the 
Lieut. 

battalion.  " «uu.  jjxhj.  o.  uumper,  Seminole 

linem,!lT^l®u  With  «?e  Choctaws  and  Chickasaws  came  into 

n“  thelnHre  ^ whlcJ{  th?-v  maintained  their  position  dur- 

sidered  t l/Tl.t  !.nerit  un?uall<jed  praise,  especially  when  it  is  con- 
l d th  t tb  ?? ht  was  extremely  dark,  the  number  and  position  of 

enemy>t“reUnCer  ’ a“d  that  they  st00(l  for  the  under  an 

following  is  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded:  W.  J.  Lyttle 
Captain  M elch  s squadron  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment,  severely 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


7 


wounded;  Daniel  Cox,  Captain  Welch’s  squadron  Choctaw  and  Chick- 
asaw regiment,  slightly  wounded;  Capt.  C.  S.  Stewart,  Texas  regi- 
ment, killed ; John  H.  Crow,  Texas  regiment,  killed ; — Reed, 

Texas  regiment,  killed; Jackson,  Texas  regiment,  killed;  John 

Friend,  Texas  regiment,  severely  wounded;  Smith,  Creek  regi- 
ment killed;  Smith,  Creek  regiment,  severely  wounded:  one 


killed,  name  not  reported.  _r  n 

In  consequence  of  notice  received  from  General  McCulloch  that 
Fremont  was  at  Springfield  with  a very  large  force ; that  his  advance 
guard  had  marched,  and  that  probably  his  main  body  would  move 
South  the  next  day;  that  lie  (General  McCulloch)  would  obstruct  the 
roads  and  fight  from  the  line  down,  but  might  be  obliged  to  fall  back 
to  Boston  Mountains,  and  he  having  directed  me  to  take  position  near 
the  Arkansas  line,  so  as  to  co-operate  with  him,  in  connection  with  the 
fact  that  the  forage  of  the  country  had  been  destroyed  by  the  enemy 
and  the  horses  of  my  command  worn  down  by  rapid  marches,  it  was 
considered  improper  to  pursue  the  enemy  farther,  and  I returned  with 
the  troops  to  my  train  at  Concharta,  which  was  reached  on  the  24th  ot 

November,  1861.  , 

Information  being  received  at  this  time  that  the  anticipated  attack 
upon  General  McCulloch  had  been  averted  by  Fremont’s  retreat,  and 
that  Hopoeithleyohola,  with  his  forces,  had  taken  refuge  m the  Cherokee 
country  by  invitation  of  a leading  disaffected  Cherokee,  it  was  con- 
sidered unnecessary  to  take  post  near  the  Arkansas  line  (as  directed 
by  General  McCulloch),  but  proper  to  prosecute  the  operations  against 
Hopoeithleyohola  without  delay  and  with  the  utmost  energy,  which  1 
accordingly  proceeded  to  do. 

After  a few  days’  rest  and  preparation  the  forces  under  my  command 
at  Spring  Hill,  near  Concharta,  consisting  of  430  rank  and  file  of  the 
Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment  Mounted  Rifles,  under  Map  Mitchell 
Lahore;  50  men,  under  Capt,  Alfred  Wade,  Choctaw  battalion ; 28o 
men  of  the  First  Creek  Regiment,  commanded  by  Col.  D.N.  McIntosh, 
and  15  Creeks,  under  Capt,  James  M.  C.  Smith— in  all  780  men— were 
put  in  motion  on  the  29th  of  November  in  the  direction  of  Tulsey  town, 
and  Colonel  Sims,  who  had  gone  with  the  sick  of  his  regiment  to  1 alia- 


hassa,  Mo.,  with  all  the  available  force  of  the  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry, 

7 _ ? -rx  • • tx* ^ rvf  i ’AArlTr/a 


was  ordered  to  move  up  Verdigris  River  in  the  direction  of  Goody’s 
settlement,  where  Col.  John  Drew,  with  a detachment  of  his  regiment 
about  500  strong,  was  then  posted. 

At  Tulsey  Town  information  was  received  from  a prisoner  escaped 
from  H opoeith ley hola’s  camp  that  an  immediate  attack  was  intended 
by  the  enemy,  2,000  strong.  Colonel  Drew  was  ordered  to  march  trom 
Coodv’s  and  form  a junction  with  my  command  somewhere  on  the  road 
to  James  McDaniels’.  Colonel  Sims,  then  at  Mrs.  McNair’s,  on  Verdi- 
gris, was  ordered  to  join  me  at  David  \ an’s.  F rom  some  misunder- 
standing Colonel  Drew  marched  direct  to  Melton’s,  6 miles  northeast 
from  Hopoeithleyohola.  While  following  the  direction  contained  m his 
reply  I marched  north  from  Van’s  to  Musgrove’s,  on  Caney.  Thus  he 
arrived  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  enemy  twenty-four  hours  or 
more  in  advance  of  the  main  body.  On  the  8th  of  December,  about 
12  o’clock,  I found  him  encamped  on  Bird’s  Creek.  After  a brief  inter- 
view, in  which  he  informed  me  that  Hopoeithleyohola  had  sent  a mes- 
sage expressing  a desire  to  make  peace,  I authorized  him  to  send  m 
return  to  Hopoeithleyohola  the  assurance  that  we  did  not  desire  the 
shedding  of  blood  among  the  Indians,  and  proposed  a conference 
next  day.  Major  Pegg,  of  the  Cherokee  regiment,  was  sent,  and  1 


8 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL 


proceeded  to  encamp  about  2 miles  below  Colonel  Drew,  on  the  same 
creek.  Much  to  my  surprise,  about  7 o’clock  at  night  several  mem- 
bers of  Colonel  Drew’s  regiment  came  to  my  camp  with  the  informa- 
tion that  Major  Pegg  had  returned  without  being  able  to  reach  Hopo- 
eithleyohola,  who  was  surrounded  by  his  warriors,  several  thousand  in 
number,  all  painted  for  the  fight,  and  that  an  attack  would  be  made 
upon  me  that  night ; that  the  Cherokee  regiment,  panic-stricken,  had 
dispersed,  leaving  their  tents  standing,  and  in  many  instances  even 
their  horses  and  guns.  Soon  afterwards  the  wagon-master  of  the  Cher- 
okee regiment  and  his  teamsters,  true  to  their  duty,  brought  down  a 
portion  of  their  trains  and  provisions.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Quayle, 
with  a squadron  of  the  Fourth  [Ninth]  Texas  Cavalry,  was  then  sent  to 
Colonel  Drew’s  relief  and  to  report  the  condition  of  his  camp.  Colonel 
Drew  and  28  members  of  his  regiment  soon  afterwards  came  into  my 
camp  and  fully  confirmed  the  statements  made  by  the  first  party  and 
declared  their  intention  to  assist  in  its  defense. 

My  whole  command  had  been,  on  the  first  alarm,  formed  and  so  dis- 
posed as  to  protect  and  defend  our  camp  on  all  sides  and  remained 
under  arms  all  night,  quietly  awaiting  the  enemy. 

No  attack  was  made,  however,  and  soon  after  daylight  Actg.  Asst. 
Adjt.  Gen.  E.  W.  Lee,  with  a small  party,  went  up  to  Colonel  Drew’s 
deserted  camp  and  found  all  standing  and  apparently  untouched.  Col- 
onel Drew,  with  the  Cherokees,  a portion  of  the  Texas  cavalry,  and 
some  Choctaws,  went  up  and  brought  away  the  camp  equipage  and 
other  property  found  there.  About  11  o’clock  I recrossed  the  creek  and 
proceeded  down  on  the  east  side,  with  a view  of  taking  a position  which 
would  enable  me  to  keep  open  communication  with  the  depot  at  Coweta 
Mission  and  with  re-enforcements  of  Creeks,  Seminoles,  and  Choctaws 
who  were  expected  at  Tulsey  Town. 

Captain  Foster,  of  the  Creek  regiment,  was  sent  with  two  companies, 
of  that  regiment  again  across  towards  Parks’  Store,  on  Shoal  Creek,  to 
ascertain  whether  the  enemy  had  come  down  from  the  mountains,  and 
also  to  look  after  Captain  Parks  and  his  men,  who  had  gone  on  a scout 
the  night  before  to  the  rear  of  Hopoeitlileyohola’s  camp. 

After  proceeding  down  Bird  Creek  about  5 miles  two  runners  from 
Captain  Foster  reached  me  at  the  head  of  the  column,  stating  he  had 
found  the  enemy  hi  large  force  below.  Parks  had  exchanged  a few 
shots  with  them,  taken  6 prisoners,  and  was  retreating,  hotly  pursued. 
Scarcely  had  this  intelligence  reached  me  before  shots  were  heard  in 
the  rear.  Hastily  directing  the  Cherokee  train  to  be  parked  on  the 
prairie  and  a sufficient  guard  placed  over  it,  the  forces  were  formed  in 
three  columns,  the  Choctaws  and  Chickasaws  on  the  right,  the  Texans 
and  Cherokees  in  the  center,  and  the  Creeks  on  the  left,  and  the  whole 
advanced  at  quick  gallop  upon  the  enemy,  who  had  by  this  time  shown 
himself  in  large  force  above  us,  along  the  timber  skirting  the  main 
creek  for  over  2 miles,  as  well  as  a ravine  extending  far  out  into  the 
prairie.  A party  of  about  200  having  attacked  our  rear  guard,  Captain 
Young,  in  command  of  a squadron  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 
regiment,  being  in  rear  of  the  main  column,  perceiving  the  encounter, 
wheeled  liis  squadron  and  advanced  rapidly  towards  the  enemy.  Upon 
his  approach  the  party  retreated  towards  the  timber  on  Bird  Creek. 

The  leading  companies  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment, 
commanded  by  Captains  Jones  and  McCurtain,  were  directed  to  the 
right,  so  as  to  form  a junction  with  the  squadron  under  Captain  Young. 
Col.  D.  N.  McIntosh,  with  his  Creek  regiment,  was  ordered  to  turn  the 
right  of  the  enemy  on  the  creek.  That  portion  of  the  enemy  on  the 


Chap-  XVIII. I OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY.  9 

ravine  in  tlie  prairie  were  driven  by  the  Choctaws  and  Texans  across 
the  open  ground  intervening  between  it  and  timber  on  the  creek.  The 
position  then  taken  up  by  the  enemy  at  Chusto-Talasah,  or  the  Gav- 
in" Banks  (the  Creeks  call  the  place  Fonta-liulwaclie,  Little  Hi„.i 
Slfoals),  presented  almost  insurmountable  obstacles  to  our  troops. 

The  creek  made  up  to  the  prairie  on  the  side  of  our  approach  in  an 
abrupt,  precipitous  bank,  some  30  feet  in  height,  at  places  cut  mto 
steps,  reaching  near  the  top  and  forming  a complete  parapet,  while  the 
creek,  being  deep,  was  fordable  but  at  certain  points  known  only  to 
the  enemy.  The  opposite  side,  which  was  occupied  by  the  hostile 
forces,  was  densely  covered  with  heavy  timber,  matted  undergrowth, 
and  thickets,  and  fortified  additionally  by  prostrate  logs.  Near  the 
center  of  the  enemy’s  line  was  a dwelling-house,  a small  corn-crib,  and 
rail  fence,  situated  in  a recess  of  the  prairie,  at  the  gorge  ot  a bend  of 
the  creek  of  horseshoe  form,  about  400  or  500  yards  m length.  This 
bend  was  thickly  wooded,  and  covered  in  front,  near  the  house,  with 
large  interwoven  weeds  and  grass,  extending  to  a bench,  behind  which 
the  enemy  could  lie  and  pour  upon  the  advancing  hue  his  deadly  foe 
in  comparative  safety,  while  the  creek  banks  on  either  side  covered  the 

h0ThebCreek^  Commanded  by  Col.  D.  N.  McIntosh,  on  the  left  came 
soon  into  action,  and,  charging  the  enemy  with  great  ™Petuosity,  met 
them  in  hand-to-hand  encounter,  drove  them  from  the  timber,  ana 
dispersed  them  in  every  direction.  On  the  right  the  Choctaws  and 
Chickasaws  boldly  charged  on  horse  to  the  bank  of  a ravine  near  the 
creek  under  a heavy  fire,  and,  dismounting,  drove  back  theenemy,  who 
disputed  every  step  of  their  advance  with  the  greatest  obstinacy  and 
bravery.  Major  Laflore,  Captains  Jones,  McCurtain,  and  Reynolds 
were  particularly  conspicuous  in  this  part  of  the  engagement;  also 
Colonel  Drew  and  his  men,  who  acted  with  the  Choctaws  and  Texans. 
Almost  simultaneously  with  these  movements  on  th®  and  c 

detachment  of  the  Texas  cavalry,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Quayle, 
made  a charge  to  the  left  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  and 
routed  the  enemy  in  that  quarter;  then,  changing  position  to  the  right 
of  the  line,  warmly  engaged  the  Indians  concealed  about  the  creek  and 
ravines.  Another  detachment  of  the  Texas  cavalry,  under  Colonel 
Sims  after  making  a demonstration  to  the  right  of  the  Creek  regiment, 
moved  up  the  creek  about  1 mile,  joined  Lieutenant-Colonel  Quayle, 
and  assisted  him  in  completing  the  rout  of  the  enemy  d^twm 

In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  appeared  in  large  force  about  the  house 
at  the  bend,  and  Captain  Young,  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regi- 
ment was  ordered  with  his  squadron,  about  100  strong,  to  attack  them. 
The  charge  of  the  squadron  was  made  in  gallant  style  to  the  timber 
below  the  house,  and,  there  dismounting,  moved  up  under  cover  of  the 

The  enemy  were  driven  from  their  stronghold  and  pursued  far  into 
the  bend,  where,  receiving  on  the  flank  an  unexpected  fire,  the  squa 
ron  took  position  at  the  house.  Being  then  re-enforced  by  some  men 
from  Captains  Reynolds’,  McCurtain’s,  and  Hall’s  companies,  of  the 
Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment,  the  conflict  with  the  peisistent  foe 
was  renewed  with  increased  vigor,  and  after  a fierce  struggle  the  enemy 
was  forced,  with  heavy  loss,  through  the  bend  and  across  the  creek. 

Our  troops,  changing  position  at  this  juncture  to  meet  a flank  fire 
again  on  the  right,  the  enemy  in  front  rallied,  and  by  then  dnect  fimu 
from  the  creek  and  on  the  right  and  rear  compelled  a retreat  again  to 
the  house.  At  this  time  the  force  ot  the  enemy  at  this  point  was  not 


10 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIT. 


less  than  500,  and  at  no  time  during  the  conflict  here  did  our  force 
equal  one-half  that  number.  The  combat  now  was  at  close  quarters,, 
and  raged  with  great  fury  on  both  sides  for  some  half  hour,  the  enemy 
alternately  yielding  and  advancing  and  pouring  upon  our  troops  a 
galling  fire.  While  thus  engaged  the  horses  of  our  men  were  menaced 
in  rear,  and,  the  alarm  being  given,  caused  a movement  in  that  direc- 
tion. The  horses  being  secured,  the  troops  formed  again  in  line  at 
some  distance  in  front  of  the  house. 

I would  particularly  notice  here  the  conspicuous  conduct  of  Asst, 
Adjt.  Gen.  R.  W.  Lee,  who  fought  on  foot  with  the  men,  cheering  and 
encouraging  them  during  the  conflict  at  this  point,  and  who  here  re- 
ceived a contusion,  his  life  probably  being  saved  by  his  pistol-belt 
turning  the  ball. 

A few  minutes  afterwards  a detachment  of  Creeks,  under  Col.  1).  N. 
McIntosh,  opportunely  came  up  to  the  relief  of  the  exhausted  men  of 
the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment,  and,  throwing  themselves  upon 
the  enemy,  closed  the  battle. 

The  firing  now  entirely  silenced,  the  enemy  disappeared  from  our 
entire  front,  and  the  sun  having  set,  the  troops  were  withdrawn  and 
marched  to  camp.  The  battle  lasted  over  four  hours. 

On  the  next  morning  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment,  he  Creek 
regiment,  Colonel  Drew  and  his  Cherokees,  and  a portion  of  the  TexavS 
regiment  returned  to  the  battle  ground.  The  enemy  had  retreated  to 
the  mountains. 

After  burying  our  dead  we  followed  the  train,  which  had  been  sent 
with  the  wounded,  under  Colonel  Sims,  to  Van’s,  and  encamped  again 
for  the  night  within  a few  miles  of  the  battle-field. 

The  force  of  the  enemy  in  the  engagement  at  Cliusto-Talasah  was 
certainly  over  2,500.  Several  Cherokee  prisoners  stated  it  at  4,000. 
This  was  also  Major  Pegg’s  estimate  after  his  visits  to  Hopoeithleyo- 
hola’s  camp.  Their  loss,  as  admitted  by  prisoners  taken  in  our  last 
scout,  was  412.  It  probably  was  500  in  killed  arid  wounded. 

The  force  on  our  side  actually  engaged  did  not  exceed  1,100,  a strong 
guard  being  necessary  at  the  Cherokee  train.  Our  loss  was  15  killed 
and  37  wounded. 

The  officers  and  men  under  my  command  behaved  throughout  the  en- 
gagement at  Cliusto-Talasah  on  the  9th  of  December  in  such  manner  as 
to  meet  unqualified  approbation,  and  coming  under  my  personal  observ- 
ation I would  mention  as  worthy  of  especial  notice  and  commendation 
the  conduct  of  the  following  : 

Col.  D.  N.  McIntosh,  Creek  regiment ; Lieut.  Col.  William  Quayle,  Texas 
regiment;  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  R.  W.  Lee;  Maj.  Mitchell  Laflorer 
Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  Actg.  Adjt.  Joseph 
A.  Carroll,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles ; Capts- 
R.  A.  Young,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  Lein. 
M.  Reynolds,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  Joseph 
R.  Hall,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  Willis 
Jones,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  Jackson  Mc- 
Curtain,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles ; W.  B.  Pitch - 
lynn,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  Lieuts.  J.  W. 
Wells,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles;  James  F. 
Baker,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  regiment  Mounted  Rifles. 

First  Serg.  Samuel  IV  C.  Patten  particularly  distinguished;  Capt. 
Alfred  Wade,  Choctaw  battalion,  and  my  young  bugler,  Nathaniel  J. 
O.  Quine. 

The  actual  loss  of  the  enemy  in  this  engagement  far  exceeded  our  first 


Chap.  XVIII.]  OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY.  11 

estimate,  and,  although  calculated  to  dishearten  them,  was  of  less  im- 
portance than  the  moral  effect  produced.  They  had  learned  that  their 
superior  numbers  could  not  compensate  for  the  determined  valor  of  our 
troops  and  that  they  could  not  successfully  meet  them  in  combat;  that 
whenever  we  could  find  them  we  could  defeat  them,  and  that  without 
material  aid  from  abroad  Hopoeithleyohola’s  party  must  be  entirely 
destroyed.  Impressed  with  this  conviction,  the  main  body  of  Hopoeith- 
leyohola’s army  retired  hastily  towards  Kansas,  where  an  asylum  had 
been  offered  them.  This  statement  is  made  by  intelligent  prisoners, 
confirmed  by  the  appearance  of  the  trails  leading  towards  Kansas  seen 
on  our  scout  two  weeks  afterwards. 

My  supply  of  ammunition  being  nearly  exhausted,  and  having  on  my 
arrival  at  Van’s,  the  night  of  December  10,  learned  that  a body  of 
Oherokees  from  Fort  Gibson,  about  100,  who  passed  up  the  previous 
evening,  had  put  on  the  shuck  badge  (Hopoeithleyohola’s)  and  gone 
direct  to  his  camp  at  Shoal  Creek,  I was  impressed  with  the  necessity 
of  placing  the  force  under  my  command  as  soon  as  possible  in  position 
to  counteract  any  movement  among  the  people  in  aid  of  Hopoeithleyo- 
hola and  his  Northern  allies.  Colonel  Drew,  with  his  train,  and  Col- 
onel Sims,  with  the  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry,  were  ordered  on  the  11th 
direct  to  Fort  Gibson,  and  with  the  Creek  and  Choctaw  regiment  I 
moved  by  way  of  Tulsey  Town  down  the  Arkansas.  An  express  was 
at  the  same  time  sent  to  Col.  James  McIntosh,  at  Van  Buren,  with  an 
account  of  the  battle  at  Cljusto-Talasah,  with  a request  that  he  would 
send  some  white  troops  into  the  Cherokee  country,  in  order  that  the 
moral  effect  of  their  presence  might  repress  any  outbreak.  We  arrived 
at  Choska,  in  the  Creek  Nation,  20  miles  above  Fort  Gibson,  on  the 
13th.  Leaving  the  main  body  of  the  command  there,  I hastened  with 
Welch’s  squadron  (Companies  I and  K,  of  the  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 
regiment)  and  encamped  on  Grand  River,  opposite  Fort  Gibson.  Col- 
onel Sims  had  already  arrived,  and  was  encamped  at  Fort  Gibson. 

The  arrival  of  Colonel  Drew  witli  the  account  of  our  victory  over 
Hopoeithleyohola,  the  presence  of  Colonel  Sims’  regiment,  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  proximity  of  the  forces  at  Choska  had  already  sup- 
pressed outward  show  of  sympathy  with  the  enemy.  The  next  day  1 
received  a letter  from  Col.  James  McIntosh,  dated  Van  Buren,  Decem- 
ber 14,  1861,  in  which  he  advised  that  he  had  just  ordered  Colonel 
Voung’s  regiment,  Whitfield’s  battalion,  and  five  companies  of  Greer’s 
regiment  to  report  to  me  at  Fort  Gibson  or  wherever  I might  be 
found;  that  he  had  ordered  Capt.  Con.  Rea,  ordnance  officer  at  Fort 
Smith,  to  honor  my  requisition  for  ammunition,  and  Major  Clark  to 
furnish  supplies  immediately,  and  that  he  hoped  with  this  additional 
force  I would  be  able  to  march  against  Hopoeithleyohola  with  certainty 
of  success,  &c.  An  express  was  immediately  started  back  to  Fort 
Smith  with  a requisition  for  ammunition.  1 remained  still  at  Fort 
Gibson  to  see  the  Principal  Chief  of  the  Cherokees,  Hon.  John  Ross, 
and  confer  with  him  on  the  state  of  affairs  among  the  Cherokees. 

On  the  19th  a letter  was  received  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Diamond, 
commanding  Colonel  Young’s  regiment,  reporting  that  he  would  reach 
Fort  Gibson  on  the  20th.  On  the  evening  of  that  day  I crossed  over 
to  Fort  Gibson,  for  the  purpose  of  addressing  the  Cherokees,  in  con- 
junction with  the  chief,  on  the  existing  state  of  affairs  among  them, 
and  greatly  to  my  surprise  found  Col.  James  McIntosh,  who  announced 
his  intention  of  taking  the  field  with  some  .2,000  troops  against  llopo- 
eithleyohola.  Major  Whitfield,  with  his  battalion,  crossed  Grand  River 
early  next  morning  and  reported  to  me.  Neither  Colonel  Young’s  regi- 


12 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chat.  XVffl. 


ment  nor  any  companies  from  Colonel  Greer’s  regiment  ever  did  so  (I 
presume  the  order  previously  given  was  received),  but  formed  part  of 
the  separate  column  Colonel  Mclntosli  had  determined  to  put  in  motion. 
No  objection  was  made  by  me  to  the  change  in  Colonel  McIntosh’s 
intentions.  On  the  contrary,  I afforded  all  the  information  in  my 
possession  as  to  the  situation  of  Hopoeithley oh ola’s  camp  and  the  sur- 
rounding country,  and  it  was  understood  we  were  to  co-operate,  moving 
the  one  up  the  Arkansas  and  the  other  up  the  Verdigris.  Colonel 
McIntosh  also  promised  me  a supply  of  ammunition  from  what  he  had 
brought  along.  On  the  20th,  with  Major  Whitfield’s  battalion  and 
Captain  Welch’s  squadron,  I returned  to  Choska,  after  entering  into 
a satisfactory  arrangement  with  Colonel  Drew  and  the  chief  in  regard 
to  the  reorganization  of  Colonel  Drew’s  regiment. 

Colonel  Drew’s  regiment,  when  reorganized,  was  ordered  to  join  me 
at  Choska,  and  also  the  available  force  of  Colonel  Sims’  regiment. 
December  21  I wrote  to  Col.  James  McIntosh,  to  know  when  he  would 
be  ready  and  for  ammunition  5 in  answer  to  which,  on  the  same  day, 
he  fixed  upon  the  next  at  12  o’clock  for  the  commencement  of  his  march 
with  the  largest  part  of  his  forces,  and  the  next  morning,  the  23d,  for 
the  departure  of  the  rest  5 their  destination  Mrs.  McNair’s,  on  the  Ver- 
digris, distance  from  Hopoeithley  oh  ola’s  camp  about  25  miles,  stating 
that  he  would  reach  Mrs.  McNair’s  on  the  morning  of  the  24th,  ex- 
pressing the  opinion  that  it  would  not  be  well  to  remain  at  Mrs.  Mc- 
Nair’s more  than  one  day,  and  that  he  woul$  like  to  see  and  concert 
measures  with  me  on  the  evening  of  the  24th,  and  proposing  to  meet 
me  at  any  point  I might  designate;  that  it  was  his  design  to  co-operate 
with  me  in  any  measure  for  the  welfare  of  the  country,  &c.  This  I was 
then  satisfied  his  precipitancy  would  render  impracticable;  neverthe- 
less, having  on  the  night  of  the  23d  received  at  Choska  the  promised 
ammunition,  I marched  the  next  day  for  Tulsey  Town,  and  informed 
Colonel  McIntosh  by  letter  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  reach  that 
place  before  the  26th;  that  Col.  Stand  Watie  was  ordered  to  be  at  Mrs. 
McNair’s,  on  the  Verdigris,  December  25;  that  his  (Colonel  McIntosh’s) 
well-appointed  command  was  too  fast  for  mine,  but  if  Col.  Stand  Watie 
joined  him  I supposed  he  would  have  force  enough. 

On  my  arrival  at  Tulsey  Town  on  the  evening  of  the  26th  a letter 
reached  me  by  express  from  Col.  Stand  Watie,  dated  December  25,  at 
Mingo  Creek  (which  is  some  12  miles  west  of  Mrs.  McNair’s,  in  the 
direction  of  Hopoeithleyokola’s  camp),  informing  me  that  Colonel  Mc- 
Intosh had  gone  on,  but  as  he  was  only  6 miles  in  advance  he  hoped  to 
overtake  him.  Colonel  McIntosh  pushed  on  without  waiting  even  for 
Col.  Stand  Watie,  and  attacked  Hopoeithleyohola.  Col.  Stand  Watie, 
however,  followed  the  enemy  the  next  day,  overtook  him,  some  30<>  strong, 
had  a running  fight,  and  killed  15  of  the  enemy,  without  the  loss  of  a 
man.  Hopoeithleyohola,  it  is  said,  had  gone  on  with  about  200  warriors 
and  made  his  escape.  I also  heard  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  that 
Colonel  McIntosh  had  attacked  and  dispersed  the  Indians.  It  was 
therefore  useless  for  me  to  attempt  to  reach  the  rear  of  the  enemy  by 
way  of  the  Cherokee  settlement  in  the  Big  Bend  of  the  Arkansas.  The 
only  chance  to  effect  any  good  was  to  pursue  the  enemy  by  the  nearest 
route.  Accordingly  I marched  for  Parks’,  on  Shoal  Creek,  and  there, 
on  the  28tli,  met  Colonel  McIntosh  returning  to  winter  quarters.  On 
the  29th  I moved  up  Bird  Creek  and  camped  on  the  Osage  trail  to  the 
Big  Bend,  having  discovered  during  the  day  foot  prints  and  other  evi- 
dences that  the  enemy  had  gone  up  Bird  Creek. 

The  next  morning  early  we  struck  a plain  trail,  and  followed  it  a lit- 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


13. 


Chap.  XVIII.] 

tie  west  of  north  for  two  days.  On  the  second  day  (the  31st)  a party 
of  Cherokees  consisting  of  3 men  and  2 women,  were  intercepted  on 
the  nmd  from  Key’s  settlement,  on  Oaney,  to  the  Big  Bend  1 L of  whom 
was  killed  in  single  combat  by  Capt.  W.  It.  McIntosh,  of  the  Creek 
regiment : 2 made  their  escape;  the  women  were  taken  prisoners. 

Again  following  the  trail,  we  overtook  several  Seminole  women  and 
children,  from  whom  we  learned  that  Hopoeithleyohola  had  gone  on 
two  days  in  advance.  Having  followed  the  trail  nearly  if  not  quite  to- 
the  Kansas  line,  we  turned  across  towards  the  Arkansas,  and  intercepted 
several  parties  of  Creeks,  Osages,  and  Oherokees  on  their  way  to  Wal- 
nut Creek,  Kansas.  After  an  exciting  chase  by  the  advance  guard, 
under  Mai.  N.  W.  Townes,  of  the  Fourth  [Ninth]  Texas  Cavalry,  and 
Major  Whitfield’s  battalion,  several  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and  a 
large  number  of  prisoners  taken,  mostly  women  and  children.  A few 
cattle  were  also  captured  by  the  Creeks.  . , , , . 

The  weather  was  exceedingly  cold ; sleet  fell  m considerable  quanti- 
ties during  the  day,  and  there  being  every  appearance  of  a snow-stonn, 
we  pushed  for  tbe'timber.  Several  new  trails  were  discovered during 
the  evening,  all  leading  in  the  direction  of  Walnut  Cieek.  the  next 
morniuo-,  finding  the  earth  covered  with  sleet,  I resolved  to  return  to  my 
train,  and  marched  the  main  body  of  my  command  down  the  Arkansas. 
Sending  Colonel  Drew  with  his  regiment  to  examine  a wagon-tiail  we 
had  discovered  the  evening  previous,  he  found  a small  camp  of  Chcro- 
kees,  which  he  broke  up,  wounding  1 man  and  taking  several  prisoners.. 
Late  in  the  evening  of  the  same  day  the  advance  guard  discovered  an 
encampment  of  Creeks  directly  under  a rocky,  precipitous  bluff  which 
overhung  the  Arkansas  River,  and  by  rapidly  pushing  down  the  bluff 
and  into  the  river  we  were  enabled  to  charge  the  camp  ^ak  }t  up, 
killing  1 man  and  taking  21  prisoners,  women  and  children.  Sev  eral  men 
made  their  escape  across  the  river.  Turning  to  the  top  of  the  bluff  we 
encamped  for  the  night,  without  food  for  ourselves  or  horses.  The  next 
day  we  reached  Skia  Tooka’s  settlement,  in  the  Big  Bend,  where  an 
abundance  of  meat  and  some  corn  was  obtained.  Next  day  reached 
Tulsey  Town,  by  a forced  march,  where  we  found  our  tram. 

This  fatiguing  scout  of  seven  days,  embracing  the  entire  country 
lately  occupied  by  Hopoeithleyohola’s  forces,  accomplished  oyer  an 
exceedingly  rough  and  bleak  country,  half  the  time  without  provisions, 
the  weather  very  cold  (during  which  1 man  was  frozen  to  death),  was 
endured  with  great  fortitude  by  the  officers  and  men  under  my  com- 
mand. Its  results  were  6 of  the  enemy  killed  and  150  prisoners  taken, 
mostly  women  and  children,  the  total  dispersing  in  the  direction  of 
Walnut  Creek,  Kansas,  of  Hopoeithleyohola’s  forces  and  people,  thus 
securing  the  repose  of  the  frontier  for  the  winter.  It  alsodemon^ated 
that  the  capture  of  the  whole  of  those  who  remained  on  Shoal  Creek  up 
to  the  26th  of  December,  including  Hopoeithleyohola  himself,  could  have 
been  easily  effected  had  Col.  James  McIntosh  waited  until  the  foices 
under  my  command  reached  a position  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy j,  or- even 
if  Col.  Stand  Watie  had  been  sent  up  Delaware  Creek  or  up  Bud  Creek 
and  thence  to  the  rear  of  Hopoeithleyohola’s  position,  the  same  result 
would  have  been  attained  and  the  machinations  of  the  arch  old  traitor 

^'The  tods  on  Bird  Creek  and  on  the  Arkansas  also  showed  that  large 
numbers  of  Indians  had  descended  to  Hopoeithleyohola  s camp  before 
t he  battle  on  Bird  Creek  of  December  9,  and  that  still  larger  numbers 
had  returned  up  those  two  streams  before  the  battle  on  Shoal  Creek  of 
1 December  26.  It  was  also  apparent  that  not  more  than  1,000  had  gone 


14 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


off  immediately  after  that  fight.  Prisoners  of  intelligence  put  the  num- 
ber at  500  warriors. 

This  report  has  been  long  delayed,  but  the  apparent  neglect  will,  it  is 
hoped,  be  justified  when  it  is  considered  by  the  Department  that  we 
have  been  constantly  in  the  field  on  active  service  since  the  events 
reported  until  within  the  past  two  weeks,  during  which  the  placing  of 
the  troops  in  winter  quarters  has  engaged  my  time  and  attention. 

I have  the  honor,  sir,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

DOUGLAS  H.  COOPEB, 
Colonel , C.  S.  Army , Commanding  Indian  Department . 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  M.  J.  Brinson , Ninth  Texas  Cavalry , of  engagement 

at  Round  Mountain. 


Camp  Wilson, 

Creek  Nation , November  25,  1861. 

Sir  : 1 hereby  transmit  to  you  an  account  of  the  battle  fought  on  the 
19th  instant : 

The  attack  was  brought  on  by  the  second  squadron  about  sunset, 
composed  of  about  70  men.  I was  promptly  aided  on  my  right  by  Cap- 
tain Berry  and  on  my  left  by  Captain  McCool,  who  formed  in  my  own, 
or  second  squadron.  After  firing  from  three  to  five  rounds  I perceived 
the  enemy  in  strong  position  and  force,  numbering  some  1,500  Indians, 
and  flanking  my  small  force  upon  the  right  and  left,  I had  necessarily 
to  fall  back  to  the  main  command,  some  2£  miles,  under  a heavy  retreat- 
ing fire.  The  whole  command — in  which  I fought  my  own  squadron, 
Captain  Berry’s  company,  a part  of  McCooFs,  and  a part  of  Captain 
Williams’  company — 1 am  confident  did  not  amount  to  exceeding  150 
men. 

In  my  own  company  I regret  to  have  to  report  the  loss  of  John  H. 
Crow,  a private,  killed.  None  wounded.  One  horse,  1 gun,  and  5 pow- 
der-flasks losts. 

Very  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

M.  J.  BKINSON, 

Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  Quayle. 


No.  J. 

Reports  of  Capt.  R.  A.  Young , First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment , 
of  engagement  at  Round  Mountain. 

Springfield  Camp, 
Cherokee  Nation , November  30,  1861. 
Colonel  : On  the  19th  instant,  a little  after  night-fall,  we  weie 
ordered  to  saddle  up  and  mount  our  horses,  and  the  order  was  given 
to  march.  After  marching  about  200  or  300  yards  we  were  ordered  to 


Chap.  XVllI.J 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


15 


halt  and  form,  which  we  did,  and  then  advanced  [to  with] in  about  150 
yards  of  the  enemy  and  dismounted.  While  dismounting  we  were  fired 
on  and  2 of  our  horses  shot.  My  men  dismounted  in  good  order,  and  I 
ordered  them  to  advance  and  fire.  We  advanced  8 or  10  paces  from 
our  horses  and  fired,  the  enemy  keeping  up  a constant  fire  on  us.  We 
loaded  and  fired  the  third  time  and  silenced  the  enemy’s  guns. 

The  prairie  was  on  fire  on  my  right,  and  as  we  advanced  to  the  attack 
1 could  see  very  distinctly  the  enemy  passing  the  fire,  and  I supposed 
a large  body  of  men  (200  or  300),  but  they  were  about  300  yards  from 
me  and  the  prairie  was  burning  very  rapidly,  and  I may  have  taken  the 
motion  of  the  grass  for  men. 

I lost  6 horses  in  the  fight ; those  that  were  not  mortally  wounded 
stampeded,  and  we  could  not  find  them  next  morning.  I suppose  the 
engagement  lasted  fifteen  minutes. 

I am,  colonel,  respectfully,  yours, 

’ ’ E.  A.  YOUNG, 

Capt.,  Covndg.  Co.  K,  1st  Regt.  C.  and  C.  Mounted  Rifles . 

Col.  D.  H.  Cooper, 

Commanding  Indian  Department. 


1861. 

Colonel  : On  the  morning  of  December  [November]  10  I was  ordered 
to  bring  up  the  rear  with  my  squadron,  and  about  6 miles  from  camp 
the  rear  guard  sent  me  a message  that  they  were  attacked  by  the  enemy. 
1 immediately  wheeled  the  squadron  and  went  back  to  their  assistance 
and  got  about  half  a mile,  [when]  I discovered  the  enemy  retreating 
towards  the  creek.  1 formed,  and  Colonel  Cooper  rode  up  and  ordered 
me  to  charge.  After  pursuing  about  2 miles  we  came  to  the  creek  and 
I dismounted  my  men  and  advanced  into  the  swamp,  but  not  finding 
the  enemy,  1 ordered  the  men  to  return  to  their  horses  and  mount.  My 
squadron  was  on  the  right  of  our  command,  and  after  I had  mounted 
the  squadron  I received  orders  from  Colonel  Cooper  to  form  on  the  left 
of  the  Texas  regiment,  and  in  order  to  get  to  the  left  of  the  Texas  reg- 
iment I had  to  pass  down  the  creek,  and  discovered  the  regiment  com- 
ing up  to  my  right,  and  about  the  same  time  discovered  the  enemy  to 
my  right  in  a bend  of  the  creek,  formed  around  a house.  I formed  and 
charged.  We  routed  them  from  this  position  and  followed  them  into 
the  swamp  200  yards.  They  flanked  us,  and  1 fell  back  to  the  house  in 
order  to  prevent  them  from  surrounding  us.  W e advanced  on  them  a 
second  time,  and  were  conqmlled  to  fall  back  to  the  house  in  conse- 
quence of  their  flanking  around.  We  had  only  80  men  in  the  squadron, 
while  the  enemy  had  400  or  500,  fighting  us  with  all  the  advantages  of 
the  creek  on  us  and  a complete  natural  ambuscade  to  protect  them. 

I have  to  report  the  death  of  Private  F.  T.  Ehodes  and  9 others 
wounded  in  the  squadron. 

We  fought  them  between  three  and  five  hours. 

1 am,  colonel,  respectfully,  yours, 

R.  A.  YOUNG, 

Captain,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Mounted  Rifes,  C.  S.  Army. 

Col.  I).  H.  Cooper, 

Commanding  Indian  Department. 


16 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI1L 


No.  4. 


Report  of  Col.  D.  N.  McIntosh , First  Creek  Regiment , of  engagement  at 

Chusto-Talasah. 


Camp  Pleasant, 

Cherokee  Ration , December  16,  1861. 

Sir  : According  to  your  request  I will  hereby  give  you  a brief  ac- 
count of  the  battle  at  High  Shoal,  Cherokee  Nation,  on  the  9th  instant: 

The  engagement  took  place  about  2 p.  m.,  and  continued  for  [the] 
space  of  three  and  a half  or  four  hours.  Without  any  doubt  our  ene- 
mies had  the  following  advantages  over  us: 

1st.  From  all  appearances  it  was  a premeditated  affair  by  them. 
They  had  placed  their  forces  in  a large  creek,  knowing  by  marching 
across  the  prairie  that  we  would  be  likely  to  pass  in  reach  of  the  place. 

2d.  The  grounds  they  had  selected  were  extremely  difficult  to  pass,, 
and  in  fact  most  of  the  banks  on  the  creek  were  bluff  and  deep  waters,? 
so  that  no  forces  could  pass  across  only  at  some  particular  points,, 
which  were  only  known  to  them. 

3d.  This  place  was  fortified  also  with  large  timber  on  the  side  they 
occupied,  and  on  our  side  [the]  prairie  extended  to  the  creek,  where 
the  enemies  were  bedded,  lying  in  wait  for  our  approach. 

Having  completed  the  above  plan,  they  sent  out  to  us  a small  portion 
of  their  forces  to  make  the  attack,  in  order  to  draw  us  down  to  their 
desired  and  selected  place,  which  was  done  on  our  rear  guard,  and  im- 
mediately we  marched  on  to  our  enemies,  taking  the  left  division,  while 
your  command  on  the  right  and  Texas  regiment  occupied  the  middle 
division.  Thus  the  engagement  was  generally  commenced.  Our  men, 
without  any  exception,  fought  bravely,  and  finally  the  Creek  regiment, 
under  my  command,  charged  upon  the  enemy  and  chased  them  out  from 
their  strong  fortified  place  and  took  the  creek  from  them,  after  which 
I ordered  my  regiment  to  march  out  upon  the  prairie,  and  about  that 
time  a rumor  came  to  me  that  you  were  still  engaged  in  fighting  on 
[the]  right,  and  I ordered  my  regiment  to  your  relief. 

Our  loss  in  the  battle  was  2,  and  from  best  information  I have  heard 
[the]  Choctaw  regiment  lost  3 on  the  battle-field  and  2 died  since  from 
wounds ; and  [the]  Texas  regiment  2 and  1 from  [the]  Cherokee  regi- 
ment, making  our  total  loss  [in  killed]  10  and  about  21  wounded. 

The  enemy’s  loss,  from  the  best  information  I can  gather,  was  27  killed 
and  seen  on  the  battle-field,  and  from  the  signs  a great  many  dead  were 
concealed  or  carried  off  during  the  night,  and  [the]  wounded  could  not 
have  been  less  than  200  or  300. 


Col.  D.  H.  Cooper, 

Commanding  Indian  Brigade. 


[D.  n.  mcintosh, 

Colonel , &e .] 

\ 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  John  Drew , First  Cherokee  Mounted  Rifes , of  engagement 

at  Chusto-Talasah. 

Fort  Gibson, 

Cherokee  Nation , December  18,  1861. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  the  First  Regiment  Chero- 
kee Mounted  Riflemen,  under  my  command,  reached  Bird  Creek  in  the 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


Operations  in  Indian  territory. 


17 


orenoon  of  Saturday,  the  7th  instant.  It  consisted  the  evening  of  that 
lay  of  about  480  men,  rank  and  file.  The  hostile  Creeks  were  encamped 
rom  G to  8 miles  distant. 

The  day  followiug,  under  your  instructions  and  with  the  concurrence 
>f  Colonel  McIntosh,  commanding  the  Creek  regiment,  I authorized 
laior  Pegg  to  assure  Hopoeithleyohola  and  party  of  your  desire  tor  a 
>eaceable  settlement  of  the  difficulty  with  the  Creeks,  and  that  you  had 
io  wish  to  prosecute  a war  against  them.  Major  Pegg  was  accompanied 
o the  Creek  camps  by  Capts.  George  W.  Scraper  and  J.  P.  Davis  and 
lev.  Lewis  Downing.  Before  they  returned  and  late  that  evening  I 
bund  that  there  were  only  about  GO  men  in  camp,  and  that  a report 
vas  circulating  that  we  were  to  be  attacked  by  an  overwhelming  force 
lien  at  hand.  I ordered  my  horse  to  be  saddled,  and  while  in  the  act 
>f  [throwing]  a blanket  on  my  saddle  Captain  Benge  came  up  and  said 
ve  had  better  be  off*,  as  the  enemy  were  upon  us.  After  proceeding  a 
iart  of  the  way  to  your  camp  the  party  returned  to  secure  the  arnmuni- 
ion.  Major  Pegg  was  then  in  camp,  and  reported  that  he  had  seen  a 
arge  number  of  warriors  painted  for  battle,  who  would  be  down  upon 
is  that  night,  and  that  he  had  been  allowed  to  return  only  on  the  plea 
>f  removing  some  women  and  children  from  danger.  I his  renewed 
he  excitement,  and  as  it  [was]  now  quite  dark,  the  party  dispersed  in 
squads.  Information  had  been  conveyed  to  you  ot  the  dispersion  of  the 
•egiment,  and  while  myself,  Captain  Fields,  and  a few  others  were  mak- 
ng  our  way  to  your  camp  the  squadron  of  Texas  cavalry,  which  had 
ieen  instructed  to  secure  the  public  property  in  our  camp,  was  fallen  in 
vith.  This  prompt  movement  saved  my  train,  tents,  &c. 

Major  Pegg,  Adjt.  James  S.  Vann,  Capts.  Davis  and  J.  D.  Hicks, 
Lieuts.  S.  H.  Smith,  Jesse  Henry,  Anderson  Benge,  Trotting  Wolfi  and 
several  privates  pursued  their  way  to  Fort  Gibson. 

Captains  Vann,  Pike,  and  Scraper,  and  Lieutenants  White-Catcher, 
Eli  Smith,  Foster,  Bearmeat,  and  N.  Fish,  with  parts  of  their  com- 
panies, were  missing,  and  doubtless  were  in  the  camp  of  Hopoeithleyo* 
iola  or  made  their  way  there. 

Capt.  James  McDaniel  and  Lieuts.  Wat  Stop,  N.  D.  Bear,  and  Skiey- 
iltooka  were  absent,  but  were  almost  certainly  at  the  same  place. 

The  unarmed  portion  of  the  regiment— which  consisted  in  the  aggre- 
gate of  ab@ut  1,200  in  number — were  left  at  this  place  in  camp,  with 
he  following  officers : Lieut.  Col.  William  P.  Boss,  commanding;  Capt. 
ST.  B.  Sanders  and  Lieutenants  Sanders,  Hawkins,  Alimer-cker-ner, 
Orab- grass  Smith,  Fogg,  Little  Bird,  Young,  Webber,  Downing,  Drew, 
IJlteesky,  and  Deer-in- Water,  and  a surgeon — Corden. 

The  following-named  officers  and  privates  were  with  me  in  your  camp 
ind  present  at' the  battle  of  Bird  Creek  on  the  0th  instant  : Company 
F:  Capt.  Bichard  Fields,  whose  horse  was  shot;  Lieut.  Broom  Bald- 
idge,  killed;  Sergt.  Dempsey  Handle,  and  Privates  Creek  McCoy, 
Situ wakee,  and  Tracker.  Company  D:  Capt.  J.  N.  Hildebrand  and 
Lieuts.  George  Springston  and  Ezekiel  Bussell,  Private  Nelson  Ilog- 
diooter.  Company  II:  Capt.  E.  B.  Hicks,  Lieut.  George  W.  Boss, 
Sergts.  William  Ilewbanks,  Allan  Boss,  and  Peter;  Privates  Henry 
VIeigs,  Bichard  Bobinson,  Carter  Oo  yor-lor-clia-lie,  and  Coming  Deer. 
Jompany  K:  Capt.  Pickens  M.  Benge,  Lieut.  George  Benge,  Privates 
Oliver  Boss,  Thomas  Boss,  Broad  Christy,  Thomas  Yali-hoo-lar,  and 
Adam  (a  Creek) ; Surg.  James  P.  Evans,  and  Expressman  William  S. 
Ooodey. 

The  deportment  of  these  few  officers  and  men,  under  the  peculiar 
2 r r — vol  viit 


18  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH1 

circumstances  of  their  situation,  was  highly  honorable  to  them.  Tin 
teamsters  present  also  deported  themselves  in  a creditable  manne] 
throughout. 

The  causes  which  led  to  the  dispersion  of  the  regiment  arose  from  i 
misconception  of  the  character  of  the  conflict  between  the  Creeks,  fron 
an  indisposition  on  their  part  to  engage  in  strife  with  their  immediate 
neighbors,  and  from  the  panic  gotten  up  by  the  threatened  attack  upoi 
us.  The  regiment  will  be  promptly  filled  and  ready  for  service. 

For  the  very  kind  manner  in  which  you  were  pleased  to  speak  o 
myself  and  those  who  adhered  to  their  obligations  in  your  note  calling 
for  this  report  I beg  you  to  accept  my  grateful  acknowledgments. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant 

JOHN  DREW, 

Col.,  Comdg.  First  Regiment  Cherokee  Mounted  Riflemen. 

Col.  D.  H.  Cooper, 

Commanding  Indian  Department. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  William  B.  Sims , Ninth  Texas  Cavalry , of  engagement  a 

Chusto-Talasah. 

Regimental  Headquarters, 

Fort  Gibson , Ind.  T .,  December  15,  1861. 

Sir  : At  the  commencement  of  the  engagement  on  the  9th  instant  witl 
Hopoeithleyohola’s  forces  on  Bird  Creek,  Cherokee  Nation,  in  obedience 
to  your  commands  I proceeded  to  divide  the  detachment  of  my  regi 
ment,  amounting  to  about  260  men,  into  two  divisions,  sending  Lieu 
tenant-Colonel  Quayle,  with  about  50  of  Captain  Berry’s  company,  com 
rnanded  by  himself,  and  small  detachments  from  the  following  com 
panies  : Captain  McCool’s,  under  Lieutenant  Brown  ; Captain  Hart’s 
under  Lieutenant  Black;  Captain  Williams’,  under  Lieutenant  Bowen 
and  Captain  Brinson’s,  under  Lieutenant  Utley ; amounting  in  all  t< 
about  100  men.  He  advanced  with  his  command  on  to  the  creek,  to  th< 
left  of  the  Choctaw  regiment.  Not  finding  the  enemy  there,  he  returne( 
and  charged  a ravine  on  the  right  of  the  Choctaws,  which  he  succeede< 
in  taking,  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy.  Driving  them  from  thei 
position,  he  marched  on  and  charged  another  ravine  still  farther  on  th< 
right,  but  when  he  got  into  the  ravine  the  Indians,  whohadpossessioi 
of  its  mouth,  opened  a raking  fire  upon  his  men.  He  ordered  them  h 
charge  down  the  ravine,  which  they  did,  and  put  the  enemy  to  rout 
A party  of  Indians  still  kept  up  a heavy  fire  upon  them  from  the  right 
who  were  at  first  supposed  to  be  Choctaws,  as  they  were  wearing  ou 
badges,  but  they  were  deserted  Cherokees  and  Creeks.  In  the  las 
charge  with  Colonel  Quayle  there  were  about  20  Choctaws,  who  acte< 
with  the  greatest  bravery. 

With  the  men  under  my  command,  to  wit,  parts  of  four  companies 
under  command  of  Captains  Duncan,  English,  Wright,  and  Smith,  afte 
having  dismounted  I charged  to  the  right  of  Colonel  McIntosh’s  com 
mand  and  put  the  Indians  to  flight  without  firing  a gun.  I then  ordered 
my  men  to  mount  their  horses  and  moved  down,  with  the  Creeks  stil 
remaining  on  their  right,  about  half  a mile,  where  wre  dismounted 
charged  into  the  creek  bottom,  and  put  the  Indians  to  flight. 


/HAP.  XVIII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


19 


We  then  mounted  our  horses;  it  was  then  reported  that  the  enemy 
ivas  again  advancing.  We  again  dismounted  and  charged  down  the 
3reek,  putting  the  Indians  completely  to  rout.  We  then  mounted  our 
Worses  and  advanced  up  the  creek  about  1 mile,  dismounted,  and 
oined  the  remainder  of  my  command  on  the  right,  who  were  then  fight- 
ng  on  foot  in  a ravine.  We  there  withstood  a heavy  fire  from  the 
memy  for  some  time,  which  finally  abated.  The  Creeks  then  with- 
lrew,"  followed  by  the  Choctaws.  I ordered  my  men  to  fall  back  [and] 
nount  their  horses,  after  which  we  made  a charge,  and  succeeded  in  get- 
ting our  wounded  men  off  the  field.  I then  formed  a line  to  your  left 
m the  prairie. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  of  my  command.  * 

The  forces  of  the  enemy,  I think,  would  have  amounted  to  about 
2,500  or  3,000  men.  From  the  best  information  I can  get  I would  sup- 
pose their  loss  to  be  about  150  men.  The  number  wounded  on  their 
>ide  not  ascertained,  as  they  were  borne  from  the  field. 

All  the  officers  and  soldiers  under  my  command  conducted  themselves 
luring  the  engagement  with  great  decision  and  bravery. 

W.  B.  SIMS, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Fourth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry , C.  S.  Army . 

Col.  D.  H.  Cooper, 

Commanding  Indian  Department. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Capt.  Joseph  R.  Hall , First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regiment , 
of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah. 

It  being  requested  of  me  to  make  a report  of  the  incidents  of  Decem- 
>er  9,  1861,  on  which  [day]  we  were  attacked  by  the  Hopoeithleyohola 
>and,  on  Bird  Creek,  Cherokee  Nation,  I do  respectfully  submit  the 
bllowing,  as  it  came  to  my  observation  during  the  engagement : 

My  attention  was  first  directed  to  the  advance  of  the  enemy  by  some 
Ireeks,  who,  upon  the  discovery  of  the  enemy,  wheeled  their  horses 
ind  with  a whoop  charged  in  direction  of  the  enemy.  This  attracted 
he  attention  of  all  and  gave  us  a view  of  a good  body  of  men  advanc- 
ng  on  our  rear.  Each  commander  immediately  engaged  himself,  form- 
ng  his  company  into  a line  facing  the  enemy,  no  sooner  than  which 
vas  done  we  were  ordered  to  march  on  the  enemj^,  when  they  began 
;o  fall  back  into  a creek  bottom  and  waited  our  approach.  The  great 
lurry  in  which  they  marched  made  it  impossible  to  keep  the  companies 
oge tlier,  on  account  of  the  great  difference  in  their  horses  and  ponies  ; 
some  were  not  able  to  keep  up  and  those  on  the  best  horses  would  not 
jialt.  The  distance  being  near  2 miles  from  where  they  started  to  the 
place  of  engagement,  my  company  being  in  rear  of  Captain  Reynolds’, 
; dismounted  with  him  on  the  prairie  a half  mile  above  the  house  in 
he  bend.  At  this  time  I do  not  think  I had  over  25  men.  We  marched 
n the  brush  on  the  creek  as  far  as  the  creek  banks.  Not  finding  any- 
hiug  there  we  fell  back  to  our  horses  and  hurried  down  to  the  house, 
vhere  there  was  at  that  time  very  heavy  firing.  On  moving  down  I 
noticed  more  of  my  men  who  had  dismounted  above  the  house  and  were 
matching  their  chance  for  a shot.  I dismounted  my  men  a little  below 

* Nominal  list  omitted  shows  killed,  2;  wounded,  9. 


20 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  IvANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


the  house,  about  a field,  and  there  I found  it  impossible  to  hold  some 
back,  for  others  had  not  yet  secured  their  horses. 

They  had  not  been  there  a great  while  before  the  firing  ceased  for  a 
while  from  the  enemy’s  side,  when  it  was  again  renewed,  but  not  soi 
heavy.  I remained  about  the  house  about  an  hour,  when  I walked  out 
to  where  I could  see  my  horse.  I met  Colonel  Cooper,  who  ordered  me 
to  get  my  men  together  and  cross  the  creek  below  the  house.  Some  of 
my  men  were  then  with  Lieutenants  Thompson  and  Krebs,  on  the  creek 
above  the  house,  mingled  with  men  of  different  companies,  while  others 
were  scattered  around  and  below  the  house  in  the  same  manner  with 
Lieutenant  Tobly.  Having  secured  me  a good  rifle  and  six-shooter  from 
one  of  Captain  Welch’s  wounded  men,  1 mounted  my  horse  and  got  a 
few  of  my  men  together,  which  enabled  me  in  getting  together  more 
of  my  men.  Some  of  them  were  without  caps  and  bullets.  It  being 
then  quite  late,  I ordered  the  balance  with  me  to  save  what  ammunition 
they  had  until  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  use  it. 

By  this  time  I had  3 men  wounded.  The  companies  were  then  alt 
forming  on  the  prairie,  and  the  enemy  commenced  showing  themselves 
about  the  house  and  field  below  it,  when  the  Creeks  gave  them  a round. 

Orders  being  given  to  march,  Ave  left  behind  2 ponies  which  had  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

I had  about  45  men  under  my  command,  40  of  whom  were  engaged 
in  the  fight ; the  rest  were  Axith  the  train. 

Respectfully,  yours, 


JOS.  R.  HALL, 
Commanding  Company  D. 


Col.  D.  H.  Cooper. 


Ko.  8. 

Report  of  Capt.  Jackson  McCurtain , First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Regi- 
ment, of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah. 

Fort  Derdane, 

Cherokee  Ration , January  18,  1862. 

Being  your  guest,  I will  try  to  give  you  a full  report  of  High  Shoal 
battle,  on  December  9,  A.  D.  1861 : 

On  our  marching,  the  alarm  apprehended  [being  ghren]  from  the 
rear  guard  that  they  [were]  attacked  by  the  enemy,  [the]  regiment  was 
immediately  ordered  to  turn  to  the  right  and  form  into  line  instantly. 
Then  the  enemy  was  falling  back  to  the  creek.  Then  order  was  given 
again  to  march  by  twos.  Thence  we  were  on  rapid  march  in  following 
the  enemy  for  a mile  and  a half ; crossed  a prairie.  Then  I halted  my 
men  about  100  paces  from  bank  of  creek  on  the  left  of  Captain  Jones, 
dismounted  from  our  horses,  then  ran  down  to  the  bank  of  creek  and 
commenced  firing  on  the  enemy.  I did  [not]  occupy  the  position  but 
[a]  short  time,  and  A\7as  about  crossing  the  creek,  when  I A\~as  ordered 
to  go  down  farther,  left  of  my  first  position.  I then  took  my  men  and 
went  doAvm  near  Avliere  a house  was.  When  we  came  to  near  a house 
the  front  of  the  house  was  crowded  by  the  enemy.  Then  Ave  commenced 
firing  on  them.  We  took  possession  of  the  house  soon  after  we  com- 
menced. Then  my  men  were  fighting  all  along  on  the  creek.  I have 
no  idea  of  Avliat  length  of  time  we  Avere  engaged  in  fighting  at  that 
place.  I AA'as  ordered  to  take  my  men  out  of  that  place;  I did  so. 


HA1>.  XVIII  ] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


21 


Chen  I was  ordered  again  to  go  down  to  assist  Captain  Jones’  company. 

went  where  Captain  Jones’  company  was  in  the  ravine.  While  I was 
lown  there  assisting  Captain  Jones  [the]  sun  set,  and  [an]  order  was 
>iven  to  fall  back  to  the  regiment.  My  men  and  everybody  else  heard 
in  order  and  left  the  place ; but  Lieutenant  Eiley  and  I,  not  hearing 
m order,  remained  until  Lieutenant  Eiley  told  me  we  were  left  alone 
md  was  to  be  surrounded  by  the  enemy.  We  were  the  very  last  men 
to  come]  out  [of]  the  ravine. 

Lieutenant  James  Eiley  was  [the]  only  lieutenant  that  [came]  along 
with  me,  and  in  fighting  he  encouraged  our  men  along  and  he  stood 
md  fought  manfully  with  them  through  [the]  whole  fight. 

I venture  to  say  that  all  my  men  have  bravely  fought  through  during 
the]  whole  battle;  also  I am  confident  the  battle  lasted  fully  four 
lours  from  the  commencement  to  the  end.* 

It  was  late  in  the  evening  when  we  left  the  battle-field. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

JACKSON  McCUETAIN, 

Captain. 

Colonel  Cooper. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  B.  Pitchlynn , First  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw 
Regiment , of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah. 

Fort  Derdane, 

Cherokee  Nation , January  18,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a brief  report  of  the  engagement 
n which  the  company  [of  which]  I am  honored  to  be  captain  fought  so 
successfully  on  Bird  Creek,  Cherokee  Nation,  December  9,  1861: 

When  orders  were  given  to  make  a charge  our  point  of  attack  was 
nade  a distance  near  half  a mile  above  the  old  cabin,  at  the  mouth  of 
i certain  ravine,  and  there  we  remained  and  fought  desperately  nearly 
in  hour,  when  the  firing  of  the  enemy  partially  ceased.  At  this  time 
ve  had  orders  to  move  and  attack  in  the  direction  of  the  old  cabin, 
vhere  we  remained  the  balance  of  the  day. 

The  mode  of  warfare  adopted  by  the  enemy  compelled  us,  as  you 
ire  aware,  to  abandon  strict  military  discipline  and  make  use  of  some- 
th at  similar  movements  in  order  to  be  successful. 

At  the  close  of  the  battle  we  took  our  proper  place  in  the  regiment, 
iccording  to  orders,  and  found  one  of  my  company  fatally  wounded, 
vho  expired  on  the  second  night  after  the  battle.  Two  horses  and 
equipments  were  lost  in  the  engagement. 

I will  merely  state  that  my  men  fought  bravely  and  gallantly. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  B.  PITCHLYNN, 

Capt . Co.  A,  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  Begt.  Mounted  Rifles. 

Col.  D.  H.  Cooper,  Commanding. 


* Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted  shows  5 men  wounded,  10  horses  and  equip- 
nents  and  3 guns  lost. 


22  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIU 

No.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  James  McIntosh , Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles , cow 
manding  division , 0/  engagement  at  Chustenahlah , Cherokee  Nation 
with  letters  found  in  Hopoeithleyoholtfs  camp. 

Headquarters  Division, 
Haw  Buren , Ar7c.,  January  1,  1862. 
General  :•  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  th 
battle  of  Chustenahlah,  which  took  place  in  the  Cherokee  Nation  on  th 
26th  of  December,  1861 : 

Before  entering  upon  the  details  of  the  battle  it  is  necessary  for  m< 
to  state  that  I entered  the  Cherokee  Nation  with  a portion  of  my  divis 
ion  upon  the  representation  of  Colonel  Cooper,  commanding  the  India] 
Department,  calling  upon  me  for  additional  force.  This  call  was  base< 
upon  the  hostile  stand  taken  by  the  Creek  chief  Hopoeithleyohola  am 
the  disaffection  which  has  sprung  up  in  one  of  the  Cherokee  regiments 
I hastened  to  Fort  Gibson,  with  1,600  men,  and  had  an  interview  wit] 
Colonel  Cooper,  and  entered  into  arrangements  for  mutual  co-operation 
The  plan  proposed  was  that  Colonel  Cooper,  with  his  force  strength 
ened  by  Major  Whitfield’s  battalion,  should  move  up  the  Arkansa 
Fiver  and  endeavor  to  get  in  the  rear  of  Hopoeithlevoliola’s  positioi 
on  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Verdigris  River,  near  the  Big  Bend  o 
the  Arkansas,  while  my  force  should  march  up  the  Verdigris  River  op 
posite  the  position  held  by  the  enemy,  and  then  move  directly  upoi 
him.  On  account  of  the  scarcity  of  forage  it  was  mutually  determine! 
that  either  force  should  attack  the  enemy  on  sight. 

I left  Fort  Gibson  at  12  m.  on  the  22d  ultimo  with  the  following 
force:  Five  companies  of  the  South  Kansas-Texas  Regiment,  com 
manded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lane ; the  available  strength  of  thi 
Sixth  Regiment  of  Texas  Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffith 
seven  companies  of  the  Third  [Eleventh]  Regiment  of  Texas  Cavalry 
commanded  by  Colonel  Young  j four  companies  of  my  own  regiment 
Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Riflemen,  under  Captain  Gipson ; and  Cap 
tain  Bennett’s  company  of  Texans  attached  to  the  headquarters  of  th< 
division.  This  force  amounted  to  1,380  men. 

On  the  evening  of  the  25th  ultimo  a part  of  the  enemy’s  force  appeare< 
m sight  immediately  after  our  arrival  in  camp.  A regiment  was  sen 
to  observe  them.  I soon  became  satisfied  that  this  party  was  endeav 
or  mg  to  lead  us  on  a fruitless  chase.  I therefore  restrained  my  impa 
tient  men  and  ordered  them  back  to  camp.  During  the  evening  ai 
express  reached  me  from  Colonel  Cooper,  with  the  intelligence  that  i 
would  probably  be  two  or  three  days  before  he  could  make  the  precon 
certed  movement,  on  account  of  the  desertion  of  his  teamsters,  and  gen 
erously  stated  that  if  I found  it  necessary  to  advance  he  would  give  m< 
all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  From  this  point,  knowing  it  wai 
P0SS1^e  to  move  my  train  farther,  I ordered  it  to  remain  in  chargi 
ot  Captain  Elstner,  acting  brigade  quartermaster,  with  a guard  of  10< 
men.  7 & 

™ f°ur  days’  cooked  rations  I left  camp  early  on  the  morning  0 
the  26th,  and  moved  cautiously  toward  the  stronghold  of  the  enenr 
among  the  mountains  running  back  into  the  Big  Bend  of  the  Arkansas 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lane,  with  his  regiment,  moved  in  advance.  A 
company  of  his  regiment,  under  Captain  Short,  was  thrown  forward  ai 
an  advance  guard,  with  orders  to  throw  out  flankers  well  to  the  righ 

Verdigris  T°Ward  12  m*  we  aPProa^ed  Shoal  Creek,  a tributary  of  th 


;hap.  xvm.j 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


23 


As  soon  as  Captain  Short  had  crossed  the  stream  a heavy  and  con- 
inuous  firing  was  opened  upon  him.  The  company  gallantly  mam- 
ained  its  position.  I immediately  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffith, 
vith  his  regiment,  to  move  up  on  the  right,  and  Colonel  Young  on  the 
eft.  The  center,  composed  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lane’s  regiment, 
Japtain  Bennett’s  company,  and  the  detachment  of  the  Second  Regi- 
nent  of  Arkansas  Mounted  Riflemen,  then  moved  forward  and  crossed 
he  stream  in  the  face  of  the  enemy  in  large  numbers  posted  to  the 
•iobt  on  a high  and  rugged  hill,  with  its  side  covered  with  oak  trees. 
Che  enemy  continued  their  fire  upon  us.  Colonel  Young  promptly 
crossed  the  stream  and  formed  upon  the  left  of  the  center,  which  was 
ilready  in  line  of  battle.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffith,  with  his  regn 
nent,  was  ordered  to  march  up  the  stream,  which  flowed  at  the  base  of 
he  hill  on  which  the  enemy  was  posted,  and,  after  coming  opposite 
:heir  left  flank  to  dismount,  cross  the  stream,  and  attack  him  in  the 
lank.  All  these  orders  were  promptly  and  efficiently  executed,  and 
the  whole  force  ready  for  action.  The  enemy  was  in  a very  strong 
position,  and  from  it  observed  our  actions,  in  happy  innocence  of  the 
o-all ant  resolve  which  animated  the  hearts  of  those  in  the  valley  below 
them.  The  Seminoles,  under  the  celebrated  chief  Halek  Tustenuggee, 
were  in  front  on  foot,  posted  behind  the  trees  and  rocks,  while  others 
were  in  line  near  the  summit  of  the  hill. 

Hopoeithleyohola’s  Creeks  were  beyond,  on  horseback.  A few  Repre- 
sentatives of  other  tribes  were  also  in  the  battle.  The  whole  force  was 
estimated  at  1,700.  Between  the  rough  and  rugged  side  of  the  hill  a 
space  of  200  or  300  yards  intervened  of  open  ground.  Each  tree  on 
the  hill-side  screened  a stalwart  warrior.  It  seemed  a desperate  under- 
taking to  charge  a position  which  appeared  almost  inaccessible,  but 
the  order  to  charge  to  the  top  of  the  hill  met  a responsive  feeling  from 
each  gallant  heart  in  the  line,  and  at  12  m.  the  charge  was  sounded, 
one  wild  yell  from  a thousand  throats  burst  upon  the  air,  and  the  liv- 
ing mass  hurled  itself  upon  the  foe.  The  sharp  report  of  the  rifle  came 
from  every  tree  and  rock,  but  on  our  brave  men  rushed,  nor  stopped 
until  the  'summit  of  the  hill  was  gained  and  we  were  mingled  with 
the  enemy.  The  South  Kansas-Texas  regiment,  led  by  those  gallant 
officers  Colonel  Lane  and  Major  Chilton,  breasted  itself  for  the  highest 
point  of  the  hill,  and  rushed  over  its  rugged  side  with  the  irresistible 
force  of  a tornado,  and  swept  everything  before  it.  The  brave  Major 
Chilton,  while  approaching  the  summit  of  the  hill,  received  a severe 
wound  in  the  head,  but  with  unabated  vigor  continued  in  the  fight. 
Captain  Bennett,  with  his  company  and  the  detachment  of  the  Second 
Regiment  Arkansas  Mounted  Riflemen,  under  Captain  Gipson,  gal- 
lantly charged  side  by  side.  Captain  Gipson  was  ordered  to  dismount 
his  command  and  move  into  a thicket  into  which  he  had  driven  a por- 
tion of  the  enemy,  which  he  did  promptly  and  with  great  execution. 

After  charging  some  distance  on  the  extreme  left,  the  gallant  Colonel 
Young,  observing  that  the  enemy  were  moving  to  the  more  rugged  part 
of  the  field  of  battle  on  the  right,  with  ready  foresight  rapidly  moved 
his  regiment  to  that  portion  of  the  field,  and  succeeded  in  cutting  oil 
many  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffith,  having  obeyed  the 
first’order  given  him,  observing  the  enemy  flying  from  the  hill,  rapidly 
mounted  his  command,  and  moved  forward  up  the  stream,  crossed  it 
some  distance  above,  and  gallantly  encountered  the  enemy,  who  had 
made  a stand  near  their  principal  encampment.  The  enemy  by  this 
time  were  much  scattered  and  had  retreated  to  the  rocky  gorges  amid 
the  deep  recesses  of  the  mountains,  where  they  were  pursued  by  our 


24  OPERATIONS  IN  iMO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

victorious  troops  and  routed  in  every  instance  with  great  loss.  They 
endeavored  to  make  a stand  at  their  encampment,  hut  their  efforts  were 
ineffectual,  and  we  were  soon  in  the  midst  of  it.  Property  of  every 
description  was  scattered  around.  The  battle  lasted  until  4 o’clock, 
when  the  firing  gradually  ceased,  and  we  remained  victors  in  the  center 
of  Hopoeithleyohola’s  camp. 

The  loss  sustained  by  the  enemy  was  very  severe.  Their  killed 
amounted  to  upwards  of  250.  Our  loss  was  8 killed  and  32  wounded. 
The  brave  and  gallant  Lieutenant  Fitzhue  was  shot  in  the  head,  and  fell 
while  gallantly  leading  his  company.  Capt.  J.  D.  Young,  of  Young’s 
regiment,  and  Lieutenant  Durham,  of  the  South  Kansas-Texas  Regi- 
ment,  were  both  wounded  while  in  the  thick  of  the  battle.  We  cap- 
tured 1G0  women  and  children,  20  negroes,  30  wagons,  70  yoke  of  oxen, 
about  500  Indian  horses,  several  hundred  head  of  cattle,  100  sheep,  and 
a great  quantity  of  property  of  much  value  to  the  enemy.  The  strong- 
hold of  Hopoeithleyohola  was  completely  broken  up,  and  his  force  scat- 
tered in  every  direction,  destitute  of  the  simplest  elements  of  subsist- 1 
ence. 

At  4 o’clock  the  rally  was  sounded,  and  the  different  commands  went 
into  camp  on  the  battle-field.  The  dead  and  wounded  were  collected 
and  cared  for.  The  officers  of  the  medical  department  of  the  different 
regiments  deserve  much  credit  for  their  promptness  in  attending  to  the 
wounded. 

A party  of  Stand  Watie’s  regiment  of  Cherokees,  numbering  300, 
under  the  command  of  the  colonel,  although  under  my  orders,  came  up 
just  as  the  battle  terminated.  This  regiment  had  been  ordered  to  join 
me  from  its  station  on  Grand  River.  It  was  no  fault  of  its  commander 
that  it  did  not  reach  us  sooner.  Every  effort  on  his  part  was  made  in 
order  to  reach  us  in  time. 

At  early  dawn  on  the  day  after  the  battle  I again  left  camp  in  pur- 
suit of  the  Hying  enemy.  After  a hot  pursuit  of  25  miles  we  overtook 
2 wagons,  which  were  captured  and  burned.  At  this  moment  sharp 
tiring  was  heard  upon  the  left,  and  a messenger  came  from  Col.  Stand 
Watie  with  the  repont  that  he  was  engaged  with  the  enemy.  I imme- 
diately moved  in  the  direction,  and  upon  our  arrival  I ascertained  that 
Colonel  Watie  had  overtaken  a number  of  the  enemy  aiid  had  gallantly 
charged  them.  Major  Boudinot,  commanding  the  left  flank  of  the  regi- 
ment, had  rushed  into  a deep  ravine  and  driven  the  enemy  from  it.  In 
the  skirmish  15  men  of  the  enemy  were  killed  and  a number  of  women 
and  children  taken. 

Throughout  our  rapid  march — sometimes  on  ground  covered  with 
snow  and  at  others  facing  the  chilly  blasts  from  the  north — the  great- 
est enthusiasm  prevailed  in  anticipation  of  the  coming  struggle,  and  at 
all  times  during  the  march  and  on  the  battle  field  every  officer  and 
soldier  of  the  brigade  nobly  did  his  duty,  and  it  is  with  heartfelt  pride 
that  I bring  them  to  the  notice  of  the  Department.  The  charge  at  the 
commencement  of  the  battle  was  splendid;  none  more  gallant  was  ever 
made.  Individual  acts  of  daring  and  hand-to-hand  encounters  were  of 
frequent  occurrence  during  the  day,  but  it  would  be  impossible  to  enu- 
merate them.  I therefore  refer  the  Department  to  the  rej>orts  of  regi- 
mental and  detachment  commanders,  herewith  transmitted. 

To  Captain  Elstner,  of  the  Second  Regiment  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifle- 
men, who  acted  as  brigade  quartermaster  and  commissary,  my  thanks 
are  due  for  the  efficient  and  able  manner  in  which  he  conducted  the 
affairs  of  his  department.  To  my  personal  staff  I am  indebted  for  much 
valuable  service.  Both  Mr.  Frank  C.  Armstrong  and  Mr.  James  S. 


Dhai*.  XVIIL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


25 


Vann,  my  volunteer  aides-de-camp,  went  gallantly  into  the  light,  and 
bore  themselves  with  great  coolness  and  courage.  Lieut.  G.  A.  Thorn- 
toD,  the  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  was  also  active  and  efficient 
in  carrying  various  orders,  and  deserves  great  credit  for  his  coolness 
during  the  battle. 

Casualties. — Killed,  0 ; wounded,  40. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant. 

JAMES  MCINTOSH, 
Colonel , Commanding  Division. 


Letter  of  C<£,  James  McIntosh , transmitting  reports  of 'subordinate  com- 
manders of  the  battle  of  Chustenahlah , December  26,  1861. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Fort  Smith , Ark.,  January  4,  1862. 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  inclosed  reports  of  regi 
mental  and  detachment  commanders  of  the  battle  of  Chustenahlah, 
Cherokee  Nation,  fought  on  the  26th  ultimo ; also  copies  of  letters  from 
Kansas  to  the  Indians.  These  letters  were  found  in  Hopoeithleyohola’s 
camp. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  MCINTOSH, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General,  C.  S.  Army , Richmond , Ya. 

[Inclosures.] 


Copies  of  letters  taken  in  HopoeithleyohoUs  camp. 

Barnsville,  September  10,  1861. 
Hopoeithleyohola,  Hok-tar-hah-sas-Harjo : 

Brother:  Your  letter  by  Micco  Hutka  is  received.  You  will  send 
a delegation  of  your  best  men  to  meet  the  commissioner  of  the  United 
States  Government  in  Kansas.  I am  authorized  to  ‘inform  you  that 
the  President  will  not  forget  you.  Our  Army  will  soon  go  South,  and 
those  of  your  people  who  are  true  and  loyal  to  the  Government  will  be 
treated  as  friends.  Your  rights  to  property  will  be  respected.  The 
commissioners  from  the  Confederate  States  have  deceived  you.  They 
have  two  tongues.  They  wanted  to  get  the  Indians  to  fight,  and  they 
would  rob  and  plunder  you  if  they  can  get  you  into  trouble.  But  the 
President  is  still  alive.  His  soldiers  will  soon  drive  these  men  who 
have  violated  your  homes  from  the  land  they  have  treacherously 
entered.  When  your  delegates  return  to  you  they  vyill  be  able  to 
[inform  you  when  and  where  your  moneys  will  be  paid.  Those  who 
stole  your  orphan  funds  will  be  punished,  and  you  will  learn  that  the 
people  who  are  true  to  the  Government  which  so  long  protected  you 
are  your  friends. 

Your  friend  and  brother, 

E.  H.  CARRUTH, 
Commissioner  of  U.  S.  Government. 


26 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XViii. 


Barnsville,  Kans.,  September  11,  1861. 
The  Ohickasaws  and  Choctaws 

Who  are  loyal  to  the  U.  S.  Government  : 

Friends  and  Brothers:  The  commissioners  of  the  United  States 
would  like  to  meet  delegations  from  your  nations  at  the  headquarters 
of  the  Kansas  brigade,  where  they  will  confer  with  you.  The  Indians 
who  are  true  to  the  Government  will  always  and  everywhere  be  treated 
as  friends  by  her  armies.  Your  rights  will  be  held  sacred ; you  will 
be  protected  in  person  and  property.  It  is  only  over  the  enemies  of 
government  and  law  that  an  avenging  hand  will  be  raised. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

• E.  H.  CARRUTH, 

Commissioner  of  U.  S.  Government. 


Headquarters  Kansas  Brigade, 

Barnsville , September  11,  1861. 


Tusaquach,  Chief  of  the  Wichitas  : 


Friend  and  Brother  : It  is  the  wish,  of  the  commissioner  of  the 
United  States  Government  that  you  either  come  to  Kansas  with  your 
friends  the  Seminoles  or  send  two  or  three  of  your  best  braves.  We 
also  want  the  Keechies,  lonies,  Cadoes,  and  the  Comanches  to  send 
some  of  their  men  to  meet  and  have  a talk  with  the  commissioners  of 
your  Great  Father  at  Washington.  His  soldiers  are  as  swift  as  the 
antelope  and  brave  as  the  mountain  bear,  and  they  are  your  friends 
and  brothers.  They  will  give  you  powder  and  lead.  They  will  fight 
by  your  sides.  Your  friend  Black  Beaver  will  meet  you  here,  and  we 
will  drive  away  the  bad  men  who  entered  your  company  last  spring. 
The  Texans  have  killed  the  Wichitas;  we  will  punish  the  Texans. 

Come  with  your  friends  the  Seminoles. 

Your  brother, 


E.  H.  CARRUTH, 

Commissioner  for  the  U.  S.  Government. 


Ko.  11. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  C.  Young , Eleventh  Texas  Cavalry , of  engagement  at 
Cliustenahlah , Cherohee  Nation. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  action  of  my  regiment  in  the 
engagement  of  the  26th  December.  I took  up  my  position  on  the  left, 
according  to  your  instructions,  at  the  commencement  of  the  action.  I 
remained  there  until  the  woods  were  on  fire,  and  being  satisfied  that 
the  enemy  did  not  intend  an  attack  on  our  left,  I moved  my  regiment 
in  the  direction  of  the  mountains,  on  the  right.  On  moving  up  the 
first  mountain  I passed  Major  Chilton,  of  Colonel  Greer’s  regiment,  who 
was  wounded  in  the  head,  and  learning  from  him  the  direction  the 
enemy  had  taken,  I moved  my  regiment  in  an  oblique  direction  through 
the  mountains,  where,  after  going  some  2 miles,  we  came  up  with  the 
enemy,  strongly  posted  among  the  rocks  and  timber.  We  immediately 
charged  them,  carrying  everything  before  us.  After  this  the  enemy, 
being  completely  routed,  ran  in  different  directions.  My  regiment 
then  pursued  them  in  detachment  of  companies,  keeping  up  a running 
fight  until  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  The  regiment  was  then  raided, 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


27 


and  we  proceeded  to  gather  up  the  killed  and  wounded,  which  we  suc- 
ceeded in  doing,  and  reached  camp  a little  after  dark. 

My  regiment  killed  211,  viz : By  the  staff,  3 ; a detachment  of  36 
men  from  the  companies  of  Captains  Twitty,  Beeves,  and  Young,  com- 
manded by  Capt,  J.  D.  Young,  killed  34 ; Captain  Harman’s  company 
killed  16;  Captain  Burk’s  company  killed  30;  Captain  Nicholson’s 
company  killed  16;  Captain  Bound’s  company  killed  26;  Captain 
Featherston’s  company  killed  10 ; Captain  Hill’s  company  killed  26 ; 
Captain  Wallace’s  company,  50.  Total  killed,  211. 

Our  loss  killed  on  the  held  was  1 private,  William  Franklin,  Cap- 
tain Harman’s  company;  mortally  wounded,  Sergt.  W.  H.  H.  Adding- 
ton, of  Captain  Young’s  detachment,  and  W.  S.  Proctor,  of  Captain 
Wallis’  company;  and  J.  N.  Bobinson,  of  Captain  Wallis’  company, 
severely  wounded,  left  arm  broken;  slightly  wounded,  Capt,  J.  IX 
Young,  in  the  thigh,  and  Benjamin  Clark,  private  in  Captain  Feather- 
ston’s company,  wounded  in  the  leg.  Total  killed  and  wounded,  6.  In 
Captain  Nicholson’s  company  3 horses  shot,  and  in  Captain  Harman’s 
company  3 horses  shot.  Captain  Featherston’s  company  lost  — ; Cap- 
tain Hiil’s,  1 killed.  In  Captain  Wallis’  company  1 horse  killed  and  1 
disabled.  In  Captain  Burk’s  company  1 horse  lost. 

We  took  a great  many  women,  children,  and  negroes  prisoners ; also 
a number  of  horses  and  cattle,  which  were  turned  over,  by  your  order, 
to  Captain  Gipson,  of  the  Arkansas  regiment. 

In  conclusion,  I am  proud  to  say  that  both  officers  and  men  of  my 
regiment  behaved  throughout  the  engagement  as  became  soldiers  and 
Texans. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F ’ W.  C.  YOUNG, 

Colonel , Commanding  Texas  Cavalry. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Lieut  Cot  John  S.  Griffith , Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry , 
of  engagement  at  Chustenahlali , Cherokee  Nation. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Texas  Begiment, 

Camp  Hominy  Creek , Cherokee  Nation , December  27,  1861. 

Colonel  : On  the  26th  instant,  at  12  m.,  I was  ordered  by  you  to 
move  my  command  up  on  the  right  of  and  parallel  with  Colonel  Lane’s 
command.  This  executed  brought  me  to  Hominy  Creek,  when  I was 
further  ordered  to  dismount  my  men  and  form  a line.  When  Colonel 
Lane  made  his  gallant  charge  on  the  enemy  I ordered  my  men  to  their 
horses,  formed,  and  rapidly  advanced  in  a flanking  movement  you  in- 
tended for  me  to  make  up  the  valley  for  half  a mile,  crossed  over  to 
the  west,  or  battle  side  of  the  creek,  proceeded  a short  distance  up,  and 
discovered  the  enemy  upon  the  opposite  bank.  I charged  across  the 
creek,  put  the  enemy  to  rout,  continued  up  the  valley  something  like 
a half  mile  farther,  cutting  off  all  the  straggling  and  then  flying  Indians 
in  that  direction.  I then  turned  to  the  left  in  a northwestward  direction 
over  the  rocky  hills  and  gorges  that  made  into  the  larger  gorge  that  was 
then  in  between  Colonel  Lane’s  command  and  mine.  Continuing  this 
course,  I crossed  over  five  or  six  rocky  hills,  on  three  of  which,  behind 
the  rocks,  the  enemy  were  in  position  in  considerable  numbers.  My 
men  gallantly  charged  in  succession,  putting  them  completely  to  rout. 
It  was  during  these  charges  that  the  brave  and  gallant  Lieutenant 
Fitzliue  and  Thomas  Arnold  fell  among  the  foremost  in  the  light. 


28 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

After  going  about  3 miles  in  this  direction  T came  to  the  Cross  Hol- 
lows. There  the  enemy  were  collected  in  large  numbers.  Dismounting 
my  men,  we  poured  a galling  tire  on  them  at  about  12o  yards  distance, 
which  finally  dislodged  them.  From  thence  I proceeded  in  a westward 
direction,  cutting  off  occasionally  straggling  Indians,  until  3.30  o’clock 
p.  m.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  by  my  command,  as  near  as  can  be  esti- 
mated by  myself  and  officers,  is  70  killed;  that  of  my  own  men,  15 
killed  and  wounded,  as  follows,  to  wit : Company  C,  Lieutenant  Smith 
commanding,  E.  V.  Howell,  mortally  wounded  in  the  head;  John  B. 
West,  wounded  in  the  wrist.  Company  D,  Lieutenant  Kelly  command- 
ing, Bugler  J.  B.  Harris,  killed ; G.  W.  Coffman,  wounded  in  breast. 
Company  E,  Captain  Wharton  commanding,  William  Spencer,  wounded 
in  breast ; W.  P.  Wright,  wounded  in  breast  and  arm.  Company  F, 
Sergeant  Young  commanding,  James  Green,  mortally  wounded,  shoulder 
and  wrist;  Henry  Ellis,  wounded  in  leg;  George  W.  Wilson,  wounded 
in  chest  and  arm";  Leonard  Sheffield,  wounded  in  breast.  Company  G, 
Captain  Boss  commanding,  Thomas  T.  Arnold,  killed ; J.  H.  Whitting- 
ton, wounded  in  groin.  Company  H,  Lieutenant  Whittington  com- 
manding, First  Sergt.  B.  H.  Baker,  wounded  slightly  in  shoulder ; A. 
M.  Keller,  wounded  slightly  in  hand.  Company  K,  Captain  Throck- 
morton commanding.  First  Lieut.  G.  S.  Fitzkue,  killed. 

At  3.30  o’clock  I started  back  to  where  the  battle  commenced,  where 
I arrived  at  dark,  bringingin  75  women  and  children  as  prisoners  and 
3 negroes  and  80  horses,  which  are  herewith  turned  over  to  you.  To 
the  brave  and  gallant  Captains  Boss,  Hardin,  Wharton,  and  Throck- 
morton, and  Lieutenants  Scott,  Cummings,  Kelley,  Smith,  and  Whit- 
tington, and  Sergeant  Young  I am  much  indebted  for  the  success  we 
had  by  their  fearless  charges  in  the  front  of  their  respective  commands, 
which  so  signally  routed  the  enemy  from  every  point.  I am  indebted 
to  Adjutant  Gurley  and  Sergeant-Major  Porter  for  their  efficiency  in 
transmitting  orders,  as  well  as  for  good  figh  ting.  Lieutenants  Truitt, 
V anee,  and  Cannon,  and  every  non-commissioned  officer  and  private,  for 
so  nobly  sustaining  their  officers,  not  only  deserve  my  thanks,  but  the 
applause  of  their  countrymen.  Assistant  Surgeon  Bradford  did  good 
duty  as  a soldier  in  the  ranks  until  his  presence  was  required  with  the 
wounded,  whom  he  has  since  constantly  and  skillfully  attended. 

Before  closing  I must  return  my  sincere  thanks  to  Captains  Boss, 
Wharton,  and  Throckmorton,  and  Adjutant  Gurley  for  timely  assist- 
ance when  I was  in  imminent  personal  peril,  and  my  gratitude  to 
Providence  for  crowning  our  arms  with  victory. 

With  respect,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  S.  GBIFFITH, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry. 

Col.  James  McIntosh,  Commanding. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Walter  P.  Lane , Third  Texas  ( South  Kansas- 
Texas)  Cavalry , of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah , Cherokee  Ration. 

Begimental  Encampment, 

South  Kansas- Texas  Cavalry , December  26,  1861. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  my  command 
in  the  battle  of  Chustenahlah,  on  the  26th  instant: 

1 had  with  me  the  greater  portion  of  five  companies,  to  wit,  Companies 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


29 


A B E,  F,  and  G.  To  these  were  attached  a few  from  other  companies 
in?  the  regiment,  in  all  about  350  men.  Company  A was  commanded  by 
Sergt.  B.  B.  Gause,  Company  B by  Lieut.  M.  D.  Ector,  Company  E by 
Capt.  D.  M.  Short,  Company  F by  Capt.  Isham  Chisum,  and  Company 
G by  Lieut,  O.  A.  Durrum.  Our  advance  guard,  in  command  of  Cap- 
tain Short,  being  fired  upon  by  the  enemy,  stood  firm  until  our  force 
came  up.  It  was  at  once  evident  that  the  enemy  were  in  force  and  had 
taken  a very  strong  position,  protected  and  sheltered  to  a great  extent 
by  trees  and  rocks,  with  an  open  prairie  in  front  of  them.  I was 
ordered  to  charge  the  strongest  point  of  the  enemy.  When  the  reg- 
iments had  taken  the  different  positions  assigned  them  the  bugle 
sounded  the  charge.  As  we  approached  the  foot  of  the  bill  the  enemy 
opened  a heavy  fire  upon  us.  No  confusion  was  created  by  it  in  our 
advancing  columns.  Many  of  the  enemy  made  for  their  stronghold  on 
the  top  of  the  hill,  where  there  was  a natural  breastwork  of  rocks,  and 
fired  over  the  rocks  at  us.  Many  of  my  men,  without  making  any  halt, 
gained  the  heights  by  the  few  narrow  entrances  on  the  side  where  it 
was  alone  accessible,  while  others  dismounted  and  scaled  the  rock,  and 
here  for  a*  short  time  a desperate  struggle  ensued.  Many  shots  were 
fired  when  the  contending  parties  were  only  in  a few  steps  of  each 
other,  and  in  some  instances  they  were  engaged  in  a hand-to-hand 
struggle.  Soon  the  point  was  cleared  by  us,  and  the  enemy  retreated 
in  great  confusion,  some  of  them  making  a stand  for  a short  time  in  the 
deep  gorges  and  rocky  defiles  of  the  mountains.  When  we*had  com- 
pletely scattered  and  routed  those  who  had  made  a stand  against  us, 
hearing  a heavy  firing  northeast,  I obliqued  with  my  command  in  that 
direction,  and  joined  Colonel  Stone’s  regiment,  with  which  I co-operated 
during  the  remainder  of  the  battle,  going  where,  from  the  firing,  we 
would  be  most  likely  to  come  up  with  the  largest  bodies  of  the  enemy. 
We  continued  in  the  pursuit  until  one  hour  by  sun  in  the  evening. 

It  is  due  to  all  those  in  command  of  companies  to  say  that  they  de- 
serve great  credit  for  the  manner  they  led  their  companies  into  the 
charge  and  for  their  conduct  throughout  the  battle.  The  truth  is, 
every  officer  and  private  in  my  command  acted  gallantly  and  to  my  en- 
tire satisfaction  during  the  engagement.  I am  proud  indeed  that  at 
such  a time  it  was  my  fortune  to  command  such  men.  When  I con- 
sider the  position  occupied  by  the  enemy,  I deem  it  nothing  but  due  to 
you  to  state  that  the  battle  was  admirably  planned,  and  was  executed 
by  the  different  commands  in  a manner  calculated  to  reflect  great  credit 
on  our  arms. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

’ J W.  P.  LANE, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  South  Kansas- Texas  Cavalry. 

James  McIntosh, 

Colonel , Commanding , and  Acting  Brigadier -General. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  Gipson , Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifes , of 
engagement  at  C/instenahlah , Cherokee  Ration. 

December  28,  1861. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  in  the  battle  of  Ohustenahlah  by  the  battalion  of  your  regiment 


30 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


under  my  command,  composed  of  tlie  following  companies : My  own, 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  Scott;  Captain  Parker’s,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant  Caldwell;  Captain  Bang’s,  commanded  in  person;  and  Cap- 
tain Flannagan’s,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Callaway.  In  consequence  j 
of  the  companies  being  reduced  by  sickness  and  leave  of  absence,  the 
whole  number  under  my  command  amounted  to  only  130  men. 

On  the  morning  of  the  26th  December,  after  marching  10  miles,  we 
came  in  sight  of  the  encampment  of  the  enemy,  between  whom  and  our 
advance  guard  an  animated  fire  soon  ensued.  In  obedience  to  your 
order  I took  position  in  the  center,  Colonels  Greer  and  Stone’s  regiment 
on  my  right  and  Colonel  Young’s  regiment  and  Captain  Bennett’s  com- 
pany on  my  left.  At  the  command  we  charged  the  enemy,  who  were 
positioned  at  a distance  of  200  yards  in  the  timber,  and  firing  upon  us 
from  the  points  of  the  hills  and  valleys  between.  After  our  first  fire 
they  fell  back  among  cliffs  of  rocks.  We  then  dismounted,  again 
attacked  them,  and  again  routed  them.  Finding  that  we  could  not 
overtake  them  on  foot,  we  returned  to  our  horses  and  followed  up  the 
retreat  for  2 miles.  Coming  in  sight  of  them,  we  again  charged  and 
routed  them.  We  followed  up  the  retreat  for  3 miles,  shooting  and  cut- 
ting the  enemy  down  all  along  the  route.  I estimate  that  we  killed  from 
80  to  100.  I had  none  killed. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  wounded,  viz : 

My  own  company : Private  J.  G.  Humphrey,  dangerously ; Private 
W.  C.  Ejfpler,  dangerously ; Private  M.  G.  Blaylock, 'wounded  in  the 
arm ; Private  Biley  Nicholson,  slightly. 

Captain  Parker’s  company:  William  McCarthey,  wounded  in  the  head. 

Captain  King’s  company:  Joseph  H.  Bradford,  wounded  slightly; 
Bobert  D.  Bolton,  wounded  slightly. 

Officers  and  men  under  my  command  fought  bravely  and  did  their 
whole  duty. 

WM.  GIPSON, 

Senior  Capt .,  Comdg.  Bat.  Second  Ark.  Mounted  Riflemen. 

Colonel  McIntosh,  Commanding. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Capt.  H.  S.  Bennett , Lamar  Cavalry  Company , of  engagement 
at  Chustenahlah , Cherolcee  Nation. 

I beg  leave  to  state  that  on  the  day  of  the  battle  I had  in  my  com- 
mand 40  men,  and  that  we  formed  in  line  for  battle  about  12  noon,  and 
in  a very  short  time  made  a charge  on  the  enemy,  then  stationed  about 
300  yards  distant,  who  instantly  upon  the  charge  being  made  fell  back 
upon  the  opposite  side  of  a ravine,  covered  with  bush  and  vine,  and  on 
our  approacli  to  that  point  we  received  orders  to  dismount;  but  finding 
the  enemy  at  such  a distance,  retreating  and  firing,  I immediately  or- 
dered my  company  to  remount  and  charge;  but  before  reaching  the 
base  of  the  mountain  the  enemy  had  ascended  its  top  and  made  a stand, 
and  as  we  charged  to  the  top  of  a steep  and  rocky  mountain  we  encoun- 
tered a very  heavy  fire  from  the  enemy,  about  100  strong.  v We  ascended 
the  mountain  in  good  order,  and  made  a desperate  charge  and  at  once 
put  the  enemy  to  flight.  The  enemy  retreated  in  disorder.  Occa- 
sionally from  ambush  or  the  cover  of  trees  and  rocks  we  received 
their  deadly  shots,  and  in  this  manner  the  conflict  continued  until  we 


Chap.  XVHL] 


OPERATIONS  IN  INDIAN  TERRITORY. 


31 


had  completely  routed  them  from  the  mountain,  and  then  the  first  strug- 
gle ended,  the  company  killing  some  20  of  the  enemy  and  wounding 
some  9 or  10.  The  number  killed  in  my  company  was  2— Privates  F. 
Lane  and  H.  E.  Wilson.  One  slightly  wounded. 

A portion  of  my  command,  under  Lieut.  I.  H.  Wright — whose  gal- 
lantry on  the  occasion  deserves  praise — continued  the  pursuit  some  7 
or  8 miles,  killing  and  wounding  several  more.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to 
state  that  my  small  command  did  battle  with  a courage  and  heroism 
scarcely  equaled. 

The  engagement  on  the  26th  continued  some  three  or  four  hours. 
For  such  a signal  and  glorious  victory  the  highest  praise  is  due  our 
gallant  commander. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

H.  S.  BENNETT, 
Captain,  Lamar  Cavalry . 

Colonel  McIntosh,  Commanding  Forces. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Col.  James  McIntosh , Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles , com- 
manding division , of  skirmish  with  Creeks  and  Seminoles. 

Headquarters  Division, 

Fort  Smith , Ark.,  January  10,  1862. 

Generae:  In  my  report  to  you  in  regard  to  the  captured  property 
taken  at  Chustenahlah  I should  have  stated  that  190  sheep  were  turned 
over  to  the  commissary,  Captain  Lanigan,  at  Fort  Gibson. 

Since  writing  that  communication  I have  received  a report  from  Colo- 
nel Watie,  commanding  Cherokee  regiment  (who  I left  behind  to  col- 
lect the  stock  taken  from  the  Indians),  stating  that  he  brought  back 
with  him  between  800  and  900  head  of  cattle  and  250  Indian  ponies. 
Colonel  Cooper,  who  marched  with  his  command  of  Indians  over  the 
ground  two  or  three  days  after  the  battle,  also  found  a number  of  cat- 
tle, which  were  secured.  All  this  property  is  in  addition  to  what  I have 
hitherto  reported. 

Colonel  Watie  also  reports  that  on  his  return  to  Grand  Biver  from 
the  battle-field,  he  having  ascertained  that  a company  of  Cherokees 
numbering  50  or  60  were  near  his  camp,  making  their  way  northward, 
with  arms  in  their  hands,  sent  two  companies  to  arrest  them.  In  en- 
deavoring to  accomplish  this  1 Cherokee  was  killed  and  7 made  pris- 
oners. Their  wagons  and  some  of  their  arms  fell  into  the  hands  of 
Colonel  Watie.  From  an  officer  just  in  from  Colonel  Cooper’s  com- 
mand I ascertain  that  Hopoeithleyohola  has  gone  to  Kansas,  and  has 
not  more  than  400  or  500  Creeks  with  him.  Many  of  the  Indians  who 
espoused  his  cause  have  left  him  since  the  battle,  and  are  now  anxious 
to  come  in  and  make  a treaty.  As  we  have  made  them  entirely  desti- 
tute, 1 think  all  but  Hopoeithleyohola’s  immediate  followers  will  come  in. 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  MCINTOSH, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Forces,  Richmond,  Va. 


32 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  XVIII. 


NO.  17. 

Report  of  Col  Stand  Watie , Second  Cherokee  Mounted  Rifles , of  skirmish 
tvith  Creeks  and  Seminoles. 

Headquarters, 

On  Shoal  Creek , December  28,  1861. 

Colonel:  In  the  march  upon  the  enemy  yesterday  the  force  under 
my  command  had  proceeded  some  20  or  25  miles  when  my  scouts,  under 
Captain  Coody,  reported  the  enemy  in  considerable  force  on  the  hills 
to  my  left.  I immediately  left  the  route  you  were  pursuing  and  took 
my  command  to  the  place  where  the  enemy  had  been  seen.  They  had 
discovered  my  approach  and  retreated  to  strong  positions  among  the 
hills  and  mountain  gorges.  I placed  about  half  of  the  command  under 
Major  Boudinot,  directing  him  to.  go  to  the  left,  while  I took  command 
of  the  rest  to  the  right.  The  enemy  was  scattered  over  a large  scope 
of  country,  much  of  it  inaccessible  to  horses,  but  my  men  attacked  the' 
enemy  wherever  found,  never  failing  to  route  them  from  their  strong- 
holds. The  fight  continued  with  intervals  for  two  hours  or  more. 
What  is  quite  remarkable,  none  of  my  men  were  either  killed  or 
wounded.  According  to  the  best  estimates  I can  make  of  the  loss  of 
the  enemy,  it  could  not  be  less  that  9 or  10  killed.  1 cannot  tell  the 
number  of  wounded,  but  I have  reason  to  think  it  quite  small.  This 
estimate  does  not  include  the  killed  of  the  enemy  by  the  force  under 
Major  Boudinot,  whose  report  of  the  doings  of  his  command  is  here- 
with respectfully  submitted.  Captain  Jumen  and  Oapt.  Joe  Thomp- 
son commanded  the  part  of  the  force  which  I took  charge  of.  The 
officers  and  men  of  their  companies  behaved  with  signal  gallantry. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

STAND  WATIE, 
Commanding  Cherokee  Regiment . 

Colonel  McIntosh,  Commanding. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Mag.  E.  C.  Boudinot , Second  Cherokee  Mounted  Rifles , of  skir- 
mish with  Creeks  and  Seminoles. 

Headquarters, 

Shoal  Creek , December  28,  1861. 

Colonel:  In  obedience  to  your  order  I took  charge  of  the  left 
division  of  the  force  under  your  command  in  the  attack  made  upon  the 
enemy  yesterday.  The  enemy  were  seen  upon  every  hill  and  in  every 
valley,  and  according  to  the  best  estimate  we  could  make  of  their 
strength  they  must  have  numbered  from  500  to  600  warriors.  They 
made  no  determined  stand,  but  were  driven  by  our  soldiers  from  point 
to  point.  Every  man  seemed  anxious  to  be  foremost,  and  the  charges 
made  upon  the  enemy  over  rocks,  mountains,  and  valleys — the  roughest 
country  I ever  saw — were  made  with  the  utmost  enthusiasm,  and  with 
irresistible  impetuosity.  Although  the  firing  was  brisk  and  rapid  for 
an  hour  and  a half,  with  intervals  of  following  the  enemy  from  one 
position  to  another,  none  of  the  men  in  my  division  were  killed  cr 
wounded. 


Chap.  XV1II.3 


ACTION  AT  SALEM,  MO. 


33 


The  killed  of  the  enemy  it  is  impossible  to  estimate  accurately,  as 
the  skirmishing  was  over  so  much  ground,  so  I give  only  the  number 
which  I am  sure  were  counted,  which  is  11  killed;  the  wounded  un- 


The  companies  in  the  left  division  were  commanded  by  Captains 
Bell.  Maves,  Parks,  and  Coody,  who  all  distinguished  themselves  by 
their  daring  and  gallantry,  as  did  also  every  officer  and  soldier  in  the 
command.  You  yourself  had  charge  of  the  remainder  of  the  force. 
We  took  some  75  prisoners,  together  with  25  or  30  pack  horses,  which 
afterwards  were  released  by  your  order.  It  is  due  Colonel  Taylor  to 
state  that  when  you  gave  me  the  command  of  the  left  division  he  was 
thought  to  be  in  your  division,  and  after  I discovered  him  in  mine  I 
yielded  to  his  superior  rank,  and  gave  no  orders  but  what  were  con- 
curred  in  or  first  given  by  him.  a 0 BOUDINOT, 

Major , Cherokee  Regiment . 


Col.  Stand  Watie,  Cherokee  Regiment, 


DECEMBER  3,  1861.— Action  at  Salem,  Mo. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  John  B.  Wyman,  Thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Maj.  William  D.  Bowen,  First  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  John  B.  Wyman , Thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Headquarters,  Rolla , December  4,  1861. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  on  Thursday  last 
Colonel  Dodge  requested  me  to  send  a small  party  to  Salem  and  vicin- 
ity, to  bring  in  some  witnesses  in  the  case  of  some  prisoners  he  has  now 
in  the  fort.  I made  the  arrangement  for  40  men  to  go  the  next  morn- 
ing. In  the  mean  time  one  of  my  scouts  came  in  from  Salem  and  below 
there,  and  reported  that  Freeman,  with  80  or  100  men,  was  in  the  vicin- 
ity. I therefore  increased  the  detachment  to  120  men,  with  proper 
officers,  all  under  command  of  Major  Bowen.  He  left  Friday,  at  9 a.  m., 
and  reached  Salem  same  afternoon  (25  miles).  Saturday  and  Sunday 
he  devoted  to  scouring  the  country.  Did  not  find  Freeman,  but  took 
8 prisoners,  all  of  whom  have  been  in  the  rebel  army. 

On  Monday  morning  at  4 o’clock  Freeman  approached  Salem  with 
over  300  men,  and  when  within  2 miles  dismounted  his  men  and  made 
his  way  through  the  brush  and  woods  (thus  avoiding  the  pickets),  and 
got  to  the  inside  picket  line  before  any  one  was  aware  of  his  approach. 
Driving  in  these  pickets,  they  proceeded  to  the  quarters  of  Company  A 
and  commenced  their  attack.  How  bravely  and  gloriously  they  were 
repulsed  I leave  you  to  judge  from  reading  the  report  of  the  major, 
which  1 have  this  moment  received. 

I beg  also  to  inform  you  that  upon  the  receipt  of  the  news  yesterday 
at  12  o’clock  I ordered  a re-enforcement  sent  Major  Bowen,  and  at  I p. 
m.  130  chosen  men  left  this  post  and  at  6 p.  m.  had  joined  the  major 
at  Salem,  who  was  at  that  hour  in  peaceable  possession  of  the  town, 

3 R r— vol  viii 


34 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVITL 


although  anticipating  another  attack  last  night,  but  feeling  fully  con- 
fident he  could  cope  with  them  successfully  if  they  dared  to  do  so. 

1 should  be  glad  to  receive  orders  from  you  to  take  or  send  such  a 
force  as  would  either  exterminate  or  drive  them  out  of  the  State.  I 
am  informed  by  reliable  parties  that  Freeman  and  Turner  both  intend 


to  winter  in  Dent  County,  and  have  laid  in  stores  and  forage  for  that 
purpose.  In  fact,  the  prisoners  inform  me  they  swear  they  “will  do  so 
or  die.” 

Awaiting  your 
yours, 


orders,  I am,  general,  respectfully  and  obediently , 


J.  B.  WYMAN, 
Colonel  and  Acting  Brigadier- General. 

Major-General  Hallecx, 

Commanding  Department  of  Missouri. 


No.  2. 

Deport  of  Maj.  William  D.  Bowen , First  Battalion  Missouri  Ca  valry. 

Headquarters,  Salem , December  3,  1861. 

Dear  Sir  : I was  attacked  this  morning  at  4 o’clock  by  300  rebels, 
under  command  of  Colonels  Freeman  and  Turner.  They  dismounted 
some  2 miles  from  town,  and  by  coming  through  the  woods  they  got 
inside  of  my  outer  pickets.  They  first  commenced  firing  on  Company 
A’s  quarters,  killing  1 and  wounding  others.  Companies  B and  C, 
being  quartered  some  500  yards  from  them,  rallied  on  foot  to  the  res- 
cue of  Company  A.  After  a hard  fight  of  twenty  minutes  Company  D 
came  up  mounted.  I ordered  Captain  Williams  to  charge  on  the  rebels, 
who  were  then  retreating,  which  was  promptly  done,  dispersing  them 
in  every  direction.  My  officers  and  men  proved  themselves  to  be  sol- 
diers, and  I feel  I have  just  reason  to  be  proud  of  them.  My  force  con- 
sisted of  30  from  each  company — 120  in  all. 

Our  loss  is  2 men  killed,  2 mortally  wounded  (1  since  dead),  and  8 
slightly  wounded.  The  rebel  loss  was  6 killed,  10  mortally  wounded, 
20  slightly  wounded.  We  also  took  several  guns. 

I am,  general,  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

’ & ’ W.  D.  BOWEN, 

Maj.,  First  Bat.  Car.,  attached  to  Thirteenth  Begt.  111.  Vols. 

Acting  Brigadier-General  Wyman. 


DECEMBER  3-12,  1861.— Scout  through  Saline  County,  Mo. 

Deport  of  Maj.  George  C.  Marshall , Second  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  First  Battalion,  Regiment  Merrill’s  Horse, 

Sedalia , j¥o.,  December  14,  1861. 

Official  report  of  a scout  of  Maj.  George  C.  Marshall’s  command,  com- 
posed of  300  men  of  regiment  Merrill’s  Horse  and  three  companies  of 
regular  cavalry,  through  Saline  County. 

December  3,  marched  northeast  through  Richard  Gentry’s  farm  and 
encamped  at  Union  Church,  on  Dr.  Cartwright’s  farm ; took  several 
prisoners. 


Chap.  XVIII.]  SCOUT  THROUGH  SALINE,  CO.,  MO.  35 

December  4,  marched  northeast  15  miles.  Onr  advance  guard,  of  12 
of  Company  C of  the  Begulars,  was  fired  upon  by  a portion  of  a com- 
pany of  60  rebels,  who  then  retreated  into  the  brush.  This  occurred  in 
front  of  Belwood’s  farm,  their  rendezvous.  Upon  searching  his  house 
2 kegs  of  powder  and  a quantity  of  parts  of  cavalry  equipments  were 
found.  We  encamped  on  Mrs.  Wingfield’s  farm. 

December  5,  marched  about  15  miles ; took  several  prisoners,  some 
horses  and  mules,  and  encamped  on  the  farm  of  the  notorious  Claiborn 
F.  Jackson,  and  raised  the  Stars  and  Stripes  over  the  traitor’s  house. 

December  6,  marched  north  about  18  miles  through  Arrow  Bock, 
where  we  found  several  kegs  of  powder  concealed  in  warehouses ; de- 
stroyed the  ferry-boat,  and  while  doing  it  our  men  were  fired  upon  by 
a few  men  from  across  the  river;  the  fire  having  .been  returned,  the 
enemy  ran.  Leaving  Arrow  Bock,  we  marched  north  through  Saline 
City,  where  we  captured  some  arms  and  powder ; encamped  on  Judge 
Bobert  Field’s  farm. 

December  7,  marched  north  about  18  miles,  and  captured  Captains 
Weed  and  Simmons,  of  General  Clark’s  staff.  The  column  was  halted 
at  8 a.  m.  about  2 miles  from  Glasgow,  and  left  in  command  of  Majoy 
Hunt. 

Major  Marshall,  with  a detachment  of  about  25  men,  proceeded  to 
Boper’s  Mill,  opposite  Glasgow,  where  he  had  learned  a portion  of 
Capt.  Bobert  W.  Swynne’s  company  were  encamped.  They  took  the 
four  pickets  he  had  out  prisoners,  after  giving  one  of  them  a hard  chase, 
thus  enabling  him  to  surprise  all  there.  Lieutenant  El  well  took  the 
left,  with  16  men  ; Sergeant  Bradshaw  the  right,  with  5 men  ; and  the 
major  the  center,  with  3 men.  A portion  of  the  enemy  were  caught 
playing  cards  and  others  getting  breakfast.  Another  portion,  which 
had  just  crossed  the  river  with  the  captain,  well  armed  and  mounted, 
started  to  run,  but  were  soon  halted  by  a few  prompt  shots.  It  was  a 
finely- conducted  surprise,  completely  bagging  the  whole  of  them,  28  in 
number,  and  getting  their  arms,  ammunition,  teams,  cooking  utensils, 
&c.  The  column  then  moved  north  through  Cambridge  and  encamped 
on  William  T.  Gilham’s  farm, 

December  8,  marched  west  about  21  miles.  Nothing  of  interest  oc- 
curred, and  encamped  on  Mr.  Softly’s  farm. 

December  9,  marched  15  miles  west;  found  Government  wagons,  5 
of  which  we  brought  with  us  and  destroyed  3,  being  unable  to  get 
mules  or  harness  to  bring  them  with  us.  Encamped  on  Mr.  McBey- 
nolds’  farm,  2 miles  from  Waverly.  Joseph  Shelby  brought  his  company 
down  that  night  to  try  to  annoy  us  by  firing  at  our  pickets  and  to  try 
to  scare  us  by  bombarding  us  with  a 10-inch  mortar  loaded  with  mud. 
Lieutenants  Kelly’s  and  Gordon’s  companies  were  called  out,  and  soon 
scattered  them  and  silenced  their  formidable  battery. 

December  10,  marched  into  Waverly  without  any  resistance.  Learning 
there  was  powder  concealed  there,  we  proceeded  to  search  some  of  the 
stores,  and  found  9 kegs  of  powder  concealed  under  a platform  in  Shel- 
by’s store.  The  celebrated  mortar  was  found  and  taken.  A 6-pounder 
^un-carriage  was  destroyed,  the  gun  having  been  bursted  a few  days 
before  we  arrived  there.  Shelby  stopped  with  his  company  on  a high 
bluff  across  a deep  ravine,  watching  our  movements,  the  enemy  amus- 
ing themselves  by  shooting  at  our  men,  when  Lieutenant  Kelly  was 
ordered  to  charge  on  them,  but  they  fled  in  perfect  security  on  their 
swift  steeds. 

We  only  had  to  lament  one  of  the  regulars  breaking  his  leg  in  the 
charge  by  his  saddle  turning,  and  the  sad  accident  of  Samuel  Jones, 


36 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVHL 


corporal  Company  E,  in  accidentally  shooting  himself,  causing  his  in- 
stant death. 

Leaving  Waverly,  we  marched  back  5 miles  and  encamped  on  Mrs. 
Murphy’s  farm. 

December  11,  marched  east  through  Marshall,  about  27  miles,  and 
encamped  on  Mrs.  Wingfield’s  farm. 

December  12,  marched  to  Sedalia  through  Georgetown,  about  23 
miles. 

G.  C.  MARSHALL, 

Major , Commanding. 


DECEMBER  5-9,  1861. — Expedition  through  the  Current  Hills,  Mo. 

REFORTS. 


No.  1. — Col.  John  B.  Wyman,  Thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Maj.  William  D Bowen,  First  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 


Report  of  Col.  John  B.  Wyman , Thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Headquarters,  Rolla , December  10,  1861. 

Captain  : I inclose  copies  of  dispatches  received  from  Major  Bowen 
at  1 o’clock  this  morning.  By  them  you  will  see  that  the  major  has 
fallen  back  to  Salem,  which  place  he  will  hold  until  further  orders. 
My  opinion  is  that  a force  sufficient  to  hold  that  place  should  be  placed 
there  permanently,  say  four  companies  cavalry  and  one  battery  artil- 
lery. I feel  confident  it  would  have  the  effect  to  keep  McBride  and 
Freeman  at  a proper  distance.  I submit  this  for  the  consideration  of 
our  general  and  await  orders. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

J.  B.  WYMAN, 

Acting  Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  D.  Bowen)  First  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters,  Salem , December  9,  1861. 

Dear  Sir  : On  the  5th  we  advanced  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  Find- 
ing they  had  retreated  to  the  Current  Hills,  we  pursued  them  four  days 
through  one  of  the  roughest  countries  I have  ever  been  in.  We  were 
two  nights  and  two  days  in  the  saddle,  stopping  only  a half  hour  at  a 
time  to  feed.  I followed  them  from  Jack’s  Forks  to  Spring  Valley, 
scouring  the  country  in  every  direction  as  we  advanced.  We  have 
been  sometimes  within  4 miles  of  him,  but  he  has  always  managed  to 
escape  us,  he  having  the  advantage  of  knowing  the  by-paths.  Cap- 
tain Montgomery,  being  the. advance  guard  of  our  column,  on  the  7th 
ran  into  a party  of  the  enemy,  but  they  discovered  him  and  fled  to  the 
hills.  He  fired  several  shots  at  him  without  effect.  It  being  a very 
rough  country,  heavy  timber,  and  dark,  it  was  impossible  to  follow 


Chap.  XVIII.]  BLACKWATER  CREEK,  OR  MILFORD,  MO.  37 

them.  My  command  being  out  of  provisions  and  scarcity  of  forage,  I 
have  had  to  fall  back  to  Salem. 

Freeman  has  retreated  to  McBride’s  command  at  Thomasville  and  is 
again  advancing  on  the  Currents.  I shall  be  pleased,  with  your  per- 
mission, to  have  another  turn  with  him  in  the  Current  Hills ; also  to 
be  furnished  with  two  weeks’  rations,  as  the  country  is  entirely  desti- 
tute of  everything  in  the  provision  line.  I have  taken  20  prisoners 
and  some  35  horses.  I think  it  is  very  necessary  for  the  service  to 
keep  a force  in  Salem,  and  also  to  meet  them  on  the  Current  Hills. 
Scouts  sent  out  by  Captain  Stevens  have  not  yet  returned. 

I await  your  further  orders,  and  remain,  your  humble  servant, 

W.  D.  BOWEN, 

Major. 

Acting  Brigadier-General  Wyman. 

P.  S.— 

General  : Will  you  please  inform  me  what  I will  do  with  the 
prisoners'?  A portion  was  taken  with  arms.  I am  satisfied  they  are 
all  Freeman’s  men.  I think  if  half  of  them  were  kicked  and  let  go  it 
would  be  the  best  thing  we  could  do  with  them,  for  they  are  already 
near  scared  to  death. 

Your  humble  servant, 

W.  D.  BOWEN. 


DECEMBER  18,  1861.— Skirmish  at  Black  water  Creek,  or  Milford,  Mo. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Copley  Amory,  Fourth  U.  S.  Cavalry. 

No.  4 —Letter  from  Col.  Fred.  Steele,  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

f 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  20,  1861. 

A part  of  General  Pope’s  forces,  under  Col.  J.  C.  Davis  and  Major 
Marshall,  surprised  another  camp  of  the  enemy,  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
18th,  atMilford,  a little  north  of  WTarrensburg.  Abrisk  skirmish  ensued, 
when  the  enemy,  finding  himself  surrounded,  surrendered  at  discretion. 
We  took  1,300  prisoners,  including  3 colonels  and  17  captains,  and  1,000 
stand  of  arms,  1,000  horses,  65  wagons,  and  a large  quantity  of  tents, 
baggage,  supplies.  Our  loss  2 killed  and  8 wounded.  Enemy’s  loss 
not  yet  known.  Information  received  last  night  from  Glasgow  that  our 
troops  at  that  place  had  taken  about  2 tons  powder  in  kegs  buried  on 
Jackson’s  farm.  This  effectually  cuts  off  their  supply  of  ammunition. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Major-General , Commanding  Army. 


38 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVHL 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope , XT.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Otterville , December  23,  1861. 

Captain:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that,  having  replaced  by 
troops  from  La  Mine  the  garrison  of  Sedalia,  I marched  from  that 
place  on  Sunday,  the  15th  inst.,  with  a column  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and 
artillery,  numbering  about  4,000  men.  The  First  Brigade  was  com- 
manded by  Col.  J.  C.  Davis,  Indiana  Volunteers ; the  second  by  Col. 
F.  Steele,  Eighth  Iowa  Regiment.  The  object  of  the  movement  was  to 
interpose  between  Price’s  army,  on  the  Osage,  and  the  recruits,  escorts, 
and  supplies  on  their  way  south  from  the  Missouri  River.  This  body 
of  the  enemy  was  represented  to  be  between  4,000  and  6,000  strong,  with 
a large  train  of  supplies. 

I encamped  on  the  15th  11  miles  southwest  of  Sedalia.  That  the 
enemy  might  be  thoroughly  misled  as  to  the  destination  of  the  expedi- 
tion, it  was  given  out  that  the  movement  was  upon  Warsaw,  and  the 
troops  pursued  the  road  to  that  place,  several  miles  beyond  Sedalia. 
I threw  forward  on  Clinton  four  companies  of  the  First  Missouri  Cav- 
alry, under  Major  Hubbard,  with  orders  to  watch  any  movements  from 
Osceola,  to  prevent  any  reconnaissance  of  our  main  column,  and  to  in- 
tercept any  messengers  to  the  enemy  at  Osceola. 

On  the  16th  I pushed  forward  by  forced  marches  27  miles,  and  with 
my  whole  force  occupied  at  sunset  a position  between  the  direct  road 
from  Warrensburg  to  Clinton  and  the  road  by  Chilhowee,  which  latter 
is  the  route  heretofore  pursued  by  returning  soldiers  and  by  recruits. 
Shortly  after  sunset  the  advance,  consisting  of  four  companies  of  Iowa 
cavalry,  under  Major  Torrence,  captured  the  enemy’s  pickets  at  Chilho- 
wee, and  learned  that  he  was  encamped  in  force  (about  2,200)  6 miles 
north  of  that  town.  After  resting  the  horses  and  men  for  a couple  of 
hours  I threw  forward  ten  companies  of  cavalry  and  a section  of  artil- 
lery, under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown,  Seventh  Missouri  Regiment,  in 
pursuit,  and  followed  with  my  whole  force,  posting  the  main  body  be- 
tween Warrensburg  and  Rose  Hill  to  support  the  pursuing  column.  I 
at  the  same  time  re-enforced  Major  Hubbard  with  two  companies  of 
Merrill’s  Horse,  and  directed  him,  in  order  to  secure  our  flank  in  the 
pursuit,  to  push  forward  as  far  as  possible  towards  Osceola.  This  offi- 
cer executed  his  duty  with  distinguished  ability  and  vigor,  driving  back 
and  capturing  the  pickets  and  one  entire  company  of  the  enemy’s  cav- 
alry, with  tents,  baggage,  and  wagons.  One  of  the  pickets  and  two 
wagons  were  captured  within  the  lines  of  Rains’  division,  encamped 
north  of  Osage  River. 

The  column  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown  continued  the  pursuit 
vigorously  all  night  of  the  16th,  all  day  of  the  17th,  and  part  of  the 
night  of  the  same  day,  his  advance  guard,  consisting  of  Foster’s  com- 
pany of  Ohio  cavalry  and  a detachment  of  30  men  of  the  Fourth  Regu- 
lar Cavalry  occupying  Johnstown  in  the  course  of  the  night.  The 
enemy  began  to  scatter  as  soon  as  the  pursuit  grew  close,  disappear- 
ing iii  every  direction  in  the  bushes  and  by  every  by-path,  driving  their 
wagons  into  farm-yards  remote  from  the  road  and  throwing  out  the 
loads.  As  these  wagons  were  all  two-horse  wagons  of  the  country,  and 
had  been  in  fact  taken  by  force  from  the  farm-houses,  it  was  impossible 
to  identify  them. 

When  our  pursuit  reached  Johnstown,  about  midnight  on  the  17th, 


;hap.  XVIII.]  BLACKWATER  CREEK,  OR  MILFORD,  MO. 


39 


Dhe  enemy,  reduced  to  about  500,  scattered  completely,  one  portion 
feeing  precipitately  towards  Butler  and  the  other  towards  Papinsville. 
Fhe  main  body  of  my  command  moved  slowly  towards  Warrensburg, 
iwaiting  the  return  of  the  force  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown,  which 
proceeded  from  Johnstown  to  scour  the  country  south  of  Grand  Biver 
:o  the  neighborhood  of  Clinton.  In  these  operations  16  wagons,  loaded 
vith  tents  and  supplies,  and  150  prisoners  were  captured.  The  enemy’s 
brce  was  thoroughly  dispersed. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown’s  forces  re- 
oined  the  command.  Knowing  that  there  must  still  be  a large  force 
>f  the  enemy  north  of  us,  I moved  slowly  on  the  18th  towards  Warrens- 
mrg,  and  when  near  that  town  the  spies  and  scouts  I had  sent  before, 
narching  from  Sedalia  in  the  direction  of  Lexington,  Waverly,  and 
Arrow  Bock,  reported  to  me  that  a large  force  was  marching  from  the 
;wo  latter  places,  and  would  encamp  that  night  at  the  mouth  of  Clear 
>eek,  just  south  of  Milford.  I posted  the  main  body  of  my  command 
lear  Warrensburg  and  Knobnoster,  to  close  all  outlet  to  the  south  be- 
ween  those  two  points,  and  dispatched  seven  companies  of  cavalry, 
ive  of  the  First  Iowa  and  two  of  the  Fourth  Begular  Cavalry,  after- 
wards re-enforced  by  another  company  of  regular  cavalry  and  a section 
>f  artillery,  all  under  command  of  Col.  J.  C.  Davis,  Indiana  Volunteers, 
o march  on  the  town  of  Milford,  so  as  to  turn  the  enemy’s  left  and 
•ear  and  intercept  his  retreat  to  the  southeast,  at  the  same  time  direct- 
ng  Major  Marshall,  with  Merrill’s  regiment  of  horse,  to  march  from  War- 
ensburg  on  the  same  point,  turning  the  enemy’s  right  and  rear  and 
brining  a junction  with  Colonel  Davis.  The  main  body  of  my  command 
iccupied  a point  4 miles  south,  and  ready  to  advance  at  a moment’s 
lotice  or  to  intercept  the  enemy’s  retreat  south. 

Colonel  Davis  marched  promptly  and  vigorously  with  the  forces  under 
lis  command,  and  at  a late  hour  in  the  afternoon  came  upon  the  enemy 
mcamped  in  the  wooded  bottom-land  on  the  west  side  of  Blackwater, 
>pposite  the  mouth  of  Clear  Creek.  His  pickets  were  immediately 
Iriven  in  across  the  stream,  which  was  deep,  miry,  and  impassable, 
except  by  a long  narrow  bridge,  which  the  enemy  occupied  in  force— as 
s believed,  under  Colonel  Magoffin.  Colonel  Davis  brought  forward 
lis  force,  and  directed  that  the  bridge  be  carried  by  assault.  The  two 
iompanies  of  the  Fourth  Begular  Cavalry  being  in  advance,  under  the 
■ornmand  respectively  of  Lieutenant  Gordon  and  Lieutenant  Amory, 
were  designated  for  that  service,  and  were  supported  by  the  five  com- 
)anies  of  the  First  Iowa.  Lieutenant  Gordon,  of  the  Fourth  Cavalry, 
ed  the  charge  in  person  with  the  utmost  gallantry  and  vigor,  carried 
he  bridge  in  fine  style,  and  immediately  formed  his  company  on  the 
opposite  side.  He  was  promptly  followed  by  the  other  companies.  The 
force  of  the  enemy  posted  at  the  bridge  retreated  precipitately  over  a 
larrow  open  space  into  the  woods,  where  his  whole  force  was  posted. 
The  two  companies  of  the  Fourth  Cavalry  formed  in  line  at  once,  ad- 
vanced upon  the  enemy,  and  were  received  with  a heavy  volley  of  small 
inns,  muskets,  rifles,  and  shot-guns-.  One  man  was  killed  and  8 
wounded  by  this  discharge,  with  one  exception  all  belonging  to  Com- 
>any  D,  Fourth  Cavalry,  Lieutenant  Gordon.  Lieutenant  Gordon  him- 
elf  received  several  balls  through  his  cap.  Our  forces  still  continuing 
o press  forward, f and  the  enemy  finding  his  retreat  south  and  west  cut 
>ff,  and  that  he  was  in  presence  of  a large  force,  and  at  best  could  only 
irolong  the  contest  a short  time,  surrendered  at  discretion.  His  force, 
eported  by  the  colonel  commanding,  consisted  of  parts  of  two  regiments 
>f  infantry  and  three  companies  of  cavalry,  numbering  in  all  1,300  men, 


40 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xviix. 


among  whom  there  were  three  colonels  (Robinson,  Alexander,  and  Ma- 
goffin),one  lieutenant- colon  el  (Robinson),  and  one  major  (Harris),  and 
51  commissioned  company  officers. 

About  500  horses  and  mules,  73  wagons  heavily  leaded  with  powder, 
lead,  tents,  subsistence  stores,  and  supplies  of  various  kinds,  fell  into  | 
our  hands,  as  also  1,000  stand  of  arms. 

The  whole  force  captured,  with  their  train,  were  marched  into  the 
camp  of  the  main  body,  reaching  there  about  midnight.  Many  arms 
were  thrown  away  by  the  enemy  in  the  bushes  or  creek  when  he  sur-  * 
rendered  and  have  not  yet  been  found.  It  was  impossible  to  furnish 
any  accurate  account  of  the  number  of  prisoners,  arms,  or  horses  when 
I telegraphed,  as  they  surrendered  just  at  dark  and  were  brought  into- 
camp  at  a late  hour  of  night.  The  weather  was  bitterly  cold,  and  the  i 
troops  marched  as  early  as  possible  the  next  morning  for  Sedalia  and 
Otterville.  As  the  prisoners  and  arms  were  at  once  sent  down  to  Saint 
Louis,  I have  not  yet  had  the  opportunity  of  making  any  accurate 
count  of  them.  The  numbers  as  stated  were  reported  to  me  by  Colonel 
Robinson,  their  commander;  by  Col.  J.  C.  Davis;  and  by  Major  Tor- 
rence, First  Iowa  Cavalry. 

The  forces  under  Colonel  Davis  behaved  with  great  gallantry,  and 
the  conduct  of  Colonel  Davis  himself  was  distinguished.  I desire  to- 
present  to  your  special  notice  Col.  J.  C.  Davis,  Indiana  Volunteers 
Major  Hubbard,  First  Missouri  Cavalry;  and  Lieutenant  Gordon,,  j 
Fourth  Regular  Cavalry.  Both  officers  and  men  behaved  well  through-  j 
out. 

Within  five  days  the  infantry  forces  comprising  this  expedition  have  i 
marched  100  miles,  the  cavalry  more  than  double  that  distance ; have  < 
swept  the  whole  country  of  the  enemy  west  of  Sedalia  as  far  as  Rose  Hill 
to  a line  within  15  miles  of  the  Osage;  have  captured  nearly  1,500  pris- 
oners, 1,200  stand  of  arms,  nearly  100  wagons,  and  a large  quantity  of 
supplies.  The  march  alone  would  do  credit  to  old  soldiers,  and  it  gives 
me  pleasure  to  state  that  it  has  been  performed  with  cheerfulness  and 
alacrity.  The  troops  reoccupied  their  camps  at  Sedalia  and  Otterville 
just  one  week  after  they  marched  out  of  them.  A list  of  our  killed 
and  wounded  will  be  transmitted  as  soon  as  possible.  The  enemy’s 
loss  is  not  known  and  cannot  yet  be  ascertained.  Some  of  his  dead 
were  found  on  the  field. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 

Ca.pt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  Department  of  the  Missouri. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Copley  Amory , Fourth  U.  S.  Cavalry . 

Hdqrs.  Squadron  Fourth  U.  S.  Cavalry, 

Camp  near  Sedalia , Afo.,  December  29,  1861. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  Companies  B,  C,  D,  of  the  Fourth  Regular  Cavalry,  under 
my  command,  at  the  action  on  the  Black  water  River,  at  Milford,  on  the 
19th  December.  I had  reported  with  my  three  companies  to  General 
Jeff.  C.  Davis,  and  had  left  the  town  of  Knobnoster  some  3 miles  behind: 


41 


Chap,  xvm.]  BLACKWATER  CREEK,  OR  MILFORD,  MO. 

us  when  I heard  the  advance  guard  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets 
about  1 mile  from  Blackwater  Biver  towards  Knobnoster.  My  com- 
mand had  the  head  of  the  column,  and,  ordering  it  to  take  the  gallop, 
we  soon  came  up  with  General  Davis,  who  gave  the  following  order: 
“There  they  are;  give  it  to  them,  boys.”  Immediately  forming  tours 
and  then  platoons,  we  charged  across  the  prairie  towards  the  timber, 
supposing  the  enemy  to  be  there  encamped,  but  observing  no  signs  of 
them  I broke  by  fours,  and  riding  at  a sharp  gallop  soon  passed  through 
the  mile  of  woods  intervening  between  the  prairie  and  the  bridge.  On 
arriving  at  the  open  space  before  the  river  we  observed  a body  of  men 
on  the  opposite  side.  Having  satisfied  myself  that  they  were  the  enemy 
defending  the  bridge,  I sheltered  my  men  as  much  as  possible  and 
ordered  them  to  dismount.  At  this  time  and  until  after  the  crossing  of 
the  bridge  the  three  companies  were  in  the  following  order : 1st,  my  own, 
B;  2d,  Lieutenant  Gordon’s,  D;  3d,  Company  C,  under  feergeant  ^efx. 
After  giving  them  two  volleys  the  enemy  showed  signs  of  confusion,  and 
I gave  the  order  to  charge.  My  company  (B),  closely  followed  by  the 
other  two  companies  (D  and  C),  gallantly  dashed  across  the  bridge,  The 
enemy,  terrified  by  the  suddenness  and  boldness  of  the  charge,  broke 
and  fled  in  two  directions,  one  party  taking  the  road  to  the  right,  closely 
pursued  by  my  company  (B),  and  the  other  party  by  the  road  to  the  left, 
followed  by  Lieutenant  Gordon  with  D and  C companies. 

The  party  followed  by  Lieutenant  Gordon  led  him  directly  to  their 
camp,  which  neither  of  us  had  before  seen.  Immediately  upon  observ- 
ing the  enemy  Lieutenant  Gordon  dismounted  his  men  and  deliver^ 
two  volleys,  which  the  enemy  returned,  wounding  8 men  of  Company  D 
and  one  of  Company  C.  And  here  I would  state  that  the  coolness  and 
intrepidity  of  Lieutenant  Gordon,  whose  courage  was  the  theme  of  all 
present,  were  closely  imitated  by  the  two  companies  with  him.  Before 
this,  having  concluded  it  useless  to  keep  up  the  pursuit,  and  having 
discovered  the  whereabouts  of  the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  I had 
wheeled  my  company  to  go  to  the  assistance  of  Lieutenant  Gordon.  On 
arriving  on  the  ground  I found  that  one  of  the  companies  of  the  First 
Iowa  Cavalry  had  broken  and  were  in  confusion.  I ordered  them  to 
halt,  but  could  not  stop  them.  Having  extricated  the  companies  I 
turned  to  find  General  Davis,  but  could  not  see  him  anywhere.  Meet- 
ing with  Major  Torrence,  of  the  Iowa  cavalry,  I asked  where  General 
Davis  was  to  be  found,  but  he  could  give  me  no  information.  I then 
said,  “You  are  next  in  rank;  why  don’t  you  take  command  and  do 
something1?”  His  reply  was,  “I  am,”  but  I received  no  order  from 

I then  withdrew  the  three  companies  and  formed  them  in  line  of  bat- 
tle opposite  the  enemy’s  camp,  the  five  companies  of  Iowa  cavalry  form- 
ing on  our  left  and  about  200  yards  in  rear.  At  this  point  a flag  of 
truce  appeared,  and  setting  out  again  in  search  of  General  Davis  I found 
him  on  the  left  of  our  line.  Pointing  out  to  him  the  flag,  I asked  per- 
mission to  go  and  meet  it.  He  ordered  me  to  do  so.  On  coming  up 
with  the  bearer  of  the  flag  I inquired  of  him  what  he  desired.  He  in- 
formed me  that  he  belonged  to  the  Confederate  Army,  and  wished  to 
know  what  flag  we  fought  under.  Having  given  him  the  desired  infor- 
mation he  returned  to  his  camp,  while  I reported  to  General  Davis. 
The  general  then  asked  my  opinion  as  to  the  feasibility  of  charging  on 
the  enemy’s  camp,  and  I gave  it  as  my  opinion  that  it  would  be  madness 
to  charge  them  through  x>rairie-grass  breast-high  to  a horse  and  then 
through  thick  timber,  the  enemy  being  posted  behind  trees,  and  evi- 
dently outnumbering  us  four  to  one,  but  that  if  he  would  order  us  to 


42 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


dismount  and  fight  on  foot  something  might  be  done.  At  auy  rate  we 
were  willing  and  ready  to  make  the  trial.  After  a few  moments  I re- 
ceived an  order  to  take  position  half  a mile  on  our  right,  for  the  purpose 
of  intercepting  the  retreat  of  the  enemy.  We  did  so,  and  remained  there 
until  the  surrender,  which  soon  followed. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ COPLEY  AMORY, 

Second  Lieut.,  Fourth  Car.,  Comdg.  Squadron  Fourth  JJ.  S.  Car. 

Col.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Missouri,  Saint  Louis , Mo . 


No.  4. 

Letter  from  Col.  Fred,  Steele,  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Sedalia,  January  2,  1862.\ 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  copy  of  a report 
addressed  to  your  headquarters  by  Lieutenant  Amory.*  The  original 
report  I forwarded  through  General  Pope’s  headquarters.  I have  no 
doubt  but  that  this  is  a correct  report  of  the  affair.  Lieutenant  Amory 
thinks  that  justice  was  not  done  him  in  General  Pope’s  report.  Lieu- 
tenant Amory’s  account  is  corroborated  by  Dr.  Brodie  and  Lieutenant 
Gordon.  If  the  matter  were  investigated  I think  it  would  be  found 
that  there  are  other  inaccuracies  in  the  official  report  of  the  expedi- 
tion and  affair  near  Milford. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRED’K  STEELE, 

Colonel  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry , commanding  at  Sedalia. 


DECEMBER  18,  1861. — Scout  from  Rolla  towards  Houston,  Mo. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen,  Henry  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army. 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  20,  1861. 

Captain  Wood’s  scouting  party  has  returned  to  Rolla.  It  pursued 
the  enemy  south  of  Houston ; killed  1 captain  and  brought  in  1 major 
prisoner  of  war.  About  100  of  Price’s  men  were  captured  and  released 
on  parol,  not  being  able  to  bring  them  in. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan. 


DECEMBER  23,  1861. — Expedition  to  Lexington.  Mo. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  24,  1861. 
General  Pope’s  cavalry,  sent  to  Lexington,  has  captured  2 captains 
and  1 lieutenant  and  4 men,  with  horses,  &c.  They  destroyed  the 


See  No.  3. 


jap.  xvm.l  HALLSVILLE  AND  MT.  ZION  CHURCH,  MO. 


43 


mndery  and  ferry-boats  at  that  place.  Colonel  Bishop’s  detachment 
rertook  a party  of  bridge-burners  yesterday,  killed  10,  took  17  pris- 
□ers,  and  30  horses.  All  damage  on  railroad  will  be  repaired  in  three 


ays. 


Major-General  McClellan. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


DECEMBER  25,  1861. — Expedition  to  Danville,  Mo 
Report  of  Col.  George  R.  Todd , Tenth  Missouri  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Tenth  Regiment  Missouri  Vols.,  U.  S.  A., 

In  the  Field , Danville , Mo .,  December  25,  1861. 
Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  order  I crossed  the  river,  having  with  me 
part  of  the  Eighty-first  Ohio  Volunteers,  under  Colonel  Morton,  and 
part  of  my  own  regiment,  leaving  the  balance  of  each  under  com- 
Land  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hundhausen,  at  Hermann.  The  only 
racticable  route  for  us  was  to  High  Hill,  10  miles  east  of  this  place. 
>n  arriving  there  we  found  that  all  the  secessionists  under  arms  had 
assed  westward  and  were  occupying  this  point.  To-day  at  noon  our 
ickets  drove  in  those  of  the  enemy  and  we  immediately  followed,  and 
le  enemy  having  abandoned  the  place  we  took  possession  without 
ghting.  We  have  captured  several  of  their  men  and  a number  of 
orses,  but  as  yet  cannot  report  definitely. 

On  the  23d  instant  I telegraphed  from  Hermann  to  General  McKean, 
b Jefferson  City,  that  there  was  a force  of  200  to  500  secessionists 
assing  through  this  point  westward.  He  answered  that  he  would 
?nd  over  a force  to  intercept  their  passage  westward.  If  he  has  done 
),  and  their  passage  northward  is  cut  off,  I think  about  1,000  of  them 
m be  taken,  which  will  include  all  the  Warren  ton  bridge-burners, 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  R.  TODD, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri. 


ECEMBER  27-28,  1861. — Skirmish  near  Hallsville,  Mo.,  and  action  at 
Mount  Zion  Church,  Mo. 

Report  of  Brig . Gen.  Benjamin  M.  Prentiss , U.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Missouri, 

Palmyra , Mo.,  January  4,  1862. 

In  pursuance  of  general  orders,  received  on  the  evening  of  the  23d 
ay  of  December,  1861,  I proceeded  from  Palmyra  for  Sturgeon,  on  the 
Loming  of  the  24th.  day  of  December,  with  five  troops  of  Third  Mis- 
mri  Cavalry,  Col.  John  M.  Glover  commanding.  I arrived  at  Sturgeon 
u the  evening  of  the  26th.  During  the  following  day,  having  learned 
lat  there  was  a concentration  of  rebels  near  the  village  of  Hallsville, 
i Boone  County,  I sent  forward  one  troop  of  cavalry,  commanded  by 


44 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 


Captain  Howland,  to  reconnoiter  in  that  vicinity.  Captain  Howlanc 
proceeded  to  Hallsville,  but  found  no  rebels.  After  proceeding  aboui 
2 miles  beyond  his  advance  guard  encountered  the  rebels  in  force,  com 
manded  by  Colonel  Horsey.  Captain  Howland  endeavored  to  draw  of 
his  company,  having  taken  9 prisoners,  but  was  overpowered.  Bein^ 
wounded  and  having  lost  his  horse,  he  was  taken  prisoner,  with  1 pr? 
vate  of  his  company.  The  remainder  of  his  men  made  good  thei] 
retreat,  arriving  at  Sturgeon  at  6 o’clock  p.  m.  Having  learned  th< 
position  of  the  enemy,  I immediately  ordered  five  troops  of  cavalry, 
Col.  John  M.  Glover  commanding,  and  five  companies  of  Sharpshooters. 
Colonel  Birge  commanding,  numbering  in  all  470,  to  march  at  2 o’clock 
a.  m.,  at  which  hour  I started,  and  after  marching  a distance  of  16  miles 
at  8 o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  28th  instant  found  one  company  of  rebels,  com 
manded  by  Captain  Johnson,  in  position  to  the  left  of  the  road  leading 
from  Hallsville  to  Mount  Zion.  I ordered  two  companies  of  Sharp 
shooters  to  pass  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy  and  one  of  cavalry  to  dis 
mount  and  engage  them  in  front.  It  being  difficult  for  the  Sharp 
shooters  to  attain  their  position  unperceived,  the  enemy  manifesting  a 
disposition  to  retire,  Colonel  Glover  opened  fire  and  succeeded  in  kill 
ing  5 and  capturing  7 prisoners,  from  whom  1 learned  the  number  and 
position  of  the  main  force.  The  enemy  being  posted  at  a church  and 
place  known  as  Mount  Zion,  in  Boone  County,  and  one  mile  and  a half  in 
advance,  numbering  near  900  men,  I ordered  the  cavalry  under  Colonel 
Glover  forward,  accompanied  by  two  companies  of  Birge’s  Sharpshoot 
ers,  Colonel  Birge  with  them. 

Arriving  near  the  encampment,  one  troop  of  the  cavalry  were  ordered 
to  dismount  and  engage  the  enemy.  The  Sharpshooters  were  after 
wards  ordered  through  a field  on  our  right  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy’s 
left,  and,  if  possible,  drive  them  from  the  woods.  The  firing  being 
heavy,  these  three  companies  not  being  able  to  drive  the  enemy  fromj 

tig  PAVOr  PnlAriAl  niATTAT.  rrn'+l.  11  1. 1 „ J? 1 ■ ^ 1 1 


cover,  Colonel  Glover,  with  his  available  force,  moved  in  double 


quick  to  the  aid  of  the  three  companies  engaged,  and  for  half  an  horn 
longer  the  battle  raged  and  became  a hand-to-hand  fight.  Captain 
Boyd  s company  of  Sharpshooters  were  in  the  midst  of  the  rebel  camp, 
also  Major  Carrick,  with  Company  C,  Third  Missouri  Cavalry,  when 
Colonel  Glover  arrived.  The  rebels  could  not  stand  the  tire  of  oui 
rifles  and  retreated,  leaving  in  our  hands  90  horses  and  105  stand  oj 
arms.  The  battle  was  brought  to  a close  about  11  a,  m. 

The  reserve  of  two  companies  coming  into  action  at  the  moment  the 
enemy  gave  way,  our  victory  was  complete.  After  collecting  our  own 
wounded  we  proceeded  to  collect  that  of  the  enemy,  placed  them  in 
the  church,  and  sent  for  farmers  and  friends  in  the  vicinity  to  rendei 
assistance.  I collected  wagons,  made  our  own  wounded  as  comfort 
able  as  possible,  and  at  4 p.  m.  started  for  Sturgeon,  where  we  arrived 
at  9 p.  m. 

Our  loss  in  the  battle  of  Mount  Zion  and  in  the  engagement  of  th€ 
evening  previous  is  as  follows:  Killed,  3:  severely  wounded,  17 : slightly 
wounded,  46.  Rebel  loss:  Killed,  25;  wounded',  150. 

I have  not  been  able  to  get  a correct  report  of  rebels  missing,  but, 
having  taken  30  prisoners  from  them,  learn  that  their  punishment  is  a 
severe  one.  Sixty  of  the  rebels,  with  Captain  Howland  and  4 of  our 


men  as  prisoners,  arrived  at  the  camp  at  night,  20  miles  distant  from 
the  field  of  battle. 


Permit  me  to  mention  that  our  entire  force  behaved  gallantly.  1 


make  special  mention  of  the  following  officers : Col.  John  M.  Glover. 
Major  Carrick,  Lieutenant  Tates,  and  Lieutenant  Kirkpatrick,  of  the 


IAP.  XVIII. 


DESTRUCTION  OF  DAYTON,  MO. 


45 


hird  Missouri  Cavalry;  Colonel  Birge,  Captain  Boyd,  and  Adjutant 
emple  of  Dirge’s  Sharpshooters;  and  Lieut.  Edwin  Moore,  my  aide.  I 
Iso  assure  you  that  the  men  behaved  with  coolness  and  daring  during 

'l  <hav^f  the* 'honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

3rvant’  B.  M.  PRENTISS, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Cant.  J.  0.  Kelton,  , . 

1 Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Missouri . 


ECEMBER  29,  1861 


-Descent  upon  Commerce,  Mo.,  and  attack  on  steamer 
City  of  Alton. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  Jeff.  Thompson,  G.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

New  Madrid,  Mo.,  December  30,  1861. 

Dear  General:  I left  here  on  Saturday  evening,  at  9 o’clock,  with 
0 men,  one  6-pounder,  and  one  of  my  little  rifled  cannon.  I Pr°°e.e.  ® 
p the  road  through  Sikeston,  but  before  reaching  Hunter  s the  little 
annon  was  by  accident  rendered  unfit  for  service,  and  the  team  at- 
ached  to  the  6-pounder  gave  ont.  1 sent  the  little  gun  back  to  this 
lace,  and  planted  the  6-pounder  to  command  Jones  Ford.  I then, 
rith  27  men  (I  making  28),  proceeded,  by  the  Hunter  s i Ford .and  S andy 
tidge  road,  to  Commerce,  which  place  we  dashed  into  about  10  p.  m. 
'he  town  was  completely  surprised,  and  1 soon  had  all  the  mate  Johab- 
tants  assembled  and  guarded.  I then  had  the  stores  of  two  Federa  s 
rnened,  and  allowed  my  men  to  select  such  wearing  apparel  as  they 
rere  in  need  of.  About  2.30  o’clock  the  steamer  City  of  Alton  came 
n sight.  I made  arrangements  to  surprise  her,  not  having  cannon, 
mt  was  defeated  in  my  plan  by  the  women  of  Commerce,  whom  I could 
lot  prevent  from  giving  the  alarm.  She  approached  the  shore,  how- 
ver%ear  enough  to  get  a good  peppering,  and  she  backed  down 
•iver  several  mites,  and  had  not  attempted  to  pass  up  when  I left,  which 
vas  nearly  sundown.  I got  muskets,  2 rifles,  6 horses,  15  or  20  suits 
if  clothes,  and  returned  (after  stampeding  the  Union  men  of  Scott 
Jounty)  safely  to  this  post,  having  marched  106  miles  m»  forty  hours. 

Yours,  respectfully,  M>  JBFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  C.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ky. 


FANUARY  1-3,  1862. — Expedition  from  Morristown  to  Dayton  and  Rose 
Hill,  Mo.,  skirmish  en  route,  and  destruction  of  Dayton. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  D.  R.  Anthony , First  Kansas  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  First  Kansas  Cavalry, 
Camp  Johnson , Morristown , Mo .,  January  4,  1862. 
Sir:  Information  having  been  received  by  me  on  the  evening  of  the 
31st  ultimo  that  Captains  Fulkerson,  Scott,  and  Bnty,  with  from  loU 


46 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  INB.  T.  IChap.  XYnx 


to  300  men,  were  at  Dayton,  Mo.,  making  preparations,  recruiting, 
and  outfitting  for  Price’s  army,  at  midnight  I took  200  men,  with  the 
12-pounder  howitzer,  and  arrived  at  Dayton  about  daylight;  but  the 
enemy  had  run,  two  companies  of  Colonel  Newgent’s  command  having 
encamped  at  Austin  the  night  before,  a place  only  6 miles  distant. 
The  main  body  of  the  rebels  had  returned  to  the  junction  of  Walnut 
Creek  and  Grand  River.  Small  parties  were  seen  of  20  or  30  men  each 
in  the  woods  and  on  the  prairie  hills ; detachments  were  sent  out  after 
them.  Captain  Gregory,  of  Company  E,  had  an  engagement  with  one 
party  of  25  men ; killed  1 man.  The  captain’s  horse  was  shot  and  1 
horse  wounded.  None  of  our  men  were  hurt.  Some  15  Union  families 
moved  into  Kansas.  We  captured  a lot  of  stock  belonging  to  rebels, 
6 tents,  and  company  utensils. 

On  the  2d  we  moved  to  Rose  Hill,  and  the  next  day  returned  to 
Camp  Johnson. 

The  scouting  party  which  went  to  Walnut  Creek  found  that  Captain 
Scott  had  left  for  the  south.  Dayton  havihg  been  used  voluntarily  by 
its  inhabitants  as  a depot  for  recruiting  and  supplying  the  rebels,  and 
there  being  only  one  Union  house  in  town,  and  all  the  Union  men  there 
desiring  its  destruction,  it  was  burned,  except  the  one  belonging  to  the 
Union  man.  Although  there  were  46  buildings  in  the  town,  we  found 
only  two  men  to  represent  the  whole  population. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

D.  R.  ANTHONY, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel . Commanding . 

Brigadier- General  Denver, 

Commanding  Troops  in  Kansas. 


J ANUARY  5-12,  1862. — Operations  in  Johnson  and  La  Fayette  Counties.  *Mo., 
and  skirmish  (January  9)  at  Columbus,  Mo. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  L).  R.  Anthony , First  Kansas  Cavalry. 

Headquarters, 

Camp  Johnson , Morristown , Mo .,  January  13,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  5th  instant  a party  of  twelve  Union  citizens  of  Johnson 
County,  Missouri,  mounted  on  horses  and  armed  with  shot-guns,  came 
into  camp  and  informed  me  that  a force  of  300  rebels,  under  command 
of  Colonel  Elliott,  were  committing  depredations  upon  Union  men,  and 
asking  assistance  from  me  to  aid  or  protect  them  in  moving  their  fami- 
lies to  Kansas.  I ordered  Major  Herrick,  with  200  men,  to  proceed  to 
Holden,  Johnson  County,  and  capture  Colonel  Elliott,  and  also  to  put 
down  all  rebel  bands  he  met  on  the  way  and  protect  Union  men. 
Major  Herrick  took  four  days’  rations ; found  no  enemy  in  force  on  the 
route — indeed,  the  country  seemed  desolate  and  deserted  by  the  men. 

On  the  9th  Captain  Merriman  was  sent  with  50  men  to  Columbus. 
The  people  of  Columbus  informed  him  there  was  no  enemy  in  that 
vicinity ; but  on  his  return,  about  half  a mile  south  of  the  town,  was 
fired  on  from  ambush  by  Colonel  Elliott,  who  had  secreted  his  men  in 
the  bush,  and  5 of  our  men  were  killed.  Captain  Merriman  was  forced 
to  retreat.  He  was  soon  joined  by  Captain  Utt,  of  Company  A,  with 
50  more  men.  They  then  scoured  the  bush  for  miles  around,  but  found 
no  enemy,  they  having  that  day  deserted  their  camp,  which  was  found 
by  our  men  located  in  a rocky  ravine. 


Chat.  XV in.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  CHARLESTON,  MO. 


47 


The  next  day  Captain  Swoyer,  of  Company  B,  left  camp  at  Holden 
and  searched  the  country  of  the  Black  water  as  far  north  as  Chapel 
Hill,  and  learned  that  Colonel  Elliott  had  reached  a point  within  10 
miles  of  Lexington.  Captain  Swoyer  returned  next  day  to  camp  at 

Holden. 

Captain  Merriman,  on  the  day  of  the  attack  on  him,  burned  the  town 
of  Columbus,  having  learned  it  was  the  rendezvous  of  Colonel  Elliott, 
and  the  people  of  the  town  having  decoyed  him  into  the  ambush.  Major 
Herrick  remained  at  Holden  until  the  12th,  and  then  returned  to  Camp 
Johnson.  Fifty  or  sixty  Union  families  availed  themselves  of  the  oppor- 
tunity to  move  out  with  him.  Major  Herrick  also  captured  60  head  of 
horses,  mules,  and  cattle,  and  young  stock  belonging  to  men  who  fired 
upon  Major  Hough  and  those  who  were  with  Colonel  Elliott,  and  brought 


them  to  camp. 

Respectfully,  yours, 


D.  R.  ANTHONY, 


Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  First  Kansas  Cavalry . 


Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  Kansas. 


JANUARY  8,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Charleston,  Mo. 

Report  of  Col . Nicholas  Perczel , Tenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Tenth  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteers, 

Birds  Point , Mo.,  January  8,  1862. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  your  orders,  on  the  7th  instant  I took  the  cars 
with  my  command  at  9 o’clock  p.  m.  We  left  the  cars  at  11  p.  m., 
joined  the  cavalry  attached  to  my  command,  and  proceeded  towards 
Prairie  road,  on  which,  at  one  Swank’s  house,  a body  of  Tennessee 
cavalry,  numbering  about  1,000  men,  were  supposed  to  be  encamped. 
I formed  my  line  as  follows : Guide  and  two  troops  at  the  head  of  the 
column  ; Company  A,  Tenth  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteers,  as  advance 
guards $ then  formed  the  detachment  of  the  same  regiment  and  that  of 
the  Twentieth  Illinois,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Small, 
of  the  Tenth  Iowa,  the  cavalry  in  the  center ; then  the  detachment  from 
the  Eleventh  and  Twenty-second  Illinois  Regiments,  under  the  command 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ransom,  the  Twenty-second  bringing  up  the  rear. 
We  proceeded  in  the  greatest  and  perfect  stillness,  my  instructions 
being  to  surprise  and  fight  the  rebel  forces.  The  night  was  cloudy  and 
rainy.  Our  guide  several  times  lost  his  way,  which  delayed  our  prog- 
ress considerably.  At  last,  at  4 o’clock  in  the  morning,  we  heard  the 
distant  and  faint  sound  of  a bugle.  Marching  on,  we  emerged  into  a 
more  open  country  and  a better -beaten  road,  but  our  guide  having  lost 
all  calculation  he  did  not  know  which  side  to  take,  and  was  obliged  to 
awake  the  inmates  of  a farm-house  and  led  us  in  the  direction  indicated 
by  them.  We  jiassed  seven  farm-houses  without  molestation. 

Towards  5 o’clock  we  found  ourselves  on  the  back  track  to  Charles- 
ton. Here  only  was  I informed  by  the  guide  that  we  had  passed  the 
pretended  camp  of  the  rebels.  I think  he  did  not  know  it  himself.  We 
marched  a short  distance  in  this  direction,  till  we  reached  a farm-house 


48 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


with  the  door  open  and  fire  and  light  in  the  room.  As  it  looked  to  me 
a little  suspicions,  I detailed  Captain  Stoddard,  with  a squad  of  men,  to 
visit  it.  He  entered  it,  and  found  the  owner,  Mr.  Eodan,  washing  him- 
self, and  the  different  members  of  his  family  at  household  work.  When 
asked  whether  he  hdd  seen  any  rebel  soldiers,  he  replied  that  he  had 
seen  but  one  soldier  during  the  last  two  weeks.  Nothing  extraordinary 
having  been  discovered,  Captain  Stoddard  returned  to  his  post,  and  we 
resumed  our  march.  We  had  not  proceeded  more  than  150  yards 
when,  as  soon  as  the  guide  and  advance  guards  passed,  a body  of  reb- 
els, almost  75  or  80  men,  ambuscaded  on  the  right  of  the  road  behind  a 
rail  fence,  opened  upon  the  detachment  of  the  Tenth  Iowa  a deadly  fire, 
covering  almost  all  its  length.  I was  at  the  head  of  this  detachment, 
with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Small,  commanding.  The  men  were  thrown  into 
confusion,  returned  the  fire  at  random,  and  probably  without  effect,  but 
by  our  united  efforts  they  were  rallied  in  less  than  two  minutes.  Cap- 
tains Eandleman  and  Lusby,  having  been  ordered  to  cross  the  fence  and 
pursue  the  rebels,  did  it  with  spirit  and  promptitude,  but  the  rebels,  as 
usual,  disappeared.  Not  knowing  the  force  of  the  rebels,  I thought  it 
prudent  to  reform  our  line  to  the  rear  in  the  woods  on  our  left,  and  began 
the  painful  duty  of  collecting  our  sick  and  wounded.  Assistant  Sur- 
geon Dr.  Willey,  and  his  aid,  Ephraim  E.  Davis,  steward,  took  with  con- 
siderable zeal  and  activity  to  their  wdrk,  and  a little  later  were  ably  as- 
sisted by  Dr.  Bailey,  of  the  Twentieth  Illinois.  Short  as  the  fire  was,  the 
Tenth  Iowa  had  5 killed,  2 mortally  wounded,  and  15  more  or  less 
severely.  The  line  of  ambuscade  did  not  reach  the  other  detachment. 
I must  remark  that  even  towards  dawn  the  darkness  was  so  intense  that 
I did  not  dare  to  push  my  advance  guard  forward.  I followed  it  closely 
for  fear  that  we  might  lose  each  other.  I could  not  throw  out  any  flanks, 
because,  even  at  the  shortest  distance,  the  connection  must  have  to  be 
kept  up  by  hailing,  which  would  have  frustrated  all,  attempts  to  sur- 
prise the  rebels,  by  giving  them  early  and  continued  warning.  Deplor- 
able as  the  result  has  been,  I have  to  congratulate  the  promptitude  with 
which  every  officer  and  man,  notwithstanding  the  effect  of  first  surprise, 
obeyed  every  order.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Small  and  all  the  officers  have 
done  their  duty.  On  the  8th  instant,  in  the  morning,  we  put  our  sick 
on  the  cars  and  returned  to  our  quarters. 

The  man  Eodan  having  willfully  and  damnably  denied  all  knowledge 
of  the  presence  of  the  rebels,  while  in  all  probability  the  ambush  pro- 
ceeded from  his  house,  I arrested  and  had  him  turned  over  to  the  officer 
of  the  post  guard.  He  is  at  all  events  guilty  of  a capital  crime,  having 
misled  us  by  his  feigned  ignorance  and  caused  by  this  our  severe  loss. 
The  charges  against  him  will  be  made  out  and  forwarded  to  the  proper 
place. 

Finally  let  me  add  the  acknowledgment  of  prompt  obedience  and 
strict  preservation  of  order  to  all  officers  and  men  of  the  other  detach- 
ments composing  my  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  respectfully, 

N.  PEECZEL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Expedition. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Bird’s  Point. 


,'hap.  XVIII.  1 ACTION  AT  ROAN’S  TAN-YARD,  MO. 

JANUARY  8,  1862. — Action  at  Roan’s  Tan-Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo. 


49 


REPOETS. 


sr0  i, — Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Palmer. 

sr0  2.— Col.  Thomas  J.  Turner,  Fifteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 
STo.  3.— Maj.  W.  M.  G.  Torrence,  First  Iowa  Cavalry, 
vjo,  4 — Col.  Lewis  Merrill,  Second  Missouri  Cavalry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Rainier. 

Otteryille,  January  10,  1862. 

On  the  8th,  at  4 o’clock  p.  m.,  Majors  Torrence  and  Hubbard,  with 
150  men,  attacked  Poindexter,  with  from  1,000  to  1,300  men,  on  Silver 
Greek.  The  enemy  were  totally  routed,  with  heavy  loss.  Seven  left 
dead  on  the  field;  many  carried  off.  Prom  50  to  75  wounded.  Our 
loss  reported  at  4 killed.  The  rebel  camp  was  destroyed,  and  a laige 
number  of  horses  and  arms  taken.  A heavy  fog  alone  saved  them  from 
complete  destruction.  The  number  of  prisoners  is  reported  at  30. 

JOHN  M.  PALML11, 

Brigadier-  Gen  era  L 

Major-General  Halleck. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col  Thomas  J.  Turner , Fifteenth  Illinois  Infantry, 

Headquarters  La  Mine  Cantonment, 

Otter ville,  Mo .,  January  14,  1862. 

Captain:  Major  Hubbard,  of  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  returned 
to  this  place  last  night.  He  left  his  command  on  the  north  side  of  the 
river,  opposite  Booneville.  Ice  in  the  river  prevented  his  crossing. 
He  reports  that  on  the  8th  instant,  at  Silver  Creek,  in  Howard  County, 
he  attacked  the  rebels,  900  strong,  under  command  of  Colonel  Pom- 
dexter.  After  a brisk  engagement,  which  lasted  forty  minutes,  he 
completely  routed  the  enemy."  The  enemy’s  loss  was  40  killed  and  60' 
wounded."  His  loss  6 killed  and  19  wounded.  He  captured  160  horses,. 
60  wagons,  105  tents,  80  kegs  powder,  about  200  rifles  and  shot-guns,, 
and  a large  quantity  of  clothing,  blankets,  and  bed-quilts.  He  has  in 
his  possession  160  captured  horses  and  28  prisoners.  The  wagons, 
powder,  and  other  property  captured  he  was  compelled  to  destroy  for 
want  of  help  to  remove  them.  I directed  him  to  bring  the  prisoners 
and  horses  here,  unless  he  received  orders  to  take  them  to  some  other- 

point.  . . , ,,  . 

Major  Hubbard  is  greatly  in  need  of  ammunition,  as  is  also  ail  tne 
cavalry  at  this  post.  I have  been  informed  that  requisitions  have 
been  forwarded  to  Saint  Louis  for  a supply,  but  they  have  not  been 

attended  to.  , 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  an  ordnance  oflicer  be  appointed 

for  the  post. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J 1 THOS.  J.  TURNER, 

Colonel , Commanding  Cantonment. 
Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

4 R R — VOL  VIII 


50  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XViril 

Ko.  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  W.  M.  G.  Torrence , First  Iowa  Cavalry . 

' 

Camp  near  Fayette,  Mo., 

January  10,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with  you; 
order  I marched  my  command  to  Boone ville,  and  was  there  joined  In 
three  companies  of  MerrilPs  Horse,  under  Major  Hunt,  and  at  the  ear 
liest  day  possible  crossed  the  Missouri  River,  and  reached  camp  neai 
Fayette  on  the  evening  of  the  5th  instant,  when  I was  there  joined 
four  companies  of  the  First  Missouri,  under  command  of  Major  Hub 
bard,  and  one  company  of  the  Fourth  Ohio,  Captain  Foster.  We  pro 
ceeded  at  once  to  gather  information  of  the  enemy’s  movements  bv 
sending  scouts  through  different  portions  of  this  and  adjoining  counties 

On  the  7th  instant  reconnaissances  in  force  were  made  to  Glasgow 
Roanoke,  and  surrounding  country,  and  information  received  that  on* 
Colonel  Poindexter  was  recruiting  in  this  and  other  counties,  and  thai 
he  had  his  principal  camp  somewhere  on  the  headwaters  of  Silvei 
Creek,  with  a force  of  regularly  enlisted  men  from  COO  to  800  strong 
together  with  an  equal  number  of  aiders  and  abettors  of  rebellion 
Early  upon  the  morning  of  the  8th  instant  we  moved  out  of  camp  witl 
500  mounted  men  in  search  of  their  camp,  and  marched  to  Roanoke,  H 
miles  distant,  and  then  in  the  direction  of  Silver  Creek.  When  withir 
4 miles  of  where  the  camp  wras  reported  to  be  the  column  was  halted, 
and  the  following  disposition  made  of  our  forces : To  Major  Hunt  wag 
assigned  the  command  of  that  portion  of  his  forces  armed  with  carbines, 
and  with  Major  Hubbard’s  command  and  Captain  Foster’s  company  tc 
form  the  advance  of  the  column,  to  attack  the  camp,  draw  their  fire, 
and  reply  with  carbines,  when  the  First  Iowa  and  a portion  of  Merrill’s 
Horse  were  to  charge  upon  the  camp,  mounted,  if  possible,  and  if  not 
practicable  charge  with  revolver  and  saber  on  foot.  To  Lieutenant 
Dustin,  of  Company  F,  First  Iowa,  was  assigned  the  advance  guard, 
supported  by  Lieutenant  Burrows,  First  Missouri. 

All  being  in  readiness  the  column  moved  forward  rapidly,  the  ad- 
vance guard  driving  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  rushing  to  the  entrance 
of  the  camp.  The  column  followed  soon  after,  dismounted,  and  drew 
the  enemy’s  fire.  They  were  in  a strong  position,  being  protected  by 
ravines,  thick  underbrush,  and  timber.  Their  volley  was  promptly  an- 
swered by  our  forces  pouring  in  a galling  fire.  Three  companies  of  the 
First  Iowa  and  a part  of  a company  of  Merrill’s  Horse  were  then  ordered 
forward  to  charge  the  camp,  which  was  promptly  done.  The  enemy 
were  now  thrown  into  confusion  and  soon  began  to  retreat,  leaving 
horses,  guns,  together  with  camp  and  garrison  equipage.  It  was  a 
complete  rout,  as  the  appearance  of  the  camp  fully  attested.  Two  com- 
panies from  the  rear  were  ordered  to  cut  off  their  retreat,  but  the  dark- 
ness and  heavy  fog,  together  with  the  thick  underbrush,  rendered  it 
impossible. 

To  avoid  surprise  and  to  be  able  to  move  all  our  forces  forward  an 
order  was  given  to  destroy  the  camp  and  look  up  dead  and  wounded. 
This  was  soon  accomplished,  and  the  darkness  forbidding  further  purn 
suit,  the  whole  command  was  then  moved  to  camp,  23  miles  distant. 
The  prompt  action  of  the  troops  throughout  is  worthy  of  the  highest 
praise.  Lieutenant  Dustin  is  worthy  of  honorable  mention  for  his  gal- 
lant conduct  in  leading  the  advance  guard ; also  Major  Hunt,  of  Mer- 


:hai\  xyiti.] 


51 


ACTION  AT  ROAN7S  TAN-YARD,  MO. 


ilFs  Horse  5 Captains  Clinton  and  Mondell,  of  the  First  Missouri,  for 
heir  gallant  and  cool  hearing  during  the  entire  action. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  cannot  be  actually  ascertained,  but  from  the 
liost  reliable  information  their  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  cannot  be 
ess  than  80  to  100. 


Yours,  most  obediently, 


W.  M.  G.  TORRENCE, 
Major , First  Battalion , First  Iowa  Cavalry. 


Brigadier-General  Pope,  Otterville , Mo. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col  Lewis  Merrill , Second  Missouri  Cavalry . 

Headquarters  Merrill’s  Horse, 

Columbia , Mo.,  January  10,  1862. 

Captain  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  night  of  Sunday, 
the  5th,  nearly  at  daylight,  I received  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Birge 
at  Sturgeon),  stating  that  a party  of  some  300  or  400  rebels  had  camped 
that  night  at  Renick,  and  were  to  move  next  morning  to  Roanoke,  some 
12  or  15  miles  from  there,  with  the  object  of  crossing  the  river  at  Ar- 
row Rock  or  Brunswick,  and  stating  that  he  would  attempt  to  overtake 
them  by  daylight  of  the  6th,  and  requesting  me  to  co-operate.  Not  ap- 
proving the  plan  proposed  for  me  by  Colonel  Birge,  I sent  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Shatter,  with  all  the  men  I could  spare,  to  go  by  way  of  Fayette 
and  thence  north  towards  Roanoke  and  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  enemy, 
should  Colonel  Birge’s  command  not  succeed  in  overtaking  him  at 
Renick.  Colonel  Birge,  I understand,  went  to  Renick,  and  not  find- 
ing the  enemy,  returned  to  Sturgeon  the  same  day.  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Shaffer  reached  Fayette  late  the  night  of  the  6th,  and  there  found 
a large  cavalry  force,  consisting  of  detachments  from  the  First  Mis- 
souri Cavalry,  under  command  of  Major  Hubbard,  First  Iowa  Cavalry, 
under  Major  Torrence,  and  Merrill’s  Horse,  under  Major  Hunt.  He 
then  learned  during  the  night  that  the  enemy,  variously  estimated  at 
from  1,300  to  2,500,  were  encamped  on  Smith’s  farm,  about  5 miles  from 
Roanoke.  At  the  same  time  he  received  information  that  the  remains 
of  the  command  of  Colonel  Dorsey,  which  had  been  engaged  in  the 
Mount  Zion  fight,  was  then  marching  to  attack  me  at  Columbia.  I had 
only  part  of  one  company  left  when  Colonel  Shaffer  left  me,  and  he 
knew  that  part  of  that  would  be  sent  to  Jefferson  City  to  escort  the 
provision  train.  Early  next  morning  he  sent  the  command  of  Major 
Hubbard,  which  he  had  found  at  Fayette,  re-enforced  by  one  com- 
pany of  his  own  command,  to  find  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  returned  at 
once  to  Columbia  with  the  rest  of  his  command. 

Major  Hubbard  found  the  enemy’s  camp  about  14  miles  northwest  of 
Fayette  about  3 o’clock  p.  m.,  and  immediately  attacked  them,  routing 
them  completely  and  taking  possession  of  their  camp,  which  he  en- 
tirely destroyed.  I have  no  official  reports  of  the  engagement  from  the 
part  of  my  regiment  engaged,  and  I presume  before  this  Major  Hub- 
bard’s reports  have  been  received.  The  loss  of  my  regiment  was  2 
killed  and  3 wounded.  The  enemy’s  loss  is  not  positively  reported,  but 
5 are  known  to  have  been  killed  and  14  taken  prisoners.  This  is  only 
what  is  certainly  known. 


52 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XViIJ 

Oapt.  J.  B.  Watson,  of  the  rebel  army  (and  believed  to  have  beet 
concerned  in  the  Magi  burning),  now  on  recruiting  service  near  here 
was  captured,  with  two  of  his  men,  to-day  by  a part  of  my  command 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant 

LEWIS  MERRILL, 
Colonel , Commanding  MerrilVs  Horse.  I 

Capt.  J.  C.  Keeton, 

Assistant  A djutant-  Gen  eral. 


JANUARY  15-17, 1862. — Expeditions  to  Benton,  Bloomfield,  and  Dallas,  Mo 

Report  of  Col.  Leonard  F.  Ross , Seventeenth  Illinois  Infantry. 


Headquarters, 

Cape  Girardeau , Mo.,  January  19,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

^ Having  learned  from  reliable  sources  that  the  citizens  of  Stoddard, 
Scott,  and  Bollinger  Counties,  under  the  lead  of  Captains  Bowles  and 
Kitchen,  of  General  Thompson’s  division,  Confederate  Army,  were 
organizing  for  the  purpose  of  joining  the  rebel  forces  at  New  Madrid 
on  the  15th  instant  I ordered  Maj.  Francis  M.  Smith,  of  the  Seventeenth 
Illinois  Volunteers,  with  five  companies  of  infantry,  one  company  ol 
cavalry,  under  command  of  Captain  Graham,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry, 
and  one  piece  of  artillery,  under  command  of  Sergeant  Dyer,  Campbell’s 
battery  fight  artillery,  to  proceed  to  Benton,  Scott  County,  Missouri, 
and  there  attack  and  disperse  any  organization  that  might  be  found, 
capturing  such  persons  as  had  been  in  the  rebel  army  who  had  not  sub- 
sequently surrendered  themselves  and  taken  the  oath.  At  the  same 
time  I ordered  Captain  Murdoch,  of  the  Missouri  State  Militia,  to  take 
charge  of  an  expedition  to  Bloomfield,  Stoddard  County,  Missouri,  con- 
sisting of  50  of  his  own  company  (mounted)  and  a portion  of  Company 
H,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  Capt.  Milton  L.  Webster  commanding, 
with  similar  instructions;  also  an  expedition  to  Dallas,  Bollinger 
County,  Missouri,  under  command  of  Maj.  Jonas  Rawalt,  Seventh  Cav- 
alry,  consisting  ol  100  mounted  men,  with  the  same  instructions,  design- 
ing to  surprise  and  capture  all  persons  in  rebellion  against  the  United! 
States  Government,  as  also  their  property  which  might  be  of  use  in  con- 
ducting the  present  rebellion.  In  accordance  with  such  instructions 
the  several  expeditions  moved  simultaneously  from  this  post  on  the 
evening  of  the  15th  instant  for  their  respective  destinations,  all  of 
which  resulted  as  satisfactorily  as  the  circumstances  and  surroundings 
indicated.  On  the  1 i th  instant  the  various  expeditions  returned,  bring- 
ing with  them  the  following  prisoners:  From  Dallas,  Major  Rawalt, 
with  18  prisoners  formerly  of  Thompson’s  command,  but  wiio  had  been 
discharged  from  further  service. 

The  expedition  under  Captain  Murdoch  was  the  more  successful, 
inasmuch  as  many  of  the  discharged  officers  of  Thompson’s  command 
were  attending  a ball  in  Bloomfield  preparatory  to  their  re-eulisting, ! 
and  were  probably  not  anticipating  an  attack  until  they  found  them- 
selves surrounded.  Thirty-nine  prisoners  were  captured.  * Among  them 
were  Lieutenant-Colonel  Farmer,  Second  Regiment  Missouri  State 
Guard;  Captain  Cole,  Company  A,  Second  Regiment  Missouri  State 
Guard,  and  some  10  other  officers,  all  of  whom  were  discharged  by 
virtue  of  expiration  of  term  of  enlistment.  The  expedition  to  Benton 


53 


AP.  XVIII. ] BENTON,  BLOOMFIELD,  AND  DALLAS,  MO. 

•rested  and  brought  in  some  five  persons  charged  with  aiding  and 
lettiog  the  rebels,  as  also  having  been  in  the  service  of  the  Confeder 
e Government.  A number  of  guns  were  also  destroyed,  the  intensity 
* the  cold  making  the  carrying  of  the  same  very  troublesome.  Con- 
derable  property,  consisting  of  stock,  horses,  saddles,  bridles,  &c., 
as  brought  into  the  post  by  the  expeditions,  and  by  my  order  was 
irned  over  to  the  quartermaster  of  the  post. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  promptness  of  both  officers  and 
en  in  the  several  expeditions  above  reported.  The  weather  was  cold 
id  disagreeable,  and  they  were  to  a considerable  extent  unacquainted 
ith  the  general  character  of  the  service  upon  which  they  were  ordered ; 
at  they  responded  with  a promptness  and  alacrity  that  ultimately 
isuredthe  success  of  the  same.  I desire  further  to  state  that  in  this 
tstance  I have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  the  news  of  the  expe- 
ition  did  not,  as  usual,  precede  the  march  of  the  troops,  but  that,  on 
le  contrary,  the  knowledge  of  the  same  was  kept  within  the  limits  of 
lis  post,  owing  to  the  thoroughness  of  the  officers  in  charge  of  the 
ickets.  I have,  in  accordance  with  my  best  judgment,  looking  at  the 
tatter  in  the  light  of  all  the  facts  that  I can  gather,  released  several 
f the  prominent  parties  upon  their  parol  of  honor;  a copy  of  which 
inclose  herewith.  I regarded  this  as  the  best  method  to  pursue, 
oping  by  so  doing  to  establish  a more  perfect  understanding  of  the 
bject  and  aim  of  the  Government  among  those  whose  enmity  arises 
nquestionably  from  (as  I Jiave  previously  intimated)  perverted  state- 
lents  on  the  part  of  our  enemies.  These  men  have  pledged  their  return 
pon  honor  at  such  time  as  you  may  indicate  through  this  post,  and  1 
m fully  satisfied  of  their  honesty  of  purpose,  feeling,  as  they  expressed 
lem  selves,  a desire  to  be,  after  their  observation  and  limited  acquaint- 
nce  here,  permanently  out  of  the  service. 

I desire  further  to  state  in  this  connection  that  much  remains  undone 
et  in  these  localities  which  I hope  to  effect  as  soon  as  I can  procure 
rms  for  the  cavalry  now  located  at  this  point.  Many  are  returning 
nd  will  yet  return  from  the  rebel  army  who  fear  to  come  voluntarily 
nd  take  the  oath  because  of  an  expressed  determination  on  the  part 
f General  Thompson  to  hang  such  persons,  but  who,  if  taken  by  force, 
fill  be,  I am  satisfied,  hereafter  loyal  citizens.  I do  not  desire  to  intrude 
ly  opinion,  but  I am  satisfied  that  the  best  policy  to  pursue  towards 
be  remainder  of  the  prisoners  is  as  pursued  towards  those  above  indi- 
ated.  I shall,  however,  await  for  approval  before  doing  so. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  BOSS, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post . 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Cairo, 

Cairo , January  23,  1862. 

Bespectfully  forwarded  to  headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri. 
. disapprove  the  plan  of  paroling  prisoners  of  Thompson’s  army,  as 
suggested  by  Colonel  Boss,  but  refer  the  matter  to  the  general  com- 
nanding  department  for  his  order  in  the  matter. 

U.  S.  GBABT, 
Brigadier- General . 


54 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai*.  XVTII. 


Headquarters,  Gape  Girardeau, 

January  21,  1862. 

General  : In  addition  to  the  report  of  yesterday  I desire  to  add  that 
the  expedition  to  Bloomfield  was  originally  assigned  to  Major  Living 
ston,  Eleventh  Missouri  Volunteer  Infantry,  designing  to  give  a com- 
mand  to  each  of  the  majors  at  this  post.  Before  the  expedition  started 
however,  Major  L.  was  taken  sick,  and  the  command  was  turned  over 
to  Captain  Murdoch.  In  order  to  properly  arm  the  cavalry  that  was 
sent  I had  to  obtain  the  temporary  loan  of  some  rifles  from  the  Elev- 
enth Missouri  Volunteers,  leaving  a portion  of  that  regiment  for  the 
time  unarmed.  I earnestly  hope  that  the  cavalry  regiment  at  this  post 
will  be  armed  as  early  as  practicable,  as  W'e  must  rely  almost  wholly  upon 
them  to  hold  in  check  the  roving  bands  of  robbers  and  plunderers  in- 
festing Southeast  Missouri.  I would  like  to  take  a regiment  of  infantry 
some  artillery,  and  cavalry,  and  hold  Bloomfield  for  a few  days,  until 
those  men  could  be  driven  from  the  State.  The  roads  are  so  heavy  be- 
low that  there  is  no  danger  of  re-enforcements  being  sent  from  New 
Madrid  or  Columbus.  There  are  reports  of  Price  moving  eastward  near 
Arkansas  line.  I have  heard  nothing,  however,  reliable.  Have  von 
any  such  information  ? 

Your  obedient  servant, 


Brig.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  Cairo , III. 


L.  F.  ROSS,  Colonel. 


JANUARY  20-24,  1862. — Operations  in  and  about  Atchison,  Kans. 

Report  of  Capt.  Irving  W . Fuller , First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans., 

January  28, 1862. 

Abridged  report  of  Capt,  I.  W.  Fuller,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  in 
command  of  a detachment  of  First  Missouri  Cavalry  detached  from  this 
post  by  virtue  of  the  following  order,  viz : 

Special  Orders,  > Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

57 • 5 Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans.,  January  20,  1862.  j 

Captain  Fuller,  Company  E,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  will  proceed  with  his  command 
to  Atchison,  and  there  report  to  Hon.  J.  H.  Fairchild,  mayor  of  Atchison  City,  with 
whom  he  will  confer  and  co-operate  in  all  measures  necessary  to  maintain  the  peace  of 
Atchison  City  and  County  and  arresting  any  irregular  bands  or  bodies  of  armed  men 
who  may  be  depredating  on  the  public  or  contravening  the  provisions  of  General 
Orders,  No.  5,  issued  from  these  headquarters,  bearing  date  January  7,  1862.  lie  will 
remain  at  Atchison  until  further  orders. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hunter: 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major,  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  j 

And  in  pursuance  of  the  following  order,  to  wit : 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth,  January  20,  1862. 


Special  Orders, 

No.  58. 

* v ' v IfiVy  fj  tWC  CCIW  y J 

I.  So  much  of  Special  Orders,  No.  57,  from  these  headquarters,  of  this  day’s  date,  a 
orders  Captain  Fuller,  Company  E,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  to  report  to  Mayor  Fail 
child  at  Atchison  City,  is  hereby  revoked.  Captain  Fuller,  with  his  entire  command 
wrll  report  to  Deputy  United  States  Marshal  Hook,  but  in  all  other  respects  will  carr 
out  the  provisions  of  Special  Orders,  No.  57. 


hap.  XYin.j  OPERATIONS  IN  AND  ABOUT  ATCHISON,  KANS. 


55 


H.  Lieutenant  Sprague,  Company  D,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  with  20  men,  will  forth- 
with proceed  on  the  road  towards  Atchison  City  until  he  overtakes  the  command  of 
Captain  Fuller,  to  whom  he  will  report  for  orders. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hunter:  CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major , cmd  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


In  pursuance  of  the  above  order  I left  Fort  Leavenworth  with  my 
command  at  2 o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  20th  January,  1862,  and  proceeded 
o Atchison,  where  I arrived  at  8 o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  same  day.  I 
•eported  immediately  upon  my  arrival  to  Mayor  Fairchild  (Special 
Orders,  Ho.  58,  revoking  that  part  of  Orders  Ho.  57,  not  having  reached 
ne  yet).  Mayor  Fairchild  informed  me  that  the  citizens  had  driven 
he  principal  iayhawkers  (depredators)  out  of  town,  but  at  the  same 
ime  requested  me  to  arrest  certain  parties  who  were  suspected  to  be 
n league  with  these  depredators  and  as  having  the  keeping  of  stolen 
lorses  and  cattle.  In  conformity  with  his  request  I arrested  several 
if  such  persons  as  he  pointed  out  to  me  and  charged  with  the  above 
jrime,  but  who  from  want  of  evidence  and  with  his  concurrence  were 

liscliarged.  . , , 

On  the  next  morning,  January  21, 1862,  at  4 o’clock  a.  m.,  Lieutenant 
Sprague  joined  my  command  with  20  men  and  reported  for  duty.  At 
5 a.  m.  of  the  same  day  I sent  out  Lieutenant  Sprague  with  25  men 
n search  of  liorse-thieves  and  depredators  and  stolen  property,  who 
succeeded  in  capturing  5 of  the  stolen  horses  and  2 jayhawkers,  and  re- 
turned at  2 p.  m.  of  the  same  day.  I then  proceeded  with  the  balance 
Df  my  command  to  the  farm  of  Sueter  Dixon,  a noted  jayhawker,  and 
took  from  his  farm  20  horses  and  2 shot-guns,  the  property  of  citizens 
of  Kansas  and  Missouri,  to  whom  1 restored  their  property  upon  their 
bringing  satisfactory  proof  of  ownership. 

January  22,  Mayor  Fairchild  delivered  to  me  8 horses  taken  from  the 
iayhawkers  by  the  Home  Guards  of  Atchison  previous  to  my  arrival, 
winch  were  all  claimed  by  citizens  of  Kansas  and  delivered  to  them  as 

^January  23,  made  several  scouts  and  searches  in  the  neighborhood  of 
town.  I was  informed  by  Messrs.  Brown,  Dunlap,  and  Sinners  that 
several  horses  were  brought  to  their  farms  by  parties  unknown  for 
safe-keeping,  but  that  they  supposed  them  to  be  jayhawked  horses,  and 
would  like  to  have  an  investigation  of  the  matter.  I proceeded  to  the 
farms  of  the  above-named  men,  seized  the  horses,  and  brought  them 
into  town,  when  they  were  immediately  claimed  by  their  proper  owners 

and  delivered  to  them.  . , , , 

January  24,  I was  notified  by  Mr.  Irving,  of  Missouri,  at  3 o’clock 
a.  m.  that  15  iayhawkers  had  robbed  his  farm  in  Missouri  and  taken 
therefrom  40  horses  and  mules  and  6 negroes;  that  they  dragged  his 
family,  among  whom  there  are  several  females,  out  of  bed,  insulting 
them  in  the  most  revolting  manner,  robbed  them  ot  their  jewelry,  and 
finally  left  and  proceeded  in  the  direction  of  Elwood.  I immediately 
concluded  to  go  in  search  of  this  party,  and  Mr.  Irving  offering  himself 
and  a few  neighbors  as  guides,  I consented  thereto,  but  dispatched  him 
in  advance.  I overtook  him  at  Geary  City,  where  I found  that  his  party 
had  caught  2 and  killed  the  captain  (by  name  Chandler)  of  jayhawk- 
ers, and  wounded  another.  The  rest  had  escaped,  11  in  number,  and 
had  gone  in  the  direction  of  Elwood.  I then  told  Mr.  Irving  that  i 
thought  best  for  him  and  his  party  to  go  home,  as  I had  a force  suffi- 
cient to  answer  all  purposes.  Accordingly  Mr.  Irving  and  his  party 
went  home.  I took  the  2 prisoners  in  my  charge  and  gave  chase  to  the 


56 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  \Chxp.  xvm. 


remainder.  I followed  tliem  closely.  When  I came  within  8 miles  of 
Elwood  I ascertained  that  the  party  I was  in  pursuit  of  had  divided. 
Five  had  gone  west  of  Elwood,  in  the  direction  of  White  Cloud,  and  6 
had  gone  to  Elwood.  Accordingly  I divided  my  command.  I sent  Lieu- 
tenant Sprague  in  pursuit  of  the  party  of  5 en  route  to  White  Cloud, 
and  proceeded  myself  in  pursuit  of  the  other  jjarty  en  route  to  Elwood, 
where  I captured  them.  Two  hours  after  Lieutenant  Sprague  joined 
me,  having  been  successful  in  the  capture  of  the  party  sent  after,  with 
all  the  stolen  property  in  their  possession — 5 horses,  saddles,  bridles, 
&c.  The  party  I captured  had  in  their  possession  12  horses,  3 mules, 
and  4 wagons,  all  these  the  property  of  Mr.  Irving. 

These  are  the  most  material  points  of  my  proceedings. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  W.  FULLEE, 

Captain , First  Missouri  Cavalry . 

Lieutenant  Sachs, 

Post  Adjutant , Fort  Leavenworth , Kans. 


JANUARY  22,  1862. — Occupation  of  Lebanon,  Mo. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Clarlc  Wright , Wright’s  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters,  Post  Lebanon, 

January  22,  1862. 

Major:  I arrived  at  this  place  at  1.30  o’clock  p.  m.  and  took  formal 
possession  of  the  town.  I sent  forward  two  companies,  however,  in 
advance,  who  arrived  about  daylight,  but  found  no  one  here,  although 
there  were  20  rebels  here  yesterday.  At  this  writing  I have  a number 
of  scouting  parties  out  in  various  directions,  and  by  next  will  be  able 
to  tell  you  what  is  going  on  in  this  vicinity.  Some  days  ago,  from  the 
Gasconade,  I dispatched  scouts  to  turn  the  rear  of  the  enemy  and  learn 
if  possible  what  was  going  on  in  the  Southwest.  One  of  these  has 
returned,  and  reports  the  enemy  all  quiet  about  Springfield,  and  the 
rebels  all  believe  that  we  have  gone  back  to  Eolla;  they  have  no  idea 
of  our  making  a forward  movement ; that  quite  all  of  Earns’  men  have 
gone  home,  and  say  they  will  remain  through  the  winter.  Eains,  on 
last  Thursday,  with  400  men — all  he  had  left — went  to  Granby,  it  is 
said,  to  run  the  lead  furnaces.  On  Friday  last  another  squadron  of  200 
passed  Miller’s,  on  the  head  of  Spring  Eiver,  going  south.  He  says 
there  are  none  other  than  Missouri  troops  in  Springfield,  and  that 
Price  has  not  over  10,000  troops. 

I also  learn  that  since  I retired  from  this  post  some  considerable 
amount  of  supplies  has  been  run  off  to  the  rebels.  I will  stop  that 
arrangement,  however. 

At  this  moment  the  scouting  party  sent  out  under  Lieut.  Valentine 
Preuitt,  First  Missouri,  have  returned,  bringing  in  1 prisoner,  and 
report  having  killed  Capt.  Tern  Graig,  of  this  place,  in  a running  fight. 
He  was  thought  to  be  Federal-proof,  and  his  lady  friend  (secesh)  was 
exulting  at  the  time  the  news  arrived  over  the  matter  and  how  nicely 
he  had  escaped  us,  and  that  we  would  never  get  him;  but  the  scene  is 
changed.  At  the  request  of  his  wife  I have  sent  an  escort  and  wagon 
to  bring  in  the  body.  We  have  also  found  a cache  of  cut  pork,  said  to 
belong  to  him.  I have  sent  out  the  quartermaster  to  estimate  and 


„ xvrtl.]  EXPEDITION'  TO  BLUE  SPRINGS,  MO.  ■>  < 

.riiiff  it  in.  I think  by  to-morrow  I will  have  the  machine  fairly  m 
notion,  after  which  the  atmosphere  in  this  vicinity  will  be  very  un- 
lealthy  for  rebels.  I captured  also  a lot  of  papers  belonging  to  the 
ebels,  but  have  not  had  time  to  examine  them.  My  next  will  gn< 
ome  light  on  the  subject.  I am  still  more  convinced  of  the  impor 
Zee  of  holding  this  post  than  ever.  It  will  require,  however,  an 
■nergetic  commander.  I also  think  it  very  important  to  attack  Spring 
fold  at  once.  That  I will  leave,  however,  for  wiser  heads  and  largei 

°IChave  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  major,  your  most  obedient 

!ervant’  CLARK  WRIGHT, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Post  Lebanon,  Mo. 

Maj.  N.  P.  Chipman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Holla , Mo. 


JANUARY  29-EEBRUARY  3,  1862.— Expedition  to  Blue  Springs,  Mo. 

Report  of  Gapt.  William  S.  Oliver , Seventh  Missouri  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Camp  Stevenson, 

Independence , February  3,  1862. 

General:  I liave  just  returned  from  an  expedition  which  I was 
compelled  to  undertake  in  search  of  the  notorious  Quantrill  and  his 
mng  of  robbers  in  the  vicinity  of  Blue  Springs.  Without  mounted 
iien  at  my  disposal,  despite  numerous  applications  to  various  points, 

[ have  seen  this  infamous  scoundrel  rob  mails,  steal  the  coaches  and 
lorses,  and  commit  other  similar  outrages  upon  society  even  within 
sight  of  this  city.  Mounted  on  the  best  horses  of  the  country,  he  has 
defied  pursuit,  making  his  camp  in  the  bottoms  of  the  - -and 

Blue  and  roving  over  a circuit  of  30  miles.  I mounted  a company  ol 
tny  command  and  went  to  Blue  Springs.  The  first  night  there  myselt 
with  5 men,  were  ambushed  by  him  and  fired  upon.  We  killed  2 ot 
bis  men  (of  which  he  had  18  or  20)  and  wounded  a third.  The  next 
day  we  killed  4 more  of  the  worst  of  the  gang,  and  before  we  left  suc- 
ceeded in  dispersing  them.  I obtained  6 or  7 wagon  loads  of  pork ^and 
a quantity  of  tobacco,  hidden  and  preserved  for  the  use  °f  the  Southern 
Armv,  and  recovered  also  the  valuable  stage-coach,  with  2 of  then 
horses.  I was  absent  a week,  and  can  say  that  no  men  were  ever  more 
earnest  or  subject  to  greater  privations  and  hardships  than  both  the 
mounted  men  and  the  infantry  I employed  on  this  expedition. 

Quantrill  will  not  leave  this  section  unless  he  is  chastised  and  driven 
from  it.  I hear  of  him  to-night  15  miles  from  here,  with  new  recruits, 
committing  outrages  on  Union  men,  a large  body  of  whom  have  come 
in  to-night,  driven  out  by  him.  Families  of  Union  men  are  comm* 
into  the  city  to-night  asking  of  me  escorts  to  bring  m their  goods  and 

chattels,  which  I duly  furnished.  . _ A 

The  duplicate  orders  from  you  to  move  I received  the  same  day 
while  absent  on  this  expedition.  I returned  to  this  place  at  once,  bu 
find  it  utterly  impossible  in  the  present  condition  of  the  command 
to  start  at  once.  My  men  are  without  boots  and  shoes,  and  the  long 
march  in  the  snow  and  cold  from  Morristown  and  this  last  severe  expe- 
dition has  filled  the  hospital,  as  you  are  aware  from  the  report  ot  the 


58 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  INI).  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL 


post  surgeon,  heretofore  transmitted.  Three  are  confined  to  their  beds 
with  broken  limbs  and  two  with  small-pox.  They  cannot  be  removed 
in  my  wagons.  Others  may  come  down  in  a few  days. 

I applied  to  General  Hunter  for  shoes,  &c.  He  replied  that  all  my 
supplies  of  that  sort  must  be  obtained  through  you.  Saying  nothing, 
general,  about  the  deplorable  condition  which  the  withdrawal  of  my 
force  will  leave  this  people  in,  is  it  not  pertinent  for  me  to  ask  how  I 
can  move  my  command  in  its  present  condition  on  this  frozen  ground 
and  snow  ? I assure  you,  sir,  nothing  do  I more  desire  than  to  rejoin 
my  regiment,  but  if  I go  now  my  men  must  travel  with  frozen  feet, 
and  my  sick  I must  leave  behind  for  aught  I see.  I am  not  insensible, 
and  cannot  be,  to  the  appeals  which  pour  in  upon  me  from  the  many 
Union  men  of  this  vicinity  to  remain,  but  I have  no  duties  to  dis- 
charge transcending  your  command,  and  do  not  ask  for  delay  on  that 
account. 

The  duties  of  the  officers  of  the  battalion  are  rendered  onerous  and 
burdensome  on  account  of  the  absence  of  three  lieutenants  and  a cap- 
tain belonging  to  the  Seventh  Missouri,  now  at  Sedalia;  besides  which 
one  lieutenant  is  confined  to  his  bed  sick. 

For  the  last  two  weeks  I have  been  without  any  sugar,  there  being 
none  to  be  had.  I send  to-morrow  to  Kansas  City  to  endeavor  to 
obtain  supplies ; still  I have  a plenty  of  pork,  confiscated  flour,  and  | 
secesli  forage  and  wood. 

Hoping  this  presentation  of  facts  will  excuse  me  from  moving  until 
at  least  I obtain  further  commands  from  you,  and  awaiting  your  further 
orders,  I remain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  OLIVER, 

Captain , Comdg . Detached  Battalion  Seventh  Mo.  Vols. 

P.  S. — I omitted  to  say  I find  that  I had  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded- 
during  the  expedition  referred  to. 

Brigadier- General  Pope, 

Commanding , Otterville , Mo. 


FEBRUARY  9,  1862— Skirmish  at  Marshfield,  Mo. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen,  Samuel  R.  Curtis , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Camp  at  Copey,  18  miles  in  advance  of  Lebanon, 

February  10,  1862 — 5 p.  m. 

Captain  : I should  have  reported  that  a party  of  my  cavalry,  under 
Lieut.  Col.  F.  W.  Lewis,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  made  a descent  on 
Bolivar  last  Saturday  morning,  taking  1 or  2 straggling  rebel  soldiers 
and  carrying  terror  and  astonishment  due  north  of  Springfield.  On 
their  way  back  they  captured  125  head  of  cattle,  which  had  been  col- 
lected for  the  rebel  army. 

Yesterday  at  4 o’clock  a cavalry  battalion,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wright,  entered  Marshfield,  routing  and  pursuing  a small  party  of  the 
enemy’s  force  that  was  running  the  mill.  Pursuit  was  made,  and  Cap- 
tain Montgomery  overtook  them,  killing  2,  wounding  3,  taking  3 
prisoners,  several  slaves,  3 Government  mule  teams,  2 common  teams, 
all  loaded  with  wheat  designed  for  the  enemy.  Kone  of  our  men  were 


,'HAF.  XVIII.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  CRANE  CREEK,  MO. 


59 


Hurt  My  march  to-day  has  been  very  satisfactory.  Latest  news  from 
Springfield:  Price  was  still  there.  General  Frost  arrived  Friday  or 
Saturday  with  a few  men,  and  his  battery,  with  about  400  men,  was  ex- 
pected within  four  days.  Firing  heard  to-day  from  that  direction. 
Probably  that  re-enforcement  has  arrived. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML«  _fcv>*  Uxtllfej 

Brigadier- Genera  l . 

Oapt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


FEBRUARY  12,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Springfield,  Mo. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , U.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Springfield , Mo.,  February  13, 1862. 

Captain  : The  flag  of  the  Union  floats  over  the  court-house  of 
Springfield,  Mo.  The  enemy  attacked  us  with  small  parties  at  10.30 
fclock  12  miles  out,  and  my  front  guards  had  a running  fire  with  them 
most  of  the  afternoon.  At  dusk  a regiment  of  the  Confederate  cavalry 
attacked  the  outer  picket,  but  did  not  move  it.  A few  shots  from  a 
tiowitzer  killed  2 and  wounded  several.  The  regiment  retreated  to  this 
place,  and  the  enemy  immediately  commenced  the  evacuation  of  the 
yity.  I entered  the  city  at  10  a.  m.  My  cavalry  is  in  full  pursuit, 
rimy  say  the  enemy  is  making  a stand  at  Wilson’s  Creek.  Forage, 
flour,  and  other  stores  in  large  quantities  taken.  Shall  pursue  as  fast 
as  the  strength  of  the  men  will  allow. 

Yery  respectfully,  &c.,  

* * ’ SAML.  B.  CUETIS, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


FEBRUARY  14,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Crane  Creek,  Mo. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , TJ.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

McCullaFs  Store , February  14,  1862—7  p.  m. 

General  : The  enemy  was  attacked  by  my  cavalry  about  hall  an 
hour  since : he  was  then  at  Crane  Creek.*  Whether  he  will  stand  there  or 
not  is  very  uncertain,  but  I think  it  will  be  hard  for  his  train  and  heavy 
artillery.  He  will  probably  move  on  through.  I will  try  to  attack  him 
in  rear  to-morrow,  but  will  delay  if  he  stops  until  you  can  reach  him. 
I regret  that  I can  get  no  report  from  you,  but  hope  you  got  my  reply 
to  yours  this  morning.  I find  one  or  two  companies  of  Benton  Hus- 
sars here,  and  will  take  them  with  me,  as  the  nearest  and  best  way 
for  >them  to  rejoin  you.  I hope  you  are  able  to  reach  the  enemy  or 


* See  Bowen’s  report,  Pea  Ridge,  or  Elkhorn,  Ark. 


60  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvirr. 

strike  his  flank  at  McDowell’s,  since  lie  is  now  probably  passing  Crane 

Creek. 

Truly,  yours, 

SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel, 

Commanding  Division. 


FEBRUARY  15,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Flat  Creek,  Mo. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , TJ.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Camp  near  Flat  Creek,  2 miles  west  of  Christian’s, 

February  15,  1862 — 7 p.  in. 

General  : I moved  slowly  till  I had  passed  Crane  Creek.  There 
the  precipitate  flight  of  the  enemy  induced  me  to  order  forward  the 
cavalry,  with  instructions  to  overtake  and  charge  the  enemy.  When 
they  arrived  here  they  were  fired  on  by  artillery,  and  therefore  made 
a stand  until  other  forces  came  up.  The  little  howitzers  returned 
the  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  kept  them  at  bay  till  I got  heavier  bat- 
teries in  position  and  drove  the  enemy  forward.  The  valley  is  very 
strong  for  the  enemy,  and  I wonder  he  did  not  make  a better  stand. 
I am  taking  the  straggling  cattle  for  rations  to-night,  and  will  move  on 
to  Cassville  at  4. 

I hope  the  force  of  your  command  is  near  me  to-night.  My  men 
are  living  on  meat,  and  have  hardly  time  to  cook  it  5 but  they  seem 
eager  to  push  forward,  either  to  take  Price  or  drive  him  out  of  the 
State. 


I am,  general,  very  truly,  yours, 


Brigadier-General  Sigel,  en  route. 


SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier - General. 


FEBRUARY  16,  1862.— Action  at  Potts’  Hill,  Sugar  Creek,  Ark. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Clark  Wright , Wright’s  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Wright’s  Battalion, 

Camp  Carr , Big  Sugar  Creek , Ark.,  February  17,  1862. 
Colonel  : I desire  to  submit  through  you  to  the  general  command- 
ing a brief  report  of  the  charge  made  upon  the  rebels  on  yesterday. 
When  my  command  was  ordered  forward,  we  came  up,  as  you  are  aware, 
and  formed  on  the  rear  of  Major  McConnell’s  battalion,  Third  Illinois 
Cavalry.  The  major  and  myself  held  a brief  consultation,  and  mutually 
agreed" that,  if  permitted,  and  a charge  was  made,  to  go  in  together,  and 
at  his  suggestion  I followed  Colonel  Ellis,  being  supported  by  the  major. 
Thus  we  were  formed  at  the  creek  when  the  charge  was  sounded. 
Colonel  Ellis,  leading  the  charge,  took  the  road  and  received  a heavy 
cross-fire  from  the  enemy.  As  I approached  I discovered  a heavy 
column  of  the  enemy  on  either  side  of  the  road.  I at  once  deployed 
my  battalion  to  the  right  and  charged  their  lines.  Major  McConnell 


Chap.  XVUI.l 


ACTION  AT  SUGAR  CREEK,  ARK. 


61 


went  to  the  left.  For  a few  minutes  the  fight  was  well  contested  on  the 
right,  the  heavy  timber  and  dense  underbrush  affording  good  eover- 
ina-  for  the  enemy.  I ordered  a saber  charge  after  firing  our  carbines 
and  pistols,  but  soon  found  that  the  brush  was  too  dense  to  make  it 
rapid  enough.  Consequently  we  returned  sabers  and  fought  our  way 
through  with  carbines.  My  battalion  moved  steadily  forward  routing 
the  enemv,  driving  him  beyond  the  brush  into  the  open  ground  be>  ond, 
at  which  point  I received  an  order  to  fall  back.  I dropped  back  some 
200  yards  and  formed.  Our  loss  is  1 killed  (private,  Compan>  ) ; 
Captain  Switzler,  Company  A,  severely  wounded;  2 privates.  Company 
C slightly  wounded.  Loss  of  the  enemy  unknown.  My  officers  and 
men  all  acted  with  great  bravery  and  coolness,  and  kept  m as  good 
order  as  the  circumstances  would  admit  of;  and,  so  far  as  my  observa- 
tion extended,  Colonel  Ellis’  command,  First  Missouri,  Major  McCon- 
nell’s battalion,  Third  Illinois,  and  Major  Bowen’s  battery  all  deser\e 
credit  for  their  bravery  and  energy  in  repulsing  and  routing  the  enemy 
from  such  an  ambush.  All  acted  nobly  under  the  circumstances. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  colonel,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

CLARK  WRICrHl, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Wright's  Battalion  Cavalry. 
Col.  E.  A.  Carr,  ^ 

Acting  Major-General , Commanding  Fourth  Division. 


FEBRUARY  17,  1862.— Action  at  Sugar  Creek,  Ark. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , TJ.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Sugar  Creek  Crossing,  6 miles  from  line  in  Arkansas, 

February  18,  1862. 

Captain  : The  general’s  dispatch  of  the  14th  is  received.  We  rejoice 
again  at  the  success  of  our  comrades  in  the  East.  . , 

The  enemy  was  re-enforced  yesterday  by  the  troops  of  McCulloch  and 
made  another  stand  at  this  place.  His  batteries  opened  on  us  and  were 
very  soon  replied  to  by  mine.  After  a few  rounds  of  shot  and  shell  I 
ordered  a cavalry  charge,  which  drove  them  from  the  high  grounds  they 
occupy,  with  the  loss  of  many  killed,  wounded,  and  scattered.  My  loss 
is  13  killed  and  15  or  20  wounded*  Among  the  latter  are  Major  Bowen, 
of  my  escort,  in  the  wrist;  my  assistant  adjutant-general,  Captain 
McKenny,  severely  cut,  but  not  dangerously;  Captain  Switzler,  not 

dM|eadvance  encamped  on  the  battle  ground.  General  Sigel’s  com- 
mand is  4 miles  back  and  will  reach  me  this  morning.  Have  sent  cav- 
airy  forward  to  annoy  and  explore.  Cross  Hollow  is  their  next  point, 
12  miles  ahead.  I shall  also  await  the  arrival  of  the  First  and  Second 
Divisions,  as  this  is  their  great  boasted  trap  for  the  Federal  Arm> . 
Hope  also  the  Third  Iowa  will  arrive  to-day. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 

Brigadier- General , Commandi ng. 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


‘ See  Bowen’s  report  of  Pea  Ridge,  or  Elkhorn,  Ark. 


62 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  x vttt 


FEBRUARY  18,  1862. — Action  at  Bentonville,  Ark. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  C.  Schaeffer  Boernstein,  Chief  of  Staff. 

No.  3. — Brigadier-General  A.  Asboth,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , TJ.  S.  Army. 

[Received  Saint  Louis,  February  21,  1862.] 

I sent  a cavalry  force  under  Brigadier-General  Asbotli  yesterday  to 
take  Bentonville.  A small  force  was  routed  j their  equipments  taken  • 
a large  flag,  arms,  and  teams  were  brought  in.  It  is  difficult  to  pro- 
cure information  of  the  topography  of  the  country.  Cross  Hollow  is  a 
deep  ravine,  in  thick  brush,  flanked  by  the  WFite  River  Mountains. 

General  Sigel’s  force  and  five  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa  have  ar- 
ia ved,  so  my  force  is  again  united.  I want  to  take  Cross  Hollow  and 
I ayettec  ille,  but  see  nothing  else  this  side  of  the  Arkansas  River  worth 
going  after,  and  I have  no  means  of  crossing  that  river.  Forage  and 
meat  are  found  in  abundance,  but  the  taking  of  it  is  attended  with  con- 
siderable labor,  and  tends  to  demoralize  my  troops  and  draw  after  me 
a horde  of  camp  followers,  who  commit  many  outrages. 

The  scattered  blankets  and  coats  on  the  field  show  that  the  enemy 
had  made  a more  extensive  arrangement  for  battle  than  I supposed. 
Their  rout  was  complete,  but  they  keep  their  artillery  so  far  back  in 
defiles  I have  not  yet  been  able  to  secure  it.  1 shall  make  a recon- 
naissance in  force  to-day,  and  have  private  scouts  also  busy  feeling  the 
enemy  in  his  brushy  cavern. 

SAML.  R,  CURTIS, 
Brigadier-  Genera l , Commanding. 

Capt.  NT.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  C.  Schaeffer  Boernstein , Chief  of  Staff. 

Saint  Louis,  March  4, 1862. 

Captain  : The  rebel  flag  which  I had  the  honor  to  deliver  to  head- 
quarters by  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis,  commanding  Southwest- 
ern District,  Western  Department,  was  taken  at  Bentonville,  Ark.,  the 
19th  [18th]  of  February. 

The  day  after  the  engagement  at  Sugar  Creek  Brigadier-General 
Asboth  was  ordered  by  the  commanding  general  to  march  towards 
Bentonville.  His  force  consisted  of  parts  of  the  Benton  and  Fremont 
Hussars  and  one  battery  commanded  by  Captain  Elbert.  Bentonville 
was  occupied  by  a part  of  Colonel  Rector’s  regiment  of  Arkansas 
infantry.  After  a short  engagement  the  rebels  were  driven  to  flight, 
leaving  behind  a large  amount  of  provisions,  arms,  wagons,  and  horses. 
Besides  that,  our  forces  captured  a number  of  prisoners,  and  took  pos- 


\ ’ hat.  XVlll.J  ACTION  AT  BENTONVILLE,  ARK.  63 

session  of  their  regimental  flag,  which  they  found  hoisted  at  the  court- 
house. 


Your  most  obedient  servant, 

O.  SCHAEFFER  BOERNSTEIN, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Oapt.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistan t Adjutant-  General. 


No.  3. 


Reports  of  Brigadier- General  A.  Ashoth , U.  S.  Army. 


Bentonville,  Ark.,  February  18,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I entered  this  place  with 
my  command  at  20  minutes  past  12  o’clock,  taking  down  the  secession 
flag  floating  from  the  court-house,  and  securing  a number  of  prisoners 
and  arms.  I hold  now  quiet  possession  of  the  surrounded  town,  and, 
searching  all  the  houses,  will  collect  further  arms  and  ammunition. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Briciadier- General. 


General  Samuel  B.  Curtis. 


Headquarters  Second  Division, 

Camp  at  Sugar  Creek  Crossing , Benton  Co.,  Ark.,  Feb.  19,  1862. 

General  : By  your  order  of  yesterday  I was  directed  to  set  out 
with  a portion  of  my  cavalry  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  upon  a recon - 
noitering  expedition  on  the  road  to  Bentonville,  under  instructions  to 
take  possession  of  that  town  if  possible.  In  obedience  to  and  in  fur- 
therance of  this  order  I issued  the  Special  Order,  No.  30,  herewith 
inclosed*  and  with  the  force  therein  designated  started  upon  the  recon- 
naissance at  9.30  o’clock  a.  m.  Following  Sugar  Creek  4J  miles,  1 
struck  the  Cassville  and  Springfield  road  (which  leaves  the  Wire  road 
at  a point  6 miles  behind  Sugar  Creek  Crossing,  where  the  First  and 
Second  Divisions  were  last  encamped),  and  after  surprising  a dis- 
mounted rebel  cavalry  j)icket  4 miles  this  side  of  Bentonville  and 
taking  some  of  their  horses  and  all  tlie^r  saddles  and  bridles,  I occu- 
pied Bentonville  at  20  minutes  past  12  o’clock.  The  accompanying 
topographical  sketch,*  with  notes  of  explanation,  gives  a full  descrip- 
tion of  the  road,  together  with  tlie  character  of  the  country,  its  re- 
sources, camping  sites,  &c. 

The  deserted  rebel  camp  exhibited  vestiges  of  a late  encampment  ot 
about  5,000  men,  the  larger  part  of  whom,  according  to  information 
received,  has  departed  on  the  road  to  Smith’s  Mill,  towards  Blooming 
ton,  or  Mud  Town.  Bentonville  was  entirely  deserted  upon  our  taking 
possession  of  it.  In  a short  time,  however,  we  collected  from  the 
bushes  in  its  vicinity  about  60  men,  32  of  whom,  being  rebel  soldiers 
or  taken  with  arms,  I brought  in  as  prisoners.  A list  of  their  names 
is  herewith  inclosed.*  To  the  others,  sick  and  wounded  and  non- 
combatant  inhabitants  of  the  towrn,  I administered  the  oath  ot  alle- 
giance. 


Omitted  as  of  no  present  importance. 


64 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XHILl 

The  rebel  post  quartermaster  escaped  from  his  office,  but  his  horse  I 
and  equipments  were  taken,  together  with  his  office  papers  and  ac  j 
counts,  as  were  also  the  mail-bag  and  letters  from  the  post-office,! 
besides  those  found  in  the  barracks  and  hospitals.  Four  teams,  all  I 
that  were  in  the  town,  were  loaded  with  provisions,  arms,  accouter- 
ments, clothing,  &c.,  which  were  placed  in  charge  of  my  acting  division 
quartermaster,  Captain  Beusberg,  together  with  7 horses  in  teams  and 
$475.75  in  Confederate  bills  dropped  by  a flying  rebel.  Twenty-nine  | 
other  horses  taken  are  in  possession  of  the  respective  cavalry  compa- 
nies, and  will  be  immediately  collected  for  the  use  of  the  artillery. 

The  last  rebel  troops  left  Bentonville  on  Sunday — some  of  their 
baggage  trains  not  until  Monday  forenoon — all  in  the  direction  of 
Mud  Town,  to  re-enforce,  as  is  stated,  the  enemy’s  position  at  Cross 
Hollow.  No  troops  have  come  from  or  left  for  Maysville. 

On  my  return  I took  another  road,  represented  to  be  good,  without 
any  creek  crossings,  joining  the  Fayetteville  road  4 miles  south  of 
Sugar  Creek  Crossing,  but  as  it  was  already  sunset,  and  my  cavalry, 
besides  the  2 pieces  of  artillery,  embarrassed  with  32  prisoners  and 
laden  wagons,  and  not  knowing  with  certainty  the  position  of  the 
enemy  on  the  Fayetteville  road,  from  where  cannonading  was  heard 
the  whole  afternoon,  I resumed  the  Smith  Mill  road  again  to  Sugar 
Creek  Valley  and  arriving  at  our  encampment  with  my  whole  com- 
mand at  about  7.30  o’clock  in  the  evening,  presented  the  secession  flag 
to  General  Curtis,  commanding. 

The  provisions  and  clothing  taken  will  be  distributed  among  the  men 
of  the  command.  One  of  the  wagons,  however,  having  been  overturned  ! 
near  the  camp  of  the  First  Division,  its  2 horses,  together  with  the 
provisions  it  contained,  were  appropriated  by  the  troops. 

It  was  impossible  for  me  to  explore  the  section  of  country  lying  j 
between  the  Fayetteville  road,  the  Sugar  Creek  road  to  Bentonville,  I 
and  the  road  from  that  place  by  Osage  Springs  to  Mud  Town,  but  from 
information  received  it  is  intersected  by  by-roads  in  all  directions, 
adapted  to  cavalry  maneuvers  in  flank  of  the  rebel  position  at  Cross  I 
Hollow.  It  however  lacks  water.  A closer  examination  is  required. 

With  regard  to  the  32  prisoners  and  34  muskets  and  rifles,  as  well 
as  to  the  disposition  of  the  before-mentioned  money,  I would  ask  for 
orders. 

1 am,  general,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ASBOTH, 

Brigadier-  Gen  era  /,  Commandin g Di vim o n . 

General  Franz  Sigel, 

Commanding  First  and  Second  Divisions. 


FEBRUARY  18-19,  1862. — Expedition  to  Mount  Vernon,  Mo. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  K.  Mills. 

Headquarters  Post  of  Springfield,  Mo., 

February  20,  1802. 

General:  Learning  that  the  secession  flag  was  in  Mount  Vernon, 
and.  that  a small  party  of  Price’s  soldiers  (cut  off  by  your  advance  to 
the  southward)  had  entered  the  place,  I dispatched  Captain  Mudgett,  j 
of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  with  30  men  of  his  command,  to  capture  ] 
them.  They  left  here  on  the  18th  and  returned  on  the  evening  of  the  j 


■ AV.  XVIII.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  AVEST  PLAINS,  MO. 


65 


)tli,  having  been  perfectly  successful.  They  took  the  flag  and  5 
risoners,  and  once  more  raised  the  Stars  and  Stripes  over  the  court- 

I have  discovered  the  whereabouts  of  some  125  rebels  some  28  miles 
om  here,  who  were  cut  off  from  joining  Price,  and  are  reported  to  have 
train  with  them.  I have  organized  a sufficient  force,  and  as  soon  as 
y spies  return  shall  send  after  them. 

Bespectfully,  yours,  „ T ^ 

? JAMES  K.  MILLS, 

Lieutenant - Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Brigadier-General  Curtis, 

Commanding  Army  of  Southwest. 


FEBRUARY  19,  1862.— Skirmish  at  West  Plains,  Mo. 

REPORTS. 

o.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  S.  N.  Wood,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

0.  2.— Maj.  William  C.  Drake,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  S.  At.  Wood , Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry . 

Headquarters  Wood’s  Battalion, 

Sixth  Missouri  Volunteer  Cavalry, 
Rolla , February  26,  1862, 

Colonel:  According  to  your  order  of  February  15  I left  camp  Sun- 
ay,  February  16,  1862,  with  all  my  available  force,  consisting  of  Com- 
any  A,  Capt.  S.  A.  Breese,  42  men ; Company  B,  Captain  Hackney, 
5 men;  Company  C,  Lieutenants  Martin  and  Hawkins,  27  men;  Com- 
any  I),  Capt.  E.  M.  Morris,  29  men;  Company  E,  Captain  He  Gress 
nd  Lieutenant  Cole,  29  men;  total,  152;  arri\Ted  at  Salem,  Mo.,  the 
ame  evening,  and  reported  to  Major  Drake,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry ; got 
hat  information  I could,  and  we  mutually  agreed  upon  an  expedition 
outli,  and  both  Avent  to  work  to  get  our  commands  ready  to  move, 
lajor  Drake’s  command  consisted  of  Captain  Miller  and  Lieutenant 
'herrie  and  60  men,  Lieutenant  McDannal  and  50  men;  total,  110  men; 
laking  a total  force  of  262  men;  Company  A,  of  my  battalion,  taking 
long  their  mountain  howitzer.  We  camped  Monday  night  8 miles 
outli  of  Salem.  Tuesday  we  tra\Teled  30  miles,  to  Eoark’s  store,  in 
pring  Valley.  Wednesday  morning  at  1 o’clock  Ave  were  in  our 
addles  and  on  our  way  to  either  Thomasville  or  West  Plains.  Eight 
flies  brought  us  to  Harlow’s  Mill,  a notorious  rebel  rendezAmus, 
hd  30  miles  from  either  Thomas\Tlle  or  West  Plains.  A cold  sleet 
ad  fallen  all  the  morning.  My  men  Avere  completely  saturated  and 
lmost  frozen.  We  Avere  compelled  to  halt  and  build  fires  to  keep  from 
reezing. 

Here  I learned  that  Coleman’s  infantry  was  at  West  Plains,  but  no 
roops  in  Tho.masville.  Where  Coleman  himself  was  I could  not  learn, 
immediately  detailed  a small  wagon  guard,  and  with  the  balance  of 
oinmahd,  including  our  mountain  howitzer,  pushed  on  30  miles  to  West 
Tains.  I sent  Major  Drake  with  the  Third  Iowa  Battalion  to  take 
5 R R— VOL  VIII 


66  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIv.,  KANS.^AND  IND.  T.  ICiiai*.  XVII 

position  on  the  south  and  east  of  the  town.  I sent  Companies  B,  I 
and  C to  the  west,  and  prepared  to  enter  the  town  on  the  north  wit 
Company  A and  the  howitzer,  supported  on  our  left  by  Company  I 
At  3 p.  m.  we  thus  had  the  town  completely  surrounded.  We  advance 
and  entered  the  place,  a brisk  firing  having  commenced  on  our  par 
Not  over  half  a dozen  shots  were  fired  by  the  rebels,  they  breaking  an 
running  in  every  direction.  Supposing  them  posted  in  force  in  ti 
court-house,  Sergeant  Moody  opened  fire  upon  the  building  with  tl 
howitzer.  One  shot  with  canister  covered  the  entire  front  with  bulle 
holes.  A shell  passed  through  both  walls  and  three  partitions  an 
jben  exploded. 

The  contest  was  brief.  None  killed  or  wounded  on  our  side.  The 
loss  was  5 killed,  1 mortally  wounded  (died  before  leaving  the  place 
8 slightly  wounded,  and  60  taken  prisoners.  We  remained  in  tow 
(which  is  only  10  miles  from  the  Arkansas  line)  until  the  next  day  (20tl 
at  2 p.  m.  Of  the  prisoners  taken  about  20  were  released,  as  there  w i 
no  Evidence  connecting  them  with  the  rebel  army.  We  also  capture 
about  40  horses  and  60  stand  of  arms,  together  with  several  wagon 
1 append  a list  of  prisoners  and  captured  property.* 

At  2 p.»m.  Tuesday  (20th),  learning  that  Colonel  Coleman  and  30  me 
were  in  Texas  County,  we  marched  north  20  miles  to  Hulton  Valle; 
made  one  or  two  arrests,  sending  scouts  in  all  directions  to  ascertai 
Coleman’s  position.  We  remained  in  Hulton  Valley  until  noon  (21st 
but  hearing  nothing  of  Coleman  we  marched  20  miles  north  to  El 
Creek.  Saturday  I marched  the  main  command  to  Houston,  sendil 
Captain  He  Cress  and  20  men  to  Smiley’s  Mill  for  flour.  Captain  1 
Cress  fell  in  with  a party  of  11  rebels,  killed  2 and  took  1 prisoner,  a 
riving  at  camp  at  9 o’clock  p.  m.  Believing  that  other  parties  of  rebel 
were  in  the  county,  I determined  to  scout  the  whole  county. 

I immediately  prepared  orders,  and  from  2 to  4 a.  m.  Sunday  mor 
ing  had  sent  out  seven  scouting  parties  of  from  15  to  20  each.  Health 
that  Coleman  bad  a fort  near  Smiley’s  Mill,  I sent  Captain  Breese  ar 
20  men  to  ascertain  the  fact,  and  if  true  to  destroy  it.  The  capta 
found  a large  frame  house,  the  property  of  Hick  Smiley.  The  insit 
partitions  had  been  removed.  Logs  had  been  put  up  as  high  as  a mar 
breast  all  around  the  house.  Outside  of  this  a ditch  had  been  dug,  tl 
dirt  being  i brown  between  the  logs  and  the  building.  A door  In 
been  heavily  planked  and  port-holes  cut  just  above  the  logs,  makir 
a position,  if  occupied  by  a few  men,  hard  to  take  without  artiller 
Captain  Breese  set  fire  to  it  and  burned  it  down.  Lieutenant  Cherr 
returned  before  night,  having  found  10  armed  rebels  at  Judge  Ci 
more’s,  and  captured  the  entire  party.  Three  or  four  other  prisone 
were  taken. 

Monday  morning,  being  satisfied  Colonel  Coleman  and  party  In 
escaped  south,  and  no  further  work  left  for  us  to  do,  and  being  out 
provisions,  I directed  Major  Brake  to  return  with  his  command  1 
Salem,  taking  my  own  command,  prisoners,  and  horses,  and  returuii 
to  Kolia,  arriving  here  at  1 o’clock  this  day.  The  total  number  of  pri 
oners  is  60. 

In  conclusion  I must  bear  testimony  to  the  gallantry  of  the  office] 
and  soldiers  constituting  the  command.  We  started  with  but  five  daj 
rations  of  sugar  and  coffee  and  but  two  of  other  articles,  depen dii 
upon  what  the  country  afforded  for  subsistence.  Without  tents,  tra 
cling  225  miles  in  ten  days,  sleeping  on  the  ground,  half  of  the  coil 


Omitted. 


67 


hap.  XVin.]  SKIRMISH  AT  WEST  PLAINS,  MO. 

mild  constantly  on  guard,  yet  both  officers  and  men  endured  it  all 
without  a murmur. 

I have  the  honor,  colonel,  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

.S.  N.  WOOD, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Commanding  Wood's  Battalion,  Sixth  Mo.  Vols. 

Col.  J.  B.  Wyman, 

Commanding  Post , Rolla , Mo. 

— 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  C.  Drake,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Post  at  Salem,  Mo., 

March  4,  1862. 

I have  been  unable  to  make  regular  reports  of  my  command,  owing 
o absence  on  sundry  and  divers  scouts,  &c.  At  the  time  our  last 
eport  should  have  been  made  we  were  out  on  a scout  in  force. 

On  February  17,  120  of  my  command  were  attached  to  Lieut.  Col.  S. 
!.  Wood’s  battalion  of  120  men,  under  orders  to  scout  through  Dent, 
Shannon,  Howell,  and  Texas  Counties.  We  returned,  bringing  with 
s 100  prisoners,  80  horses,  mules,  &c.,  80  rifles  and  shot-guns,  2 kegs 
f powder,  a large  lot  of  commissary  stores,  and  other  contraband  arti- 
les,  including  wagons,  ambulance,  buggy,  &e.,  most  of  which  were 
aptured  at  West  Plains,  the  county  seat  of  Howell  County,  and  the 
•alance  at  Houston,  the  county  seat  of  Texas. 

West  Plains  was  the.  headquarters  of  Colonel  Coleman,  the  guerrilla 
hief  of  this  country.  He  had  there  at  the  time  of  our  desceut  about 
0 infantry,  forming  a nucleus  for  a regiment  of  Price’s  army.  Him- 
elf  and  his  cavalry  force  were  absent  on  a scout.  At  about  a mile 
nd  a half  before  reaching  the  town  Colonel  Wood’s  battalion  and  ours 
eparated,  to  enter  the  town  from  different  sides.  Our  boys  got  there 
rst  and  made  the  attack,  resulting  in  6 killed  and  10  wounded  of  the 
nemy  and  the  rest  prisoners.  After  the  fight  was  all  over  Wood’s  men 
ame  up. 

Our  boys  behaved  like  veterans  and  did  credit  to  your  command. 

We  expected  to  find  Coleman  and  his  mounted  men  there  and  looked 
or  quite  a brush,  but  we  were  disappointed.  At  Houston  we  expected 
. fight,  but  found  no  one  there  to  oppose  our  entry.  Took  possession 
f the  town;  remained  there  over  Sunday,  and  returned  on  Monday  to 
i ale m.  Colonel  Wood  took  prisoners  and  property  to  Bolla.  General 
lalleck  telegraphed  to  General  McClellan  that  Colonel  Wood  had 
Iriven  the  rebels  from  Dent,  Shannon,  Howell,  and  Texas  Counties. 

The  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  was  not  mentioned,  at  which  the  boys  feel 
uglily  indignant  after  doing  all  the  work. 

For  state  of  my  command  would  refer  you  to  accompanying  re- 
>ort.# 

With  great  respect,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  C.  DRAKE, 

Major,  Commanding , 

Col.  Cyrus  Bussey. 


Not  found. 


68  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK  , KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 

FEBRUARY  23,  1862. — Occupation  of  Fayetteville.  Ark. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Henry .W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  A.  Asboth,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Proclamation  of  General  Asbotli  to  the  citizens  of  Fayetteville,  Ark. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  JJ.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mo.,  Saint  Louis , February  27,  1862. 
General  Curtis  has  taken  possession  of  Fayetteville,  Ark.,  capturin 
a number  of  prisoners,  stores,  baggage,  &c.  The  enemy  burned  a pai 
of  the  town  before  they  left.  They  have  crossed  the  Boston  Mountain 
in  great  confusion.  We  are  now  in  possession  of  all  their  stronghold.' 
Forty-two  officers  and  men  of  the  Fifth  Missouri  Cavalry  were  poisone 
at  Mud  Town  by  eating  poisoned  food  which  the  rebels  left  behind  then 
The  gallant  Captain  Diilfer  died,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Yon  Deutsc 
and  Captain  Lehmann  have  suffered  much,  but  are  recovering.  Tb 
indignation  of  our  soldiers  is  very  great,  but  they  have  been  restraine 
from  retaliating  upon  the  prisoners  of  war. 

H.  .W.  HALLECK,  Major-General. 

Major  General  McClellan. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  SW.  Dist.  of  Mo.,  Camp  Halleck,  Feb.  24,  1862. 

Captain  : Our  flag  was  raised  on  the  court-house  of  Fayettevill 
yesterday  at  11  o’clock.  The  picket  of  the  rebels  fled,  losing  severa 
who  were  taken  prisoners,  among  them  two  officers.  Principal  built 
ings  around  the  square  were  still  burning,  having  been  fired  by  tb 
rebels  to  destroy  those  stores  which  they  had  no  time  to  carry  awa; 
The  main  force  of  the  enemy  has  fled  beyond  the  mountain  range 
that  divide  the  waters  of  White  River  and  Arkansas.  I am  now  maste 
of  all  their  strongholds  and  larger  cities  of  Western  Arkansas,  and  hoi 
a check  ou  the  rebels  in  the  Indian  country,  being  south  of  the  Chei 
okees  and  east  of  the  Choctaws.  I am  told  the  enemy  is  blockadiu 
the  mountain  passes  by  felling  trees  and  otherwise  obstructing  the  waj 
as  McCulloch  did  Cross  Timber  Valley  last  summer.  Forty -two  < 
the  officers  and  men  of  the  Benton  Hussars  were  poisoned  at  Mud  Towi 
on  arriving  at  that  place  Thursday  last,  by  eating  rebel  food  or  drinl 
ing  rebel  liquor.  One  gallant  officer,  Captain  Diilfer,  died.  Liei 
tenant-Colonel  Yon  Deutsch  and  Captain  Lehmann  suffered  very  mucl 
but  have  recovered.  For  the  sake  of  humanity  I hope  it  was  not  ii 
tended,  but  the  evidence  of  the  animus  is  almost  irresistible.  Tb 
murder  of  one  of  our  soldiers  in  Bentonville  was  resented  by  burnin 
of  part  of  the  town  by  our  troops;  but  the  perpetrators  of  the  burnin 
will  be  summarily  punished  by  me. 

Two  days’  rations  of  flour  arrived  last  evening.  I have  started  mil! 
at  every  place  on  my  way,  but  some  deficient  or  awkward  arrange 
ment  of  transportation  prevents  it  from  coming  up  as  it  should, 
have  the  rebel  mills  at  Cross  Hollow  apd  two  mills  on  my  right  win 


AP.  XVIII.]  OCCUPATION  OF  FAYETTEVILLE,  ARK.  69 

inding,  but  I am  not  certain  that  wheat  in  sufficient  quantities  can 
5 secured. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Capt,  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Brigadier-General  A.  Asboth , V.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  at  Colonel  Tibbett’s, 
Fayetteville , Washington  Co.,  Ark.,  Feb.  23,  1862 — 11.20  o’clock. 
General  : I am  now  in  Fayetteville.  The  Stars  and  Stripes  float 
om  its  court-house.  The  enemy’s  picket,  driven  in  by  my  men, 
^treated  from  the  town,  and,  joined  by  some  others,  are  drawn  up  at  a 
lort  distance  from  it..  The  buildings  in  the  town  square  are  still 
laming.  We  have  already  several  prisoners  taken  in  arms,  among 
Lem  two  officers.  Your  instructions  as  to  the  occupation  of  the  town 
ill  be  fully  complied  with.  The  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  I now  order  to 
large  upon  the  enemy. 

ASBOTH, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Second  Division. 

General  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding  South  western  District,  Dept,  of  the  Missouri. 


Headquarters  at  Colonel  Tibbett’s, 
Fayetteville,  Washington  County , Ark.,  February  23,  1862. 
General  : Two  companies  of  cavalry,  the  retreating  rear  guard  of 
tie  enemy,  were  followed  by  our  cavalry,  leaving  behind  1 killed  and 
wounded,  1 mortally.  We  have  1 wounded.  A dying  private  of 
Iclntosli’s  regiment  disclosed  to  our  surgeon  that  three  regiments 
f McCulloch’s  command  are  posted  10  miles  from  here,  but  the  town, 
s well  as  the  surrounding  country,  is  well  guarded  by  our  cavalry  and 
rtillery.  The  enemy  having  been  seen  in  the  forenoon  7 miles  from 
ere,  on  the  West  Fork  of  the  White  River,  I sent  a company  of  Fre- 
aont  Hussars  to  that  point,  but  they  came  too  late  y the  enemy  had 
iown.  It  was  Brooks’  battalion,  from  400  to  500  strong — the  same 
hat  we  had  met  towards  Mud  Town  the  day  before  yesterday. 

All  the  troops  were  in  the  best  spirits,  and  the  Third  Illinois  [?]  Cav- 
lry,  forming  the  advance  guard,  behaved  very  well,  dismounting  at 
oinmand  to  act  as  infantry  in  the  bushes.  Of  the  activity,  zeal,  and 
aiergy  of  Colonel  Phelps  I cannot  speak  too  highly. 

The  people  having  full  confidence  in  your  command,  and  looking  to 
;ou  for  protection,  while  the  rebels  are  disheartened  by  the  defeat  in 
Tennessee  and  by  the  rapid  advance  of  your  troops,  I would  consider 
t advisable  to  hold  Fayetteville.  The  Union  men  implore  it,  and  prom- 
se  provisions  for  our  men  and  forage  for  the  animals.  Re-entorced 
jy  two  regiments  of  infantry,  I will  hold  the  place  and  surrounding 
country  against  all  the  troops  now  before  us.  If  ordered  to  leave,  all 


70  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ohap.  xvni.ji 

the  loyal  people  will  have  to  leave  with  us,  just  as  the  Missourians  did! 
a few  months  ago.  Some  of  the  leading  citizens  of  the  town  will  seel 
you  to-morrow  at  your  headquarters  and  submit  their  request  to  such> 
effect. 

The  topographical  sketch  showing  our  position  and  disposition  ofl 
troops  will  follow,  and  will  sustain  my  suggestion  as  to  holding  the[i 
place.  I therefore  ask  you,  general,  to  grant  me  and  my  command^ 
permission  to  remain  here.  It  will  improve  the  spirit  of  our  men  andl 
break  down  more  and  more  that  of  the  enemy. 

The  printing-office  was  destroyed,  but  we  found  a portable  printing- 
press  in  the  court-house,  and  I have  issued  an  order  to  collect  printers 
in  our  command  to  put  it  in  operation. 

The  hospital  here  is  in  good  condition,  well  provided  with  mattresses 
and  couches  for  from  50  to  60  men. 

We  discovered  and  secured  from  30  to  40  wagon  loads  of  lead,  for 
which  it  would  be  well  to  send  teams. 

Requesting  yoor  orders,  I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedi- 
ent servant, 

ASBOTH, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding  Second  Division. 

P.  S. — We  have  also  secured  6 wagon  loads  of  tools  for  pioneers, 
sappers  and  miners,  left  behind  by  the  Confederate  forces. 

General  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding  Southwestern  District , Dept,  of  the  Missouri. 


No.  4. 

Proclamation  of  Brigadier- General  Asbotli , U.  S.  Army , to  the  citizens  of 

Fayetteville , Arh. 

Headquarters  at  Colonel  Tibbett’s, 
Fayetteville , Washington  County , Arlc.,  February  23,  1862. 

To  the  Citizens  of  Fayetteville  : 

Sent  in  command  of  the  advance  guard  of  the  United  States  Army 
of  the  Southwestern  District,  Department  of  the  Missouri,  by  General 
Samuel  R.  Curtis,  commanding,  I have  occupied  your  town  to  arrest 
the  wanton  destruction  of  public  and  private  property  already  inaugu- 
rated by  the  Confederate  .troops ; to  sustain  those  of  its  inhabitants 
Avho  have  been  faithful  to  the  laws ; to  encourage  all  wTho  may  have 
temporarily  wavered  in  their  duty  under  the  threats  of  bad  and  design- 
ing men,  and  to  establish  the  law  and  order  essential  to  the  public] 
weal.  While,  therefore,  calling  upon  the  loyal  citizens  of  this  town  to 
aid  me  in  the  furtherance  and  accomplishment  of  these  objects,  I at 
the  same  time  offer  to  all  who  may  have  faltered  in  their  fealty,  but 
who  shall  now  truthfully  declare  their  allegiance  to  the  laws  of  the 
Union,  the  protection  of  its  Hag.  Deserted  tire-sides  cannot  be  guarded,! 
but  every  house  containing  a living  soul  shall  have  the  protection  of 
our  power.  None,  therefore,  should  depart.  Those  absent  should! 
return. 

General  Curtis,  the  commanding  general,  desires  personally  to  see| 
and  confer  with  one  or  two  of  your  leading  citizens  regarding  the  wel-j 


I A L\  XVIII  1 


PEA  RIDGE  PRAIRIE,  MO. 


71 


re  of  the  town,  who  will  be  escorted  to  his  headquarters  (a  distance 
• a few  miles)  under  guarantees  of  safety  to  their  persons. 

ASBOTH, 

Br  i ga  dier-  Gen  era /,  Com  ma  n d ing  Secon  4 Division. 


EBRUARY  23-24,  1882. — Reconnaissance  to  Pea  Ridge  Prairie,  Mo.,  and 

skirmish. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  M.  Richardson , Missouri  Cavalry  Militia . 

> 

Springfield,  Mo.,  February  26,  1862. 
Sir  : On  Friday,  22d  instant,  I was  ordered  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
ills,  commanding  this  post,  to  proceed  with  my  command  to  Mount 
ernon  and  there  wait  the  arrival  of  Captain  Mudgett.  I started  at 
1.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  with  41  of  my  Mountain  Rangers, 
te  others  being  sick  and  on  detached  service.  At  10  o’clock  p.  m.  of 
le  same  day  we  reached  Mount  Vernon,  having  marched  33  miles, 
n arriving  i received  an  order  from  Captain  Mudgett  to  be  at  Gullet’s 
rm,  8 miles  below  Mount,  Vernon,  by  daylight  next  morning.  We 
Earted  at  3 o’clock,  and  were  there  by  the  time  required.  After  con- 
ning with  Captain  Mudgett  he  determined  for  me  to  proceed  north  of 
bring  River  and  disperse  the  rebels  congregated  there. 

Having  rested  my  command  two  hours  we  started,  marched  down 
bring  River  on  the  north  side  to  the  old  Booneville  Ford,  crossing  there 
id  traveling  in  a northwestern  direction  to  a point  where  the  road 
ading  from  Oregon,  or  Bower’s  Mills,  to  Greenfield  enters  the  Pea 
idge  Prairie.  At  that  point  I directed  Sergeant  Butcher  with  8 men 
> proceed  up  the  prairie  on  its  south  side,  to  arrest  all  persons  running 
om  the  north,  to  search  certain  houses  for  arms,  and  to  keep  a good 
>okout  for  the  rebels. 

With  the  balance  of  the  command  I proceeded  to  the  north  side  of 
le  prairie,  then  changing  my  course  east  towards  Bell’s,  where  we 
xpected  to  find  the  enemy.  X had  traveled  up  the  prairie  but  a short 
istance  when  Sergeant  Breshers,  stationed  on  a high  point  of  the 
rairie,  made  the  signal  the  enemy  had  been  found.  Sergeant  Butcher 
ad  marched  up  the  south  side  of  the  prairie  one  mile  and  a half,  when 
band  of  rebels  formed  near  a point  of  timber  to  oppose  his  progress, 
le  marched  steadily  forward,  and  on  nearing  them  they  retired  behind 
le  point  of  timber,  where  the  sergeant  and  his  party  charged  them, 
le  result  of  which  was  a running  fight  for  3 miles.  In  the  action  my 
icn  killed  3 rebels,  wounded  1,  and  killed  1 horse.  We  had  1 horse 
hot,  and  the  sergeant  rode  his  down  in  the  chase.  We  captured  3 
risoners  and  3 horses.  The  sergeant  and  his  party  were  engaged  with 
•om  12  to  15  rebels,  and  had  it  not  been  that  my  full  command  made 
s appearance  so  promptly  on  the  south  side  of  the  prairie  he  would 
ave  brought  on  an  action  with  from  40  to  50,  who  were  posted  in  the 
rush,  but  retired  as  the  command  marched  across  the  prairie. 

It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  commend  Sergeant  Butcher  and  his 
len  in  the  highest  terms  for  their  gallant  conduct  on  the  field.  Any 
fiicer  would  be  proud  to  command  such  men. 

From  the  scene  of  action  I sent  Sergeant  Breshers  with  10  men  to  the 
orth  side  of  the  prairie,  and  with  the  balance  I marched  up  the  south 
ide,  the  two  divisions  meeting  at  John  Colly’s.  Breshers  rendered 
aluable  services.  We  gave  the  neighborhood  a good  scouring,  driving 


72 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIv.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


the  secessionists  before  us.  We  were  in  a section  of  country  infested 
with  a band  of  bad  men — secessionists.  We  alarmed  them  greatly,  and 
rendered  good  service  to  the  Union  cause.  They  had  come  to  the  con- 
clusion our  troops  would  not  visit  them,  and  were  depredating  on  the 
property  of  loyal  citizens.  The  3 prisoners  we  took  were  engaged  in 
the  attempt  to  rob  the  house  of  John  Gullet  of  a lot  of  boots  and  shoes 
on  the  evening  of  the  19th  instant. 

On  the  evening  of  this  hard  day’s  work  we  reached  the  plantation  of 
Price  Anderson.  Tra  veling  without  tents  and  camp  equipage,  we  were 
preparing  to  take  our  rest  on  the  ground  without  shelter,  when  Mr. 
Anderson  invited  the  company  to  take  shelter  in  his  large  and  commo- 
dious residence.  Having  reason  to  believe  an  enemy  in  front  of  us,  the 
command  laid  on  its  arms  during  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th  I divided  the  command,  sending  half 
of  it,  under  Sergeant  Butcher,  up  Stall’s  Creek,  and  from  thence  to 
Mallard’s  still  house,  in  the  Turnlack  timber  north  of  the  prairie,  with 
directions  to  destroy  Pennington’s  still-house  and  the  one  at  Mallard’s, 
and  to  come  to  my  assistance  if  he  heard  firing.  With  half  the  com- 
mand I crossed  the  prairie  to  Daniels’  farm,  where  it  was  represented 
the  rebels  had  a strong  picket.  Not  finding  them,  I marched  to  Mal- 
lard’s still-house  from  the  northwest.  The  rebels  had  lied  before  us, 
and  I returned  to  Mount  Yernon,  and  on  the  25th  came  to  this  city. 
There  were  two  reasons  for  destroying  those  still-houses : First,  they 
were  places  of  rendezvous  for  the  forming  secession  bands  for  plunder; 
secondly,  bad  men  would  get  drunk  there,  and  go  to  Union  men’s  houses 
and  expose  their  naked  persons  to  Union  women.  I hope  you  will,  and 
1 know  every  good  woman  in  the  State  will,  indorse  the  destruction — 
the  burning  of  those  still-houses.  They  were  each  worth  almost  $150. 

Since  my  company  was  mustered  into  the  service  I have  been  con- 
stantly in  the  field  and  am  behind  with  my  property  reports,  but  will 
make  them  out  at  the  earliest  convenient  moment. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

‘ JOHN  M.  RICHARDSON, 
Captain  Mountain  Bangers,  Mo.  8.  M. 

Col.  Chester  Hardinq, 

Adjutant- General , Missouri. 


FEBRUARY  23-25,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Greenville,  Mo.,  and  skir- 
mish near  Saint  Francisville. 

Report  of  Col.  Albert  Jackson , Twelfth  Missouri  Cavalry  Militia. 

y Greenville,  Mo.,  February  27,  1862.  ] 

Sir  : On  the  23d  instant  there  was  a scouting  party  sent  out  from 
this  post  by  the  commandant,  Colonel  Alexander,  of  about  200  men. 
The  troops  composing  this  party  consisted  of  parts  of  two  companies  of 
the  First  Indiana  Cavalry,  Captain  Ha  wkins’  company  Missouri  Volun- 
teers, and  Captain  Beeper’s  company  Missouri  State  Militia,  all  under 
command  of  Major  Clendenning,  of  the  First  Indiana  Cavalry.  On 
Tuesday,  the  25th  instant,  they  were  surprised  by  a party  of  rebels, 
variously  estimated  at  from  2,000  down  to  80  men,  the  true  number, 
from  best  accounts,  not  being  less  than  80  nor  over  200  men.  That  our 
men,  or  at  least  the  largest  portion  of  them,  made  an  unnecessary 


73 


[af.XVHI.]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  SAINT  ERANCISVILLE,  MO. 

arnpede  and  inexcusable  retreat  there  can  be  no  question.  The  fault 
’ it  is,  I believe,  universally  attributed  to  the  officer  in  command  of 
ie  expedition,  whether  justly  or  not  I do  not  pretend  to  say.  I wish, 
jwever,  to  represent  the  case  so  far  as  to  do  justice  to  Captain  Leeper 
id  a part  of  his  company,  who  by  their  dauntless  courage  and  heroic 
induct  on  the  occasion  prevented  our  force  from  being  involved  in  the 
Lost-  humiliating  disgrace. 

When  the  surprise  was  made  our  whole  force  was  just  mounted  and 
bout  to  make  a forward  movement.  Captain  Leeper  immediately  ordered 
is  men  to  dismount  and  form,  which  was  done  by  most  of  his  men,  and  im 
Mediately  engaged  the  enemy.  By  orders  of  the  commanding  officer  the 
:her  troops  moved  a few  yards  in  advance  of  the  position  which  they 
bcupied,  and  instead  of  their  forming  and  charging,  as  they  had  a good 
jiance  to  do,  and  by  which  movement,  too,  they  would  have  secured 
very  one  of  the  rebels  as  prisoners,  they  turned  around  and  broke  back 
irougk  the  lane  where  Captain  Leeper  and  his  men  were  fighting,  run- 
ling  over  and  breaking  that  line,  thereby  causing  part  of  keeper’s  men 
i join  in  the  stampede  (panic  they  call  it),  and  leaving  him  with  only 
bout  25  men  with  which  to  contend  against  the  enemy.  Leeper  stood 
is  ground  with  the  few  men  left  him  and  prevented  the  enemy  from 
ursuing  the  fugitives ; and  at  last,  when  the  enemy  turned  back  and 
jft,  he  followed  on  after  our  men,  gathering  up  some  of  their  arms  and 
lothing  which  they  had  disencumbered  themselves  of  in  their  flight, 
[e  left  1 killed  and  2 wounded  on  the  field  and  lost  6 taken  prisoners, 
he  prisoners  taken  were  those  of  Captain  keeper’s  men,  who  had  been 
nocked  down  and  run  over  by  Major  Clendenning  and  his  men  as  they 
irned  and  fled  from  the  enemy,  they  not  being  able  to  recover  before 
ie  enemy  got  up  that  far — which  was  as  far,  too,  as  he  ever  advanced, 
japtain  Leeper  feels  a little  sore  under  this  defeat,  but  every  one  who 
oticed  Captain  keeper’s  conduct  on  the  field  of  combat  does  him  the 
'istice  to  say  that  he  acted  bravely  and  as  co©lly  as  if  no  fight  was 
oing  on,  giving  his  orders  to  his  men  and  seeing  that  they  were  as 
ell  disposed  as  they  could  be,  and  also  calling  to  the  fugitives  to  come 
ack ; that  they  could  whip  them  if  they  would  come  back ; and  he 
ow  says  that  if  only  the  whole  of  his  own  company  had  remained  they 
ould  have  been  the  conquerors  instead  of  the  vanquished. 

It  is  not  my  place  to  write  a report  of  this  transaction  ; that  is  the 
uty  of  the  proper  officer.  I only  want  to  have  justice  done  to  an 
ffieer  who  under  so  unfavorable  circumstances  did  his  whole  duty ; 
nd  as  Captain  keeper’s  company  is  a part  of  the  Missouri  Militia,  of 
hich  you  have  the  chief  command,  I thought  it  would  not  be  con  si  fi- 
red out  of  place  for  me  in  this  way  to  bring  his  acts  to  your  notice, 
'aptain  Leeper,  I have  no  doubt,  is  wishing  to  merit  and  obtain  a 
igher  command  than  he  now  holds,  and  it  is  the  opinion  of  all  who 
now  how  bravely  and  honorably  he  did  his  duty  on  the  occasion,  and 
etting  off  with  so  small  a loss  (1  killed  and  2 wounded),  that  he  has 
hown  himself  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  those  who  have  bestowed 
pon  him  the  office  he  now  holds. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALBERT  JACKSOX. 
General  John  M.  Schofield,  Saint  Louis. 


74  OPERATIONS  IN  MO,,  ARK..  KAN’S.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

FEBRUARY  25,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Keetsville,  Barry  Co.,  Mo. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  Clark  Wright,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis , U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Camp  Halleclc , February  27,  1862. 

Captain  : A cavalry  force  of  Texas  Rangers  turned  my  flank  and 
surprised  Captain  Montgomery  at  Keetsville,  killing  2 men,  taking 
60  or  70  horses,  and  burning  some  5 sutler  wagons.  The  enemy’s 
cavalry  also  made  some  demonstrations  to  my  right.  The  citizens  of 
Arkansas  seem  quite -willing  to  rally  under  the  old  flag;  but  they 
fear  the  united  forces  of  Price,  Van  Dorn,  McCulloch,  and  Pike  may 
return  and  force  them  to  be  secessionists  as  before. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier-  General.  Commanding . 

Capt.  K.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis,  Mo. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Clad:  Wright , Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry, 

Cassville , Mo.,  February  27,  1862. 

General  : I left  Camp  Halleck  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  and  pressed  for- 
ward in  the  direction  of  Keetsville  by  forced  marches.  I learned, 
however,  before  reaching  there  that  500  Texas  Rangers  had  attacked 
Captain  Montgomery.  I still  pressed  forward,  and  on  my  arrival  there 
learned  that  the  captain  had  fallen  back  on  Cassville,  and  that  that 
point  was  threatened  It  was  after  dark,  but  I at  once  determined  to 
join  the  forces  at  this  place,  where  I arrived  at  9 o’clock  p.  m.  last 
night.  The  particulars  of  the  attack  1 learn  from  the  captain  to  be  as 
follows : I 

About  11  o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  25th  some  500  mounted  men, 
well  armed,  supposed  to  be  Texas  Rangers,  made  a descent  upon  their 
camp  from  the  right  and  left  through  the  brush,  riding  down  the  picket 
and  guards,  and  commenced  a general  fire  upon  the  men  asleep  in  camp. 
The  captain  rallied  his  force  on  foot  and  a general  fight  ensued.  A 
portion  of  our  men,  however,  were  cut  off*,  but  the  remainder  stood 
their  ground  and  three  times  repulsed  the  enemy.  After  about  twenty 
minutes,  however,  the  enemy’s  superior  force  being  about  to  surround 
our  force,  the  captain  fell  back  under  cover  of  the  brush  and  main- 
tained his  position  and  held  the  town,  the  enemy  retiring. 

On  yesterday  morning,  after  the  enemy  had  all  left,  our  men  found 
that  the  enemy  had  cut  loose  and  stampeded  some  40  of  their  horses. 
The  captain  and  a portion  of  his  men  fell  back  to  Cassville  for  assist- 
ance, leaving  Lieutenant  Montgomery  and  the  remainder  of  the  men 


HAP.  XVIII  ] 


SKIRMISH  AT  KEETSVILLE,  MO. 


75 


j collect  tlie  remainder  of  the  public  property,  to  bury  the  dead,  and 
ring  up  the  rear.  At  roll  call  our  men  all  answered  to  their  names, 
ut  3 — 1 private,  a sentinel,  shot  dead,  another  mortally  wounded 
since  dead),  and  1 supposed  to  be  taken  prisoner.  Our  horses  were 
11  cut  loose  and  stampeded,  but  have  all  been  recovered  but  about 
0.  The  captain  saved  all  his  transportation  and  camp  and  gam- 
on  equipage.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  3 killed  on  the  ground  and 
prisoner  and  horse  taken.  The  prisoner  says  that  they  (the  rebels) 
ad  some  10  wounded  that  he  knows  of.  I also  learn  from  the  pris- 
ner  that  Major  Boss,  of  Sherman,  Tex.,  was  in  command;  that  there 
rere  eight  full  companies^  all  Texans,  of  Colonel  Young’s  brigade, 
xcept  Captains  Bird’s,  Smith’s,  and  Davis’  companies  of  McBride’s 
ivision,  Missouri  troops.  After  their  attack  on  Keetsville  they  went 
outh,  and  at  Harbin’s  they  captured  10  prisoners,  a sutler,  and  team- 
ter,  burning  three  wagons  before  the  door. 

On  yesterday  morning  they  ate  breakfast  6 miles  southeast  of  Har- 
tin’s,  and  said  they  were  going  on  to  their  main  camp  in  Boston  Mount- 

ins,  at  Dr. ’s,  who  lives  immediately  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain, 

n the  road  leading  from  this  place  to  Ozark,  on  the  Arkansas  Biver. 
"hey  have  barracks  there,  no  doubt,  and  their  forces  may  be  there, 
^t  Keetsville  I heard  another  rumor  that  the  rebels  had  three  regi- 
ments in  that  vicinity  to  capture  trains  as  they  passed,  and  that  they 
ntended  attacking  this  place.  I have  also  information  that  Colonel 
Coffee,  of  Dade  County,  Missouri,  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Pineville,  with 
•00  men,  and  that  he  is  also  recruiting  other  forces  there  for  the  pur- 
pose of  capturing  our  trains.  The  train  that  has  gone  forward  this 
morning  was  within  half  a mile  of  Keetsville  at  the  time  of  the  attack 
here,  and  Captain  Montgomery  very  prudently  turned  it  back  to  Cass- 
ille  and  covered  his  retreat.  The  forces  sent  out  by  Colonel  Canby  [?} 
mder  Colonel  Ellis,  instead  of  getting  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  as  1 
mderstood  it  would,  passed  up  the  main  road  just  in  my  front  some 
hirty  minutes.  Had  they  passed  down  the  river  to  the  Ozark  road 
hey  no  doubt  would  have  fallen  in  with  the  enemy.  We  were  all  to- 
gether at  this  place  last  night.  We  held  a consultation  this  morning, 
rnd  Colonel  Ellis  proposed  to  press  the  train  through  direct.  He  es- 
corts it  with  his  command.  I thought  it  would  have  been  best  to  have 
:ept  the  train  back  one  day,  and  with  our  combined  force  displace  the 
ebels  and  then  send  it  forward.  He,  being  the  ranking  officer,  took 
)recedence.  I hope  he  will  get  through.  1 also  learn  that  the  citizens 
>f  Keetsville  all  knew  of  the  attack  being  made,  and  communicated 
ntelligence  to  the  enemy,  and  purposely  kept  all  knowledge  of  it  from 
Oaptain  Montgomery,  and  in  the  afternoon  before  the  fight  the  ladies  all 
eft  the  town,  one  at  a time,  and  that  at  the  time  of  the  attack  all  were 
>ut;  and  many  other  circumstances  prove  conclusively  that  the  citi- 
zens are  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a part  of  the  attacking  party,  there 
being  no  exceptions. 

Colonel  Williams’  forces  are  very  light,  and  there  is  another  train 
Expected  to-morrow.  Consequently  I remained  here  to-day,  in  the 
jnean  time  straightening  up  Captain  Montgomery’s  comx>any.  I desire 
o know  by  return  messenger  what  would  be  the  proper  course  under 
he  circumstances — to  mount  Montgomery’s  men  and  what  to  do  with 
he  town  and  people  of  Keetsville.  It  is  the  worst  hole  in  all  this 
country.  I have  men  scouting  to-day  to  find  out  something  about  the 
memy,  and  we  will  do  the  best  we  can  for  them  in  our  crippled  con- 
lition  without  horses.  I can  mount  Montgomery’s  men  here  in  the 
county  if  you  will  give  the  permission. 


76 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chat.  XVIIL 

I learn  from  a reliable  source,  since  writing  the  above,  that  there  are 
400  rebels  in  Stockton  and  150  at  White  Haw,  both  places  in  Cedar 
County,  Missouri ; also  100  at  King’s  Point  and  90  near  Millville,  in  a 
fort,  in  Dade  County,  Missouri.  All  those  parties  are  committing  dep- 
redations and  swearing  vengeance  aga'inst  the  Union  men. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

CLARK  WRIGHT, 
Colonel  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  Commanding , &c. 


EEBRUARY  28-APRIL  8,  1862. — Operations  at  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  and 
Island  No.  10,  and  descent  upon  Union  City,  Tenn. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  LTtl^CIIUYE  EVENTS. 

Feb.  28. — Union  forces  advance  from  Commerce  upon  New  Madrid,  Mo. 

Mar.  1. — Skirmish  near  Sikeston,  Mo. 

2. — Skirmish  near  New  Madrid,  Mo. 

3-14. — Siege  and  capture  of  New  Madrid,  Mo. 

7. — Engagement  at  Point  Pleasant,  Mo. 

15-April  7. — Siege  and  capture  of  Island  No.  10. 

17.  — Action  at  Riddle’s  Point,  Mo. 

18.  — Engagement  at  Point  Pleasant,  Mo. 

23. — Expedition  from  Point  Pleasant  to  Little  River,  Mo. 

30-31. — Descent  upon  Union  City,  Tenn. 

31. — Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Mackall,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Maj.  Gen.  John 
P.  McCown  in  command  at  Madrid  Bend. 

April  8. — Garrison  of  Island  No.  10  surrendered  at  Tiptonville,  Tenn. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi. 
No.  2. — Statement  of  the  organization  and  return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the 
Mississippi  during  the  operations  against  New  Madrid. 

No.  3. — Surg.  O.  W.  Nixon,  U.  S.  Army,  Medical  Director. 

No.  4. — Strength  and  organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  operating  against 
Island  No.  10,  Maroli  31,  1862. 

No.  5. — Capt.  Joseph  A.  Mower,  First  United  States  Infantry,  commanding  siege  train. 
No.  6. — Maj.  Warren  L.  Lothrop,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery. 

No.  7. — Brig.  Gen.  David  S.  Stanley,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Division. 

No.  8. — Col.  John  Groesbeck,  Thirty  ninth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 
No.  9. — Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith,  Forty-third  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  10. — Col.  John  W.  Sprague,  Sixty-third  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division. 

No.  12. — Col.  William  H.  Worthington,  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 
No.  13. — Maj.  William  S.  Robertson,  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Col.  Nicholas  Perczel,  Tenth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  15. — Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth  Division. 

No.  16. — Col.  James  D.  Morgan,  Tenth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 
No.  17. — Col.  Gilbert  W.  Cumming,  Fifty-first  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  18. — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  B Plummer,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifth  Division. 

No.  19. — Gol.  Napoleon  B.  Buford,  Twenty-seventh  Illinois. 


hap.  XVIIT.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


77 


o.  20. — Col.  Washington  L.  Elliott,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry, 
o.  21.— Flag-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote,  U.  S.  Navy, 
o.  22. — Commander  Henry  Walke,  U.  S.  Navy, 
o.  23. — Assistant  Secretary  of  War  Thomas  A.  Scott. 

o.  24.— General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Confederate  Army  of 
the  Mississippi. 

o.  25.— Maj.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Madrid  Bend, 
o,  26.— Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Mackall,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Madrid  Bend^ 
with  letter  from  General  Beauregard. 

0.  27.— Col.  E.  D.  Blake,  C.  S.  Army,  Acting  Inspector-General. 

o.  28— Maj.  George  W.  Brent,  C.  S.  Army,  Acting  Inspector-General. 

o.  29.— Capt.  A B.  Gray,  C.  S.  Army,  Chief  Engineer.  ' 

o.  30.— Capt.  D.  B.  Harris,  C.  S.  Engineers. 

o.  31.— Capt.  D.  Wintter,  C.  S.  Engineers. 

ro.  32.— Brig.  Gen.  J.  Trudeau,  Chief  of  Artillery. 

io  33— Capt.  A.  Jackson,  jr.,  Tennessee  Artillery. 

To.  34.— Capt.  Edward  W.  Rucker,  C.  S.  Artillery. 

To.  35.— Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  P.  Stewart,  C.  S.  Army. 

To.  36.— Brig.  Gen.  E.  W.  Gantt,  C.  S.  Army. 

To.  37.— Brig.  Gen.  L.  M.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army. 

j0.  38. — Brig.  Gen.  M.  Jeff.  Thompson,  Missouri  State  Guard. 

to.  39.— Col.  J.  G.  W.  Steedman,  First  Alabama  Infantry. 

jo.  40.— Lieut.  Col.  W.  D.  S.  Cook,  Twelfth  Arkansas  Infantry. 

To.  41.— Col.  J.  B.  G.  Kennedy,  Twenty-first  Louisiana  Infantry. 

To.  42.— Col.  Alexander  J.  Brown,  Fifty-fifth  Tennessee  Infantry. 

To.  43.— Confederate  report  of  guns,  carriages,  ammunition,  &c. 

To.  44. — Flag-Officer  George  N.  Hollins,  C.  S.  Navy. 

To.  45. — Abstract  from  Major-General  Polk’s  memorandum  of  Brigadier-General  Me- 
Cown’s  command  at  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10  in  the  latter  part  of 
February,  1862. 

’ No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope , U.  8.  Army , commanding  the  Army  of 

the  Mississippi.* 

New  Madrid,  Mo.,  April  1,  1862. 
Was  absent  when  yonr  dispatch  arrived.  Canal  is  finished  and  boats 
iow  descending  bayou  to  this  place;  expect  them  here  to-night.  Enemy 
commenced  erecting  batteries  at  points  of  high  land,  only  landing 
daces  on  river ; little  serious  to  be  feared  from  them.  Our  floating 
latter y,  properly  placed,  will  deal  easily  with  them  or  any  other  ob- 
stacle to  landing.  Have  erected  two  batteries,  of  two  32s  each,  but  a 
nile  and  a half  below  the  24-pounder  battery,  opposite  mouth  of  slough 
see  sketch  sent  you).f  These  batteries  cover  handsomely  the  landing  on 
opposite  shore.  I have  no  apprehension  of  the  result.  Commodore 
Foote  promises  to  run  a couple  of  his  boats  past  Island  No.  10  to-night* 
If  so,  all  difficulty  is  over.  Troops  in  fine  condition  and  can  be  relied 
m.  Railroad  to  Sikeslon  under  water  and  roads  to  Commerce  bad. 
Best  send  anything  for  this  command  to  Island  No.  8,  with  orders  to 
Colonel  Buford  to  send  it  through  the  canal  in  barges  or  flats ; easy 
communication  in  this  way  for  stores.  Do  not  be  uneasy;  no  precaution 
will  be  omitted,  and  there  is  no  fear  of  the  result  in  the  command.  I 

* See  also  Pope’s  dispatches  from  February  28  to  April  10,  in  “ Correspondence,  etc.,”- 

P08t. 

tNot  found. 


78 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [CnAi>.  XVin 


telegraphed  yesterday  that  gunboats  had  again  been  repulsed  by  ouj 
Iowa  battery,  one  of  them  so  badly  damaged  as  to  drift  broadside  dowi 
the  river,  unable  to  work  her  engines. 

JNO.  POPE,  Major-General. 

General  Halleck. 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  April  9,  1862. 

The  canal  across  the  peninsula  opposite  Island  No.  10,  and  for  tin 
idea  of  which  I am  indebted  to  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  was  completed 
by  Colonel  Bissell’s  Engineer  Regiment,  and  four  steamers  broughi 
through  on  the  night  of  the  6th.  The  heavy  batteries  I had  throwi 
up  below  Tiptonville  completely  commanded  the  lowest  point  of  the 
high  ground  on  the  Tennessee  shore,  entirely  cutting  off  the  enemy7* 
retreat  by  water.  His  retreat  by  land  has  never  been  possible  througl 
the  swamps. 

On  the  night  of  the  4th  Captain  Walke,  of  the  Navy,  ran  the  enemy7* 
batteries  at  Island  No.  10  with  the  gunboat  Carondelet  and  reportec 
to  me  here.  On  the  night  of  the  6th  the  gunboat  Pittsburgh  also  rar 
the  blockade. 

Our  transports  were  brought  into  the  river  from  the  bayou,  wherd 
they  had  been  kept  concealed,  at  daylight  on  the  7th,  and  Paine’s  divisj 
ion  loaded.  The  canal  has  been  a prodigiously  laborious  work.  II 
was  12  miles  long,  6 miles  of  which  were  through  heavy  timber,  which 
had  to  be  sawed  off  by  hand  4 feet  under  water.  The  enemy  has  lined 
the  opposite  shore  with  batteries,  extending  from  Island  No.  10  tc 
Tiptonville,  Meriwether  Landing,  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  riven 
by  this  army.  I directed  Captain  Walke  to  run  down  with  the  two 
gunboats  at  daylight  on  the  7th  to  the  point  selected  for  crossing,  and 
silence  the  enemy’s  batteries  near  it.  He  performed  the  service  gal 
lantly,  and  I here  bear  testimony  to  the  thorough  and  brilliant  mannei 
in  which  the  officer  discharged  liis  difficult  duties  with  me,  and  to  tin 
hearty  and  earnest  zeal  with  which  $t  all  hazards  he  co-operated  wit! 
me. ' 

As  soon  as  he  signaled  me  the  boats  containing  Paine’s  divisioi 
moved  out  and  commenced  to  cross  the  river.  The  passage  of  this 
wide,  furious  river  by  our  large  force  was  one  of  the  most  magnificent 
spectacles  I ever  witnessed.  By  12  o’clock  that  night  (the  7th)  all  the 
forces  designed  to  cross  the  river  were  over,  without  delay  or  accident 
As  we  commenced  to  cross,  the  enemy  began  to  evacuate  Island  No.  1C 
and  his  pontoons  along  the  shore.  The  divisions  w ere  pushed  forw  ard 
to  Tiptonville  as  fast  as  they  landed,  Paine’s  leading.  The  enemy  was 
driven  before  him,  and  although  they  made  several  attempts  to  form 
line  of  battle  and  make  a stand,  Paine  did  not  once  deploy  his  column. 
The  enemy  was  pushed  all  night  vigorously,  until  at  4 a.  m.  he  was 
driven  back  upon  the  swamp  and  forced  to  surrender. 

Three  generals,  seven  colonels,  seven  regiments,  several  battalions 
of  infantry,  five  companies  of  artillery,  over  100  heavy  siege  guns,  24 
pieces  of  field  artillery,  an  immense  quantity  of  ammunition  and  sup 
plies,  and  several  thousand  stand  of  small-arms,  a great  number  oi 
tents,  horses,  w agons,  &c.,  have  fallen  into  our  hands. 

Before  abandoning  Island  No.  10  the  enemy  sunk  the  gunboat  Gram  j 
pus  and  six  of  his  transports.  These  last  I am  raising  and  expect  t<J 
have  ready  for  service  in  a few  days.  The  famous  floating  battery  waei 


; hap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  BTC.  79 

scuttled  and  turned  adrift,  witli  all  her  guns  aboard.  She  was  captured 
and  run  aground  in  shoal  water  by  our  forces  at  New  Madrid. 

Our  success  is  complete  and  overwhelming.  Our  troops,  as  I expected, 
jehaved  gloriously.  I will  in  my  full  report  endeavor  to  do  full  justice 
:o  all. 

Brigadier- Generals  Paine,  Stanley,  and  Hamilton  crossed  the  river 
md  conducted  their  divisions  with  untiring  activity  and  skill.  I am 
especially  indebted  to  them. 

General  Paine,  fortunate  in  having  the  advance,  exhibited  unusual 
rigor  and  courage,  and  had  the  satisfaction  to  receive  the  surrender  of 
die  enemy. 

Of  Colonel  Bissell,  Engineer  Regiment,  I can  hardly  say  too  much. 
Full  of  resource,  untiring  and  determined,  he  labored  night  and  day, 
md  completed  work  which  will  be  a monument  of  enterprise  and  skill. 

We  have  crossed  this  great  river  with  a large  army,  the  banks  of 
ivhich  were  lined  with  batteries  of  the  enemy  to  oppose  our  passage  ; 
jave  pursued  and  captured  all  his  forces  and  material  of  war,  and  have 
aot  lost  a man  nor  met  with  an  accident. 

JNO.  POPE,  Major-General. 

Major-General  Halleck. 


Preface  to  report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope  of  operations  which  resulted  in 
the  capture  of  Ne  w Madrid .* 

At  this  time  the  rebel  armies  in  the  West  occupied  a line  of  fortified 
positions  from  Bowling  Green  to  Columbus,  Ky.  This  line  was  broken 
by  General  Grant  at  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson  by  the  16th  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1862.  His  operations  compelled  the  evacuation  of  Columbus, 
>n  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  River,  which  place,  though  strongly 
fortified,  was  turned  by  the  advance  of  Grant  up  the  Tennessee  and 
Cumberland  Rivers.  This  result  had  been  for  some  time  foreseen  by 
rhe  rebel  generals,  and  General  Beauregard,  who  had  been  assigned 
to  command,  selected  Island  No.  10,  60  miles  below  Columbus,  as  the 
strong  place  where  the  possession  of  the  Mississippi  River  was  first  to 
oe  contested.  The  place  was  strongly  fortified,  mounted  with  150 
pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  and  garrisoned  by  about  9,000  men.  I do 
not  mean  that  the  island  itself  contained  this  garrison  and  these  guns, 
but  that  they  were  disposed  in  the  system  of  defenses  for  the  island, 
m and  around  it,  on  both  banks  of  the  Mississippi  River. 

New  Madrid  was  manifestly  the  weak  point  of  this  system,  and 
against  that  place  our  first  operations  were  to  be  directed. 

I was  recalled  to  Saint  Louis  from  Central  Missouri  on  the  14th  of 
February,  1862,  and  on  the  18th  General  Halleck  pointed  out  to  me 
the  situation  at  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10,  and  directed  me  to 
organize  and  command  a force  for  their  reduction. 

On  the  19th  I left  Saint  Louis  for  Cairo,  111.,  which  was  then  believed 
to  be  threatened  from  Columbus,  with  orders  to  assume  command  at 
that  place  in  case  any  movement  against  it  was  made  by  the  enemy, 
but  as  soon  as  apprehension  of  such  a movement  was  at  an  end  to  pro- 
ceed with  my  operations  against  New  Madrid. 

On  the  21st  of  February,  finding  that  the  fear  of  an  advance  upon 
Cairo  was  groundless,  I left  that  place  on  a steamboat,  with  a guard  of 

* This  was  the  preface  to  copy  of  the  report  submitted  by  General  Pope  to  the  Joint 
Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War. 


80 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


140  men,  and  landed  on  the  Missouri  shore  at  Commerce,  30  miles 
above.  Commerce  is  the  lowest  point  where  the  bluffs  impinge  upon 
the  river  between  Saint  Louis  and  Helena,  in  Arkansas,  and  was  on 
that  account  selected  as  a base  of  operations  against  New  Madrid 
from  which  place  it  is  distant  by  laud miles.  The  bluff's,  how- 

ever, retreat  directly  to  the  west  from  Commerce,  leaving  an  alluvial 
swampy  bottom  land,  at  least  30  miles  wide,  along  the  river  below 
that  place.  A dismal  and  almost  impassable  swamp,  known  as  tin 
Great  Mingo  Swamp,  extends  all  the  way  from  Commerce  to  New 
Madrid.  At  that  season  of  the  year  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi 
were  overflowed,  and  the  river  spread  out  for  miles  on  both  sides 
beyond  its  bed.  The  whole  country  tor  30  miles  west  of  the  river  was 
under  water.  At  many  places  the  water  was  8 or  10  feet  deep  and 
everywhere  from  1 to  5 feet  deep.  An  old  embankment,  upon  wliicl 
a corduroy  road  had  been  built,  extended  part  of  the  way  to  New 
Madrid,  but  the  road  had  not  been  repaired  for  years,  and  was  in  i 
very  bad  condition,  and  in  many  places  entirely  impassable.  Tin 
weather  was  cold  and  wet.  A drizzling  snow  and  rain  was  falling 
upon  us,  and  adding  to  our  almost  insuperable  difficulties  from  tin 
time  we  marched  from  Commerce  until  we  reached  New  Madrid.  3 
can  only  account  for  the  fact  that  the  enemy  attempted  no  oppositioi 
to  our  march  by  their  belief  that  the  country  at  that  season  of  over- 
flow was  entirely  impracticable. 

I landed  at  Commerce  on  the  night  of  the  21st  of  February,  1862,  will 
the  small  escort  I have  mentioned.  Regiments  were  sent  me  rapidh 
from  Saint  Louis,  from  Cincinnati,  and  from  Cairo ; most  of  them  en 
tirely  raw,  having  had  their  arms  first  placed  in  their  hands  when  tbej 
embarked  on  the  steamer  to  join  me.  Few  of  them  had  ever  served  a 
all,  and  as  they  had  never  served  together  or  been  even  brigaded,  I was 
forced  to  make  a complete  organization  of  them  at  Commerce.  In  tliii 
difficult  task  I was  so  ably  assisted  by  Generals  Schuyler  Hamilton 
Stanley,  Palmer,  and  Granger  that  within  one  week  of  the  day  I landet 
almost  alone  at  Commerce  we  began  our  march  to  New  Madrid.  This 
organization  was  the  nucleus  of  the  corps  afterwards  designated  tin 
Army  of  the  Mississippi,  widely  known  and  greatly  distinguished  ii 
the  West  for  its  discipline,  its  gallantry,  and  its  effectiveness,  and  fo 
the  soldierly  and  cordial  good  feeling  which,  characterized  both  officer; 
and  men. 

It  is  not  only  proper,  but  it  is  my  duty,  to  say  here  that  during  nn 
whole  experience  in  this  war  I have  never  seen  troops  which  woul( 
compare  with  this  little  army.  Of  the  mobility  and  esprit  de  corps , o 
courage  in  battle  and  patience  and  fortitude  under  exposure,  labor,  am 
privation,  and  of  the  cordial  harmony  which  existed  among  the  officer 
and  men,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  the  services  and  the  reputatioi 
of  this  little  army,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  war,  whet  he: 
acting  together  or  separated  and  serving  in  other  organizations,  ar< 
sufficient  evidence.  I cannot  at  this  day  think  of  them  and  recall  my 
association  with  them  as  their  commander  without  emotions  whicl 
could  not  be  expressed  in  such  a paper  as  this.  As  long  as  I live 
shall  never  cease  to  remember  them,  nor  fail  to  acknowledge  the  deei 
and  lasting  gratitude  I owe  them  for  the  cordial  support  they  gave  m< 
while  I served  with  them,  and  for  their  earnest  sympathy  and  unfalter 
ing  confidence  during  the  most  trying  and  darkest  period  of  my  life] 
1 esteem  it  the  highest  honor  to  have  belonged  to  this  little  army,  and 
regard  every  officer  and  soldier  connected  with  it  as  a personal  lrieud| 
from  whom  neither  time  nor  circumstances  can  ever  estrange  me. 


CAP.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


81 


After  incredible  labor  and  exposure,  wading  through  the  swamps,  and 
l many  places  dragging  wagons  and  artillery  by  hand,  we  appeared 
efore  New  Madrid  on  the  3d  of  March,  and  at  once  drove  in  the  pickets 
ad  outposts  of  the  enemy  and  closely  invested  the  place. 

I append  hereto  my  official  report  of  the  operations  against  New 
[adrid,  the  reports  of  division  and  brigade  commanders,  and  my  official 
arrespondence  with  General  Halleck  by  letter  and  telegraph.  I also 
btach  hereto  a return  of  the  force  engaged,  which  exhibits  in  detail  its 
atire  organization  and  every  regiment  of  which  it  was  composed. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  14,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  the  information  of  the 
eneral  commanding  the  department  the  following  report  of  the  opera- 
ons  which  resulted  in  the  capture  of  this  place. 

I arrived  before  the  town  with  the  forces  under  my  command  on 
[onday,  the  3d  instant.  I found  the  place  occupied  by  five  regiments 
f infantry  and  several  companies  of  artillery.  One  bastioned  earth- 
ork,  mounting  14  heavy  guns,  about  a half  a mile  below  the  town, 
ad  another  irregular  work  at  the  upper  end  of  the  town,  mounting  7 
ieces  of  heavy  artillery,  together  with  lines  of  intrenchments  between 
lem,  constituted  the  defensive  works.  Six  gunboats,  carrying  from  4 
) 8 heavy  guns  each,  were  anchored  along  the  shore  between  the  upper 
ad  lower  redoubts.  The  country  is  perfectly  level  for  miles  around 
le  place,  and  as  the  river  was  so  high  that  the  guns  of  the  gunboats 
•oked  directly  over  the  banks,  the  approaches  to  the  town  for  several 
ales  were  commanded  by  direct  and  cross-fire  from  at  least  60  guns  of 
eavy  caliber.  It  would  not  have  been  difficult  to  carry  the  intrench- 
lents,  but  it  would  have  been  attended  with  heavy  loss,  and  we  should 
ot  have  been  able  to  hold  the  place  half  an  hour  exposed  to  the  destruc- 
ve  fire  of  the  gunboats. 

As  there  seemed  no  immediate  hope  of  the  appearance  of  our  gun- 
aats,  it  became  necessary  to  bring  down  a few  heavy  guns  by  land  to 
aerate  against  those  of  the  enemy.  They  were  accordingly  sent  for, 
ad  meantime  forced  reconnaissances  were  pushed  over  the  whole 
round  and  into  several  parts  of  the  town.  Some  brisk  skirmishes 
^suited,  in  which  the  enemy  invariably  retreated  precipitately.  It 
as  found  impossible  to  induce  them  to  trust  any  considerable  force  of 
leir  infantry  outside  of  their  intrenchments.  As  soon  as  I found  it 
ouid  be  necessary  to  await  the  arrival  of  our  heavy  guns  I deter- 
ined  to  occupy  some  point  on  the  river  below,  and  establish  our  small 
uns,  if  possible,  in  suclrposition  as  to  blockade  the  river,  so  far  as 
■ansports  were  concerned,  and  to  cut  off  supplies  and  re-enforcements 
>r  the  enemy  from  below.  Point  Pleasant,  12  miles  below,  was  se- 
eted  as  being  in  a rich  agricultural  region,  and  being  the  terminus  of 
le  plank  road  from  the  interior  of  Arkansas.  I accordingly  threw 
•rward  Colonel  Plummer,  Eleventh  Missouri,  to  that  point,  with  three 
igiments  of  infantry,  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  a field  battery 
F 10-pounder  Parrott  and  rifled  guns,  with  orders  to  make  a lodgment 
i the  river  bank,  to  line  the  banks  with  rifle  pits  for  1,000  men,  and 
> establish  his  artillery  in  sunk  batteries  of  single  pieces  between  the 
fle  pits.  The  arrangement  was  made  to  present  as  small  a mark  as 
assible  to  the  shells  of  the  gunboats,  and  to  render  futile  the  use  of 
6 R r — VOL  VIII 


82  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  \Chav.  XVI 

round  shot  from  their  heavy  guns.  Colonel  Plummer  marched  wi  I 
all  speed,  aud  after  some  cannonading  from  gunboats  which  he  foul 
there  he  succeeded  in  making  a lodgment,  constructing  his  batteril 
and  rifle  pits,  and  occupying  them  in  sufficient  force  to  maintain  tha 
against  any  open  assault.  After  repeated  and  persistent  cannonadiij 
from  the  gunboats  the  enemy  found  it  impossible.to  dislodge  him,  al 
he  maintained  obstinately  his  position  and  the  blockade  of  the  river  | 
transports  during  the  whole  of  our  operations.  Meantime  the  eneJ 
continued  every  day  to  re-enforce  New  Madrid  from  Island  No.  M 
until,  on  the  12th,  they  had  9,000  infantry,  besides  a considerable  foil 
of  artillery  and  nine  gunboats.  The  fleet  was  commanded  by  Comnl 
dore  Hollins;  the  land  forces  by  Generals  McCown,  Stewart,  and  Ganl 

On  the  11th  the  siege  guns  were  delivered  to  Colonel  Bissell,  hi 
gineer  Regiment,  who  had  been  sent  to  Cairo  for  the  purpose.  Thl 
were  at  once  shipped  to  Sikeston ; reached  here  at  sunset  on  the  12t| 
were  placed  in  battery  during  the  same  night  within  800  yards  of  t j 
enemy’s  main  work,  so  as  to  command  that  and  the  river  above  it,  al 
opened  fire  at  daylight  on  the  13th,  just  34  hours  after  they  wea 
received  at  Cairo.  One  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Tenth  and  Sixteenl 
Illinois,  under  Colonel  Morgan,  of  the  Tenth,  was  detailed  to  cover  tl 
construction  of  the  battery  and  to  work  in  the  trenches.  They  wea 
supported  by  Stanley’s  division,  consisting  of  the  Twenty-seventh  al 
Thirty-ninth  Ohio,  under  Colonel  Groesbeck,  and  the  Forty-third  an 
Sixty-third  Ohio,  under  Colonel  Smith.  Captain  Mower,  First  Unit! 
States  Infantry,  with  Companies  A and  H of  his  regiment,  was  placl 
in  charge  of  the  siege  guns.  The  enemy’s  pickets  and  grand  guarl 
were  driven  in  by  Colonel  Morgan  from  the  ground  selected  for  ti 
battery  without  firing  a shot,  although  the  enemy  fired  several  vollel 
of  musketry.  The  work  was  prosecuted  in  silence  and  with  the  utmcl 
rapidity,  until  at  3 a.  m.  two  small  redoubts,  connected  by  a curtal 
and  mounting  the  four  heavy  guns  which  had  been  sent  me,  wa 
completed,  together  with  rifle  pits  in  front  and  on  the  flanks  for  tl 
regiments  of  infantry. 

Our  batteries  opened  as  soon  as  the  day  dawned,  and  were  replied  fl 
in  front  and  on  the  flanks  by  the  whole  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  artillel 
on  land  and  water.  As  our  supply  of  ammunition  for  heavy  artill el 
was  very  limited,  I directed  Captain  Mower  to  fire  only  occasional 
at  the  enemy’s  land  batteries,  and  to  concentrate  all  his  fire  upon  td 
gunboats.  Our  guns  were  served  by  Captain  Mower  with  vigor  a:l 
skill,  and  in  a few  hours  disabled  several  of  the  gunboats  and  d-l 
mounted  three  of  the  heavy  guns  in  the  enemy’s  main  work.  Shorla 
after  our  batteries  opened  one  of  the  24-pounder  guns  was  struck  1 
the  muzzle  by  a round  shot  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  and  disable! 
The  cannonading  was  continued  furiously  all  day  by  the  gunboats  aa 
land  batteries  of  the  enemy,  but  without  producing  any  impressil 
upon  us.  Meantime  during  the  whole  day  our  trenches  wrere  beil 
extended  and  advanced,  as  it  was  my  purpose  to  push  forward  o:i 
heavy  batteries  in  the  course  of  the  night  to  the  bank  of  the  rivd 
While  the  cannonade  was  thus  going  on  on  our  right  I instruct  U 
General  Paine  to  make  a demonstration  against  the  intrenchmei* 
on  our  left,  and  supported  his  movement  by  Palmer’s  division.  Ti 
enemy’s  pickets  and  grand  guards  were  driven  into  his  intrenelimerJi 
and  the  skirmishers  forced  their  way  close  to  the  main  ditch. 

A furious  thunder-storm  began  to  rage  about  11  o’clock  that  nigl 
and  continued  almost  without  intermission  until  morning.  Just  befaH 
daylight  General  Stanley  was  relieved  in  the  trenches  with  his  divisib 


83 


HAP.  XVIII.  1 NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

y General  Hamilton.  A few  minutes  after  daylight  a flag  of  truce 
pproaclied  our  batteries  with  information  that  the  enemy  had  evac- 
ated  his  works.  Small  parties  were  at  once  advanced  by  General 
lamilton  to  ascertain  whether  such  were  the  facts,  and  Captain 
rower,  First  United  States  Infantry,  with  Companies  A and  H,  of 
i at  regiment,  was  sent  forward  to  plant  the  United  States  flag  over 
le  abandoned  works.  A brief  examination  of  them  disclosed  how 
asty  and  precipitate  had  been  the  flight  of  the  enemy.  Their  dead 
ere  found  unburied;  their  suppers,  untouched,  standing  on  the  tables; 
indies  burning  in  the  tents,  and  every  other  evidence  of  a disgraceful 
anic.  Private  baggage  of  officers  and  knapsacks  of  men  were  left 
ehind.  Neither  provisions  nor  ammunition  were  carried  off.  Some 
ttempt  was  made  to  carry  ammunition,  as  boxes  without  number  were 
>und  on  the  bank  of  the  river  where  the  steamers  had  been  landed. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  give  any  exact  account  of  the  immense 
uantities  of  property  and  supplies  left  in  our  hands.  All  their  artillery, 
eld  batteries  and  siege  guns,  amounting  to  thirty-three  pieces,  rnaga- 
nes  full  of  fixed  ammunition  of  the  best  character,  several  thousand 
and  of  superior  small-arms,  with  hundreds  of  boxes  of  musket  cart- 
dges,  tents  for  an  army  of  10,000  men,  horses,  mules,  wagons,  intrench- 
ig  tools,  &c.,  are  among  the  spoils.  Nothing  except  the  men  escaped, 
ad  they  only  with  what  they  wore.  They  landed  on  the  opposite  side 
f the  river,  and  are  scattered  in  the  wide  bottoms.  I immediately 
Ivanced  Hamilton’s  division  into  the  place,  and  had  the  guns  of  the 
lemy  turned  upon  the  river,  which  they  completely  command.  The 
ight  of  the  enemy  was  so  hasty  that  they  abandoned  their  pickets 
ad  gave  no  intimation  to  the  forces  at  Island  No.  10.  The  conse- 
uence  is  that  one  gunboat  and  ten  large  steamers  which  were  there 
re  cut  off  from  below,  and  must  either  be  destroyed  or  fall  into  our 
ands.  Island  No.  10  must  necessarily  be  evacuated,  as  it  can  neither 
e re-enforced  nor  supplied  from  below. 

During  the  operations  here  the  whole  of  the  forces  were  at  different 
mes  brought  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy  and  behaved  themselves 
ith  great  gallantry  and  coolness.  It  seems  proper,  however,  that  I 
jould  make  special  mention  of  those  more  directly  concerned  in  the 
aal  operations  against  the  place.  The  Tenth  and  Sixteenth  Illinois, 
)imnanded  respectively  by  Colonels  Morgan  and  E.  F.  Smith,  were 
etailed  as  guards  to  the  proposed  trenches  and  to  aid  in  construct- 
ig  them.  They  marched  from  camp  at  sunset  on  the  12th,  and  drove 
t the  pickets  and  grand  guards  of  the  enemy,  as  they  were  ordered,  at 
louldered  arms,  and,  without  returning  a shot,  covered  the  front  of 
le  intrenching  parties,  and  occupied  the  trenches  and  rifle  pits  during 
le  whole  day  and  night  of  the  13th  under  furious  and  incessant  can- 
mading  from  sixty  pieces  of  heavy  artillery.  At  the  urgent  request 
:*  their  colonels  their  regimental  flags  were  kept  flying  over  our 
enches,  though  they  offered  a conspicuous  mark  to  the  enemy.  The 
>olness,  courage,  and  cheerfulness  of  these  troops,  exposed  for  two 
ights  and  a day  to  the  furious  fire  of  the  enemy  at  short  range  and 
> the  severe  storm  which  raged  during  the  whole  night  of  the  13th, 
:e  beyond  all  praise,  and  delighted  and  astonished  every  officer  who 
finessed  it. 

The  division  of  General  Stanley,  consisting  of  the  Twenty-seventh, 
hirty-ninth,  Forty-third,  and  Sixty-third  Ohio  Eegiments,  supported 
ie  battery  from  2 o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  13th  to  daylight  on  the  14th, 
*posed  to  the  full  fury  of  the  cannonade,  without  being  able  to  return 
shot,  and  the  severe  storm  of  that  night,  and  displayed  coolness, 


84 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XVI 


courage,  and  fortitude  worthy  of  all  praise.  In  fact,  the  conduct  of  i 
the  troops  of  this  command  so  far  exceeded  my  expectations  that  I w 
astonished  and  delighted,  and  feel  very  safe  in  predicting  for  them 
brilliant  career  in  arms. 

To  General  Stanley,  who  commanded  in  the  trenches  on  the  13t 
and  to  General  Hamilton,  who  relieved  him  on  the  morning  of  the  14t 
I am  specially  indebted,  not  only  for  their  efficient  aid  on  the  last  da 
of  the  operations  here,  but  for  their  uniform  zeal  and  co-operation  di 
ing  the  whole  of  the  operations  near  this  place.  Brigadier-Genei 
Plummer,  commanding  at  Point  Pleasant,  is  entitled  to  special  coil 
mendation  for  the  bold  and  skillful  manner  in  which  he  effected  I 
lodgment  at  that  place  under  fire  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  for  f 
determined  persistence  with  which  he  maintained  himself  and  t 
blockade  of  the  river  for  days  under  heavy  fire  of  the  enemy.  Ca 
tain  Mower,  First  United  States  Infantry,  who,  with  two  compani 
of  his  regiment  (A  and  H),  had  charge  of  the  batteries  and  served  t 
guns,  I desire  to  present  to  your  special  notice.  A more  gallant  ai 
efficient  officer  is  not  to  be  found  with  this  command,  and  liis  emine 
services  during  the  reduction  of  this  place  entitle  him  to  special  noth 
Col.  J.  W.  Bissell,  Engineer  Begiment,  rendered  me  most  valual 
service  both  before  and  during  the  bombardment  of  the  place.  He  cc 
ducted  the  erection  of  the  heavy  batteries  and  remained  in  them  un 
the  enemy  evacuated  the  place.  Major  Lothrop,  chief  of  artillery,  h 
distinguished  himself  throughout  the  operations.  My  personal  sta 
Major  Butler,  assistant  adjutant-general,  Maj.C.  A.  Morgan  and  Ca] 
L.  H.  Marshall,  aides-de-camp,  and  Major  Corse,  inspector-general,  w€ 
prompt  and  efficient  in  conveying  my  orders  under  the  fire  of  t 
enemy. 

I transmit  inclosed  the  reports  of  division  and  brigade  commands 
immediately  concerned  in  the  final  operations,  as  also  of  Captain  Mow* 
commanding  in  the  batteries,  and  of  Major  Lothrop,  chief  of  artille] 
Col.  J.  W.  Bissell,  Engineers,  has  been  too  incessantly  occirpied 
make  a written  report,  but  desires  to  mention  the  following  officers 
his  regiment  who  displayed  unusual  gallantry : Lieutenant-Coloi 
Adams,  Captains  Dean,  Hill,  and  Tweeddale,  and  Lieutenants  Ode 
baugh,  Randolph,  and  Besier. 

Our  whole  loss  during  the  operations  was  51  killed  and  wounded, 
detailed  list  will  be  transmitted  as  soon  as  it  can  be  made. 

The  enemy’s  loss  cannot  be  ascertained.  A number  of  his  dead  we* 
left  unburied,  and  more  than  a hundred  new  graves  attested  that 
must  have  suffered  severely. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding .* 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  W.  Culltjm, 

Chief  of  Staff  and  Engineer , Department  Mississippi. 

Rote.* — As  I have  already  stated,  New  Madrid  was  the  weak  poi 
of  the  system  of  defense  on  and  around  Island  No.  10,  and  if  New  M? 
rid  could  be  captured  we  would  gain  a point  on  the  Mississippi  RB 
below  the  island  which  would  at  once  intercept  communications  a 
cut  off  re-enforcements  and  supplies  sent  by  water.  Neither  troops  n 
supplies  could  reach  its  garrison  in  any  other  manner.  New  Madi 
in  our  possession  furnished  us  a base  of  operations  against  the  isla 


* To  copy  of  report  submitted  to  Joint  Committee  on  Conduct  of  the  War. 


1*.  XVIII. J NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


85 


icli  made  its  capture  a simple  matter  of  time.  Immediately  upon  the 
jupation  of  New  Madrid  I began  operations  for  the  reduction  of  Island 
. 10.  I append  hereto  my  official  report  and  correspondence,  as  also 
5 reports  of  division  and  brigade  commanders,  which  give  as  full  and 
uplete  a history  of  the  operations  against  Island  No.  10  as  is  neces- 
y to  a thorough  understanding  of  the  subject. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 
Camp  five  miles  from  Corinth , Miss.,  May  2,  1862. 
Ieneral  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
orations  which  resulted  in  the  capture  of  Island  No.  10  and  the  bat- 
ies  on  the  main  shore,  together  with  the  whole  of  the  land  forces  of 
> enemy  in  that  vicinity.  A brief  sketch  of  the  topography  of  the 
nediate  neighborhood  seems  essential  to  a full  understanding  of  the 
orations  of  the  army. 

sland  No.  10  lies  at  the  bottom  of  a great  bend  of  the  Mississippi, 
nediately  north  of  it  being  a long,  narrow  promontory  on  the  Missouri 
>re.  The  river  from  Island  No.  10  flows  northwest  to  New  Madrid, 
ere  it  again  makes  a great  bend  to  the  south  as  far  as  Tiptonville, 
erwise  called  Meriwether’s  Landing,  so  that  opposite  New  Madrid 

0 is  a long  narrow  promontory.  From  Island  No.  8 across  the  land  to 
w Madrid  is  6 miles,  while  by  river  it  is  15 ; so  likewise  the  distance 
m Island  No.  10  to  Tiptonville  is  5 miles,  while  by  water  it  is  27. 
Commencing  at  Hickman,  a great  swamp,  which  afterwards  becomes 
Afoot  Lake,  extends  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Mississippi  and  dis- 
trges  its  waters  into  the  river  40  miles  below  Tiptonville,  leaving  the 
ole  peninsula  opposite  New  Madrid  between  it  and  the  river.  This 
linsula,  therefore,  is  itself  an  island,  having  the  Mississippi  Liver  on 
ee  sides  and  Eeelfoot  Lake  and  the  great  swamps  which  border  it 
the  other.  A good  road  leads  from  Island  No.  10  along  the  west 
lk  of  Eeelfoot  Lake  to  Tiptonville.  The  only  means  of  supply,  there- 
3,  for  the  forces  at  and  around  Island  No.  10  in  this  peninsula  were 
the  river.  When  the  river  was  blockaded  at  New  Madrid  supplies 
L re-enforcements  were  landed  at  Tiptonville  and  conveyed  across 

neck  of  the  peninsula  by  land.  There  was  no  communication  with 
interior  except  by  a small  flat-boat,  which  plied  across  Eeelfoot  Lake, 
istance  of  2 miles,  and  that  through  an  opening  cut  through  cypress 
imps  for  the  purpose.  Supplies  and  re- enforcements  or  escape  to 
considerable  extent  were  therefore  impracticable  on  the  land  side. 
3 mile  below  Tiptonville  begin  the  great  swamps  along  the  Missis- 
pi  on  both  sides,  and  no  dry  ground  is  to  be  found  except  in  occa- 
lal  spots  for  at  least  60  miles  below.  By  intercepting  the  naviga- 

1 of  the  river  below  Tiptonville  and  commanding  by  heavy  artillery 
lowest  point  of  dry  ground  near  that  place  the  enemy  would  be  at 
e cut  off  from  his  resources  and  prevented  from  escaping, 
mmediately  after  the  reduction  of  New  Madrid  this  subject  engaged 

attention.  The  roads  along  the  river  in  the  direction  of  Point 
asant  followed  a narrow  strip  of  dry  land  between  the  swamps  and 
river,  and  were  very  miry  and  difficult.  With  much  labor  the 
vy  guns  captured  from  the  enemy  at  New  Madrid  were  dragged  by 
d and  established  in  battery  at  several  prominent  points  along  the 
t,  the  lower  battery  being  placed  immediately  opposite  the  lowest 
nt  of  dry  ground  below  Tiptonville.  This  extended  my  lines  17 
os  along  the  river.  A week  was  thus  passed  in  severe  labor.  The 


86 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


enemy,  perceiving  the  consequence  of  establishing  these  batteries,  j 
tempted  in  every  way  by  his  gunboats  to  prevent  their  constructic 
They  were  therefore  in  every  case  established  in  the  night.  As  so 
as  daylight  unmasked  our  lowest  battery  the  enemy  saw  at  once  th 
we  must  either  be  dislodged  or  all  reliable  communication  with  his  fore 
would  be  cut  off.  Five  gunboats,  therefore,  at  once  advanced  agair 
the  battery,  which  consisted  of  two  24-pounder  siege  guns  and  two  J 
pounder  Parrotts,  manned  by  a detachment  of  the  First  United  Stat 
Infantry,  under  Lieutenant  Bates,  and  supported  by  General  Palme 
division,  encamped  1J  miles  in  rear.  Bifle  pits  for  500  sharpshooh 
were  dug  on  the  flanks  of  the  battery,  close  to  the  river  bank,  and  wej 
constantly  occupied.  The  gunboats  ran  up  to  within  300  yards,  ani 
furious  cannonade  was  kept  up  for  an  hour  and  a half,  when  they  we 
repulsed  with  the  loss  of  one  gunboat  sunk,  several  badly  damaged,  a 
many  men  shot  down  at  their  guns  by  our  sharpshooters  from  the  ri 
pits.  Our  loss  was  1 man  killed.  From  that  time  no  attempt  was  mal 
against  the  battery,  and  all  communication  from  below  with  the  fore 
near  Island  No.  10  cut  off.  One  of  the  gunboats  would  occasional 
during  a dark  night,  steal  up  close  along  the  opposite  shore  to  Tipte 
ville,  but  always  at  such  great  risk  that  it  was  seldom  undertake 
Neither  supplies  nor  men  could  be  taken  up  or  carried  off  in  this  wa? 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs  on  the  16th  of  March.  The  obje 
for  which  the  land  forces  had  been  moved  upon  New  Madrid  was  j 
complished  in  the  capture  of  that  place  and  the  blockade  of  the  river 
anv  supplies  and  re-enforcements  for  the  enemy  at  and  around  Isla 
No.  10. 

Meantime  the  flotilla  had  been  firing  at  long  range  both  from  the  g 
and  mortar  boats  at  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  on  and  opposite  t 
island  for  seven  consecutive  days  without  any  apparent  effect  a 
without  any  advance  whatever  toward  their  reduction.  This  result  v 
doubtless  due  to  defective  construction  of  the  boats. 

On  the  16th  of  March  I received  your  dispatch,  directing  me  if  pos 
ble  to  construct  a road  through  the  swamps  to  a point  on  the  Missoi 
shore  opposite  Island  No.  10  and  transfer  a portion  of  my  force  su 
cient  to  erect  batteries  at  that  point  to  assist  in  the  artillery  praci 
on  the  enemy’s  batteries.  I accordingly  dispatched  Col.  J.  W.  Biss< 
Engineer  Eegiment,  to  examine  the  country  with  this  view,  directi] 
him  at  the  same  time,  if  he  found  it  impracticable  to  build  a road  throu 
the  swamps  and  overflow  of  the  river,  to  ascertain  whether  it  were  pos 
ble  to  dig  a canal  across  the  peninsula  from  some  point  above  Islai 
No.  10  to  New  Madrid,  in  order  that  steam  transports  might  be  brou£ 
to  me,  which  would  enable  my  command  to  cross  the  river.  The  id 
of  the  canal  was  suggested  to  me  by  General  Schuyler  Hamilton  in 
conversation  upon  the  necessity  of  crossing  the  river  and  assailing  ti 
enemy’s  batteries  near  Island  No.  10  in  the  rear. 

On  the  17th  March  I suggested  to  Commodore  Foote  by  letter  tB 
he  should  run  the  enemy’s  batteries  with  one  of  his  gunboats,  and  th 
enable  me  to  cross  the  river  with  my  command,  assuring  him  that  I 
this  means  I could  throw  into  the  rear  of  the  enemy  men  enough  | 
deal  with  any  force  he  might  have.  This  request  the  commodo 
declined  on  the  ground  of  impracticability.  Colonel  Bissell  liavb 
reported  a road  impracticable,  but  that  a route  could  be  found  fo: 
channel  sufficient  for  small  steamers,  I immediately  directed  him 
commence  the  canal  with  his  whole  regiment,  and  to  call  on  Coloi 
Buford,  commanding  the  land  forces  temporarily  with  the  flotilla,  whi 
had  been  placed  under  my  command,  for  any  assistance  in  men 


87 


4 

ap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

aterial  necessary  for  the  work.  Supplies  of  such  articles  as  were 
reeled  and  four  steamers  of  light  draught  were  sent  for  to  Cairo,  and 
e work  begun.  It  was  my  purpose  to  make  the  canal  deep  enough 
r the  gunboats,  but  it  was  not  found  practicable  to  do  so  within  any 
asonable  period.  The  work  performed  by  Colonel  Bissell  and  his 
giment  of  engineers  was  beyond  measure  difficult,  and  its  completion 
as  delayed  much  beyond  my  expectations.  The  canal  is  12  miles  long, 
miles  of  which  are  through  very  heavy  timber.  An  avenue  50  feet 
ide  was  made  through  it  by  sawing  off  trees  of  large  size  4J  feet  un- 
>r  water.  For  nineteen  days  the  work  was  prosecuted  with  untiring 
lergy  and  determination,  under  exposures  and  privations  very  unusual 
en  in  the  history  of  warfare.  It  was  completed  on  the  4th  of  April, 
id  will  long  remain  a monument  of  enterprise  and  skill. 

During  all  this  period  the  flotilla  had  kept  up  its  fire  upon  the  bat- 
ries  of  the  enemy,  but  without  making  any  progress  toward  their 
duction.  It  had  by  this  time  become  very  apparent  that  the  capture 
Island  No.  10  could  not  be  made  unless  the  land  forces  could  be 
rown  across  the  river  and  their  works  carried  by  the  rear ; but  during 
is  long  delay,  the  enemy,  anticipating  such  a movement,  had  erected 
itteries  along  the  shore  from  Island  No.  10  entirely  around  to  Tipton  - 
lle  at  every  point  where  troops  could  be  landed.  The  difficulty  of 
ossing  the  river  in  force  had  therefore  been  greatly  increased,  and 
bat  would  have  been  a comparatively  safe  undertaking  three  weeks 
‘fore  had  become  one  full  of  peril.  It  is  not  necessary  to  state  to  you 
at  the  passage  of  a great  river,  lined  with  batteries  and  in  the  face  of 
e enemy,  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  and  hazardous  operations  of  war, 
id  cannot  be  justified  except  in  a case  of  urgent  necessity.  Such  a 
,se  seemed  presented  for  my  action.  Without  this  movement  opera- 
ms  against  Island  No.  10  must  have  been  abandoned  and  the  land 
rces  at  least  withdrawn.  It  is  but  bare  justice  to  say  that  although 
e full  peril  of  the  movement  was  thoroughly  understood  by  my  whole 
mmand,  there  was  not  an  officer  or  man  who  was  not  anxious  to  be 
aced  in  the  advance. 

There  seemed  little  hope  of  any  assistance  from  the  gunboats.  I 
erefore  had  several  heavy  coal-barges  brought  into  the  upper  end 
the  canal,  which  during  the  progress  of  the  work  were  made  into 
lating  batteries.  Each  battery  consisted  of  three  heavy  barges, 
shed  together  and  bolted  with  iron.  The  middle  barge  was  bulk- 
*aded  all  around,  so  as  to  give  4 feet  of  thickness  of  solid  timber  both 
the  sides  and  on  the  ends.  The  heavy  guns,  three  in  number,  were 
ounted  on  it,  and  protected  by  traverses  of  sand  bags.  It  also  carried 
' sharpshooters.  The  barges  outside  of  it  had  a first  layer  in  the 
>ttom  of  empty  water-tight  barrels,  securely  lashed,  then  layers  of 
•y  cottonwood  rails  and  cotton  bales  packed  close.  They  were  then 
>ored  over  at  top  to  keep  everything  in  its  place,  so  that  a shot 
metrating  the  outer  barges  must  pass  through  20  feet  of  rails  and 
>tton  before  reaching  the  middle  one,  which  carried  the  men  and  guns, 
le  arrangements  of  water  barrels  and  cotton  bales  was  made  in  order 
at,  even  if  penetrated  frequently  by  the  enemy’s  shot  and  filled  with 
ater,  the  outer  barges  could  not  sink.  It  was  my  purpose,  when  all 
as  ready,  to  tow  one  or  two  of  these  batteries  over  the  river  to  a 
)int  exactly  opposite  New  Madrid,  where  swamps  prevented  any 
cess  to  the  river,  and  where  the  enemy,  therefore,  had  been  unable 
establish  his  batteries.  When  near  the  shore  the  floating  batteries, 
Lth  their  crews,  were  to  be  cut  loose  from  the  steamers  and  allowed 
float  down  the  river  to  the  point  selected  for  landing  the  troops.  As 


88 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIlll 

soon  as  they  arrived  within  short  range  of  it  they  were  to  cast  ouil 
their  anchors,  so  as  to  hold  the  barges  firmly,  and  open  fire  upon  tint 
enemy’s  batteries.  I think  that  these  batteries  would  have  accoml 
plished  their  purpose,  and  my  whole  force  volunteered  to  man  them! 
They  were  well  provided  with  small  boats,  to  be  kept  out  of  danger! 
and  even  if  the  worst  happened,  and  the  batteries  were  sunk  by  th(l 
enemy’s  fire,  the  men  would  meet  with  no  worse  fate  than  capture. 

On' the  5th  April  the  steamers  and  barges  were  brought  near  to  th(fl 
mouth  of  the  bayou  which  discharges  into  the  Mississippi  at  New! 
Madrid,  but  were  kept  carefully  out  of  sight  of  the  river  whilst  oral 
floating  batteries  were  being  completed.  The  enemy,  as  we  afterward! 
learned,  had  received  positive  advices  of  the  construction  of  the  canal! 
but  were  unable  to  believe  that  such  a work  was  practicable.  Tin! 
first  assurance  they  had  of  its  completion  was  the  appearance  of  th| 
four  steamers  loaded  with  troops  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  April.  • I 

On  the  4th  Commodore  Foote  allowed  one  of  the  gunboats  to  run  th(j 
batteries  at  Island  No.  10,  and  Captain  Walke,  U.  S.  Navy,  who  hacl 
volunteered  (as  appears  from  the  commodore’s  order  to  him),  camq 
through  that  night  with  the  gunboat  Carondelet.  Although  many! 
shots  were  fired  at  him  as  he  passed  the  batteries,  his  boat  was  no! 
once  struck.  He  informed  me  of  his  arrival  early  on  the  5th. 

On  the  morning  of  the  Gtli  I sent  General  Granger,  Colonel  Smith! 
of  the  Forty-third  Ohio,  and  Capt.  L.  H.  Marshall,  of  my  staff,  to  mak< 
a reconnaissance  of  the  river  below,  and  requested  Captain  Walke  t<| 
take  them  on  board  the  Carondelet  and  run  down  the  river,  to  ascerl 
tain  precisely  the  character  of  the  banks  and  the  position  and  numbel 
of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  The  whole  day  was  spent  in  this  reconnais;i 
sance,  the  Carondelet  steaming  down  the  river  in  the  midst  of  a heavy 
fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  along  the  shore.  The  whole  bank  foij 
15  miles  was  lined  with  heavy  guns  at  intervals,  in  no  case  exceeding 
1 mile.  Intrench ments  for  infantry  were  also  thrown  up  along  thl 
shore  between  the  batteries.  On  his  return  up  the  river  Captain 
Walke  silenced  the  enemy’s  batteries  opposite  Point  Pleasant,  and 
small  infantry  force,  under  Capt.  L.  H.  Marshall,  landed  and  spikecl 
the  guns. 

On  the  night  of  the  6th,  at  my  urgent  request,  Commodore  FoohJ 
ordered  the  Pittsburgh  also  to  run  down  to  New  Madrid.  She  arrived 
at  daylight,  having,  like  the  Carondelet,  come  through  untouched.  J 
directed  Captain  Walke  to  proceed  down  the  river  at  daylight  on  thi  | 
7 th  with  two  gunboat  s,  and  if  possible  silence  the  bat  teries  near  Wat  j 
son’s  Landing,  the  point  which  had  been  selected  to  land  the  troops! 
and  at  the  same  time  I brought  the  four  steamers  into  the  river,  aucj 
embarked  Paine’s  division,  which  consisted  of  the  Tenth,  Sixteenth! 
Twenty-second,  and  Fifty-first  Illinois  Regiments,  with  Houghtaling’ij 
battery  of  artillery. 

The  land  batteries  of  32-pounders,  under  Captain  Williams,  Firs  j 
United  States  Infantry,  which  I had  established  some  days  before,  oppol 
site  the  point  where  the  troops  were  to  land,  were  ordered  to  open  thei:l 
fire  upon  the  enemy’s  batteries  opposite  as  soon  as  it  was  possible  to  se<  I 
them. 

A heavy  storm  commenced  on  the  night  of  the  6th,  and  continuecl 
with  short  intermission  for  several  days.  The  morning  of  the  7th  wai 
very  dark,  and  the  rain  fell  heavily  until  midday.  As  soon  as  it  wai 
fairly  light  our  heavy  batteries  on  the  land  opened  their  fire  vigorously! 
upon  the  batteries  of  the  enemy,  and  the  two  gunboats  ran  down  tin 
river  and  joined  in  the  action. 


hai>.  XVIII.]  MEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


89 


I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  Captain  Walke  during 
tie  whole  of  these  operations.  Prompt,  gallant,  and  cheerful,  he  per- 
)rmed  the  hazardous  service  assigned  him  with  signal  skill  and  suc- 
ess.  About  12  o’clock  m.  he  signaled  me  that  the  batteries  near  our 
lace  of  landing  were  silenced,  and  the  steamers  containing  Paine’s 
ivision  moved  out  from  the  landing  and  began  to  cross  the  river,  pre- 
eded  by  the  gunboats. 

The  whole  force  designed  to  cross  had  been  drawn  up  along  the  river 
ank,  and  saluted  the  passing  steamers  with  cheers  of  exultation.  As 
oon  as  we  began  to  cross  the  river  the  enemy  commenced  to  evacuate 
is  position  along  the  bank  and  the  batteries  along  the  Tennessee 
hore  opposite  Island  No.  10.  His  whole  force  was  in  motion  towards 
iptonville,  with  the  exception  of  the  few  artillerists  on  the  island,  who 
i the  haste  of  retreat  had  been  abandoned. 

As  Paine’s  division  was  passing  opposite  the  point  I occupied  on  the 
[lore  one  of  my  spies,  who  had  crossed  on  the  gunboats  from  the 
ilenced  battery ] informed  me  of  this  hurried  retreat  of  the  enemy.  I 
ignaled  General  Paine  to  stop  his  boats,  and  sent  him  the  information, 
itli  orders  to  land  as  rapidly  as  possible  on  the  opposite  shore  and  push 
irward  to  Tiptonville,  to  which  point  the  enemy’s  forces  were  tending 
•om  every  direction.  I sent  no  force  to  occupy  the  deserted  batteries 
pposite  Island  No.  10,  as  it  was  my  first  purpose  to  capture  the  whole 
rmy  of  the  enemy. 

At  8 or  9 o’clock  that  night  (the  7th)  the  small  force  abandoned  on 
le  island,  finding  themselves  deserted,  and  fearing  an  attack  in  the 
?,ar  from  our  land  forces,  which  they  knew  had  crossed  the  river  in  the 
iorning,  sent  a message  to  Commodore  Foote,  surrendering  to  him. 
he  divisions  were  pushed  forward  to  Tiptonville  as  fast  as  they  were 
mded,  Paine  leading.  The  enemy  attempted  to  make  a stand  several 
mes  near  that  place,  but  Paine  did  not  once  deploy  his  columns.  By 
lidnight  all  our  forces  were  across  the  river  and  pushing  forward  rap- 
ily  to  Tiptonville. 

The  enemy,  retreating  before  Paine  and  from  Island  No.  10,  met  at 
iptonville  during  the  night  in  great  confusion,  and  were  driven  back 
ito  the  swamps  by  the  advance  of  our  forces,  until,  at  4 o’clock  a.  m. 
n the  8th,  finding  themselves  completely  cut  off,  and  being  appar- 
ntly  unable  to  resist,  they  laid  down  their  arms  and  surrendered  at 
iscretion.  They  were  so  scattered  and  confused  that  it  was  several 
ays  before  anything  like  an  accurate  account  of  their  number  could 
e made. 

Meantime  I had  directed  Col.  W.  L.  Elliott,  of  the  Second  Iowa  Cav- 
lry,  who  had  crossed  the  river  after  dark,  to  proceed  as  soon  as  day 
awned  to  take  possession  of  the  enemy’s  abandoned  works  on  the  Ten- 
essee  shore  opposite  Island  No.  10,  and  to  save  the  steamers  if  he 
ossibly  could.  He  reached  there  before  sunrise  that  morning,  the  8th, 
n d took  possession  of  the  encampments,  the  immense  quantities  of 
tores  and  supplies,  and  of  all  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  the  main  land, 
le  also  brought  in  about  200  prisoners.  After  posting  his  guards  and 
aking  possession  of  the  steamers  not  sunk  or  injured  he  remained 
ntil  the  forces  from  the  flotilla  landed.  As  Colonel  Buford  was  in 
ommand  of  these  forces,  Colonel  Elliott  turned  over  to  his  infantry 
>rce  his  prisoners,  batteries,  and  captured  property  for  safe-keeping, 
nd  proceeded  to  scour  the  country  in  the  direction  of  Tiptonville,  along 
teelfoot  Lake,  as  directed. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  give  a correct  account  of  the  immense 
uantity  of  artillery,  ammunition,  and  supplies  of  every  description 
diich  fell  into  our  hands.  Three  generals,  273  field  and  company 


90  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIll. 

officers,  6,700  privates,  123  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  35  pieces  of  field 
artillery)  all  of  the  very  best  character  and  latest  patterns),  7,000  stand 
of  small-arms,  tents  for  12,000  men,  several  wharf-boat  loads  of  provis- 
ions,  an  immense  quantity  of  ammunition  of  all  kinds,  many  hundred 
horses  and  mules,  with  wagons  and  harness,  &c.,  are  among  the  spoils. 
Very  few,  if  any,  of  the  enemy  escaped,  and  only  by  wading  and  swim- 
ming through  the  swamps.  1 

The  conduct  of  the  troops  was  splendid  throughout,  as  the  results  ot 
this  operation  and  its  whole  progress  very  plainly  indicate.  We  haver 
crossed  this  great  river,  the  banks  of  which  were  lined  with  batteries! 
and  defended  by  7,000  men.  We  have  pursued  and  captured  the  whole 
force  of  the  enemy  and  all  his  supplies  and  material  of  war,  and  have 
again  recrossed  and  reoccupied  the  camps  at  New  Madrid,  without  los- j 
ing  a man  or  meeting  with  any  accident.  Such  results  bespeak  effi- 
ciency.  good  conduct,  high  discipline,  and  soldierly  deportment  of  the 
best  character  far  more  conclusively  than  they  can  be  exhibited  m 
pitched  battle  or  the  storming  of  fortified  places.  Patience,  willing  | 
labor,  endurance  of  hardship  and  privation  for  long  periods,  cheertul  ! 
and  prompt  obedience,  order  and  discipline,  bravery  and  spirit,  are  the 
qualities  which  these  operations  have  developed  in  the  forces  under  my  i 
command,  and  which  assure  for  them  a brilliant  and  successful  career 
in  arms.  It  is  difficult  to  express  the  feeling  which  such  conduct  has 
occasioned  one  fortunate  enough  to  be  the  commander  of  such  troops. 
There  are  few  material  obstacles  within  the  range  of  warfare  which  a 
man  of  courage  and  spirit  would  hesitate  to  encounter  with  such  a force. 

To  the  division  and  brigade  commanders,  whose  reports  I transmit,  I 
leave  the  grateful  privilege  of  designating  in  detail  the  forces  engaged 
in  these  operations.  Generals  Paine,  Stanley,  Hamilton,  and  Plummer 
crossed  the  river,  together  with  a portion  of  General  Granger’s  cavalry 
division,  under  Col.  W.  L.  Elliott,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry.  To  all  these 
officers  I am  deeply  indebted  for  their  efficient  and  cordial  aid  in  every 
portion  of  our  operations.  They  conducted  their  divisions  with  eminent 
skill  and  vigor,  and  to  them  I am  largely  indebted  for  the  discipline 
and  efficiency  of  this  command. 

General  Paine,  fortunate  in  having  the  advance,  exhibited  conspicu- 
ous gallantry  and  vigor,  and  had  the  satisfaction  to  receive  the  sur- 
render of  the  enemy.  General  Palmer  vras  posted  ten  days  before  the 
final  operations  in  support  and  in  charge  of  the  battery  below  Tipton- 
ville.  Throughout  he  was  prompt  and  active  in  the  discharge  of  his 

duties.  . , „ 

Of  Colonel  Bissell,  Engineer  Regiment,  and  his  regiment  1 can  hardly 
say  too  much.  Untiring  and  determined,  no  difficulties  discouraged 
them  and  no  labor  was  too  much  for  their  energy.  They  have  con- 
ducted and  completed  a work  which  will  be  memorable  in  the  history 
of  this  war. 

My  own  personal  staff — Major  Butler,  assistant  ad  jutant-general  j 
Major  Morgan  and  Captain  Marshall,  aides-de-camp;  Maj.  J.  M.  Corse, 
inspector-general,  and  Surg.  O.  W.  Nixon,  medical  director — rendered 
me  important  service,  and  were  in  all  respects  zealous  and  efficient. 

Our  success  was  complete  and  overwhelming,  and  it  gives  me  pro- 
found satisfaction  to  report  that  it  was  accomplished  without  loss  of  life. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ JNO.  POPE, 

Major- General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Mississippi , Saint  Louis , Mo. 


Chap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  91 

No.  2. 

Statement  of  the  organization  and  return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the 
Mississippi  during  the  operations  against  New  Madrid , Mo.f  February 
28 -March  14,  1862. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


* The  organization  of  this  army  is  given  as  it  stood  on  the  14th  of  March,  1862. 


92  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChai\  xvm. 

Statement  of  the  organization  and  return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi  during 
the  operations  against  New  Madrid , Mo.,  February  28-March  14,  1862.— Continued. 


Command. 


Second  Brigade. 
Col.  G.  N.  Bitch. 


43d  Indiana. 
46tli  Indiana. 


Total  Second  Brigade  

Total  Third  Division 

FOURTH  DIVISION. 
Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  James  D.  Morgan. 

3 Oth  Illinois 


16th  Illinois 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 
Col.  G.  W.  Cumming. 


22d  Illinois. 
51st  Illinois. 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Total  Fourth  Division 

FIFTH  DIVISION. 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  B.  Plummer. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  Bryner. 


47th  Illinois  — 
8th  Wisconsin. 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 
Col.  J.  M.  Loomis. 


26th  Hlinois  . 
11th  Missouri 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Total  Fifth  Division 

CAVALRY  DIVISION. 
CoL  Gordon  Granger. 


2d  Michigan 

3d  Michigan 

7th  Hlinois 


Total  Cavalry  Division 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


Captured 
or  missing. 


Chap.  XVIII.j  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  93 

Statement  of  the  organization  and  return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi  during 
the  operations  against  New  Madrid , Mo.,  February  28-March  14,  1862. — Continued. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate, 

CO 

© 

© 

o 

d 

© 

a 

'C 

© 

.2 

'p 

H 

s 

a 

o 

a 

© 

a 

1 

H 

8 

o 

§ 

p 

© 

a 

© 

an 

S 

H 

ARTILLERY  DIVISION. 

Maj.  W.  L.  Lothrop. 

1st  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Battery  M 

2d  United  States  Artillery,  Battery  E 

11th  Ohio  Battery 

1 

l 

3d  Michigan  Battery 

2d  Iowa  Battery 

Total  Artillery  Division 

1 

1 

UNASSIGNED  TROOPS. 

64th  Illinois  (Sharpshooters) 

Engineer  Regiment  of  the  West 

1st  United  States  Infantry,  Companies  A, B,C,D,  H,  andL 
4th  United  States  Cavalry,  Companies  B,  C,  and  D 

2 

5 

1 

8 

2d  Iowa  Cavalry 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Companies  H and  I 

Total  unassigned 

2 

5 

1 

8 

RECAPITULATION. 

First  Division 

2 

2 

10 

4 

12 

6 

Second  Division 

Third  Division 

Fourth  Division 

i 

1 

2 

Fifth  Division 

Cavalry  Division 

1 

2 

3 

8 

Artillery  Division 

1 

2 

Unassigned  troops 

5 

1 

Grand  total  Army  of  the  Mississippi 

1 

7 

21 

3 

32 

1 

No.  3. 

Report  of  Surg.  0.  W.  Nixon , IT.  8.  Army , Medical  Director . 

New  Madrid,  March  16,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  list  of  killed  and 
wounded  of  your  command  in  the  recent  action  with  the  enemy  in- 
trenched at  New  Madrid.*  The  wounds,  with  two  or  three  exceptions, 
were  severe.  Two  died  in  a few  hours  after  receiving  their  injuries 
and  two  others  the  next  day.  The  wounded  are  carefully  nursed,  and 
every  comfort  at  our  command  lias  been  given  them. 

The  different  division  and  regimental  surgeons  have  lost  no  opportu- 
nity, both  on  the  held  and  in  the  hospital,  of  ministering  to  the  comfort 
of  the  wounded. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  W.  NIXON, 

Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope.  Acting  Medical  Director. 

*The  nominal  list  accompanying  this  reiiort  shows  5 killed  and  16  wounded ,*  but  seo 
the  revised  statement,  pp.  91-93. 


94 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XVIII. 

No.  4. 

Strength  and  organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi , operating  against 
Island  No.  10,  March  31,  18G2. 


Command. 


1st  (Stanley’s)  Division 

2d  (Hamilton’s)  Division 

3d  (Palmer’s)  Division 

4th  (Paine’s)  Division 

5th  (Plummer’s)  Division. 

Cavalry  (Granger’s)  Division 

Artillery  (Lothrop’s)  Division — 

Engineer  troops  ( Bissell) 

Unattached  to  divisions 

Bird’s  Point,  Mo 

Sikeston,  Mo 


Total*. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

ana  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

122 

2,535 

3,  330 

3,679 

121 

2,428 

2,972 

3, 390 

151 

3,131 

3,  790 

4,  047 

142 

2,  832 

3,  447 

3,  988 

97 

2,  408 

2,998 

3,523 

75 

1,  341 

2,  026 

2,236 

29 

782 

972 

1,  053 

9 

96 

802 

890 

50 

1,238 

1,  478 

1,708 

36 

775 

842 

872 

6 

143 

151 

167 

838 

17,  709 

22. 808 

26, 153 

1—  O OR 

‘This  does  not  embrace  Buford’s  (flotilla)  brigade,  with  an  aggregate  present  for  duty  of  2,  251. 

ARMY  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI.— Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Stanley. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  Groesbeck. 


27th  Ohio  Infantry. 
39th  Ohio  Infantry. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith. 


43d  Ohio  Infantry. 
63d  Ohio  Infantry. 


SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  W.  H.  Worthington. 


5th  Iowa  Infantry. 
59th  Indiana  Infantry. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  N.  Perczel. 

10th  Iowa  Infantry. 

26th  Missouri  Infantry. 


Artillery. 

11th  Ohio  Battery. 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Palmer. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  James  R.  Slack. 


34th  Indiana  Infantry. 
47th  Indiana  Infantry. 


Second  Brigade . 
Col.  G.  N.  Fitch. 


43d  Indiana  Infantry. 
46th  Indiana  Infantry. 


Not  statod  in  original.  Pieces  of  artillery. 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


95 


7th  Illinois. 


Cavalry. 


Artillery. 

1st  Missouri,  Battery  G. 


FOURTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  James  D.  Morgan. 

10th  Illinois  Infantry. 

16th  Illinois  Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

1st  Illinois,  Companies  H and  I. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  G.  W.  CUMMING. 

22d  Illinois  Infantry. 

51st  Illinois  Infantry. 

Sharpshooters. 

64th  Illinois. 


FIFTH  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  J.  B.  Plummer. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  Bryner. 

47th  Illinois  Infantry 
8th  Wisconsin  Infantry. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  M.  Loomis. 

26th  Illinois  Infantry. 

11th  Missouri  Infantry. 

Artillery. 


1st  Missouri,  Battery  M. 


CAVALRY  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Gordon  Granger. 
2d  Michigan.  I 3d  Michigan. 


ARTILLERY  DIVISION. 


Maj.  W.  L.  Lothrop. 


2d  Iowa  Battery. 

5th  Wisconsin  Battery. 
5th  Wisconsin  Battery. 
7th  Wisconsin  Battery. 


1st  Michigan  Light  Artillery,  Battery  C. 
1st  Michigan  Light  Artillery,  Battery  H. 
1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  C. 

2d  United  States  Artillery,  Battery  F. 

UNASSIGNED  TROOPS. 


Engineer  Regiment  of  the  West. 
22d  Missouri  Infantry. 

2d  Iowa  Cavalry. 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry,  4 companies. 


4th  United  States  Cavalry,  Companies  B, 
C,  and  D. 

1st  United  States  Infantry,  Companies  A, 
B,  C,  D,  H,  and  I. 


FLOTILLA  BRIGADE. 


Col.  N.  B.  Buford. 


27th  Illinois  Infantry. 

12d  Illinois  Infantry. 
15th  Wisconsin  Infantry. 


1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  G. 
2d  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  I. 


96 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  Joseph  A.  Mower , First  United  States  Infantry , com.- 

manding  siege  train. 

Camp  before  New  Madrid, 

March  15,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  orders  from 
General  Pope,  I took  command  of  the  siege  train  on  the  evening  of  the 
12th  instant,  and  proceeded  with  it  to  the  position  that  had  been  assigned. 
I had  under  my  command  Companies  A and  H,  First  United  States 
Infantry.  I placed  Company  H in  the  battery  on  the  left  (Battery  No. 
1),  in  which  were  one  8-inch  howitzer  and  one  24-pounder,  and  Company 
A in  the  battery  on  the  right  (Battery  No.  2).  This  battery  had  two 
24-pounders.  I put  this  battery  under  the  immediate  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Fletcher,  commanding  Company  A.  Lieutenant  Beeder  was! 
also  with  this  company.  I was  directed  by  General  Stanley  to  open 
fire  on  the  enemy  at  daylight  on  the  13th,  which  I did  from  both  bat-; 
teries.  Our  fire  was  briskly  replied  to  by  the  fort,  which  was  in  front,; 
and  the  gunboats,  which  took  position  both  in  front  and  towards  oui 
left  flank.  They  threw  rifled  shot,  shell,  and  round  shot.  At  about  10 
o’clock  a.  m.  a round  shot  struck  one  of  the  guns  in  Battery  No.  1,  break  ! 
ing  a piece  out  of  it,  and  killing  1 man  and  wounding  6.  In  the  after- 
noon the  gunboats  withdrew  from  our  front,  and  taking  position  beyond 
the  reach  of  our  guns,  kept  up  a steady  fire,  with  occasional  intermis 
sions,  until  sundown. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  I was  preparing  to  open  fire  again,  when] 
I received  an  order  from  General  Hamilton  not  to  fire,  as  a flag  of  truce] 
was  approaching.  Shortly  after  General  Hamilton  arrived  at  the  bat 
teries,  and  desired  me  to  take  20  men  of  my  company  and  ascertain 
whether  or  not  the  fort  had  been  abandoned.  Having  no  colors  belong 
ing  to  the  First  Infantry,  I was  furnished  with  the  regimental  colors  ol 
a regiment  of  volunteers  to  raise  upon  the  fort.  I proceeded  to  the 
fort  and  found  that  the  enemy  had  deserted  it.  I raised  the  flag  upon 
the  ramparts  and  took  possession  of  the  works.  I found  that  two  oJ 
the  enemy’s  guns  had  been  dismounted  and  another  struck  and  badly 
injured  by  our  fire.  I am  unable  to  say  what  damage  was  done  to  th(j 
gunboats.  Lieutenants  Fletcher  and  Beeder  displayed  great  zeal  am 
activity  during  the  whole  engagement,  although  they,  as  well  as  tin 
whole  command,  were  nearly  exhausted  by  fatigue  and  exposure.  1 
regret  to  have  to  state  that  Lieutenant  Beeder,  after  having  exhibitei 
so  much  zeal  in  the  performance  of  his  duty,  was  unfortunately  wounded 
by  the  accidental  discharge  of  his  revolver,  and  was  consequently  de 
prived  of  the  opportunity  of  entering  the  enemy’s  works  with  his  com 
pany.  Sergeants  Connelly  and  Downey,  of  Company  A,  Corporal  Young  i 
man  and  Privates  Morgan  and  Burke,  of  Company  H,  performed  theft! 
duty  at  the  guns  with  great  coolness  and  skill ; First  Sergeant  Libby 
of  Company  H,  was  very  attentive  to  his  duties,  and  deserves  mucl 
credit,  as  do  all  of  the  men  of  the  two  companies. 

I inclose  herewith  a list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  A.  MOWER, 

Captain,  First  Infantry , Commanding  Siege  Train . I 

Maj.  Speed  Butler, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* Nominal  list  omitted  shows  1 killed,  6 wounded,  and  1 missing. 


'hat.  XVIIL]  new  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  97 

No.  6. 

Report  of  Map  Warren  L.  Lothrop , First  Missouri  Light  Artillery, 


Headquarters  Artillery, 

Camp  near  New  Madrid , Mo.,  March  10,  1802. 

Sir  : I liave  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  opera- 
ions  of  the  artillery  under  my  command  during*  the  investment  and 
vacuation  of  New  Madrid.  Having  been  ordered  by  the  general  com- 
uanding  to  make  a reconnaissance  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  select  a 
>osition  to  plant  a siege  battery,  I went  down  on  the  11th  instant,  with 
"apt.  L.  H.  Marshall,  First  Infantry,  and  a squadron  of  dragoons,  within 
bbout  a half  mile  of  the  enemy’s  works.  From  this  position  (northwest 
rom  the  town)  I could  see  distinctly  their  gunboats  and  lower  fort.  I 
letermined  at  once,  from  my  observation,  where  to  plant  the  battery, 
nd  on  the  12th  instant  w ent  to  the  same  point  again,  in  company  with 
Colonel  Bissell,  of  the  Engineers,  and  Captain  Marshall,  to  satisfy  my 
elf  that  I was  not  mistaken  in  the  selection  of  the  ground.  Colonel 
lissell  and  Captain  Marshall  thought  the  position  to  be  a good  one. 
-he  same  evening,  at  dusk,  Colonel  Bissell  and  myself,  with  Colonel 
[organ’s  brigade,  the  Tenth  and  Sixteenth  Illinois  Regiments,  went 
lown  within  about  500  yards  in  rear  of  the  position  wiiere  the  battery 
fas  to  be  established.  At  this  point  one  regiment  was  deployed  as 
kirmishers  and  the  other  furnished  with  spades  and  shovels.  The 
kirmishers  advanced  about  50  yards  in  front  of  the  men  in  rear  with 
pades  and  shovels,  until  the  latter  arrived  on  the  ground  w here  the 
•attery  was  to  be  established.  In  a few  moments  the  work  was  laid 
ut  and  the  men  put  to  work.  At  daylight  the  work  was  completed, 
nd  three  24-pounder  siege  guns  and  one  8-inch  howitzer  put  in  posi- 
ion.  This  work  was  undoubtedly  completed  before  the  enemy  had 
ny  knowledge  of  it.  At  daylight  in  the  morning  the  enemy’s  fort& 
nd  gunboats  opened  upon  our  battery  and  kept  up  a constant  can- 
onading  until  about  12  o’clock  m.  After  this  they  continued  to  firer 
t intervals  until  sundown.  Captain  Mower,  of  the  First  Infantry 
nd  Lieutenant  Reeder,  with  Companies  A and  H,  served  the  gunsr 
nd  all  conducted  themselves  in  the  most  gallant  and  creditable  man- 
er.  Captain  Mower  remained  in  the  battery  until  the  town  was  evac- 
ated  by  the  enemy,  and  then  placed  our  siege  guns  in  the  enemy’s* 
>rt. 

During  the  investment  of  New' Madrid,  Capt.  A.  M.  Powell,  First  Mis- 
3uri  Light  Artillery ; Capt.  Henry  Hescock,  same  regiment ; Capt.  N.. 

Spoor,  Second  Iowa  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Sands,  Eleventh  Ohio* 
ight  Artillery  j and  Lieutenant  Darling’s  battery,  Company  F,  Second 
artillery,  U.  S.  Army,  were  frequently  under  the  enemy’s  tire,  and  all 
ehaved  in  a very  creditable  manner. 

Captain  Powell,  a few  days  after  our  arrival  in  front  of  New  Madrid, 
as  detached  from  the  command  and  went  to  Point  Pleasant  with  Col- 

nel  Plummer. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  LOTHROP, 

Major , First  Missouri  Light  Artillery , Commanding  Artillery. 

Maj.  Speed  Butler, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

7 R r — VOL  VIII 


98 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  David  S.  Stanley,  TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  First 

Division. 

Headquarters  First  Division, 

April  20,  1862. 

Major  : In  reporting  upon  the  part  taken  by  the  First  Division  of 
this  army  in  compelling  the  surrender  of  Island  No.  10  I have  the  honor 
to  state  that  I was  assigned  the  command  of  the  division  on  the  4th 
day  of  March,  and  on  the  same  night  a detachment  of  500  men,  com- 
manded by  Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith,  Forty- third  Ohio  Volunteers,  made 
a reconnaissance  in  force,  and  after  cannonading  the  town  and  forts  for 
half  an  hour  retired  to  their  camp  without  loss.  Upon  the  6th  of  the 
same  month  my  entire  division,  consisting  of  the  First  Brigade,  Colonel 
Groesbeck  commanding,  and  the  Second  Brigade,  Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith 
commanding,  by  the  order  of  the  major-general  commanding,  pushed 
our  way  into  the  town  of  New  Madrid  to  within  700  yards  of  the  upper 
fort,  driving  the  enemy’s  infantry;  but  at  this  point,  finding  ourselves 
under  a cross-fire  of  seven  gunboats  and  the  guns  of  both  the  forts, 
I deemed  it  proper  to  withdraw  my  troops.  We  were  for  half  an 
hour  under  a fierce  cannonade,  and,  strange  to  say,  suffered  only  in  3 
wounded.  J 

The  operations  of  the  13th  March,  in  which  my  division  had  the 
honor  to  bear  an  important  part,  have  already  been  reported  to  your 
office.*  The  time  elapsing  between  the  13th  of  March  and  the  7th  ol 
April  was  occupied  in  instructing  the  division  in  the  duties  of  outposts 
and  the  drill  of  the  battalion  and  brigade.  In  all  these  I am  happy  te- 
leport decided  progress. 

On  the  7th  my  division,  accompanied  by  Captain  Dees’  Michigan 
battery,  crossed  the  Mississippi  from  the  upper  fort  immediately  aftei 
the  crossing  of  General  Paine’s  division.  Waiting  for  the  head  ol 
General  Hamilton’s  division,  we  took  up  the  march  immediately  upon 
his  arrival,  and  moved  by  the  river  route  toward  Tipton ville.  Deserted 
camps  and  abandoned  artillery  indicated  a flying  enemy.  Night  com 
ing  on  very  dark  and  our  guide  being  uncertain  of  the  route,  the  com 
mand  was  bivouacked  until  morning,  when  a contraband  informed  me 
the  enemy  had  surrendered  to  General  Paine.  Subsequently  the  same 
day  we  crossed  the  New  Madrid  Bend  to  Island  No.  10.  Covering  the 
country  for  7 miles  perpendicular  to  the  main  road  with  skirmishers 
we  picked  up  about  40  prisoners.  All  the  houses  were  found  full® 
the  enemy’s  sick,  and  cannon,  ammunition,  tents,  wagons,  and  various 
material  of  war  were  found  scattered  through  the  bend.  These  we  liac 
no  means  to  move.  The  major-general  has  already  been  apprised  o 
these  facts.  _ A 

I transmit  inclosed  the  reports  of  Colonels  Groesbeck  and  Smith 
brigade  commanders. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  S.  STANLEY, 

Brig.  Gen.,  Comdg.  First  Division , Army  Mississippi l i 
Maj.  Speed  Butler, 

Assistant  Adjutant -General,  Army  Mississippi. 


* No  such  report  found  from  General  Stanley;  but  see  Col.  John  W.  Sprague’s  report 

p.  101. 


HAr.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


99 


No.  8. 


Reports  of  Col.  John  Groesbeck , Thirty-ninth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding 

First  Brigade. 


Hdqrs.  1st  Brig.,  1st  Div.,  Dist.  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , Mo.,  March  15,  1862. 
Captain  : I liave  the  honor  to  report  to  the  general  commanding 
be  First  Division  the  part  taken  in  the  late  action  before  New  Madrid 
y the  brigade  under  my  command,  consisting  of  the  Twenty- seventh 
nd  Thirty-ninth  Begiments  Ohio  Infantry. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  12th  instant  I detailed  Companies  A and  F, 
wenty-seventh,  and  I and  H,  Thirty -ninth  Ohio,  to  drive  in  the  pick- 
bs  of  the  enemy,  hold  an  advanced  position,  and  cover  the  parties  de- 
nied to  plant  our  heavy  artillery.  He  drove  in  the  pickets,  and  took 
le  position  assigned  him  within  800  yards  of  the  enemy’s  gunboat  and 
rincipal  fort. 

At  3 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  I moved  forward  with  my 
rigade  and  took  position  on  the  right  of  the  battery.  The  enemy’s 
kirmishers  immediately  commenced  firing  upon  us,  but  without  doing 
uy  injury.  A few  minutes  afterwards  our  artillery  opened  the  engage- 
icut,  and  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  fall  back  about  200  yards,  which 
did  in  good  order,  under  a heavy  fire  of  shot  and  shell  from  the  guns 
f the  fort.  While  lying  there  five  companies  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
hio  were  detached  to  take  a position  several  hundred  yards  to  the 
‘ft,  on  a road  leading  past  the  enemy’s  fort,  to  guard  against  any  flank 
lovement.  I then  moved  the  brigade  300  yards  to  the  left  and  took 
osition  within  easy  supporting  distance  of  the  battery,  where  the  slop- 
tg  bank  of  a bayou  afforded  considerable  protection  to  the  men,  who 
imained  thus  placed  during  the  rest  of  the  day.  The  firing  ceased 
bout  sunset.  Having  thrown  out  an  additional  company  of  pickets  in 
ont  of  the  extreme  left,  the  men  remained  in  their  position  till  day- 
ght,  when  I was  relieved. 

I take  pleasure  in  mentioning  the  good  conduct  of  my  command.  It 
shaved  with  great  coolness,  although  exposed  to  heavy  fire  the  whole 
ay. 


Considering  the  closeness  and  rapidity  of  the  firing,  the  casualties 
ere  remarkably  few,  viz,  1 killed,  3 severely  wounded  of  Twenty-sev- 
lth  Ohio,  and  1 very  slightly  wounded  of  Thirty -ninth  Ohio. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  GEOESBECK, 

Colonel,  Commanding . 

Capt.  George  D.  Kellogg, 


Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Division. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  First  Division, 

Army  of  the  District  of  the  Mississippi,  April  16,  1862. 
Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
al  commanding  the  First  Division,  the  part  taken  in  the  expedition  of 
ie  7th  instant  by  the  brigade  under  my  command,  consisting  of  the 
wenty-seventh  and  Thirty-ninth  Eegiments  of  Ohio  Infantry. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  I embarked  the  brigade  on  board  trans- 
its Trio  and  Fanny  Gilmore.  After  crossing  the  Mississippi  we 
arched  6 miles  toward  Tiptonville  and  bivouacked.  Next  morning 
arched  8 miles  to  Tiptonville.  On  our  arrival  there  found  that  the 
hole  rebel  force  had  surrendered  to  Brigadier-General  Paine.  After 


100 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


our  midday  heat  I detailed  four  companies  of  the  Twenty-seventh  and 
three  companies  of  the  Thirty-ninth  Regiment,  under  Major  Noyes,  of 
the  Thirty-ninth  Regiment,  to  deploy  as  skirmishers  and  scour  the 
country  between  Tiptonville  and  Island  No.  10,  which  was  done,  and  a 
number  of  prisoners  taken.  The  night  of  the  8th  we  bivouacked  at  Isl- 
land  No.  10.  Next  morning  took  transport  Graham  for  camp  at  New 
Madrid.  No  casualties. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

' JOHN  GROESBEOK, 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Capt.  George  D.  Kellogg, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  First  Div.,  District  of  the  Mississippi . 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith , Forty -third  Ohio  Infantry , command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  First  Division, 

April  17,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  move- 
ments of  this  brigade  at  the  capture  of  the  rebel  position  at  and  near 
Island  No.  10: 

The  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Forty-third  Ohio  Infantry,  Lieut.  Col. 
Wager  Swayne,  and  the  Sixty -third  Ohio  Infantry,  Col.  J.  W.  Sprague,! 
crossed  the  river  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant,  embarking  at  the 
upper  fort  at  New  Madrid,  and  landing  at  the  site  of  the  three-gun  rebel 
battery  just  captured  by  our  gunboats,  and  having  been  formed  in  line 
of  battle,  moved  forward  a half  mile  from  the  landing,  and  took  a posi- 
tion in  a wood  near  an  abandoned  rebel  encampment  of  two  regiments, 
apparently  quite  recently  evacuated.  A guard  of  20  men  was  placed 
over  the  property  here,  and  over  a few  prisoners,  who,  being  sick  or  in 
toxicated,  had  failed  to  escape  with  the  enemy.  A company  was  sent 
back  to  the  landing  to  render  assistance  and  support  to  the  rifle  battery 
of  Captain  Dees,  which  had  crossed  with  us.  We  remained  at  this  point 
about  an  hour,  until  joined  by  the  other  brigade  of  the  division  (the 
First,  Colonel  Groesbeck),  and  then  moved  in  the  direction  of  Tipton 
ville  to  the  support  of  General  Paine,  whose  division  was  in  advance.] 
The  brigade  bivouacked  about  an  hour  after  dark  at  a point  near  the] 
bank  of  the  river,  and  about  8 miles  below  the  point  where  the  landing] 
had  been  made. 

The  march  to  Tiptonville  was  resumed  in  the  morning  and  the  brigade] 
reached  there  about  noon.  The  enemy  had  already  surrendered,  with- 
out fighting,  to  the  advance  of  our  army,  and  the  brigade  was  placed  in  I 
position  as  part  of  the  guard  of  the  prisoners.  Two  hours  later  the! 
brigade  was  put  in  march  for  the  late  position  of  the  enemy  opposite 
Island  No.  10.  On  the  march  thither  the  country  between  the  road  and  1 
the  river  was  thoroughly  beaten  up  by  a strong  line  of  skirmishers 
under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Swayne,  and  several  prisoners  taken.  The] 
brigade  bivouacked  opposite  Island  No.  10  about  5 p.  m.  On  the  morn 
ing  of  the  9th  instant  the  brigade  was  moved,  with  the  rest  of  the  division, 
by  transport,  to  New  Madrid,  and  resumed  its  former  encampment. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  George  I).  Kellogg , Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


BAP.  XYIII.J  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  101 

No.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  John  W.  Sprague , Sixty -third  Ohio  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Sixty-third  Eegiment  O.  Y.  I., 

Camp  near  New  Madrid , Mo.,  March  14,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Sixty-third  Eegiment  O.  Y.  I., 
nder  my  command,  in  obedience  to  your  order,  left  camp  about  3 o’clock 
hursday  morning,  the  13th  instant,  and  marched  about  3 miles  to  a 
oint,  say,  southwest  of  the  town  of  New  Madrid,  and  distant  about  1 
tile,  and  was  there  deployed  in  line  of  battle  along  the  road,  by  your 
rder,  as  a part  of  the  support  of  a battery  planted  by  our  troops,  say, 
ne  hundred  rods  in  advance  of  our  line. 

Almost  immediately  after  taking  this  position  the  guns  of  our  bat- 
ales  opened  fire  upon  the  fort  and  gunboats  of  the  enemy,  to  which 
ley  replied  with  shot  and  shell.  As  soon  as  the  enemy’s  gunboats  got 
do  their  chosen  positions  it  was  found  that  the  position  of  the  regi- 
ent  under  my  command  was  exposed  to  the  cross-fire  of  at  least  one 
unboat  and  the  lower  or  principal  fort  of  the  enemy.  By  your  order 
moved  my  regiment  forward  about  25  rods  in  line  of  battle  and 
ilted  along  the  base  of  a very  slight  elevation.  While  this  new  posi 
on  did  not  remove  my  command  from  exposure  to  the  cross-fire  before 
entioned,  the  elevation  before  mentioned  afforded  a partial  protection, 
uring  the  forenoon  a few  shovels  were  procured,  and  in  a few  hours  a 
ench,  say  4 feet  wide  and  from  2 to  3 feet  deep,  was  excavated,  which 
lorded  increased  protection.  The  fire  of  the  enemy  continued  during 
le  entire  day,  with  occasional  intermissions.  At  night  the  fire  of  the 
iemy  ceased,  but  about  midnight  we  were  visited  by  a terrific  storm 
* rain,  accompanied  by  thunder  and  lightning.  Our  little  trench  irnme- 
ately  filled  with  water  and  all  were  soaked  by  the  falling  rain. 

At  daylight  next  morning  we  were  relieved,  having  occupied  the 
isition  over  twenty-four  hours,  exposed  to  a galling  fire  and  the  in- 
emency  of  the  weather. 

I have  no  casualties  to  report.  One  man,  Private  Thomas  King,  of 
ampany  IT,  Captain  Jackson,  was  sent  to  the  rear,  and  was  afterwards 
en  a short  distance  from  the  regiment  on  his  way  to  rejoin  his  com- 
my,  but  did  not  do  so ; he  is  still  missing. 

In  conclusion,  I beg  leave  to  say  that  every  officer  and  man  under  my 
mmand  behaved  with  coolness  and  courage ; not  a word  of  complaint 
as  made  of  hardship  or  fatigue. 

Every  order  given  by  me  was  promptly  obeyed  and  executed,  not- 
itlistanding  the  harassing  fire  of  the  enemy. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  W.  SPEAGUE, 

Colonel  Sixty-third  Regiment  0.  V.  I. 

Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig .,  First  Div .,  Army  of  the  Mississippi. 


No.  11. 

port  of  Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton , U.  S.  Army , commanding 

Second  Division. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Pittsburg  Landing , April  22,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  to  report  that  February  27,  1862,  at  Commerce,  Mo.,  I 
reived  orders  to  organize  the  First  Division  of  this  army.  The  First 


102 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvni 

Brigade,  under  Col.  John  Groesbeck,  was  composed  of  the  Thirty -ninti 
Ohio,  Major  Noyes  commanding ; Forty-third  Ohio,  Colonel  Smith  con 
manding,  and  Twenty-seventh  Ohio,  Colonel  Fuller.  The  Second  Brig 
ade,  Col.  J.  B.  Plummer  commanding,  was  composed  of  the  Sixty-thirl 
Ohio,  Colonel  Sprague;  Twenty-sixth  Illinois,  Cblonel  Loomis,  am 
Eleventh  Missouri,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Panabaker  commanding.  Th 
Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Kellogg ; a detachment  of  th 
First  United  States  Infantry,  under  Captain  Williams;  two  companie 
of  Engineer  troops,  volunteers,  under  Major  Hasie,  and  Captain  Sand! 
Eleventh  Ohio  Battery  were  also  attached  to  the  First  Division. 

The  division  marched  from  Commerce  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  (I 
February,  and  reached  Hunter’s  farm  at  midnight,  the  roads  being  a 
most  impassable.  The  troops  bivouacked  that  night  in  the  mud  an] 
rain  without  a murmur.  By  order  of  General  Pope,  Colonel  Kellogg] 
Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  was  dispatched  in  pursuit  of  Jeff.  Thompsoi 
and  his  band.  After  a running  fight  three  light  pieces  of  his  artiller] 
were  captured  and  several  prisoners  taken,  among  them  Capt.  Jamel 
T.  Hogane  and  Lieut.  D.  B.  Griswold,  Engineers,  C.  S.  Army.  Nl 
official  report  of  this  affair,  which  was  highly  creditable  to  the  Seventl 
Illinois  Cavalry,  was  made  to  me. 

Proceeding  by  easy  stages,  we  reached  New  Madrid  March  3, 186J 
On  the  2d  of  March,  Col.  J.  L.  Kirby  Smith,  Forty-third  Ohio,  escortel 
by  Colonel  Kellogg’s  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  made  a daring  recoil 
naissance,  penetrating  into  the  town  of  New  Madrid  to  within  tlirel 
quarters  of  a mile  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments.  On  the  3d  the  First  D| 
vision  advanced  upon  the  town,  Kellogg’s  cavalry  forming  the  advancj 
guard  and  covering  the  flanks.  Colonel  Fuller’s  Twenty-seventh  Olii] 
deployed  as  skirmishers,  supported  by  a section  of  Sands’  Eleventl 
Ohio  Battery  and  closely  followed  by  the  whole  division.  The  enemy] 
pickets  were  gallantly  driven  in  by  Colonel  Fuller’s  regiment.  Thl 
orders  to  the  division  were  to  feel  the  enemy,  seizing  any  advantajj 
which  might  offer.  To  this  end  the  Thirty-ninth  Ohio  was  advanced 
by  order  of  General  Pope,-  as  skirmishers  on  the  right  flank,  and  wen 
pushed  forward  on  a line  with  Colonel  Fuller’s  Twenty-seventh  Ohio  tl 
within  1J  miles  of  the  enemy’s  principal  works.  Colonel  Smith’s  Fort  j 
third  Ohio,  in  line  of  battle,  supported  Colonel  Fuller,  and  protectel 
the  left  flank  of  the  division,  supported  by  Sands’  battery  in  the  centei 
while  Col.  J.  B.  Plummer’s  brigade  supported  the  right.  The  eneinl 
withdrew  to  their  intrenchments,  but  kept  up  an  unremitting  fire  < j 
solid  shot  and  shell  from  five  gunboats  and  their  works,  24-pouiwlJ 
shot,  shell  from  32 -pounders  and  64-pounders,  besides  missiles  If  oil 
guns  of  smaller  caliber.  The  troops,  unable  to  reply,  evinced  a rain] 
ness  and  steadiness  worthy  of  veterans. 

Reconnaissances  having  demonstrated  that  an  assault  of  the  enemy] 
works  with  the  bayonet  must  have  involved  an  unnecessary  loss  of  lil] 
to  our  troops,  it  was  most  prudently  not  resorted  to,  though  the  beann] 
of  the  troops  was  such  as  to  give  reasonable  hopes  of  success.  On  tL* 
other  hand,  it  seemed  doubtful  whether,  if  taken,  the  works  could  tl 
held  against  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats. 

Brigadier-General  Stanley  arrived  in  camp  on  the  evening  of  thl 
3d.  On  the  4th  a reorganization  of  division,  &c.,  was  made.  Genera 
Stanley  being  from  Ohio,  the  Ohio  regiments  passed  from  under  m j 
command.  Having  had  evidence  of  their  gallantry  and  coolness  midtl 
fire,  and  feeling  grateful  for  the  cheerfulness  with  which  both  offidnj 
and  men  had  responded  to  my  efforts  to  enforce  discipline  and  excitl 
their  ardor,  T parted  with  them  with  regret.  Their  place,  however,  in  til 


Chap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


103 


reorganization  of  brigades  and  divisions  was  well  filled  by  the  Fifth 
Iowa,  Lieutenant- 0 olonel  Matthies,  and  Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  Col.  J.  I. 
Alexander,  Colonel  Worthington  commanding  the  brigade  thus  con- 
stituted. 

On  the  night  of  the  4th  Colonel  Worthington,  with  four  guns,  and 
Colonel  Smith’s  command  from  the  Forty-third ' Ohio,  five  companies 
of  the  Fifth  Iowa,  and  two  companies  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  drove 
in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  opened  a brisk  fire  on  his  position.  (See 
his  report  herewith.)  The  general  commanding  having  decided  to 
occupy  Point  Pleasant,  7 miles  below  New  Madrid,  I cheerfully  pro- 
posed Col.  J.  B.  Plummer  and  the  Second  Brigade  of  my  now  Second 
Division  for  this  service.  This  brigade  consisted  of  the  Eleventh 
Missouri,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Panabaker,  and  Twenty-sixth  Illinois, 
Colonel  Loomis.  He  proceeded  on  it  on  the  5th  instant.  At  his 
request,  my  aide-de-camp,  Lieut.  William  B.  Gaw,  accompanied  him. 
The  success  which  crowned  Colonel  Plummer’s  efforts  reflected  honor 
on  the  Second  Division. 

On  the  6th,  by  direction  of  the  commanding  general,  I detailed  Major 
Robertson,  in  command  of  two  companies  of  the  Fifth  Iowa,  and  Forty- 
sixth  Indiana,  Colonel  Fitch,  of  General  Palmer’s  division,  temporarily 
attached  to  my  division,  to  report  to  Col.  Gordon  Granger,  who 
pressed  the  enemy  on  our  left  vigorously,  driving  in  his  skirmishers, 
but  was  unable,  from  want  of  heavy  artillery,  to  make  any  serious 
impression,  on  account  of  the  heavy  fire  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and 
the  exposed  character  of  the  position,  without  undue  exposure  of  our 
troops.  Colonel  Granger  speaks  in  the  following  terms  of  the  officers 
and  men  engaged  in  this  affair: 


Camp  in  front  of  New  Madrid,  March  6,  1862. 

As  commander  of  the  column  mentioned  within,  which  moved  upon  New  Madrid 
.yesterday,  it  affords  me  much  satisfaction  to  more  than  corroborate  every  statement 
of  the  modest  but  gallant  Major  Robertson.  His  officers  and  men,  under  a terrific  fire 
ot  round  shot  and  shell  for  some  two  hours,  behaved  like  veterans,  and  quite  surprised 
coolness  and  indifference  to  the  danger  which  surrounded  them.  Mai  or 
hobertson  was  especially  conspicuous,  never  dismounting  from  his  horse,  although 
i heir  sharpshooters  tried  their  best  to  pick  him  off.  Lieutenant  Gordon,  Fourth  UnitSd 
states  C avalry,  aide-de-camp,  displayed  rare  courage  with  the  skirmishers,  and  deserves 
•special  notice.  7 


On  the  7th  instant  a demonstration  was  made  by  the  First  Brigade 
>1  the  Second  Division,  in  conjunction  with  General  Stanley’s  division. 
See  report  herewith.)  Colonel  Plummer  having  received  promotion 
is  brigadier-general,  a reorganization  again  took  place  on  the  11th 
nstant,  and  the  Tenth  Iowa  and  Twenty-sixth  Missouri  were  consti- 
tuted the  Second  Brigade  of  the  Second  Division,  under  Colonel 
L crczel.  7 

On  the  13th  the  Second  Division  was  held  in  reserve  as  the  support 
7.  ^he  First  Division.  On  the  14th,  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.,  with  Colonel 
Macks  brigade  of  General  Palmer’s  Third  Division,  composed  of  the 
1 orty-sixth  and  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  the  Second  Division  was  formed 
o march  to  the  relief  of  General  Stanley’s  First  Division  and  the  guards 
d the  trenches.  The  darkness  was  palpable.  The  rain  poured  down 
n torrents.  The  men  were  obliged  to  wade  through  pools  knee-deep, 
silence  having  been  strictly  enjoined,  the  division,  hoping  to  have  the 
lonor  ot  leading  in  the  assault  on  the  enemy’s  works,  moved  steadily 
orwaid  with  cheerful  alacrity,  those  assigned  to  that  duty  taking  post 
n the  rifle  pits,  half  full  of  water,  without  a murmur.  A heavy  fog 
mrouded  everything  from  view  as  the  day  dawned,  and  we  waited 


104  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AN©  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XYIIL 

anxiously  its  lifting,  in  order  to  open  fire  on  the  enemy  from  our  bat- 
teries. At  G a.  m.  the  evacuation  of  the  place  was  reported,  as  stated 
in  my  report  of  the  14th  instant,*  as  general  of  the  trenches. 

Under  very  considerable  privations  and  hardships,  under  the  severe- 
ordeal  of  long  exposure  to  the  shot  and  shell  of  the  enemy  without 
power  to  reply,  all  the  various  regiments,  both  officers  and  men,  who 
have  been  under  my  orders,  have  deserved  commendation. 

Transports  having  reached  us  through  a channel  cut  with  enormous 
labor  under  the  direction  of  Colonel  Bissell,  on  a suggestion  advanced 
by  the  subscriber,  March  17,  1862,  the  Second  Division  embarked  on 
them  April  7,  to  cross  the  Mississippi,  which  was  accomplished  in  gal- 
lant style,  but  without  opposition,  the  gunboats  Carondelet  and  Pitts- 
burgh, under  Captain  Walke,  having  in  dashing  style  silenced  the  en- 
emy’s shore  batteries.  The  division  marched  4 miles  in  the  direction 
of  Tipton ville  and  bivouacked,  lying  upon  their  arms.  At  dawn,  April 
8, 1862,  we  pushed  forward,  and  learned  as  we  advanced  of  the  evac- 
uation of  Island  No.  10,  and  subsequently  of  the  surrender  of  the  whole 
force  of  the  enemy.  Arrived  at  Tip  ton  ville,  the  Second  Division  was 
detailed  as  guard  for  the  prisoners  of  war.  The  deportment  of  the  offi 
cers  and  men  towards  them  was  worthy  of  the  highest  praise.  It  was 
that  of  brave  and  generous  men  toward  a discomfited  enemy,  and  pro- 
duced upon  the  minds  of  the  prisoners  of  war  a marked  effect.  After 
exposure  of  no  ordinary  kind,  without  tents  and  only  partial  rations, 
having  accomplished  the  service  assigned  to  the  Second  Division,  it 
returned  to  New  Madrid. 

Col.  G.  W.  Gumming,  Fifty-first  Illinois,  and  the  troops  under  his 
command,  deserve  marked  commendation  for  the  energy  and  devotion 
exhibited  in  caring  for  the  prisoners  of  war  and  securing  the  captured 
property.  Col.  William  H.  Worthington,  Fifth  Iowa,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  and  Col.  Nicholas  Perczel,  Tenth  Iowa,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  showed  on  all  occasions  so  much  promptitude,  so  much  atten- 
tion to  the  health  and  welfare  as  well  as  instruction  of  the  brigades  undei 
their  respective  commands — the  camp  of  the  Second  Division  exciting 
the  emulation  of  the  whole  army — as  to  prove  them  well  fitted  for  their 
responsible  positions,  and  inspiring  the  men  and  officers  under  their  or 
ders  with  a confidence  which  could  not  fail  to  prove  of  the  highest  value 
in  an  engagement. 

April  12  the  division  embarked  on  transports  and  proceeded  down 
the  Mississippi  Biver  toward  Fort  Pillow,  reaching  a point  5 miles 
above  it  Sunday,  April  13.  Here  reconnaissances  on  the  Arkansas 
shore  were  pushed  by  Lieut.  William  B.  Gaw,  Volunteer  Engineers 
with  great  boldness  and  entire  success,  during  the  14th,  15th,  and  16th 
when  orders  were  received  to  proceed  to  Pittsburg  Landing,  Tenn. 

The  general  commanding  will  have  himself  observed  the  creditable 
and  zealous  devotion  and  unflinching  readiness  in  discharge  of  duty 
evinced  by  the  officers  composing  my  staff,  especially  First  Lieut.  Will 
iam  C.  Bussell,  Eighth  Missouri  Volunteers,  aide-de-camp  and  acting 
assistant  adjutant-general,  who  to  close  attention  to  his  office  duties 
added  coolness  and  gallantry  under  fire;  Lieut.  William  B.  Gaw,  Volunj 
teer  Engineers ; Brigade  Surg.  William  Varian,  who,  in  addition  to  his 
medical  duties,  intelligently  and  efficiently  performed,  has  at  all  times 
cheerfully  volunteered  his  services  as  an  aide-de-camp ; First  Lieut.  H 
Seymour  Burt,  Sixty-third  Ohio,  acting  aide-de  camp,  has  distingushed: 
himself  by  his  promptitude  and  gallantry ; First  Lieut.  Charles  A 


* Not  found. 


it  at.  xvni.l  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


105 


iazro,  Twenty-sixth  Illinois,  as  division  quartermaster,  has  greatly 
ssisted  me  by  his  attention  and  efficiency  in  the  discharge  of  his  ar 
uous  duties;  Second  Lieut.  James  E.  Merriman,  Twenty-sixth  Illi 
ois,  acting  aide-de-camp,  also  deserves  mention  for  his  active  efforts 
ntil  thrown  out  of  activity  by  indisposition.  I am  informed  by  Gen- 
ial Plummer  that  Lieut.  William  B.  Gaw,  aide-de  camp  on  my  staff', 
3iidered  to  him  very  important  services  in  the  construction  of  the  bat- 
3ries  at  Point  Pleasant  and  in  making  reconnaissances  of  the  vicinity, 
n justice  to  the  Second  Michigan  Cavalry,  I should  mention  the  cool 
nd  soldierly  bearing  of  a portion  of  it  detailed  by  the  commanding  gen- 
ral  as  an  escort  to  myself  on  a reconnaissance  ordered  by  him  March 
, 1862.  From  their  ranks  the  first  blood  was  drawn  on  that  day,  and 
lough,  to  their  chagrin,  early  ordered  back  by  me,  I am  satisfied  they 
ould  unhesitatingly  have  advanced  wherever  ordered.  Captain  Sands, 
Heventh  Ohio  Battery,  has  on  all  occasions  exhibited  fine  soldierly  con 
act,  as  the  accompanying  report  exhibits. 

I inclose  the  reports  of  Colonel  Worthington  and  Colonel  Perczel : 
Iso  that  of  Major  Robertson;  to  all  of  which  your  attention  is  invited. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SCHUYLER  HAMILTON, 

Brig.  Gen.  Vols .,  U.  S.  Army , Comdg.  Second  Division. 

Capt.  George  A.  Williams, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  12. 

eports  of  Col.  'William  H.  Worthington , Fifth  Iowa  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Brig.,  2d  Div.,  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

March  22,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  expedi- 
on  under  my  command  on  the  night  of  the  4th  instant: 

I left  camp  at  9 p.  m.,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Forty  - 
lird  Ohio  Infantry,  with  his  command,  and  two  guns  of  the  Missouri 
nd  two  of  the  Michigan  artillery,  together  with  five  companies  of  the 
ifth  Iowa  Infantry  and  two  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  of 
iy  brigade.  Proceeding  cautiously,  with  skirmishers  on  either  side 
f my  advance,  to  the  suburbs  of  the  town,  I came  upon  the  pickets  of 
le  enemy,  who  were  posted  in  strong  force.  Receiving  their  fire, 
hich  was  immediately  returned,  we  drove  them  back.  The  guns  of 
ie  Michigan  battery  were  immediately  brought  into  position  on  the 
ft  side  of  the  road  leading  into  town,  near  an  old  church,  and  opened 
fire  of  shell  upon  the  town.  In  a few  seconds  the  guns  of  the  M*is 
>uri  battery,  supported  by  Colonel  Smith’s  command,  were  brought 
do  position  upon  the  right  side  of  the  road,  and  opened  fire  immedi- 
ely.  The  enemy  responded  with  very  heavy  guns,  and  soon  obtained 
ir  exact  range  and  distance ; but  few  of  their  shells  exploded,  their 
re  coming  from  one  gunboat  stationed  at  the  lower  fort,  one  opposite 
ic  town,  and  one  above  the  town.  Our  firing  continued  until  the 
nmunition  of  the  artillery  was  nearly  exhausted,  when  the  entire 
)mmand  was  withdrawn  in  good  order  to  the  camp. 

The  conduct  of  all  the  troops  engaged,  both  officers  and  men,  was 


106 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ouap.  XVU 

creditable  to  themselves  and  our  command,  this  being  the  first  tin 
ever  under  fire. 

I regret  to  state  that  we  lost  1 man  killed  from  Company  A,  of  tl 
Fifth  Iowa  Infantry ; one  arm  broken  in  Company  I,  of  the  same  rep 
ment ; these  being  the  only  casualties  worthy  of  notice. 

I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

W.  H.  WOBTHIHGTOH, 
Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade , Second  Division. 
Lieut.  William  C.  Bussell, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Second  Division, 

Army  of  the  Mississippi , March  22,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  pa 
taken  by  my  brigade  in  the  attack  upon  Hew  Madrid  on  the  71 
instant : 

Being  ordered  by  Major-General  Pope  to  repair  with  my  brigade 
a point  in  the  rear  of  the  upper  part  of  the  town  of  Hew  Madrid  ; 
near  as  could  be  reached  without  being  exposed  to  the  view  of  tl 
enemy  and  there  await  an  attack  to  be  made  by  General  Stanley,  wii 
his  division,  upon  the  lower  part  of  the  town,  and  until  he  should  luu 
drawn  off  the  troops  from  the  upper  fort  and  all  the  gunboats,  with  tl 
exception  of  the  one  anchored  at  the  mouth  of  the  bayou,  just  abo? 
(he  upper  portion  of  the  town,  with  a view  of  then  attempting  to  drb 
off  with  my  riflemen  the  gunboat  from  the  position  then  occupied  ai 
effect  a lodgment  of  my  brigade  within  the  trenches  of  the  upper  foi 
having  arrived  at  the  point  designated  by  Lieutenant  Kelly,  of  tl 
United  States  Cavalry,  who  was  sent  by  General  Pope  as  aide  ai 
guide,  my  brigade  was  formed  in  line  of  battle,  and  skirmishers  ai 
vanced.  I then  awaited  the  attack  by  General  Stanley.  As  soon  { 
he  commenced  firing  upon  the  enemy  they  commenced  throwing  sliel 
into  the  woods  occupied  by  my  troops,  evidently  expecting  the  ma 
attack  to  come  from  that  quarter.  Instead  of  General  Stanley’s  fi 
drawing  the  enemy’s  fire  to  the  lower  part  of  the  town,  as  expected,  | 
brought  two  boats  from  the  lower  fort  in  addition  to  the  four  gunboa 
lying  at  the  upper  fort  when  the  attack  was  commenced.  I tin 
ordered  a forward  movement  of  my  brigade,  with  a view  to  co-opera 
with  and  support  the  left  of  General  Stanley’s  division.  My  skirmis 
ers  soon  fell  in  with  the  Sixty-tliird  Ohio  Infantry,  of  General  Stanley 
division,  and  my  brigade  was  halted.  General  Stanley  himself  soc 
appeared,  to  whom  I reported.  He,  deeming  it  utterly  impractical 
to  make  a successful  assault  with  the  gunboats  in  the  position  thcj 
occupied,  ordered  the  entire  command  to  take  position  under  cover 
the  woods,  and  sent  to  headquarters  for  further  instructions.  Wliil; 
waiting  for  these  the  enemy  continued  to  throw  shell  over  us.  Upc 
the  return  of  the  messenger  1 was  ordered  by  General  Stanley  i 
return  to  camp.  This  was  done  in  perfect  order  by  the  troops  cob 
prising  the  brigade,  the  enemy  in  the  mean  time  continuing  to  fi j 
upon  us. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  yours, 

W.  II.  VVOBTHIHGTOH, 
Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade , Second  Division . 

Lieut.  William  C.  Bussell, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


)HAP.  XVIII. J HEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  107 

No.  13. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  Nr.  Robertson,  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry. 


Hdqrs.  Fifth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

March  6,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  an  order  issued  from  Col.  W.  H.  Worthington, 
blfth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade,  Second  Division,  Army 
)f  the  Mississippi,  I took  three  companies  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  and 
wo  companies  (A  and  B)  of  the  Fifth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry  to  Col. 
a.  Granger,  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  and  was  by  him  ordered 
;o  deploy  the  two  Iowa  and  two  of  the  Indiana  companies  as  skirmishers 
o atttack  the  town  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  on  the  north. 

Throwing  out  my  skirmishers,  I advanced  upon  and  engaged  the 
memy’s  pickets  about  400  yards  north  of  the  town  plat,  in  a large  corn 
ield,  driving  them  to  their  guard  quarters  within  the  town.  Pressing 
fiosely  upon  them,  and  seeing  that  they  were  supported  by  400  or  500 
nfantry  and  a piece  of  light  artillery,  I sheltered  my  men  behind  a 
ence,  awaiting  my  support,  the  Forty-sixth  Indiana  Regiment  being 
lesignated  for  that  purpose.  After  keeping  my  men  thus  protected 
or  a length  of  time,  I sent  word  to  Colonel  Granger  by  one  of  his  aides 
>f  my  position  and  discoveries,  and  requested  orders  to  advance  or  re- 
ire,  when  I received  orders  to  retire  to  the  middle  of  the  corn  field, 
vhich  I did  in  good  order,  This  position  I held  nearly  an  hour,  when 
! was  ordered  by  Colonel  (Granger  to  withdraw  my  skirmishers  and  re- 
urn to  camp. 

It  affords  me  pleasure  to  compliment  the  promptness,  coolness  and 
nergy  of  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  throughout. 

Our  loss  consisted  of  1 man  killed  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  and  2 
>f  the  Fifth  Iowa  wounded. 

W.  S.  ROBERTSON, 

Major , Fifth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Lieut.  B.  F.  Patterson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

[Indorsement.] 

Camp  in  front  of  New  Madrid, 

March  6,  1862. 

As  commander  of  the  column  mentioned  within,  which  moved  upon 
few  Madrid  yesterday,  it  affords  me  much  satisfaction  to  more  than 
orroborate  every  statement  of  the  modest  but  gallant  Major  Robertson. 
Iis  officers  and  men,  under  a terrific  fire  of  round  shot  and  shell  for 
ome  two  hours,  behaved  like  veterans,  and  quite  surprised  me  by  their 
oolness  and  indifference  to  the  danger  which  surrounded  them. 

Major  Robertson  was  especially  conspicuous,  never  dismounting  from 
iis  horse,  although  their  sharpshooters  tried  their  best  to  pick  him  off. 

Lieutenant  Gordon,  Fourth  United  States  Cavalry,  aide-de-camp,  U. 
>.  Army,  displayed  rare  courage  with  the  skirmishers,  and  deserve** 
special  notice. 

G.  GRANGER, 

Colonel , Commanding  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 


108 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


No.  14. 


Report  of  Col.  Nicholas  Perczel , Tenth  Iowa  Infantry , commanding  Second 

Brigade. 


On  Board  Steamboat  City  op  Alton, 

April  19,  1862. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  Special  Orders,  No.  11,  I have  the  honor  to 
report  as  follows : 

The  Tenth  Begiment  Iowa  Volunteers  and  Twenty-sixth  Begiment 
Missouri  Volunteers  formed  the  Second  Brigade  of  your  division,  then 
in  camp  near  New  Madrid.  On  the  12th  of  March  the  Second  Division 
had  been  ordered  out  in  the  morning  at  5 o’clock,  and  took  position  in 
the  center  of  the  line  of  battle  formed  by  the  whole  army  towards  New 
Madrid,  the  Second  Brigade  in  the  second  line.  At  3 o’clock  p.  m.  the 
Second  Division  had  been  ordered  back  to  camp.  The  13th,  at  3 o’clock 
in  the  morning,  we  marched  to  the  right  of  New  Madrid,  to  relieve  the 
division  of  General  Stanley,  and  had  to  protect  our  batteries  operating 
against  the  lower  fort  of  the  rebels.  The  Second  Brigade  was  drawn 
up  in  a corn  field,  a small  wooded  land  separating  them  from  the  rebel 
batteries.  According  to  your  orders,  a company  as  skirmishers  had 
been  thrown  forward  under  Captain  Bandleman,  who  at  7 o’clock  a.  m. 
reported  that  2 men  had  come  to  them  with  a flag  of  truce,  asserting 
that  New  Madrid  and  all  its  forts  had  been  evacuated  the  night  pre- 
vious by  the  rebels.  I reported  the  case  'to  you,  and  received  your 
orders  to  send  a field  officer  and  20  men  to  New  Madrid,  that  he  may 
inquire  if  the  statement  be  true.  I detailed  Major  McCalla,  accord- 
ingly, who  entered  the  rebel  forts,  found  them  deserted,  and  reported 
to  this  effect.  You  then  ordered  four  companies,  one  from  each  regi- 
ment of  your  division,  to  occupy  the  town  and  the  forts,  which  being 
accomplished,  the  Second  Brigade  was  ordered  back  into  camp. 

On  the  7th  of  April  the  Second  Brigade,  with  the  rest  of  your  divis- 
ion, marched  to  New  Madrid,  went  on  board  steamboat,  and  was  dis- 
embarked towards  evening  about  3 miles  below  New  Madrid.  The  line! 
of  march  having  been  ordered,  we  marched  about  4 miles  in  the  wakel 
of  the  troops  which  preceded  us,  and  bivouacked  in  the  woods. 

April  8,  in  the  morning,  renewed  our  march  at  9 o’clock  a.  m.  Bel 
eeived  the  news  of  the  evacuation  of  Island  No.  10  at  12  o’clock  m.J 
received  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  the  rebel  forces  to  General  Pope] 
at  2 o’clock  p.  m.  Arrived  at  Tipton ville,  encamped  there,  and  returned! 
April  10  to  our  camp  near  New  Madrid. 

The  men  and  officers  behaved  all  very  well.  The  greatest  order  was! 
sustained  throughout  the  whole  operations.  All  had  been  ready  andl 
expected  to  encounter  the  enemy,  and  I do  not  think  it  boastful  to  assert! 
that  the  Second  Brigade  of  your  fine  division  would  not  have  been  miss-1 
ing  in  the  hour  of  deadly  conflict. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  respectfully, 


N.  PEBOZEL, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div .,  Army  Mississippi. 


Lieut.  William  0.  Bussell, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Div.,  Army  Mississippi. 


HAP.  XVIII.]  new  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


109 


Ho.  15. 

leport  of  Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Fourth 

Division. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Division, 

Army  of  the  Mississippi , April  16,  1862. 
Sir  : The  operations  of  this  division  in  the  attack  on  Hew  Madrid, 
[o.,  consisted  only  in  driving  the  rebel  pickets  and  skirmishers  into 
leir  intrenchments  on  the  day  before  the  evacuation  of  the  place  by 
le  rebels.  On  the  morning  of  the  7th  of  April  instant  this  division 
as  embarked  on  steamboats,  with  intrenching  tools,  with  a view  to 
lake  a lodgment  on  the  Kentucky  shore  near  Watson’s  Landing, 
during  that  day  the  gunboat  Carondelet  had  dismantled  a small  fort 
b the  landing,  and  under  cover  of  the  gunboats  my  division  crossed, 
ich  regiment  landing  in  succession,  amid  the  cheers  of  the  men,  and 
ijoicing  in  the  success  of  Major-General  Pope’s  plans  for  the  reduction 
E:  Island  Ho.  10.  The  intrenching  tools  were  piled  quickly  on  the  rebel 
reastworks,  it  being  apparent  that  success  in  capturing  the  flying 
ibels  depended  entirely  upon  rapid  marching  and  not  upon  field 
orks. 

The  First  Brigade,  commanded  by  Col.  James  D.  Morgan,  consisting 
f the  Tenth  Illinois  Regiment,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  John  Tillson, 
ad  the  Sixteenth  Illinois  Regiment,  commanded  by  Col.  R.  F.  Smith, 
ere  ordered  to  take  the  advance.  The  Second  Brigade,  commanded 
y Col.  G.  W.  Cumming,  consisted  of  the  Twenty-second  Illinois  Regi- 
Lent,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hart,  and  the  Fifty-first  Illi- 
ois  Regiment,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bradley,  followed, 
itli  orders  to  send  small  parties  upon  the  road  leading  from  our  line 
t’  march  and  report  the  position  of  the  rebels  if  found.  We  had 
Ivanced  but  a short  distance  before  our  advance  guard  and  flankers 
immenced  sending  in  prisoners.  They  were  ordered  to  the  rear,  and 
ir  march  continued  as  rapidly  as  it  could  safely  be  done.  One  of  the 
arties  sent  out  by  Colonel  Cumming  came  suddenly  upon  Island  Ho. 
),  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  transports,  and  would  have  captured  the 
hole  by  2 o’clock  p.  m.  of  that  day  but  for  my  orders  to  Colonel  Cum- 
ing to  keep  as  near  the  First  Brigade  a^ossible,  in  order  to  support 
ie  if  I became  engaged  with  the  rebels. 

We  had  advanced  but  a few  miles  before  a small  force  of  the  rebel 
ivalry  was  observed,  but  they  fled  on  our  approach.  After  marching 
bout  9 miles  we  discovered  the  rebels,  well  posted  and  in  force,  con- 
sting  of  2,500  infantry,  150  cavalry,  supported  by  five  pieces  of  excel- 
nt  field  guns.  I ordered  Colonel  Morgan  to  form  a line  for  an  attack, 
hich  was  promptly  and  well  done.  The  Tenth  Regiment  formed  in 
ne,  and  the  Sixteenth  formed  in  column  of  divisions  to  support  the  line 
b any  point  or  to  make  flank  movements  if  required ; but  before  we 
>uld  reach  the  rebels  they  fled.  Again  they  formed,  and  stood  until 
ir  skirmishers  fired  once,  killing  1 of  their  men  and  wounding  another, 
ad  then  fled.  The  third  time  they  formed,  and  on  our  approach  fled 
3 before.  We  continued  our  march  to  Tiptonville,  as  General  Pope 
irected,  a distance  of  14  miles  from  our  landing.  The  brigade  was 
ell  encamped  in  tents  left  by  the  flying  rebels.  A mile  and  a half  in 
ir  rear  Colonel  Cumining’s  command  was  lying  upon  their  arms.  To 
ir  left  and  nearly  in  front  of  Colonel  Cumming  the  rebels  were  en- 
imped.  During  the  night  the  pickets  of  the  First  Brigade  took  359 
risoners. 


110 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYUI 


At  2 o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  8th  a flag  of  truce,  borne  by  the  adjutant 
general  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall,  was  conducted  to  my  lieadquar 
ters.  He  brought  a written  communication  from  General  Mackall 
tendering  the  unconditional  surrender  of  his  entire  force,  which  was 
accepted,  and  during  the  day  was  surrendered  about  3,900  men,  besides 
the  prisoners  taken  during  the  day  before  and  straggling  parties  picket 
up  by  scouts.  The  whole  force  captured  exceeded  5,000  men.  A larg* 
amount  of  heavy  and  light  artillery,  muskets,  stores,  &c.,  were  als< 
taken.  I beg  leave  to  refer  General  Pope  to  the  reports  of  Colone 
Morgan  and  Colonel  Gumming,  transmitted  herewith.  In  Colonel  Cum 
ming’s  report  will  be  found  a very  clear  statement  of  all  public  property 
taken  from  the  enemy. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  referring  to  the  very  prompt  auc 
energetic  manner  in  which  my  officers  and  men  discharged  their  duties 
With  a brave  and  willing  command  an  officer  can  accomplish  any  duty 
required  of  him.  I am  under  obligations  to  Colonel  Scott,  Assistan 
Secretary  of  War,  and  to  Major  Butler,  of  General  Pope’s  staff,  fo 
their  efficient  assistance  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  instant. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

E.  A.  PAINE, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Fourth  Division , 

Maj.  Speed  Butler, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


No.  16. 

Reports  of  Col.  James  I).  Morgan , Tenth  Illinois  Infantry , commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Tenth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Bird’s  Fointj  March  3,  1862.  | 
General  : I returned  last  evening  with  Captain  Noleman’s  cavalry 
The  expedition  you  ordered  to  Sikeston,  under  my  command,  was  no 
as  successful  as  I could  have  wished.  Jeff.  Thompson  escaped,  as  usual 
After  running  him  some  t.4tenty-four  hours  he  made  a stand  some « 
miles  below  Sikeston,  on  the  New  Madrid  road.  He  was  attacked  b; 
Captain  Noleman’s  First  Illinois  Cavalry ; Company  K,  Twenty-second 
Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Buck 
anan,  and  a detachment  of  the  Tenth  Illinois  Volunteers  of  30  men 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Gallion,  same  regiment  (Company 
D).  A running  fight  took  place  and  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  Jen 
Thompson,  the  capture  of  three  1-pounder  cannon,  one  flag,  one  killed 
several  wounded,  and  a number  of  prisoners,  including  a captain  am 
lieutenant.  During  the*  engagement  two  companies  Seventh  Illinoi 
Cavalry  made  a charge  and  captured  one  piece  of  artillery ; the  otlie 
two  were  taken  by  Captain  Noleman’s  company. 

The  pursuit  was  continued  to  within  4 miles  of  New  Madrid  ; som< 
say  two  miles  and  a half.  Captain  Burrell’s  company  (First  Illinois 
Cavalry)  did  not  come  up  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  engagement.  Th< 
Twenty-second  Illinois  Volunteers  were  on  the  march  to  Sikeston  oi 
the  Benton  road,  and  the  Tenth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers  9 mile 
north  of  Sikeston.  From  all  the  information  I could  get  it  was  though 
impossible  for  Jett'.  Thompson  to  return  by  any  other  than  the  Bentoi 


1Ap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


Ill 


>ad,  or  I should  have  had  all  my  command  at  Sikeston  except  the 
rivalry. 

Captain  Noleman  deserves  credit  lor  his  activity  and  perseverance  in 
le  pursuit  and  the  part  taken  in  the  engagement.  Like  credit  is  due 
> the  officers  and  men  of  the  infantry  engaged. 

The  cannon  and  prisoners  taken  were  left  in  charge  of  General  Pope’s 
nnmand. 

Yours,  truly, 

JAMES  1).  MORGAN, 
Colonel  Tenth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers. 

General  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Cairo  and  Dependencies. 


Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Fourth  Division, 

Camp  near  New  Madrid , Mo.,  April  11,  1802. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  part  taken  by  the 
rigade  under  my  command  came  so  directly  under  your  personal 
bservation  and  direction  during  the  recent  movements  of  the  Army 
f the  Mississippi  that  I deem  it  entirely  unnecessary  to  make  a formal 
ad  detailed  report.  Our  march  to  the  transports ; our  embarkation ; 
’ossing  the  river ; our  disembarking ; our  march  to  Tiptonville ; the 
fcter  rout  of  the  rebels  ; the  number  of  prisoners  taken  during  the  day 
ad  night  of  the  7th  instant:  the  arrival  of  officer  at  our  picket  lines, 
id  the  surrender  with  which  he  was  intrusted  of  General  Mackall  and 
is  whole  command ; the  arrival  of  the  Second  Brigade  at  our  camp  on 
le  morning  of  the  8th  instant,  and  the  rapid  march  from  Tiptonville 
t the  Tenth  and  Sixteenth  Regiments  to  the  upper  ferry  at  Reelfoot 
ake,  and  the  success  met  with  in  the  additional  capture  of  prisoners, 
ad  our  safe  return  to  this  our  present  camp  without  the  loss  of  a 
ngle  man,  all  took  place  under  your  own  eye  and  observation.  I will 
lly  add  that  every  officer  and  man  of  my  command  did  his  whole  duty 
itli  a promptness  and  soldierlike  coolness  that  met  my  entire  appro- 
ition,  as  1 hope  it  will  yours. 

JAMES  D.  MORGAN, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade , Fourth  Division. 
General  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Fourth  Division. 


No.  17. 

eport  of  Col.  Gilbert  W.  Gumming , Fifty -first  Illinois  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Brig.,  4th  Div.,  Army  op  the  Mississippi, 
Camp  near  New  Madrid , April  10,  1862. 
General  : In  compliance  with  orders  received  from  your  headquar- 
ts  on  Monday  morning,  April  7,  1862,  I marched  with  the  Second 
rigade  of  your  division,  consisting  of  the  twenty-second  and  Fifty- 
;st  Illinois  Regiments,  to  the  upper  fort  at  New  Madrid,  when  we  em 
liked  on  steamers  and  proceeded  down  the  river,  in  company  with  the 
irst  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Morgan.  We  landed  at  the  enemy’s  bat- 
ry  on  the  Kentucky  shore,  about  6 miles  below  New  Madrid,  near 


112  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVlll 

Watson’s  Landing,  the  guns  of  this  battery  having  been  silenced  by  the 
enemy  fleeing  on  our  approach.  Two  large  guns,  a howitzer,  and  a 
quantity  of  ammunition  were  the  trophies  obtained  at  this  battery, 
From  this  place  we  proceeded  towards  Tiptonville,  Term.,  to  which 
place  we  were  informed  the  enemy  had  retreated.  After  marching 
about  li  miles  from  Watson’s  Landing  I was  informed  that  the  enemy 
had  left  some  valuable  property  in  an  artillery  camp  about  half  a mile 
on  our  right  and  that  some  negroes  were  plundering  the  property  left 
there.  I immediately  halted  the  brigade,  and,  taking  with  me  a com 
pany  from  each  regiment,  proceeded  to  this  camp,  and  found  there  a 
large  ammunition  wagon,  a forge  wagon,  and  some  tents  and  bedding, 
all  in  good  order,  and  was  also  informed  that  two  field  pieces  which  tin 
enemy  had  attempted  to  take  with  them  had  been  abandoned  some  dis 
tance  from  this  camp.  I stationed  a guard  at  this  place  to  prevent  tin 
captured  property  from  being  plundered,  and  sent  an  officer  back  tc 
the  gunboats  to  have  a force  detailed  to  take  the  field  pieces,  ammuni 
tion  wagon,  and  other  property  found  here  to  the  landing.  The  bri 
gade  was  then  ordered  forward,  and  overtook  the  First  Brigade  somd 
4 or  5 miles  from  the  landing,  at  a point  where  the  road  branches  ora 
to  Island  No.  10. 

Here  I received  your  order  to  reconnoiter  this  road  as  tar  as  tin 
river.  I immediately  threw  forward  two  companies  as  skirmishers! 
one  on  each  side  of  the  road,  and  in  this  way  proceeded  about  a mile! 
which  brought  me  to  the  river  and  in  full  view  of  the  famous  Island 
No.  10.  Here  we  took  some  5 or  6 prisoners,  who  informed  us  that  thJ 
enemy  had  not  over  500  men  at  the  island,  the  rest  having  retreated 
towards  Tiptonville.  Upon  receiving  this  information  I at  first  de 
termined  to  take  the  island,  but  finding  no  boats  with  which  to  read 
it,  and  having  received  your  order  to  push  on  to  Tiptonville  after  mat 
in g this  reconnaissance,  1 was  obliged  to  abandon  the  idea  of  taking 
the  island,  and  proceeded  with  my  brigade  to  within  1J  miles  of  Tip 
tonville,  where  I learned  the  enemy  was  encamped.  Having  als< 
learned  that  you  had  passed  the  enemy’s  left  with  the  First  Brigade 
and  cut  oft*  his  retreat  in  that  direction,  we  took  a position  on  his  righ 
flank,  with  our  left  resting  on  an  impenetrable  swamp  which  extender 
along  the  enemy’s  rear,  and  sent  an  orderly7  officer  to  inform  you  of  my 
position.  By  these  movements  the  enemy  was  prevented  from  moving 
in  any  direction  except  towards  the  river,  where  two  of  our  gunboat; 
were  already  stationed. 

In  this  position  we  posted  a strong  guard,  and  slept  upon  our  arms 
in  sight  of  the  enemy’s  camp-fires  and  within  hearing  of  his  drums 
About  midnight  Captain  Houghtaling  joined  us  wfitli  part  of  his  bat 
tery.  Here  we  expected  to  give  the  enemy  battle,  but  finding  them 
selves  hemmed  in,  they  surrendered  without  striking  a blow.  Sooi. 
after  the  surrender  I was  ordered  by  Major-General  Pope  to  tak<| 
charge  of  the  prisoners,  who  were  about  3,000  in  number,  including 
Generals  Mackall  and  Gantt,  and  for  this  purpose  formed  my  brigade 
on  two  sides  of  an  open  square.  The  prisoners  wrere  formed  in  closJ 
column  of  divisions,  guarded  by  Houghtaling’s  battery  in  front,  tin 
Twenty-second  Illinois  on  their  right  flank,  the  Fifty-first  Illinois  in  thei  i 
rear,  and  their  left  towards  the  timber,  which  was  soon  after  occupier 
by  other  troops.  I w as  also  ordered  byr  General  Pope  to  take  charge  o 
the  arms  and  property  taken  with  the  enemy,  and  for  this  purpose  kep 
my  brigade  on  duty  during  the  day  and  through  the  terrible  st-orn. 
Tuesday  night  without  shelter  and  during  the  day  on  Wednesday, 


ip.  XYHL]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  113 

ien  both  regiments  were  sent  to  New  Madrid  in  charge  of  the  pris- 
ers  and  a portion  of  the  captured  property. 

The  kind  and  quantity  of  property  captured  I beg  leave  to  specify  in  a 
iort  by  itself,  and  cannot  close  this  report  without  referring  to  the 
od  conduct  of  my  command.  I am  greatly  indebted  to  the  officers 
both  regiments  for  the  energetic  and  ready  manner  in  which  my 
iers  were  executed,  and  also  to  the  men  for  their  willing  obedience, 
rough  the  fatigue  of  the  march,  exposure  to  the  worst  of  storms, 
fchout  shelter  through  the  whole  of  one  night  and  day,  and  the  con- 
tnt  duty  required,  I am  proud  to  say  that  both  the  officers  and  men 
[•formed  their  entire  duty  with  cheerfulness  and  zeal,  which  entitles 
3m  all  to  great  praise.  I may,  therefore,  be  pardoned  the  indulgence 
a gratified  pride  in  the  soldierly  qualities  and  conduct  of  the  officers 
d men  of  my  command. 

[ have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  CUMMING, 

Colonel  51st  III.  Vols.,  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 
Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Fourth  Division , Army  of  the  Mississippi. 


No.  18. 

port  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  B.  Plummer , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Fifth 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  District  of  the  Mississippi, 
Camp  near  Point  Pleasant , Mo.,  March  27,  1862. 
Sir  : In  compliance  with  the  request  of  the  general  commanding  I 
ve  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  my 
vision  since  I assumed  command  of  it : 

[ marched  with  my  command  from  our  camp  near  New  Madrid  about 
o’clock  m.  on  the  5th  instant  for  this  point.  The  command  was 
nposed  of  the  Eleventh  Missouri,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Panabaker; 
3 Twenty-sixth  and  Forty-seventh  Illinois,  under  Colonels  Loomis 
I Bryner ; a squadron  of  cavalry  of  the  Second  and  Third  Michigan, 
nmanded  by  Captain  Godley,  of  the  former  regiment;  Captain 
well’s  battery  of  four  pieces  of  the  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery, 
d one  company  of  Engineer  troops,  under  command  of  Major  Hasie. 
ree  other  companies  of  cavalry  which  accompanied  me  were  dis- 
buted  by  the  general’s  order  as  picket  guards  along  the  road, 
die  inarch  was  made  by  a circuitous  route,  for  the  purpose  of  avoid- 
> 5 miles  of  road  upon  the  river  bank,  upon  which  we  would  have 
?n  exposed  to  a fire  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats.  My  object  was  to 
ich  Point  Pleasant  about  dark,  take  possession  of  the  town,  and 
ablish  my  batteries  and  rifle  pits  during  the  night.  But  at  dark  I 
md  I was  between  3 and  4 miles  from  the  town,  my  men  extremely 
igued  by  a march  of  14  miles  over  a very  bad  road,  and  unfitted  for 
*or.  I therefore  concluded  to  bivouac  and  wait  for  daylight,  which 
id  without  fires. 

During  the  night  the  town  was  reconnoitered,  and  I ascertained 
3re  were  none  of  the  enemy’s  forces  there.  Early  on  the  following 
ruing  I approached  with  my  whole  command  within  a mile  and  a 
8 R r — VOL  VIII 


114  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII] 

quarter  of  the  town,  and  then  moved  rapidly  forward,  with  a body  o 
infantry  as  skirmishers,  followed  by  a section  of  artillery  and  a squad 
ron  of  cavalry,  into  the  town,  which  we  surprised.  One  of  the  enemy’ 
transports,  the  Mary  Keene,  was  lying  at  the  landing,  and  anothe 
upon  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  I regret  to  say  that  we  were  did 
covered  by  the  enemy,  and  both  boats  were  thereby  enabled  to  escape! 
though  not  without  serious  injury.  Several  men  were  killed  on  th 
former  by  our  infantry  and  several  shots  from  our  artillery  passej 
through  her. 

The  approach  of  an  enemy’s  gunboat  induced  me  to  withdraw  thj 
artillery  and  cavalry  from  the  town.  The  gunboat  immediately  openeJ 
its  guns  upon  the  town,  without  regard  to  the  inhabitants,  who  werj 
their  friends,  but  was  driven  off  by  the  infantry. 

During  the  following  night  I established  the  guns  in  batteries  oj 
the  river  bank  and  opened  rifle  pits  for  about  280  men,  who  werj 
selected  from  the  different  regiments  for  this  duty  and  placed  unde  I 
command  of  a gallant  officer,  Capt.  A.  J.  Weber,  of  the  Eleventh  MiJ 
souri  Volunteers.  I subsequently,  on  the  17th  instant,  placed  th 
troops  in  town,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tinkham,  of  th 
Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers,  who  did  good  service. 

Not  supposing  the  commanding  general  desires  a diary  of  each  day] 
bombardment,  I would  simply  remark  that  the  enemy’s  gunboats  coil 
tinued  to  pass  and  repass  this  point  up  to  the  13th  instant,  the  day  <1 
the  abandonment  of  New  Madrid,  and  on  every  occasion  opened  theij 
guns  upon  us.  As  my  guns  were  not  sufficiently  heavy  to  do  theij 
any  injury,  I gave  orders  that  they  should  not  reply.  At  first  thej 
approached  our  shore,  but  were  in  every  instance  driven  off  by  or] 
sharpshooters.  Learning  wisdom  from  experience,  they  finally  passel 
up  and  down  close  to  the  opposite  shore,  and,  the  river  being  here  | 
mile  and  a half  wide,  they  threw  their  shells  at  us  with  impunity.  0 
the  11th  instant  a battery  of  two  heavy  guns  was  established  by  tU 
enemy  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river,  immediately  opposite  thj 
town,  supported,  as  I have  since  ascertained,  by  600  infantry,  whicj 
has  fired  upon  us  daily.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  enemy  ha\| 
thrown  into  this  town  since  it  has  been  occupied  by  me  several  hundrel 
shots  and  shells  without  killing  or  wounding  a man  of  my  divisioij 
The  only  injury  they  have  done  us  is  the  killing  of  one  artillery  horsJ 
Many  of  their  shots  have  been  well  directed,  and  shells  have  burd 
over  our  guns  and  rifle  pits  without  effect.  On  Sunday,  the  16th  hi 
stant,  three  gunboats  passed  up  and  opened  fire  upon  us,  in  conjund 
tion  with  their  battery  on  the  opposite  shore.  One  of  them  cana 
within  20  yards  of  the  shore  and  attempted  to  land,  but  was  driven  oj 
as  usual.  On  their  return  they  resumed  the  conflict.  They  tlirel 
about  100  shells  into  the  town  without  effect,  except  upon  the  housdj 
of  their  friends. 

On  the  12th  instant  the  Eighth  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  under  LieJ 
tenant-Colonel  Bobbins,  arrived  here  as  a part  of  my  division,  and  cl 
the  night  of  the  11th  instant  eight  companies  of  the  Seventh  Illinol 
Cavalry  also  arrived,  under  Colonel  Kellogg. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d  instant,  in  compliance  with  the  general^ 
order,  I dispatched  Major  Rawalt,  with  five  companies  of  the  Sevent 
Illiuois  Cavalry,  to  pursue  the  marauding  parties  of  Jeff.  Thompson 
who  were  robbing  through  the  country  west  of  us.  The  cavalry  ove  i 
took  a small  party  of  the  enemy  on  the  plank  road,  about  20  mihfl 
from  here,  and  after  skirmishing  with  them  for  a short  time  the  latter 
succeeded  in  wounding  4 of  our  men,  2 of  whom  have  since  die<l 


*ap.  xvm.l  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


115 


'wing  to  the  character  of  the  country  I did  not  deem  it  prudent  the 
ivalry  should  continue  the  pursuit.  I inclose  herewith  Major  Bawalt’s 
?port  of  the  affair.* 

Since  the  establishment  of  the  battery  of  siege  guns  below,  the  gun- 
Dats  have  not  troubled  us. 

I would  remark,  in  conclusion,  that  all  the  troops  of  this  division  who 
ive  been  under  fire  have  behaved  well,  and  that  I am  much  indebted 
> Captain  Godley,  of  the  Second  Michigan  Cavalry,  for  the  untiring 
lergy  with  which  he  reconnoitered  the  country  around  this  point,  and 
so  to  Captain  Flad,  Engineer  officer,  and  Lieutenant  Gaw,  of  Gen- 
al  Hamilton’s  staff,  who  superintended  the  establishment  of  the  guns 
id  the  construction  of  the  rifle  pits. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  B.  PLUMMEK, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Maj.  Speed  Butler, 

A.  A.  6r.,  Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  the  Miss.,  Camp  near  New  Madrid , Mo. 


No.  19. 

ports  of  Col.  Napoleon  B.  Buford , Twenty -seventh  Illinois  Infantry. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 
Opposite  Island  No.  10,  March  17,  1802 — 8 p.  m. 
Sir  : Flag-Officer  Foote’s  flotilla,  with  my  command,  arrived  here  on 
e morning  of  the  15th.  Ho  serious  demonstration  was  made  until 
sterday  morning.  I have  reconnoitered  in  person  the  Missouri  shore 
ch  day  opposite  the  whole  line  of  the  enemy’s  defenses.  Late  yes- 
rday  afternoon  I planted  one  6-pounder  opposite  the  floating  battery 
the  enemy,  mounting  nine  heavy  guns  in  rows,  and  below  two  earth- 
>rks,  mounting  four  and  five  guns,  on  Island  No.  10,  and  opened  fire. 
Y 6-pounder  fell  short  each  of  the  seven  shots  fired.  The  enemy  threw 
ells  over  me  a quarter  of  a mile. 

To-day  I have  observed  the  shore  and  have  twice  been  under  fire. 
ie  country  is  so  overflowed  that  my  troops  can  find  no  ground  to 
irch  on  except  the  margin  of  the  river  and  the  fields  filled  with 
>ughs,  which  are  from  2 to  5 feet  deep,  and  ponds.  The  clearings 
tered  about  one-quarter  of  a mile  back,  and  the  forests  are  impass- 
le. 

Lieutenant  Lyford  arrived  this  afternoon,  with  four  siege  guns  (24- 
unders)  with  him,  and  Captain  Maynadier  and  I have  again  recon- 
itered  for  a position  to  place  them,  and  can  only  do  so  under  fire, 
e shall  try  to  erect  earthworks  to-night.  To  get  to  the  place  the 
ns  must  be  drawn  across  a slough  4 feet  deep.  He  has  no  artillerists, 
bave  the  Twenty-seventh  and  Forty-second  Illinois  Volunteers,  the 
fteenth  Wisconsin,  and  the  Fourteenth  Missouri,  one  company  of  the 
cond  Illinois  Artillery,  which  is  new,  with  four  6-pounders,  and  one 
npany  of  cavalry.  If  we  do  not  get  a footing  on  the  other  side  of  the 
er  this  force  is  enough,  except  artillerists.  My  transports  are  landed 
st  to  an  overflowed  bank,  so  that  I cannot  communicate  with  them 
iept  in  a boat.  The  gunboats  and  the  mortars  have  thrown  shells 
parently  into  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  the  tents  on  Island  No.  10  have 
en  removed.  I have  seen  the  Grampus  and  four  transports. 

* See  expedition  to  Little  River,  March  23,  post. 


116 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVin. 

To-day  the  cannonading  has  been  sublime,  but  at  night  the  enemy 
continued  to  return  fire  with  one  gun  from  his  upper  battery,  which  is 
very  low.  I doubt  not  the  noble  efforts  of  the  flotilla,  conducted  as 
they  are  with  courage,  skill,  and  judgment,  will  be  successful;  but  il 
the  enemy  holds  out  as  he  has  done  to-day  it  will  take  time  and  persej 
verance. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  B.  BUFORD, 

Colonel , Commanding  U.  8.  Forces.  I 

General  Halleck. 


Hdqrs.  U.  S.  Forces  opposite  Island  No.  10,  Mo., 

March  31,  1862.  I 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  since  I have  been  in  command 
of  the  forces  at  this  place,  having  left  but  a small  number  of  troops  ai 
Columbus  and  a smaller  number  at  Hickman,  Ky.,  I have  learned  6 
daily  reconnaissances  of  rebel  cavalry  in  the  vicinity  of  the  latter  place 
and  that  two  regiments,  one  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry,  were  a 
Union  City,  who  were  in  railroad  and  telegraphic  communication  witl 
Humboldt,  where  there  was  a large  force. 

On  the  29th  instant  I received  letters  from  the  commanders  both  ai 
Columbus  and  Hickman,  each  expressing  the  desire  for  re- enforcements 
the  latter,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hogg,  proposing  that  on  the  arrival  d 
cavalry  re-enforcements  he  must  go  south  of  Union  City  and  destroy  a 
trestle  bridge  and  cut  the  telegraph  wire.  On  the  same  day  I recei\  e( 
dispatches  from  General  Strong,  at  Cairo,  who  intimated  that  I shoul< 
act  in  the  premises  on  my  own  judgment.  On  the  same  day  also  I ex 
hibited  all  my  dispatches  to  Flag-Officer  Foote,  and  suggested  to  hid 
that  if  my  forces  were  not  required  here  in  aid  of  his  operations  fo 
two  days  I would  take  a part  of  them  and  march  on  Union  City.  H 
heartily  concurred. 

On  the  30th,  at  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  I embarked  the  Twenty-seventh  Red 
iment  Illinois  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hai 
rington,  and  the  Fifteenth  Regiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  unde 
command  of  Colonel  Heg,  and  arrived  at  Hickman  at  12  m.,  when  I 
summoned  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hogg  to  join  me  immediately  with  liil 
two  companies  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  and  Captain  Hutchenl 
company  of  cavalry,  attached  by  General  McClernand  to  the  Twenty 
seventh  Regiment ; also  Captain  Sparrestrom’s  battery  of  four  6-poun(j 
ers.  I ordered  Lieutenant- Colonel  Foster,  of  the  Twenty-second  Red 
iment  Missouri  Volunteers,  with  his  four  companies,  to  remain  as  I 
reserve.  I also  conferred  with  Captain  Dove,  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  com 
manding  the  gunboat  Louisville,  and  communicated  to  him  my  plan 
Except  the  commanders  above  named  no  one  knew  my  plans.  I 

I gave  out  to  the  citizens  of  Hickman  that  on  the  hill  in  rear  of  tl) 
town  I would  review  all  the  troops.  The  people  from  the  country  r< 
mained  to  see  the  review.  At  2.30  o’clock  p.  m.  the  column  got  under  waj 
with  a light  train  and  one  day’s  rations  in  their  haversacks.  The  marcl 
was  in  the  following  order:  1st,  the  cavalry;  2d,  the  Twenty-seventj 
Regiment ; 3d,  the  company  of  artillery ; 4th,  the  Fifteenth  Wisconsij 
Regiment.  The  march  was  without  a halt  for  6 miles  on  a dusty  road 
the  thermometer  at  80°,  and  we  got  in  advance  of  the  persons  whom  j 
thought  would  be  likely  to  carry  the  intelligence  of  our  inarch  to  UnioJ 
City.  The  obstacle  we  encountered  was  at  Reelfoot  River ; the  rail 


tAP.  XVin.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


117 


►ad  and  country  bridges  had  both  been  destroyed,  the  banks  were 
reeipitate,  and  the  crossings  miry,  but  the  crossing  was  made  with 
acrity.  Beyond  the  route  was  through  a dense  woods,  flat  grounds, 
id  bad  roads.  At  7 p.  m.  it  was  too  dark  to  proceed,  so  1 ordered  a 
lit  in  a lane.  We  bivouacked,  two  companies  of  cavalry  in  front, 
•tillery  in  battery  in  the  lane,  the  Twenty-seventh  on  the  right,  the 
ifteentli  on  the  left,  and  Hutchens’  cavalry  in  the  rear.  I ordered  all 
ie  houses  in  the  vicinity  to  be  strictly  guarded.  I detained  every  one 
Mr.  Lawson’s  (a  rebel)  house.  I learned  he  had  been  apprised  of 
ir  advance  by  one  of  his  neighbors,  and  apprehended  information  had 
ached  Union  City. 

At  dawn  the  column  moved.  It  was  in  the  same  order  as  the  day 
Tore.  It  was  a little  over  4 miles  to  Union  City.  We  had  not  stopped 
r breakfast.  Before  7 a.  m.  we  were  in  sight  of  the  rebel  camp,  at  the 
stance  of  half  a mile.  I formed  my  plan  of  attack,  which  was  exe- 
ited  as  the  column  marched  up  in  succession.  First,  Lieutenant-Col- 
lel  Hogg  formed  his  cavalry  in  front  and  gallantly  led  it  on.  While 
was  forming  in  the  swampy  woods  the  rebel  pickets  fired  fifteen 
ots,  which  was  their  first  notice  of  our  approach.  The  Twenty-sev- 
th  Begiment  was  next  formed  in  line  of  battle  and  led  by  Lieutenant- 
don  el  Harrington  over  obstacles  in  perfect  order.  The  company  of 
tillery  was  led  by  Captain  Sparrestrom  through  an  opening  made  in 
e Twenty- seventh  for  their  passage.  While  passing  to  take  their 
•sition  the  enemy’s  cavalry  was  seen  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  about 
0 in  number,  opposite  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hogg,  who  opened  fire 
them  with  carbines.  The  rebel  infantry  was  seen  huddled  in  squads, 
it  did  not  form  in  line.  As  the  artillery  advanced,  led  gallantly  by 
tptain  Sparrestrom  and  followed  by  Major  Stolbrand,  who  was  suf- 
ring  from  a contusion  occasioned  by  a fall  from  his  horse  and  unable 
ride  but  full  of  enthusiasm,  Colonel  Heg  led  up  his  regiment  and 
fined  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left,  facing  the  rebel  cavalry,  which  out- 
nked  ours  in  that  direction.  Quickly  the  artillery  had  attained  the 
11  in  full  view  of  both  camps,  one  of  which  was  tents  and  the  other 
)oden  huts,  with  a parade  ground  of  about  40  acres  between  them, 
d opened  fire.  The  whistle  of  the  departing  engine  was  heard,  leav- 
? three  cars  at  the  depot,  and  the  stampede  of  infantry,  cavalry, 
>se  horses,  and  citizens  was  complete.  The  artillery  moved  forward, 
d the  cavalry  and  infantry  marched  into  the  camps. 

The  artillery  fired  twenty-seven  shots.  The  infantry  did  not  draw 
rigger.  By  my  order  Captain  Hutchens  made  a detour  to  the  right 
d captured  14  prisoners.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hogg,  with  one  com- 
ny,  went  into  Union  City  to  call  the  citizens  to  a conference  with  me. 

3 found  they  had  run  into  the  woods,  with  few  exceptions.  Our  work 
is  accomplished.  We  had  surprised  the  command  of  Col.  Edward 
ckett,  commanding  a brigade  of  one  regiment,  the  Twenty-first  Ten- 
ssee  Infantry,  numbering,  as  their  morning  report  shows  (we  cap- 
red  the  books),  616  men,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tilman, 
d one  regiment  of  cavalry,  commanded  by  Colonel  Jackson,  all  of 
lom  ran  before  they  could  see  how  large  a force  was  attacking  them, 
►rdered  both  camps  to  be  burned,  which  was  effectually  done.  Pow- 
r exploded  in  many  of  the  tents.  I captured  100  mules  and  horses 
d 12  wagons,  also  a lot  of  sabers  and  carbines,  which  were  brought 
. I had  the  telegraph  pole  next  the  depot  destroyed,  and  ran  the 
•ee  cars  away  from  the  depot,  took  out  the  baggage  and  mail  matter, 
d ordered  the  cars  set  on  fire.  I found  provisions  and  goods  in  the 
lroad  depot,  but  concluded  not  to  destroy  any  useful  buildings.  I 


118  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  XVIH 

loaded  up  all  the  wagons  we  took  with  the  articles  captured  and  coul 
not  bring  away  more.  The  troops  had  not  breakfasted,  were  wearj 
and  had  a march  of  15  miles  before  them.  In  two  hours  after  arrivin 
we  marched  in  the  same  order  we  had  advanced,  except  placing  Caj 
tain  Hutchens’  cavalry  company  as  a rear  guard.  We  captured  thre 
large  flags  and  two  guidons,  all  of  silk,  and  one  of  them  with  elegant! 
embroidered  letters,  u Victory  or  Death.” 

We  burned  all  the  baggage,  clothing,  and  provisions,  so  that  if  th 
enemy  returned  they  must  have  found  themselves  destitute.  I thin 
we  destroyed  50  trunks  and  more  than  100  stand  of  arms. 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  speak  of  the  good  conduct  of  all  th 
officers  and  men  under  my  command.  They  had  been  confined  fc 
fifteen  days  on  the  transports  near  this  place ; they  marched  30  mile 
in  a little  less  than  twenty-four  hours:  they  slept  on  the  ground 
they  made  no  fire ; they  respected  all  private  property  ; they  obeye 
all  my  orders  with  cheerful  alacrity;  they  almost  fasted  until  the 
reached  the  transports  we  had  left  at  Hickman,  where  we  arrive 
at  2.30  p.  m.  this  day;  they  embarked,  and  arrived  here  before  nigh 
When  did  troops  behave  better?  They  made  but  one  complaint,  an 
that  was  that  the  enemy  would  not  stand.  My  thanks  are  due  t 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Hogg,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Harrington,  Colon< 
Heg,  Captain  Sparrestrom,  and  Captain  Hutchens  (I  named  them  i 
the  order  of  march),  and  all  the  officers  and  soldiers  in  their  command:! 
With  such  troops  any  commander  would  feel  sure  of  victory.  I hal 
but  one  staff  officer  with  me,  Adjt.  Henry  A.  Rust,  of  the  Twenty 
seventh  Regiment,  who  exhibited,  as  he  did  at  Belmont,  all  the  quail 
ties  of  a gallant  soldier,  worthy  to  be  a commander. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Hogg  had  provided  me  with  two  trusty  guide  i 
His  judgment  was  only  equaled  by  his  gallantry.  As  my  place  was  il 
front  of  Island  No.  10,  to  co-operate  with  our  gallant  Navy  and  its  wgj 
commander,  Flag-Officer  Foote,  I felt  compelled  to  return  as  soon  al 
the  main  object  was  accomplished. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  B.  BUFORD, 
Colonel , Commanding  in  the  Field.  ] 

Major-General  Halleck. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Col.  Washington  L.  Elliott , Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Second  Ioava  Cavalry, 

Camp  near  Madrid , Tenn .,  April  11,  1862. 1 
Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with  orders  fro:: 
Brigadier-General  Granger,  commanding  cavalry  division,  I proceedel 
on  the  7th,  with  the  band  and  companies  K and  L (Hepburn’s  ba 
talion),  the  advance  of  my  regiment,  to  the  Tennessee  shore,  reportSI 
on  my  arrival,  about  2.30  a.  m.,  at  Watson’s  farm,  to  Major-General  Pop 
By  him  I was  ordered  to  proceed  at  daylight  to  the  camp  of  the  enem 
opposite  Island  No.  10.  Adjutant  Schnitzer,  First  Battalion,  Seconi 
Iowa  Cavalry,  was  detailed,  with  12  men,  as  an  advance  guard.  Aboi  . 
1£  miles  below  the  foot  of  the  island  I found  a 9 or  12  pounder  gun  pr  ; 
tected  by  an  earthwork;  half  a mile  above  this,  an  earthwork — upcJ 
this  the  enemy  had  been  at  work  the  day  of  the  evacuation;  half  a mi  > 


sap.  XVIII. ] NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


119 


bove  another  work,  completed,  but  without  armament.  Near  the 
itter  is  a ravine,  which  contained  a large  amount  of  ordnance  stores 
nd  provisions. 

Before  reaching  this  ravine  I had  placed  a guard  over  steamboats, 
diarf-boats,  and  prisoners,  consisting  of  soldiers,  deck-hands,  and  la- 
orers  recently  employed  on  the  fortifications  of  the  enemy ; then  moved 
p through  the  camp  of  the  enemy  with  my  command,  collecting  pris- 
ners  as  I marched  up.  Observing  that  one  of  our  transports  with 
roops  was  approaching  from  Island  No.  10  I went  to  meet  her.  Met 
adjutant  Schnitzer  returning  from  the  upper  batteries  of  the  Tennessee 
nd  Kentucky  shore.  A few  minutes  after  I met  General  Buford  with 
party  of  troops,  and  reported  to  him  the  condition  of  the  boats ; sug- 
ested  to  him  that  if  an  engineer  and  crew  could  be  put  on  the  Admiral 
tie  would  be  of  service  to  convey  the  prisoners  to  General  Pope ; also 
sked  that  I might  be  permitted  to  put  the  200  prisoners  taken  by  me 
i charge  of  his  troops,  and  was  referred  by  him  to  Colonel  Heg,  with 
horn  I left  my  prisoners.  Having  ascertained  that  the  camps  above 
rere  entirely  evacuated,  General  Buford  having  force  sufficient  to  col- 
ict  the  prisoners  and  property  and  guard  them,  I returned  with  my 
ommand  to  Watson’s  farm.  Pinding  that  the  commanding  general 
ad  gone  to  Tiptonville,  I went  there  and  found  that  he  had  left,  and 
y order  of  General  Hamilton,  commanding,  remained  until  ordered 
ack  to  camp  to-day. 

I could  not  procure  an  American  flag  to  place  over  the  camp  of  the 
nemy.  The  guidons  of  my  companies  and  standard  of  my  regiment 
rere  the  first  flags  to  take  the  place  of  those  of  the  rebels. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  ELLIOTT, 
Colonel  Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 
The  Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi. 


No.  21. 

Reports  of  Flag-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote , U.  S.  Navy. 

United  States  Steamer  Benton, 

Off  Island  No.  10,  April  2,  1862. 

General  : Last  night  an  armed  boat  expedition  was  fitted  out  from 
lie  squadron  and  the  land  forces  at  this  point,  under  command  of  Col- 
nel  Boberts,  of  the  Forty-second  Illinois  Begiment.  The  five  boats 
amprising  the  expedition  were  in  charge  of  First  Master  J.  T.  Johnson, 
f the  Saint  Louis,  assisted  by  Fourth  Master  G.  P.  Lord,  of  the  Ben- 
Jan;  Fourth  Master  Pierce,  of  the  Cincinnati;  Fourth  Master  Morgan, 
f the  Pittsburgh,  and  Master’s  Mate  Scoville,  of  the  Mound  City,  each 
rith  a boat’s  crew  of  10  men  from  their  respective  vessels,  and  carry  - 
ig  in  all  100  men,  exclusive  of  officers,  under  command  of  Colonel 
Roberts. 

At  midnight  the  boats  reached  the  upper  or  No.  1 fort,  and  pulling 
irectly  in  face,  carried  it,  receiving  only  the  harmless  fire  of  two  sen- 
inels,  who  ran  on  the  discharge  of  their  muskets,  while  the  rebel  troops 
l the  vicinity  rapidly  retreated,  whereupon  Colonel  Boberts  spiked  the 
ix  guns  mounted  in  the  fort  and  retired  with  the  boats  uninjured. 


120  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII] 

The  commanding  officer  represents  all  under  his  command,  from  thei 
coolness  and  determination,  as  being  ready  to  perform  more  hazardon 
service  had  it  been  required  to  the  fulfillment  of  the  object  of  the  exp( 
dition. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi , &c.,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


United  States  Steamer  Benton, 

Off  Island  No.  10,  April  3,  1862. 

General  : This  morning  the  Benton,  Cincinnati,  and  Pittsburgh,  wit 
three  mortar  boats,  opened  and  continued  for  more  than  an  hour  a fir 
on  the  rebels’  heavy  floating  battery  at  Island  No.  10,  when  the  bai 
tery,  having  received  several  shells  from  the  rifles  and  mortars,  cu 
loose  from  her  moorings  and  drifted  2 or  3 miles  down  the  river.  Thi 
shells  were  thrown  from  the  flotilla  on  different  parts  of  the  island  an 
into  the  rebel  batteries  lining  the  Tennessee  shore.  The  return  fir 
produced  no  effect  upon  the  squadron.  No  more  men  than  were  actual! 
necessary  to  man  the  rebel  batteries  were  visible. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi,  &c.,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


Flag-Steamer  Benton, 

Off  Island  No.  10,  April  6,  1862. 

General  : I inclose  several  papers  in  relation  to  our  operation 
here.  I have  written  Commodore  Porter  that,  in  consideration  of  m 
having  authority  to  modify  the  Eastport,  now  preparing  for  a gunboa 
at  Mound  City,  into  a ram,  and  the  two  boats  you  refer  to  as  beiu 
built  also  for  that  purpose,  he  had  better  not  attempt  to  fit  out  th 
steamer  Choctaw,  at  Saint  Louis,  as  he  proposes,  into  a ram,  but  ti 
confine  himself  to  fitting  out  and  getting  the  Essex  ready  to  join  id 
as  soon  as  possible.  If  under  your  authority  you  wish  Commodoil 
Porter  to  fit  out  the  Choctaw,  he  will  of  course  do  it  under  your  dire*j 
tions.  I have  no  authority  to  act  in  the  matter  except  what  may  I 
authorized  and  directed  by  you. 

As  you  will  perceive  by  the  accompanying  papers,  there  is  so  mucl 
hazard  in  running  the  blockade  with  our  badly-protected  gunboat.1] 
and  the  rebels  being  so  much  on  the  alert,  I consider  it  injudicious  tj 
hazard  another  boat  in  attempting  to  reach  New  Madrid. 

I am  not  yet  informed  of  the  condition  of  the  Carondelet. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer . 1 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  West , Saint  Louis , Mo. 


hap.  xvin.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


121 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

United  States  Flag-Steamer  Benton, 

Off  Island  No.  10,  March  30,  1862. 

'ommodore  H.  Walke, 

Commanding  Carondelet : 

Commodore  : You  will  avail  yourself  of  the  first  fog  or  rainy  night 
nd  drift  your  steamer  down  past  the  batteries  on  the  Tennessee  shore 
nd  Island  No.  10  until  you  reach  New  Madrid.  1 assign  you  this 
ervice,  as  it  is  vitally  important  to  the  capture  of  this  place  that  a 
unboat  should  soon  be  at  New  Madrid  for  the  purpose  of  covering 
General  Pope’s  army  while  he  crosses  that  point  to  the  opposite  or  to 
lie  Tennessee  side  of  the  river,  that  he  may  move  his  army  up  to 
sland  No.  10  and  attack  the  rebels  in  rear  while  we  attack  them  in 
;ont.  Should  you  succeed  in  reaching  General  Pope,  you  will  freely 
onfer  with  him  and  adopt  his  suggestions,  so  far  as  your  superior 
nowledge  of  what  your  boat  will  perform  will  enable  you  to  do,  for 
be  purpose  of  protecting  his  force  while  crossing  the  river.  You  will 
Iso,  if  you  have  coal  and  the  current  of  the  river  will  permit,  steam 
p the  river  when  the  army  moves  for  the  purpose  of  attacking  their 
notifications.  Still  you  will  act  cautiously  here,  as  your  own  will  be 
he  only  boat  below.  You  will  capture  or  destroy  the  rebel  steamer 
gunboat)  Grampus  and  the  transports,  if  possible,  between  this  place 
nd  [Island]  No.  10  at  such  time  as  will  not  embarrass  you  in  placing 
ourself  in  communication  with  General  Pope  at  the  earliest  possible 
me  after  leaving  this  place. 

On  this  delicate  and  somewhat  hazardous  service  I assign  you.  I 
lust  enjoin  upon  you  the  importance  of  keeping  your  lights  secreted 
i the  hold  or  put  out,  keeping  your  officers  and  men  from  speaking 
t all,  when  passing  the  forts,  above  a whisper,  and  then  only  on  duty, 
nd  of  using  every  other  precaution  to  prevent  the  rebels  suspecting 
jat  you  are  dropping  below  their  batteries. 

If  you  successfully  perform  this  duty  assigned  you,  which  you  so 
illingly  undertake,  it  will  reflect  the  highest  credit  upon  you  and  all 
elonging  to  your  vessel,  and  I doubt  not  but  that  the  Government  will 
dly  appreciate  and  reward  you  for  the  service  which  I trust  will 
aable  the  army  to  cross  the  river  and  make  a successful  attack  in  rear, 
bile  we  storm  the  batteries  in  front  of  this  stronghold  of  the  rebels. 
Commending  you  and  all  who  compose  your  command  to  the  care 
nd  protection  of  God,  who  rules  the  world  and  directs  all  things,  I 
m,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer. 

P.  S. — Should  you  meet  with  disaster,  you  will,  as  a last  resort,  de- 
;roy  the  steam  machinery,  and,  if  possible  to  escape,  set  fire  to  your 
unboat  or  sink  her  and  prevent  her  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the 

ffiels. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

United  States  Gunboat  Tyler, 

N Pittsburg , Tenn .,  April  1,  1862. 

lag-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  on  Western  Waters : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  this  vessel  and  the  Lex- 


122  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvnd 

ington  are  actively  employed  cruising  up  and  down  the  Tennessee 
Biver  from  within  sight  of  Eastport,  Miss.,  down  to  a place  called  Per* 
ryville,  50  miles  below  Savannah  [Tenn.]. 

The  Tyler,  with  the  Lexington,  Lieutenant-Commander  Shirk,  pro 
ceeded  up  the  river  within  2 miles  of  Eastport  on  the  30th  instant.  W< 
found  the  battery  silenced  by  the  Tyler  on  the  25th  ultimo  deserted  am 
the  mounted  gun  removed.  Although  this  vessel  fired  a few  shells  ii 
the  direction  of  the  battery  below  Eastport,  no  response  was  elicited 
On  our  way  down  we  were  fired  upon  by  some  of  their  scouts.  I sup 
pose  15  or  20  cavalry  were  seen.  Pounding  to,  we  shelled  the  wood 
and  landing  from  whence  the  shot  proceeded  and  returned  to  this  place 
The  Cairo  arrived  at  Savannah  last  evening. 

General  Grant  contemplates  attacking  the  two  small  batteries  at  am 
near  Eastport  with  the  gunboats,  in  conjunction  with  a land  force  o 
1,000  men. 

Hoping  soon  to  have  the  pleasure  of  congratulating  you  on  beinl 
in  possession  of  Island  Ho.  10, 1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedieni 
servant, 

WM.  GWIH, 

Lieutenant-  Commander , TI.  S.  Gunboat  Tyler.  I 

P.  S. — Communications  addressed  to  us  care  of  General  Grant  wil 
be  promptly  delivered. 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


April  2,  3862.  I 

Sir  : This  report  having  been  brought  back  to  this  place  througj 
mistake,  I will  add  that  yesterday  the  Cairo,  Tyler,  and  Lexington 
followed  by  two  transports,  carrying  a force  of  1,000  men,  proceedel 
up  the  river  as  high  as  Chickasaw,  Ala.  All  of  their  batteries  werj 
found  to  be  deserted.  General  Sherman  landed  there  with  a smal 
force,  and  also  at  Eastport,  Miss.  Ho  rebels  were  visible,  they  havinl 
abandoned  both  places.  They  state  at  Chickasaw  that  all  their  forcq 
have  gone  back  to  the  railroad — Memphis  and  Charleston. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  GWIH.  I 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 


April  5,  1862. 

I am  informed  that  the  Cairo  (iron-clad  steamer)  has  returned 
Cairo,  having  been  sent  there  by  General  Grant.  I shall  order  her  tj 
join  me  here  when  it  is  repaired. 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer.  I 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

United  States  Flag-Steamer  Benton, 

Off  Island  No.  10,  April  4,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope, 

Commanding  Army  at  New  Madrid , Mo. : 

General  : The  gunboat  Carondelet,  Commander  Walke,  left  li< 
anchorage  this  evening  at  10  o’clock  in  a heavy  thunder-storm,  for  tt 
purpose  of  running  the  fire  of  the  batteries  on  Island  Ho.  10  and  blioi’ 


hap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


123 


ining  the  Tennessee  shore,  to  join  your  forces  at  New  Madrid.  By  a 
>revious  concerted  signal  of  three  minute-guns  twice  fired  at  intervals 
>f  five  minutes,  which  have  since  been  heard  as  far  as  the  heavy  thun- 
Ler  would  enable  us  to  ascertain,  leads  me  to  hope  that  the  blockade 
tas  been  run  successfully,  although  the  batteries  opened  on  her  with 
orty-seven  guns  while  passing.  I am  therefore  so  exceedingly  anx- 
ous  to  hear  the  fate  of  the  noble  officers  and  men  who  so  readily  were 
Lisposed  to  attempt  the  hazardous  service,  that  I beg  you  will  immedi- 
ately inform  me  by  bearer  if  Commander  Walke  has  arrived  with  his 
ressel  and  the  condition  in  which  you  find  her  and  her  officers  and  men. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-  Officer. 


No.  22. 

Report  of  Commander  Henry  Walke , U.  8.  Navy,  commanding  TJ.  8.  gun- 
boat Carondelet. 

U.  S.  Gunboat  Carondelet,  April  7,  1862. 

Sir  : Agreeably  to  your  instructions  of  the  6th  instant,  I proceeded 
Lown  the  Mississippi  about  6.30  this  morning.  Attacked,  silenced,  and 
piked  all  the  guns  of  the  rebel  batteries  opposite  your  batteries.  The 
ower  one  made  a desperate  resistance.  It  consisted  of  two  64-pounder 
Lowitzers  and  one  32-pounder  gun.  Two  were  dismounted  and  the 
>ther  disabled  by  our  shots.  I then  took  and  spiked  temporarily  a 64- 
>ounder  howitzer  about  half  a mile  above,  and  a quarter  of  a mile  above 
hat  found  a 64-pounder  spiked.  I took  on  board  a man  who  reported 
limself  to  me  as  a spy,  whom  I send  to  you.  The  rebels  had  set  fire  to 
t house  on  the  shore. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  WALKE, 
Commander , U.  8.  Navy. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope, 

Commanding  TJ.  8.  Forces , New  Madrid. 


No.  23. 

Reports  of  Thomas  A.  Scott , Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 

Near  Island  No.  10,  Mississippi  River, 

April  2,  1862. 

Dear  Sir  : I returned  to  this  point  Monday  afternoon  and  found  all 
luiet,  but  there  were  several  small  matters  in  progress,  all  of  which 
rave  proved  successful. 

Before  leaving  for  Cairo  on  Saturday  night  Colonel  Buford,  in  com- 
aand  of  infantry  forces,  consulted  Commodore  Foote  and  myself  in  re- 
Card  to  the  propriety  of  making  a dash  upon  Union  City,  to  break  up 
he  rebel  encampment  there,  which  it  was  believed  consisted  of  one 
egiment  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry.  It  was  left  with  Colonel  Bu- 
ord,  as  commander,  to  act  as  in  his  judgment  seemed  proper. 

He  left  Sunday  morning  by  steamers  to  Hickman  with  1,050  infantry, 


124 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvni.l 


one  company  of  artillery,  four  guns,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry 
total  force,  1,350.  Made  a splendid  movement,  arriving  within  4 miles 
of  the  the  rebel  camps  by  8 p.  m.  Moved  again  at  daybreak  and  made 
the  attack.  At  7 a.  m.  opened  with  his  battery  upon  their  cavalrfl 
which  was  formed  in  line  of  battle ; broke  their  ranks  twice,  and  the 
whole  camp  finally  fled  in  great  confusion.  Their  camps,  baggage! 
stores,  &c.,  were  all  burned.  About  100  horses  and  mules,  with  12 
wagons,  were  brought  off,  along  with  such  papers  and  trophies  as  theirs 
transportation  would  admit  of. 

Troops  returned  to  Hickman  in  excellent  order,  having  made  thei 
march  of  30  miles  and  completely  routing  the  enemy  all  within  twenty- 
four  hours.  It  was  a very  successful  and  gallant  affair.  Great  credit 
is  due  to  Colonel  Buford  and  his  officers  and  men. 

Yesterday  morning  I went  out  to  find  Colonel  Bissell,  with  his  foui 
steamers  and  barges,  which  are  now  in  his  canal  in  the  woods  on  theii ! 
way  to  General  Pope,  at  New  Madrid,  by  a new  channel,  which  Colonel 
Bissell,  with  a regiment  of  mechanics,  is  cutting  through.  It  is  a her 
culean  job,  but  will  be  successful  by  Thursday  evening,  requiring  more 
time  than  was  expected. 

Pope  cannot  be  ready  before  Sunday  to  cross  his  forces,  and  the  cap 
ture  of  [Island]  No.  10  may  be  delayed  until  then.  It  will  be  made  a 
certainty. 

Yesterday  a little  expedition  was  agreed  on  for  last  night,  to  capture! 
sentinels  and  spike  all  the  guns  in  the  upper  fort  of  the  enemy  on  Ten 
nessee  shore.  Ifc  was  intrusted  by  Colonel  Buford,  commanding,  tc 
Colonel  Roberts,  of  the  Forty-second  Illinois,  with  40  picked  men  oi 
his  regiment.  Commodore  Foote  furnished  five  small  boats,  with  crews  < 
from  gunboats  to  row  them.  They  left  the  Benton  at  6 p.  m.,  and  re 
mained  among  the  timber  in  neighborhood  of  fort  until  about  11  p.  in., 
when  they  came  into  the  river  in  front  of  the  fort  and  moved  righl 
upon  it,  driving  away  sentinels,  who  fled  in  the  darkness  after  first  fire 
Colonel  Roberts  and  his  men  spiked  with  files  all  the  guns  in  position 
and  left  without  the  loss  of  a man;  a capital  success  and  most  valui 
able  to  the  flotilla  for  coming  operations,  as  the  position  of  the  fort  was^ 
difficult  to  reach,  and  contained  some  heavy  84-pounders.  We  shall 
probably  have  some  cannonading  to-day  at  Fort  No.  2.  Will  report* 
to-morrow.  I will  make  another  excursion  among  the  cottonwood  to 
morrow,  to  see  Bissell  and  his  command  working  their  way  in  new  chan 
nel  for  transportation. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington  City. 


Near  Island  No.  10,  April  2, 

(Via  Cairo,  April  3,  1862 — 2 a.  m.)  1 
Colonel  Buford,  in  command  of  infantry  forces,  completely  routed 
the  enemy  at  Union  City  Monday  morning;  burned  their  camps  and 
all  property  which  the  command  could  not  bring  away;  captured  about 
100  horses  and  mules,  with  12  wagons,  4 flags,  and  other  trophies. 

Last  night  Colonel  Buford,  commanding,  sent  Colonel  Roberts,  Forty 
second  Illinois,  wuth  40  picked  men,  to  drive  away  sentinels  at  uppei 


[AP.  XVIII.]  new  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  125 

rt  on  Tennessee  shore  and  spike  the  guns.  Commodore  Foote  fur- 
shed  boats  and  crews.  About  11  p.  m.  they  drove  sentinels  away  and 
)iked  every  gun,  some  of  which  were  of  heavy  caliber.  Great  credit  is 
le  the  commanders,  their  officers  and  men,  for  the  successful  results 
* both  expeditions.  Transports  by  the  new  channel  will  not  reach 
ew  Madrid  before  Thursday.  I spent  several  hours  with  Bissell  yes- 
rday.  Beport  fully  by  mail. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


No.  24. 

port  of  General  G.  T.  Beauregard , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Army  of 

the  Mississippi. 

Corinth,  April  1,  1862. 

Bombardment  of  Madrid  Bend  and  Island  No.  10  commenced  on  15th 
stant;  continued  constantly  since,  night  and  day.  Enemy  has  fired 
veral  thousand  13-inch  and  rifle  shells.  On  the  17th  a grand  attack 
th  five  gunboats  lasted  nine  hours.  The  result  of  bombardment  to 
th  instant  is  on  our  side.  One  man  killed,  none  seriously  wounded, 
id  no  damage  to  batteries.  Enemy  had  one  gunboat  disabled  and 
[Other  reported  sunk. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


No.  25. 

ports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  P.  Me  Gown,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  at  Mad- 
rid Bend.* 

Madrid  Bend,  March  1,  1862 — 9 p.  m. 
Dear  Colonel  : The  enemy’s  cavalry  chased  General  Jeff.  Thomp- 
n from  Sikeston  to-day — he  says  one  regiment.  Their  main  force 
sterday  was  reported  at  Benton,  said  to  be  25,000  or  30,000,  includ- 
£ one  mortar  and  siege  pieces. 

When  I arrived  here,  four  days  since,  I found  little  done.  I now 
ve  fifteen  guns  mounted.  I did  not  get  any  artillery  soldiers  until 
is  evening.  I have  strengthened  the  work  at  New  Madrid  as  much 
possible,  even  to  pitting  an  abatis  round  it.  It  stands  near  the 
ore,  and  can  at  this  stage  of  water  be  flanked  by  the  gunboats  here, 
is  garrisoned  by  two  regiments  of  Arkansas  troops,  under  command 
Colonel  Gantt. 

I am  constructing  a work  on  the  bank  of  the  river  near  the  bayou, 
-is  can  also  be  flanked  by  the  gunboats.  This  is  garrisoned  by  three 
giments,  two  regiments  under  Colonel  Walker,  and  I send  down  to- 

r See  also  McCown’s  dispatches  between  these  dates  in  “ Correspondence,  etc.,”  posh 


126 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XVIJL 


night  Colonel  Travis’  Tennessee  regiment.  I will  try  and  maintain  this 
work.  I have  sent  no  more  troops  to  New  Madrid,  for  the  reason  that 
more  troops  would  mask  the  fire  of  the  gunboats.  The  country  being 
perfectly  level,  I can  re-enforce  from  this  place  in  one  hour. 

What  I fear  most  is  that  the  enemy’s  gunboats  may  pass  this  place 
unless  they  give  me  a few  days  to  prepare  for  them.  The  guns  and 
ammunition  arrived  here  in  the  greatest  confusion.  I shall  mount  guns 
and  throw  up  breastworks  afterwards.  If  the  gunboats  pass  and  defeat 
Hollins,  New  Madrid  must  fall.  If  New  Madrid  fall,  I can  be  perfectly 
besieged  by  their  occupation  of  Tipton.  I have  here  under  my  com- 
mand ten  regiments  and  three  small  battalions,  in  all  about  5,000  in- 
fantry. I have  not  half  force  enough  to  fight  in  any  other  way  thani 
behind  my  trenches  on  the  river  shore  with  any  certainty  of  success. 
I have  two  batteries,  one  opposite  No.  10  and  the  other  at  Madrid.  Ii 
forces  could  be  massed  at  Madrid,  that  force  could  be  destroyed,  but 
should  their  gunboats  pass,  the  force  would  be  cut  off  from  Tennessee. 
I will  fight  the  gunboats  as  long  as  they  desire,  but  I fear  they  will  try 
the  Port  Eoyal  game  on  me.  Unless  I have  time,  I fear  they  may  suc- 
ceed. However,  I hope  after  they  pass  that  I may  turn  them  over  tc 
Commodore  Hollins  in  a shattered  condition.  Commodore  Hollins  has 
five  gunboats,  four  at  New  Madrid  and  one  here. 

I wish  the  general  was  here. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Brigadier- General,  ! 


Col.  Thomas  Jordan,  Jackson , Tenn. 


N.  B. — Colonel  Carroll,  Fifteenth  Tennessee  Regiment,  has  a com 
pany  in  his  regiment  from  this  place.  I need  them  much.  Please  send 
it  to  me. 

J.  P.  McC. 

N.  B. — Everything,  guns,  ammunition,  and  men,  have  been  sent  here 
in  utter  confusion.  I informed  General  Polk  that  every  day  was  oi  i 
importance,  even  if  we  lost  some  guns  in  holding  it  (Columbus). 

J.  P.  McC. 


Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  31,  1862.  I 

Colonel  : At  midnight  on  the  night  of  February  25  I was  directed 
by  Major-General  Polk  to  proceed  to  this  point.  I arrived  here  early 
on  the  morning  of  February  26  and  proceeded  to  examine  the  position, 
including  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10. 

I found  no  guns  or  works  on  the  island.  On  the  main-land,  opposite 
the  island,  Batteries  Nos.  1 and  5 were  constructed  and  partially  armed 
No  magazine  constructed  for  No.  5,  and  the  one  for  No.  1 was  over- 
flowed.* 

New  Madrid  was  defended  by  Fort  Thompson,  a small  work,  and  well 
armed  with  cannon.  This  work  was  garrisoned  by  the  Eleventh  and 
Twelfth  Arkansas  Regiments  and  Captains  Stewart’s  and  Upton’s  com 
panics  of  artillery,  under  the  command  of  Col.  E.  W.  Gantt,  of  the 
Twelfth  Arkansas. 


* See  maps  following  Blake’s  and  Gray’s  reports,  Nos.  27, 29,  pp.  137,  146,  147. 


127 


iaf.  xvni.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

Learning  that  the  enemy  was  advancing  on  the  place  in  force,  I ordered 
ol . L.  M.  W alker,  with  two  regiments,  from  Fort  Pillow.  On  the  arrival 
f these  two  regiments  I occupied  the  position  on  the  shore  of  the  mouth 
f the  Bayou  Saint  John. 

On  the  night  of  the  26th  I returned  to  Columbus  and  reported  the 
mdition  of  affairs  to  Major-General  Polk.  I returned  to  Madrid  Bend 
i the  27th. 

The  enemy  appeared  before  New  Madrid  on  the  1st  instant,  having 
le  day  previous  driven  in  our  scouts,  capturing  from  General  M.  Jeff, 
hompson  several  of  his  small  cannon. 

The  work  being  constructed  at  the  mouth  of  the  bayou  was  garri- 
med  by  Colonel  Travis’  Fifth  Tennessee  Regiment,  Colonel  Walker’s 
ortieth  Regiment,*  and  Colonel  Baker’s  First  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and 
[ississippi  Regiment,!  and  Capt.  Smith  P.  Bankhead’s  field  battery,  un- 
3r  command  of  Colonel  Travis.  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Stewart  was  assigned 
> the  command  of  the  forces  at  New  Madrid. 

March  4,  the  enemy  advanced  with  artillery  and  infantry,  and  were 
'omptly  repulsed  by  the  fire  from  Commander  Hollins’  fleet  of  gun- 
>ats  and  our  artillery. 

March  5,  picket  skirmishing  all  day. 

March  6,  the  enemy  planted  a battery  at  Point  Pleasant,  and  by  a 
liite  flag  induced  Captain  Dunnington  (Pontchartrain)  to  near  the 
ore,  when  she  was  fired  into  by  musketry,  killing  and  wounding 
veral.  Picket  skirmishing  all  day. 

March  7,  a strong  advance  of  the  enemy  was  driven  back  by  the 
*e  from  our  gunboats,  Captain  Bankhead’s  battery,  and  Capt.  R.  A. 
swart’s  Parrott  guns.  The  gunboats  failed  to  silence  the  battery  at 
)int  Pleasant,  which  attempt  was  renewed  on  the  8th  and  9th  with  a 
:e  result,  Capt.  R.  A.  Stewart  driving  the  enemy’s  infantry  from  the 
ore  at  that  point  with  his  Parrott  guns. 

March  10,  heavy  picket  skirmishing  all  day. 

March  11,  I placed  two  24-pounder  siege  pieces  opposite  Point  Pleas- 
it. 

March  13,  the  enemy  planted  some  batteries  during  the  night,  with 
le  pits  supporting  the  batteries.  They  opened  fire  upon  our  trans- 
rts,  hitting  all  that  approached  Fort  Thompson.  The  enemy’s  guns 
ire  24-pounders  and  one  8-inch  gun.  Commander  Hollins,  from  his 
nboats,  and  we  with  our  guns  from  the  works,  returned  the  fire,  re- 
Ising  one  heavy  advance  upon  the  fort  at  the  mouth  of  the  bayou. 

By  a careful  examination  of  their  works  I became  satisfied  that  they 
ire  making  regular  approaches  to  cut  off  communication  with  the 
ver  fort  (Fort  Thompson).  I was  also  convinced  that  our  gunboats 
uld  not  stand  against  their  land  batteries,  and  that  unless  the  fleet 
apped  below  Point  Pleasant  it  would  be  cut  off.  Commander  Hollins 
d General  Stewart  concurring  in  this  opinion,  I ordered  the  evacua- 
»n  of  New  Madrid. 

1 directed  General  Stewart  to  take  the  immediate  direction  of  the 
acuation  of  Fort  Thompson,  placing  at  his  disposal  the  steamer  Louis- 
le,  a large  wharf-boat  lying  at  the  fort,  and  two  gunboats ; and  to 
aieral  L.  M.  Walker  that  of  the  work  at  the  mouth  of  the  bayou, 
icing  at  his  disposal  the  steamer  De  Soto  and  one  gunboat,  and  I 
lered  the  steamers  Winchester  and  Ohio  Belle  to  report  to  General 
alker.  The  captain  of  the  Winchester  did  not  obey  the  order. 


* This  became  the  Fifth  Confederate  Regiment, 
t Probably  became  the  Fourth  Confederate  Regiment. 


128 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XVIIL 

At  11  o’clock  a heavy  rain-storm,  that  lasted  all  night,  impeded  the 
work.  All  the  field  guns  were  brought  off;  the  heavy  guns  were  spiked 
and  some  of  the  carriages  injured;  the  ammunition  all  saved,  except  f 
few  shot  and  the  ammunition  in  caissons  and  limbers  of  Captain  Bank 
head’s  battery.  These  caissons  and  limbers,  with  their  contents,  wer( 
thrown  into  the  river.  No  commissary  stores  were  left  that  I am  aware 
of.  Several  wagons  were  left  at  Fort  Thompson.  The  remaining 
wagons  and  artillery  horses  were  removed  to  Madrid  Bend. 

I send  inclosed  Colonel  Gantt’s  report  of  the  evacuation  of  For 
Thompson,  and  as  soon  as  I can  procure  reports  from  Generals  Stewar 
and  Walker  I shall  forward  them.  The  gunboat  fleet  and  transport* 
dropped  down  to  Tiptonville,  retaining  only  such  as  were  necessary  fo] 
water  boats,  transports,  and  hospitals.  The  bad  weather  and  exposur( 
had  increased  our  sick  to  an  alarming  extent. 

So  harassing  was  the  duty  at  New  Madrid,  that  I on  several  occasion: 
ordered  Colonel  Neely,  Fourth  Tennessee,  and  Colonel  Scott’s  Twelitl 
Louisiana  Begiments  to  that  point  for  twenty-four  hours  to  do  guarc 
and  picket  duty.  Several  men  and  one  officer  were  left  at  Fort  Thomp 
son,  having  hid  themselves  to  avoid  work  or  to  shelter  themselves  fron 
rain. 

Dr.  W.  S.  Bell,  medical  director,  Lieutenant  Bobinson,  Captain  West 
provost-marshal,  and  one  man  lost  their  lives  in  defense  ot  New  Mad 
rid.  Captain  Hallum,  of  the  Fifth  Tennessee  Begiment,  was  danger 
ously  wounded. 

The  principal  object  I had  in  holding  New  Madrid  was  to  possess  < 
landing  for  re-enforcements  to  fight  the  enemy,  should  I receive  them 

March  14,  disposed  my  force  so  as  to  prevent  a crossing  of  the  enemy 

March  15,  the  Federal  fleet,  gunboats,  mortar  floats,  and  transport 
appeared  and  opened  fire  upon  us.  Our  batteries  did  not  reply. 

March  16,  the  Federal  fleet  advanced  in  line  of  battle  and  remains 
at  long  range. 

March  17,  this  day  the  enemy  lashed  three  of  their  iron-clad  boat 
together  and  dropped  down  within  range  of  Battery  No.  1,  and  opene< 
fire  upon  it  at  11  a.  m.  The  remainder  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  am 
their  mortar  floats  were  placed  in  position  and  joined  in  the  conflict 
Their  fire  was  principally  directed  at  Battery  No.  1,  under  command  o 
Captain  Bucker.  The  enemy’s  transports  were  near  by,  loaded  wit! 
troops.  Three  guns  from  Captain  Bucker’s  battery  as  would  reach  th 
enemy  returned  the  fire.  The  conflict  was  terribly  severe  and  long 
continued.  The  gallant  Captain  Bucker  fired  the  last  shot  at  7 p.  m. 

I refer  you  to  subordinate  reports  for  a more  detailed  report  of  th 
conflict.  I directed  the  battery  to  be  repaired  during  the  night.  Th 
enemy  were  repulsed. 

In  obedience  to  the  inclosed  instructions*  I turned  the  command  ove: 
to  Brig.  Gen.  L.  M.  Walker,  and  left  Island  No.  10  for  Fort  Pillow  a 
11  p.  m.,  taking  with  me  Colonel  Marks’  Eleventh  Louisiana  Begiment 
Colonel  Scott’s  Twelfth  Louisiana  Begiment;  Colonel  Kennedy’s  u M( 
Cown”  Louisiana  Begiment  ; Colonel  Neely’s  Fourth  Tennessee  Beg 
ment;  Colonel  Bradford’s  Thirty-first  Tennessee  Begiment;  Colonc 
Travis’  Fifth  Tennessee  Begiment;  Captain  Bankhead’s  and  six  piece 
of  Captain  Stewart’s  (Point  Couple)  field  batteries,  and  Captains  Neely’ 
and  Haywood’s  cavalry,  leaving  at  Madrid  Bend  five  guns  ot  Captai 
Stewart’s  field  battery;  Captains  Hudson’s  and  Wheeler’s  cavalry 

* No  inclosure  found,  but  see  Jordan  to  Pickett,  March  15,  in  “ Correspondence,  etc.  ! 
p08t. 


bap.  XVIII.]  MEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


129 


Lionel  Henderson’s  Fortieth  Tennessee  Regiment;  Colonel  Baker’s 
'ennessee,  Alabama,  and  Mississippi  Regiment;  Colonel  Gantt’s  Twelfth 
.rkansas  Regiment;  Colonel  Smith’s  Eleventh  Arkansas  Regiment; 
Lionels  Brown’s  and  Clark’s  Tennessee  Regiments ; Colonel  Steed  - 
lan’s  First  Alabama  Regiment,  and  Colonel  Terry’s  Arkansas  Bat 
ilion. 

March  18,  I arrived  at  Fort  Pillow. 

March  19,  received  orders  to  return  to  Madrid  Bend. 

March  20,  arrived  below  Tiptonville. 

March  21,  established  my  headquarters  at  Madrid  Bend.  The  enemy 
as  continued  the  bombardment  up  to  this  date. 

March  31,  turned  the  command  over  to  Brig.,  Gen.  W.  W.  MackalL 
he  enemy’s  gunboats  still  above  Island  No.  10. 

After  the  evacuation  of  New  Madrid  I retained  at  the  island  a nuin 
er  of  transports,  for  watch  boats,  hospitals,  and  other  purposes,  as  a 
tst  resort,  had  I been  compelled  to  abandon  my  position,  to  have  car- 
ed my  command  below. 

In  this  long  conflict  I beg  to  express  my  obligations  to  Brig.  Gens. 
. P.  Stewart  and  L.  M.  Walker  and  Colonel  Travis,  who  at  different 
mes  commanded  the  force  at  the  mouth  of  the  bayou.  I express  my 
lanks  for  valuable  services  rendered  in  that  capacity.  Lieutenant- 
olonel  Avery  has  my  thanks  and  admiration  for  the  gallantry  exhib- 
ed  in  repelling  a strong  picket  force  of  the  enemy  and  remaining  at 
is  post  under  the  most  galling  fire. 

I would  recommend  to  your  consideration  Captain  Bankhead,  com- 
manding artillery  in  the  upper  fort,  and  Capt.  J.  W.  Stewart,  com- 
anding  artillery  in  Fort  Thompson,  for  the  energy  and  ability  dis- 
iayed  during  the  occupation  of  New  Madrid. 

Colonel  Gantt,  who  commanded  Fort  Thompson,  and  afterwards 
oops  to  prevent  a crossing  from  the  Missouri  side,  acted  with  energy, 
illantry,  and  intelligence.  Colonel  Neely’s  Fourth  Tennessee  and 
olonel  Scott’s  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiments  at  different  times  went 
» Madrid  and  did  picket  duty,  rendering  valuable  services.  The 
r vices  rendered  by  Brig.  Gen.  James  Trudeau  were  invaluable,  and 
i deserves  reward. 

Colonel  Steedman’s  First  Alabama  Regiment  rendered  gallant  and 
ficient  service  in  Battery  No.  1 on  the  17th  instant. 

Col.  A.  J.  Brown,  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Tennessee,  assisted  the  exhausted 
nnoneers  with  a detachment  of  his  men  on  the  17th,  rendering :valu 
>le  service,  and  at  all  times  has  displayed  great  zeal  and  energy. 
Captain  Rucker,  commanding  Battery  No.  1,  defended  his  battery 
ider  adverse  circumstances  with  an  obstinate  courage  worthy  of 
aise,  and  was  gallantly  sustained  by  his  lieutenant  (Saunders)  and 
cut.  T.  J.  Finnie,  who  volunteered  and  went  to  his  battery. 

Captain  Humes,  commanding  artillery  on  the  island,  deserves  com- 
cndation  for  his  energy  and  proper  bearing  at  times.  Captain  Harris, 
tigineers;  Captain  Gray,  Topographical  Engineers;  and  Captain 
unmings,  signal  officer,  rendered  gallant  and  valuable  services, 
iptain  Wintter,  Sappers  and  Miners,  and  Lieutenant  Tidmarsh,  of 
rdnance,  aside  from  their  valuable  services  in  their  respective  depart  - 
cuts,  rendered  good  service  in  gallantly  supplying  Batterv  No.  1 
ith  ammunition  under  a terrific  fire  from  the  gunboats.  Capt.  Thomas 
flmstou,  commanding  Southern  Guards  (artillery),  lias  rendered 
pcient  service,  and  has  at  all  times  acted  with  great  vigilance  and 
iergy.  Capt.  R.  A.  Stewart,  commanding  Point  Coupee  Artillery,  a 

9 r r — vol  VIII 


13-0 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chap.  XVir 


gallant  and  watchful  soldier,  rendered  valuable  services.  Lieutenani 
Colonel  Cook,  commanding  Twelfth  Arkansas,  and  Major  McKaj^,  con 
manding  Fourth  Arkansas  Battalion,  have  been  active  and  vigilant  i 
the  discharge  of  their  duties.  Colonel  Kennedy  and  his  regiment,  an 
Captain  Flemming,  with  a portion  of  his  company,  labored  hard  an 
untiringly  in  getting  the  batteries  in  position.  Colonel  Marks,  fc 
a while  in  command  of  the  troops  opposite  Island  No.  10,  labore 
assiduously  in  discharge  of  his  duties. 

I wish  here  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Commander  G.  N.  Hollins 
flag-officer,  commanding  fleet,  for  his  gallant  and  cordial  co-opera tioi 

To  my  staff,  Maj.  H.  S.  Bradford,  assistant  adjutant  general  5 Lieu 
B.  1ST.  Mathews,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  ; Capts.  H.  S.  Foot( 
jr.,  and  G.  P.  Smoote,  aides-de-camp ; Lieut.  Em.  Boss,  acting  aide  rh 
camp;  Maj.  W.  E.  Dyer,  division  quartermaster;  Maj.  P.  T.  Glass 
division  commissary ; and  Dr.  Q.  B.  Thornton,  attached  to  headquai 
ters,  rendered  valuable  and  efficient  services ; and,  in  fact,  to  each  an 
every  officer  and  soldier  I feel  grateful  for  the  willing  discipline  wit 
which  they  labored,  watched,  and  fought  in  the  presence  of  and  wit 
an  overpowering  force  for  over  thirty  days. 

For  further  information  I inclose  document  A,  Captain  Bucker 
report  [No.  34];  document  B,  Captain  Wintter’s  [No.  31];  document  t 
Col.  E.  W.  Gantt’s  [No.  36] ; document  D,  Colonel  Steedman’s  [N< 
39] ; document  E,  Colonel  Brown’s  [No.  42] ; document  F,  Captai 
Gray’s  [No.  29] ; and  document  G,  General  J.  Trudeau’s  [No.  301. 

No  reports  received  from  either  General  A.  P.  Stewart  or  Genen 
Walker,  who  were  charged  with  the  evacuation  of  New  Madrid. 

Bespectfully  submitted,. 


J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Major- General . 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  5,  1862. 


Colonel  : 1 have  only  this  moment  received  yours  of  the  29th  ultinn 
directing  me  to  make  a detailed  report  of  the  evacuation  of  New  Madri 
with  as  little  delay  as  possible. 

I forwarded  by  Captain  Blake  and  Captain  Cummings  all  the  paper 
1 could  procure  on  the  subject. 

New  Madrid  was  evSouated  on  the  night  of  the  13th  ultimo.  Th>| 
duties  imposed  upon  Generals  Stewart  and  Walker  for  several 


after  the  evacuation  prevented  their  making  a report. 

I had  directed  to  Generals  Stewart  and  Walker  the  following  orders 
I have  never  received  any  report  from  either.  Both  officers  are  no^i 
beyond  my  control.  However,  I do  not  attribute  their  failure  to 
desire  to  avoid  the  matter,  but  to  official  duties  and  illness. 

As  I stated  in  my  report,  General  Stewart  was  charged  with  tin 
evacuation  of  Fort  Thompson  and  General  Walker  with  that  of  uprifl 
work. 


I have  taken  measures  to  procure  facts  from  other  sources,  wliic 
will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  obtained. 


Will  you  direct  Generals  Stewart  and  Walker  to  make  their  reports! 


Yours,  &( 


J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Major-  General. 


Col.  Thomas  Jordan 


iap.  XYIII.l  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  131 

flnclosurea.] 

Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  15,  1862. 

rigadier-General  Walker  : 

Sir  : The  general  commanding  directs  that  you  report  to  him  the 
rcumstances  attending  the  evacuation  of  the  upper  fort,  which  was 
>mmitted  to  your  directions.  The  general,  having  learned  of  the  ex- 
aordinary  precipitation  of  the  evacuation,  directs  that  you  report, 
ithout  reference  to  the  sensitiveness  of  any  one,  no  matter  what 
nk. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

H.  S.  BRADFORD, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  29,  1862. 

dg.  Gen.  A.  P.  Stewart: 

Send  report  of  operations  at  and  evacuation  of  New  Madrid. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Major-  General. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  9,  1862. 

>1.  Thomas  Jordan, 

A djutant-  General , Corinth : 

Colonel  : In  looking  over  my  correspondence  I find  that  I have  not 
lied  direct  attention  to  a correspondence  with  General  Pope.  I sent 
e correspondence  with  General  Pope’s  report. 

I am  earliest  for  an  investigation  of  my  official  and  personal  acts 
lile  in  command  at  Madrid  Bend.  I respectfully  request  a court  of 
]uiry  at  the  earliest  date  possible. 

G.  P.  Smoote,  one  of  my  aides,  will  deliver  this,  and  if  a court  be  or- 
red,  an  investigation  can  at  once  commence  at  that  place,  examin- 
% the  witnesses  at  Corinth  j after  which  the  court  can  come  to  this 
ace. 

If  any  reports  have  been  sent  direct  to  your  office  (not  through  me), 
•espectfully  request  copies. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Major- General. 


eneral  Polk:] 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  9,  1862. 


Dear  General:  I sincerely  congratulate  you  upon  the  glorious 
dory  that  you  and  your  command  have  acted  so  conspicuous  a part, 
ace  I left  Island  10  I have  had  a severe  attack  of  pneumonia.  I am 
le  to  write  to-day. 

The  pressure  upon  me  for  my  report  was  so  great  that  I was  forced 
dictate  most  of  it  from  a sick  bed,  and  of  course  it  is  not  full,  and 
imperfect.  I regret,  too,  that  General  Stewart  and  General  Walker 
ve  not  made  reports  to  me.  However,  I attribute  it  to  official  duties 
the  part  of  General  S.  and  to  sickness  on  the  part  of  General  Walker. 


132 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  IChaf.  XV  rn 


If  any  reports  have  been  sent  direct  to  your  office  will  you  send  ice  1 hi 
reports  or  copies  $ 

1 regret  the  sad  news  I hear  from  Island  10.  The  poor  fellows  worke< 
and  fought  without  murmur  as  long  as  I was  with  them.  I parted  wit] 
them  with  regret.  It  is  a matter  of  mortification  to  me  to  find  mysel 
situated  as  I now  am — accused  of  drunkenness,  &c.  Nothing  but  a 
investigation  of  all  my  acts  will  now  satisfy  me. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

J.  P.  McCOWN. 


No.  26. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Mackall , C.  8.  Army , commandim 
at  Madrid  Bend , with  letter  from  General  Beauregard* 

Macon,  Ga.,  August  21,  1862. 1 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  ml 
late  command  of  Madrid  Bend  : 

In  obedience  to  the  order  of  General  Beauregard,  given  at  Corintll 
I proceeded  to  Madrid  Bend  by  the  first  opportunity,  and  reached  til 
headquarters  of  Major-General  McCown  on  the  morning  of  March  31 
and  assumed  command  on  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day.  On  that  dal 
Major-General  McCown,  General  Trudeau,  chief  of  artillery,  an  officJ 
in  the  service  of  the  State  of  Virginia,  the  chief  quartermaster,  anl 
chief  commissary  left  the  command,  and  every  record  of  the  post  wil 
carried  away  with  General  McCown,  except  six  or  seven  letters  froil 
the  headquarters  of  Generals  Beauregard  and  Polk  and  two  partid 
returns  of  troops  of  different  dates.  The  information  given  to  me  li 
General  McCown  was  to  the  effect  that  the  gunboats  could  do  no  injuri 
that  the  enemy  had  30,000  troops  opposite  to  me,  and  that  their  bal 
teries  extended  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  from  New  Madrid  to  I 
point  several  miles  below  our  lowest  battery,  which  was  planted  immj 
diately  above  Tipton ville;  that  they  were  endeavoring  to  cut  a can] 
across  the  opposite  peninsula  for  the  passage  of  transports,  in  order  i 
land  below  the  bend ; that  they  would  fail,  and  that  the  position  w<j 
safe  until  the  river  fell  and  no  longer. 

The  concurring  testimony  of  the  commanders  of  regiments  was  l 
the  effect  that  their  men  were  broken  down  by  hard  labor,  dispirited  d 
two  recent  evacuations,  and  impressed  with  the  idea  that  the  post  wl 
untenable  and  its  defense  hopeless.  Examination  by  Captain  Shelihl 
my  engineer,  on  April  1 and  2,  showed  that  the  works  of  defense  col 
sisted  of  a naval  fioating  battery,  and  of  water  batteries  mountiil 
about  fifty  guns,  on  a coast  of  25  miles  in  extent,  without  a single  ina| 
azine,  and  the  guns  of  far  less  range  than  those  of  the  enemy.  Satisfil 
that  the  post  was  only  tenable  so  long  as, the  forces  of  the  enemy  coul 
not  cross,  and  that  with  the  troops  at  my  disposal  I could  not  secure  til 
batteries  from  a land  force,  I devoted  myself  to  increasing  my  batterij 
and  establishing  order  among  the  troops  and  system  in  the  staff  <1 
partmcnt. 

On  the  night  of  April  1 the  enemy  stormed  our  upper  batteries,  cl  I 
fended  by  a guard  of  the  First  Alabama  Regiment,  and  spiked  til 
guns. 

*See  also  Mackall’s  dispatches,  March  31-April  10,  in  “Correspondence,  etc.,”po*B 


lp.  xviil]  new  Madrid;  mo.,  and  island  no.  10,  etc.  133 

Dn  April  3 the  fire  from  the  enemy’s  rifled  cannon  forced  the  floating 
ttery  from  its  moorings. 

On  the  4th,  a note,  signed  u One  of  Jetf.  Thompson’s  men,”  and  dated 
nil  1,  gave  notice  that  the  canal  would  be  completed  the  next  day, 
3 2d.  On  the  same  night,  during  a violent  storm,  the  first  gunboat 

I past  all  the  batteries  above  New  Madrid  unharmed;  it  was  early 
icovered,  and  every  gun  was  opened  on  it. 

On  the  6th,  this  boat  engaged  the  lower  batteries  and  silenced  some, 
pposing  that  an  attempt  to  land  would  be  made  the  next  morning,  1 
fc  the  artillery  to  man  the  forts  on  and  near  the  island  and  a regi- 
nt  of  infantry  to  guard  the  island.  I moved  at  night  with  Stewart’s 
lit  battery  and  the  infantry  stationed  in  that  part  of  the  bend,  in  all 
lut  1,000  men,  to  a central  point  of  the  jieninsula,  6 miles  distant, 
lering  the  remaining  infantry,  about  1,500  men,  of  whom  400  were 
armed,  to  join  me  at  that  point,  with  the  intention  of  attacking  the 
3my,  should  an  opportunity  present  itself  on  his  landing.  The  storm 
this  night  enabled  a second  gunboat  to  pass  uninjured, 'and  before 
* detachments  of  infantry  had  assembled  from  the  different  posts  in 
‘ wide  circuit  of  the  bend  the  enemy  were  landing  under  the  protec- 
n of  the  heavy  batteries  of  their  boats.  I now  determined  to  save, 
possible,  my  infantry  and  light  artillery  by  a retreat.  But  one  wav 
s open,  through  Tiptonville  (distance  G miles),  a sluice,  which  here 
ptied  into  the  river,  and  then  by  the  bank  of  the  river,  under  the  fire 
the  enemy’s  battery  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  the  overflow 
ering  this  bank,  and  by  its  depth  forbidding  any  movement  farther 
and.  This  was  practicable,  if  the  gunboats  did  not  interfere.  I ac- 
difigly  put  my  command  in  motion,  first  sending  my  engineer  to  su- 
intend  the  destruction  of  everything  at  the  torts.  He  was  inter- 
red by  the  enemy  and  forced  to  return.  My  arrival  at  Tiptonville 
s preceded  by  the  gunboats,  and  the  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry 
the  enemy  were  on  me.  In  my  judgment  resistance  and  escape 
re  alike  hopeless,  and  the  next  morning  I surrendered  the  column 
ler  my  immediate  command. 

make  this  report  entirely  from  memory.  Copies  of  all  letters  to 
commanding  general  were  destroyed,  to  prevent  their  falling  into 
enemy’s  hands.  I make  the  report  now,  because  on  yesterday  I 
eived  information  that  the  President  expected  it.  1 did  not  make  it 
lier  because  I did  not  know  that  it  was  expected.  I had  reported 
condition  of  the  command  and  each  movement  of  the  enemy  fully 
the  commanding  general,  and  had  assured  him  that  the  result  would 
as  it  proved,  the  fall  of  the  place  twelve  hours  after  the  enemy 
ssed.  I hope  you  will  do  me  the  justice,  with  His  Excellency  the 
isident,  to  inform  him  that  when  I asked  when  I might  expect  orders, 
i told  me  that  you  could  give  me  no  information ; that  you  suggested 
t there  was  no  objection  to  my  leaving  the  city  of  Richmond  in  the 
an  time;  and,  above  all,  that  there  was  no  suggestion  made  of  any 
'Ort  or  other  act  of  mine  as  necessary  or  proper  before  leaving,  or 
uisite  as  an  antecedent  to  my  return  to  the  field, 
hope  to  reach  Richmond  the  day  after  the  reception  of  this  report, 

I I may  more  promptly  and  conveniently  give  any  further  informa- 
a which  you  may  require. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  MACKALL, 

L Brigadier- General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


134  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KAN&.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 

[Indorsements.] 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

August  25,  1862^ 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  information 
Con  c ress. 

JASPER  S.  WHITING, 
Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Read.  Unsatisfactory. 


J.  D 


Cullum’s  Springs, 
Bladen , Ala .,  August  22,  1862, 

Brig.  Gen:  W.  W.  Mackall,  Macon , Ga.: 

My  Dear  General:  I have  just  received  your  kind  favor  of  t 
8th  instant,*  I am  happy  to  hear  of  your  safe  return  to  the  Confi 
eracy,  and  hope  you  will  soon  receive  a command  commensurate  w 
your  merit.  I hope  you  are  aware  that  immediately  after  the  battle 
Shiloh  I made  an  effort  to  have  you  and  the  whole  force  under  yc 
orders  at  Madrid  Bend  exchanged  for  a like  number  of  prisoners  tat 
from  the  enemy,  but  “Proclamation  Pope”  refused  to  do  so.  I alwi 
intended,  as  soon  as  practicable,  to  renew  again  my  application,  bu 
found  Halleck  not  more  disposed  to  make  an  exchange  of  prison* 
than  his  worthy  lieutenant.  I am  delighted  that  at  last  you  are  out 
their  hands. 

I can  see  no  necessity  for  a court  of  inquiry  relative  to  the  loss 
Madrid  Bend,  for,  if  you  recollect,  when  I sent  you  there  General  Bra 
and  myself  told  you  that  we  considered  matters  there  in  a most  desp 
ate  condition,  and  that  you  were  going,  as  it  were,  on  a forlorn  lio 
so  that  we  were  not  at  all  surprised  to  hear  of  its  fall.  I only  regreti 
that  I had  been  unable  to  send  you  there  several  weeks  earlier, 
enable  you  to  make  your  own  preparations  for  its  prolonged  defer 
Should  you,  however,  at  any  time  desire  a court  of  inquiry  to  reli< 
you  from  any  blame  for  the  surrender  of  that  position,  which  was  c 
sidered  by  me  only  as  an  outpost  to  Fort  Pillow  (not  then  entir 
completed),  I will  gladly  give  you  any  assistance  in  my  power 
obtain  one. 


I hope  to  report  for  duty  on  or  about  the  1st  proximo,  when  I wol 
be  most  happy  to  have  you  under  my  orders,  should  you  desire  to  se| 
under  me  again. 

Sincerely,  your  friend, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD 


Richmond,  Va.,  September  13,  186: 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  n< 
informing  me  that  my  report  had  been  laid  before  the  President,  i\ 
that  he  had  returned  it  to  you  indorsed,  “Read.  Unsatisfactory.” 

May  I ask  the  favor  that  you  likewise  lay  before  the  President  1 
my  respectful  application,  to  be  informed  wherein  my  report  is  unsal 

* Not  found. 


;bap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO,  10,  ETC. 


135 


actory,  that  I may  avail  myself  of  an  early  opportunity  of  supplying, 
f in  my  power,  such  further  information  as  may  he  desired  by  him  ? 
i am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W W.  MACKALL, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  G.  8.  Army. 

f Indorsements.] 

(September  15,  1862. 

Eespectfully  submitted  to  the  President. 

G W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 

I do  not  understand  from  this  report  whether  all  the  force  was  cap- 
ured  or  why  it  was  impossible  to  have  effected  a retreat. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS, 


Mobile,  Ala.,  November  26,  1862. 

General  : Your  letter  of  November  13  was  received  by  me  yester- 
lay  as  I was  going  on  board  a steamer  to  visit  Fort  Morgan,  and  I 
fas  obliged  to  postpone  my  answer  until  to-day. 

I did  not  pass  the  slough ; I was  prevented  by  the  gunboats  from 
eaching  it.  Had  I added  to  the  words  underscored  by  you,  viz,  u after  I 
►assed  on  the  other  side,”  the  words  “ of  Tiptonville,”  the  passage  would 
tave  been  free  from  all  ambiguity,  and  would  have  read  thus:  “The 
nemy’s  gunboats  preceded  me  to  Tipton ville,  and  took  a position  oppo- 
ite  the  slough  mentioned  above.  Their  troops  passed  along  the  river 
oad  to  the  slough  shortly  after  I passed  on  the  other  side  of  Tipton- 
ille.”  Going  from  Madrid  Bend  down  the  river  the  road  divides 
•efore  you  reach  Tipton  ville,  the  one  keeping  along  the  bank  of  the 
iver  in  front  of  the  village,  the  other  passing  through  the  wood-land 
ack  of  the  village.  They  come  together  below  the  village  and  there 
jllow  the  bank  of  the  river  to  the  crossing  of  the  slough.  I pursued 
lie  latter  road;  the  enemy  the  former. 

The  presence  of  the  gunboats  obliged  me  to  halt  under  cover  of  the 
imber  before  reaching  the  junction  of  the  roads  below  Tiptonville,  and 
L,  was  while  so  halted  that  the  enemy’s  land  forces,  passing  along  the 
iver  road,  took  a position  between  my  troops  and  the  slough. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  MACKALL, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


No.  27. 

ieport  of  Lieut.  Col.  E.  I).  Blalce , C.  S.  Army:  Acting  Inspector- General, 

Corinth,  Miss.,  April  10,  1862. 

General:  Agreeably  to  your  orders,  I left  Corinth  on  March  24  and 
lemphis  on  the  following  day  by  steamboat  for  Island  No.  10.  In 


156 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XWIII. 


company  with  Major  Meriwether  and  others  we  were  landed  about  7 
miles  below  Tiptonville,  on  the  Tennessee  shore  of  the  Mississippi  River.j 
There  were  four  gunboats  lying  at  the  same  point,  under  the  command, 
of  Commodore  Hollins.  On  presenting  myself  to  that  officer  and  inform- 
ing him  of  my  mission,  he  courteously  offered  our  party  the  use  of  a 
gunboat,  which  under  cover  of  the  night  safely  passed  the  enemy’s  bat- 
tery at  Riddle’s  Point,  and  was  landed  safely  at  Tiptonville  before 
dawn. 

Early  in  the  morning  I commenced  an  examination  of  the  defenses 
in  Madrid  Bend  and  on  Island  No.  10.  Rucker’s  battery  (No.  1),  about 
2 miles  above  the  settlements,  composed  of  rifled  32-pounders,  defends 
the  right  flank  of  the  position  ; but,  owing  to  the  high  water,  it  cannot 
be  now  manned,  and  is  only  accessible  iu  boats.  A guard,  however,  is 
always  kept  there  to  deceive  the  enemy  as  to  utility.  Two  miles  lowei 
down  are  four  tine  batteries  of  32  rifled  0-inch  and  8-incli  guns  and 
howitzers.  These,  with  a few  isolated  heavy  guns,  three  batteries  or 
Island  No.  10,  together  with  the  floating  battery  there,  constitute  the 
defenses  against  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy,  which  would  seem  quite 
adequate  for  this  purpose  should  he  attempt  to  reduce  the  batteries 
before  passing  them.  But  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  frequent  sue 
cess  which  has  attended  our  gunboats  in  their  passage  across  his  bat 
teries  may  suggest  to  the  enemy  the  propriety  of  a similar  essay  in  from 
of  our  batteries  in  the  obscurity  of  some  stormy  night. 

Unless  he  can  do  this,  the  high  water  must  prove  a successful  barriei 
against  the  enemy’s  efforts  to  obtain  a foothold  in  the  bend.  On  tin 
east  Reelfoot  Lake  is  impassable  to  either  flats  or  rafts.  Between  tin 
batteries  and  the  point  marked  A on  the  annexed  map  it  is  impossible 
for  him  to  cross  with  steam  power.  Between  A and  B the  country  it' 
submerged,  and  does  not  admit  of  a landing.  Between  B and  Tipton 
ville  flats  may  be  landed;  but  a few  batteries  judiciously  planted  on  the 
shore  could  effectually  prevent  a disembarkation.  An  iron-clad  gun 
boat  running  between  these  points  could  answer  the  same  purpose 
The  country  below  Tiptonville  is  under  water,  and  no  landing  can  bij 
made  there".  It  seems  to  be  certain,  then,  that  unless  the  enemy  cai 
put  boats  below  the  Madrid  batteries  the  forces  at  Island  No.  10  anc 
Madrid  Bend  are  secure  against  assault  until  the  water  falls  at  leas 
5 feet,  and  even  then  a few  guns  could  prevent  a landing. 

The  garrison  was  supplied  with  ammunition,  although  I regret  hi 
say  the  most  of  it  was  very  much  exposed,  being  kept  in  tents  on  th«j 
island,  which  was  daily  bombarded  from  the  enemy’s  mortar  boat! 
above.  The  commanding  officer  had  promised  to  have  it  magazined  a I 
soon  as  possible.  I 

There  were  at  the  post  about  2,000  effective  men  and  about  1 ,351 
on  the  sick  report.  These  last  were  scattered  over  the  bend  and  in  pri 
vate  houses.  The  sickness  was  abating ; the  principal  disease  bowej 
complaint  and  fever,  resulting  from  exposure. 

There  was  at  the  post  flour  enough  to  last  twenty-one  days,  bacon 
enough  for  thirty  days,  18  sacks  of  coffee  (165  pounds  each),  100  bushel 
of  rye,  and  about  three  months’  supply  of  the  small  rations.  In  th  | 
bend  could  have  been  obtained  about  50,000  pounds  of  bacon  and  abou ; 
250,000  bushels  of  corn.  A grist-mill  was  employed,  and  furnished  abou 
70  bushels  of  meal  per  day.  Some  of  the  commissary  stores  were  with  A 
out  shelter. 

My  examination  of  the  lake  satisfied  me  that  it  was  impossible  to  gc 
a steamboat  into  it,  and  that  it  afforded  no  means  of  re-enforcing  o,. 
retiring  an  army. 


vp.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


137 


I regret,  general,  that  my  report  is  so  incomplete ; but  necessarily 
, all  my  notes  and  papers  connected  with  my  inspection  having  been 
den.  All  the  statements  in  reference  to  the  evacuation  of  New  Madrid 
»re  lost  with  the  others  ; but  I derived  from  them  the  impression  that 
r disastrous  losses  during  that  unfortunate  night  were  owing  princi- 
,fly  to  the  want  of  proper  system  and  the  want  of  discipline  among 
e troops. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  yours, 

E.  D.  BLAKE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Acting  Inspector -General)  C.  S.  Army » 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk, 

Commanding  First  Corps,  Army  of  the  Mississippi , 


[Inclosure.] 


138 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai-.  xlq 
No.  28. 

Report  of  Maj.  George  W.  Brent , C.  8.  Army , Acting  Inspector-  Gerim 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Corinth , Mss.,  April  15,  1862. 

General:  You  will  find  annexed  an  abstract  of  the  reports  relatii 
to  the  evacuation  of  New  Madrid  which  came  to  my  hands.*  Y( 
will  observe  that  the  report  of  Commodore  Hollins  is  wanting*.  The 
is  a good  deal  of  discrepancy  in  the  reports  and  upon  material  poinf 
A careful  examination  and  analysis  of  the  reports  have  led  me  to  the 
conclusions: 

1st.  That  the  works  at  New  Madrid  could  have  held  out  longer,  tl 
enemy  up  to  tlie  date  of  evacuation  having  been  several  times  signal 
repulsed. 

2.  That  disorder  and  confusion  prevailed  at  Fort  Thompson  on  fcl 
night  of  the  13th,  the  men  disinclined  to  obey  orders,  and  orders  giv< 
apparently  without  authority. 

3d.  That  sufficient  means  for  transportation  were  not  furnished  wh- 
it was  present. 

4th.  That  had  there  been  less  haste  and  confusion,  with  the  mea. 
of  transportation  which  were  on  hand,  our  guns,  or  part  at  least,  mig 
have  been  saved. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  WM.  BRENT, 
Major  and  Acting  Inspector -General. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard. 


No.  29. 

Reports  of  Capt.  A.  B.  Gray , C.  8.  Army , Chief  Engineer. 


Engineer’s  Office, 

March  29,  1862, 

On  the  main-land,  or  left  bank  of  the  river,  which  is  the  Tennesfc 
shore,  and  ranging  for  2 miles  above  the  island  (No.  10),  are  eig 
earthworks.  Twenty-six  cannon  are  now  mounted  in  these  works, 
follows,  viz:f 

Battery  No.  1,  called  the  Redan. — This  battery  is  the  uppermost  woi 
and  constructed  for  reasons  given  in  letter  of  September  18,  1861 
copy  of  which  is  herewith  appended).  It  was  located,  after  a ra^ 
reconnaissance  of  a few  hours,  on  August  15,  the  day  on  which  t 
enemy’s  gunboats  (two)  passed  down  the  river  to  New  Madrid. 

At  daylight  August  19  the  work  was  commenced,  and  on  the  ino 
ing  of  the  20th  two  guns  placed  in  position,  since  when  none  of  t 
enemy  have  succeeded  in  descending  the  Mississippi  below  it.  It 
laid  off  as  a redan  and  subsequently  connected  with  flanks  and  a c 


*The  abstract  omitted  embraced  reports  of  March  1 and  31  from  General  McCo 
(No.  26);  of  March  15  from  Flag-Officer  Hollins  (No.  44);  of  General  Stewart,  Marcl 
(No.  35);  of  General  Gantt,  March  17  (No.  30);  and  of  Captain  Harris,  March  9 (No. 
tSee  maps  following. 


Chap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  1 3S> 

maillere  line.  This  was  not  expected  to  be  occupied  in  extreme  high 
water,  but  to  produce  certain  effect  for  a certain  period.  It  bas  an- 
swered this  purpose,  and  is  not  now  in  condition  to  be  occupied,  though 
it  can  be  held  as  long  as  the  other  batteries  last. 

The  long  and  unprecedented  rise  in  the  Mississippi  has  washed  the 
parapet  nearly  away.  The  ground  upon  which  the  work  was  put  up 
is  firm  and  not  a caving  bank.  The  guns  cannot  be  used  by  the  enemy 
aud'will  not  be  materially  injured.  They  can  be  easily  guarded  at 
night.  Batteries  Nos.  2 and  3 entirely  command  Battery  No.  1.  It 
has  six  guns  mounted  in  it  on  strong  platforms — three  columbiads 
(8-inch)  and  three  smooth-bore  32-pounders.  One  32-pounder  had  one 
trunnion  knocked  off  by  the  enemy’s  shot  on  March  20. 

Batteries  Nos.  2 and  3 are,  respectively,  2,000  and  2,175  yards  off. 
No.  2 has  three  rifled  32-pounders  and  one  smooth-bore  32-pounder. 
No.  3 has  three  rifled  32-pounders.  There  are  earthworks  thrown  up 
above  overflow  and  are  in  good  condition.  The  banks  are  near  and 
caving,  but  will  last  as  long  as  expected  at  first.  To  place  these  bat- 
teries farther  back  from  the  water  would  lessen  the  command  of  the 
channel.  If  necessary,  other  parapets  can  be  thrown  up  in  the  rear  and 
the  same  platforms  used,  without  losing  the  effect  of  but  one  gun  for  a 
short  time. 

Battery  No.  4 has  three  rifled  32-pounders  and  one  8 inch  columbiad. 
tt  is  425  yards  from  Battery  No.  3 ; is  in  good  condition,  with  some 
defect  of  caving  bank,  but  in  no  danger  of  being  inconvenienced  in  some 
time. 

Battery  No.  5 has  seven  guns.  Three  are  8-inch  columbiads,  three 
smooth  bore  32-pouuders,  and  one  rifled  32-pounder.  This  battery  was 
built  some  mouths  ago,  and  is  500  yards  lower  down  the  river  from 
No.  4.  It  is  in  good  condition  and  has  a second  bank  in  front  of  it,  and 
the  most  elevated  above  the  water  of  all  our  batteries.  The  bank  is 
some  ten  or  fifteen  feet  above  the  high-water  mark.  This  work  was  put 
ip  last  fall. 

Between  Batteries  Nos.  4 and  5 is  a parapet  prepared  for  three  guns, 
md  another  950  yards  below  No.  5 for  three  guns.  No  guns  are 
nounted,  and  it  is  not  thought  necessary  at  present  to  place  any 

here. 

In  the  rear  of  and  to  the  left  of  Battery  No.  4 is  a square  redoubt, 
milt  100  yards  square.  It  has  two  32-pounder  smooth-bore  cannon  on 
;en ter- pintle  carriages  now  mounted,  and  in  a couple  of  days  will  have 
wo  more  up.  / These  four  guns  cover  the  gorges  of  Batteries  Nos.  2 to 
),  inclusive. 

The  above  constitute  the  eight  earthworks  outlie  mainland  at  Island 
So.  10,  having  twenty-six  guns  in  position. 

Batteries  on  the  island. — Belmont  Battery,  or  No.  1,  on  the  extreme 
ipper  end  of  the  island,  has  six  guns;  two  of  them  are  8 inch  coium- 
liads,  four  of  them  smooth-bore  32-pounders.  This  battery  contained 
lie  heavy  32-pouuder  rifled  gun  called  Belmont.  At  the  third  fire  at 
he  enemy  on  March  — it  burst  into  fragments,  but  without  injury  to 
my  one.  One  of  the  two  columbiads  now  replaces  it.  This  battery  is 
n good  condition. 

Island  Batteries  Nos.  2 and  3 are,  respectively,  100  and  375  yards 
rom  No.  1.  Battery  No.  2 has  four  guns — three  smooth-bore  and  one 
ifled  32-pounder.  Battery  No.  3 has  five  guns — two  rifled  24-pounder 
Jahlgren  guns,  one  8-inch  columbiad,  and  two  smooth-bore  32-pounders. 
These  bivtteries  are  in  good  condition. 


140 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,'  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL 


Batteries  Nos.  4 and  5 are  where  the  four  24-pounder  siege  guns  and 
four  8-inch  siege  howitzers  or  mortars  were  placed.  These  cannon  are 
to-day  in  position  at  Tiptonville  and  along  the  western  side  of  Madrid 
Bend  Peninsula,  for  preventing  the  enemy’s  landing  from  the  opposite 
or  Missouri  side  of  the  Mississippi.  No  guns  have  replaced  the  siege 
cannon  on  the  island,  but  the  naval  floating  battery  New  Orleans,  carry- 
ing eight  8-inch  columbiads  and  one  32-pounder  rifled  gun,  is  located] 
there,  so  as  to  command  the  north  channel. 

Several  batteries  are  now  ready,  facing  the  batteries  of  the  enemy 
below  New  Madrid,  and  two  heavy  guns  (8-inch  columbiads  and  32- 
pounders)  will  be  in  position  on  each  side  of  the  peninsula  to  open  upon 
the  enemy,  as  well  as  to  prevent  the  passing  up  or  down  of  any  boat 
which  may  possibly  force  itself  through  the  canal  being  cut  into  John’s 
Bayou. 

I have  located  the  batteries  as  near  the  end  of  the  peninsula  as  the  j 
overflow  will  admit  of,  say  one  and  a half  miles  from  Port  Thompson  on  ( 
the  west  side,  and  about  the  same  distance  from  the  mouth  of  John’s 
Bayou  on  the  east  side.  I 

The  canal  being  cut  by  the  enemy  is  nearly  opposite  Island  No.  8, 1 
below  the  mouth  of  the  James  Bayou,  and  is,  probably,  1 mile  long  j 
from  the  Mississippi  into  a small  lake  which  connects  with  the  John’s  I 
Bayou.  Tugs  and  flat-boats  or  barges  may  possibly  get  through  such  j 
a canal,  provided  the  river  remains  up  at  its  present  high  stage.  It  is  I 
now  on  a stand  and  may  fall.  A very  rapid  fall  of  the  water  through  j 
it  might  prevent  the  use  of  John’s  Bayou,  and  may  prove  fatal  to  our  j 
defenses  by  leaving  our  right  flank  unprotected.  It  is  not  to  be  ex- 1 
pected  that  the  river  can  go  down  sufficient  to  enable  the  enemy  tol 
move  with  artillery  through  the  bottoms  in  front  and  to  the  right  of] 
the  cremaillere  line  of  the  redan  battery ; but  it  does  subside  very! 
rapidly  at  times,  and  the  utmost  attention  and  vigilance  will  be  required! 
to  watch  and  repair  our  right-flank  works  and  build  new  ones.  Asl 
long  as  the  water  remains  up  we  are  secure  in  this  direction,  and  ourl 
chief  attention  should  be  given  to  the  present  left  flank,  which  is  below! 
Island  No.  10,  and  on  the  west  side  of  the  peninsula. 

A proper  distribution  of  3,000  or  4,000  men,  with  the  guns  and  am-j 
munition  at  hand,  might  enable  Island  No.  10  to  hold  itself  as  it  now] 
is  against  the  overwhelming  force  threatening  it;  but  it  will  require! 
every  resource  of  mind  and  the  physical  as  well  as  mental  energies  oil 
every  man  now  in  this  bend.  Any  misjudgment  or  mistakes  made  now, 
such  as  have  been  witnessed  from  the  planking  of  the  streets  of  Mem-j 
phis  to  the  sad  errors  of  Columbus,  in  the  last  eight  months,  will  cost! 
the  Confederacy  an  irreparable  injury. 

If  a gunboat  were  placed  a mile  below  Tiptonville,  she  would  effect- j 
ually  prevent  any  landing  by  the  enemy  if  he  should  strike  across  from] 
Point  Pleasant  or  Kiddle’s  Point.  The  only  landing  that  could  be  made] 
by  the  enemy  to  effect  anything  below  Point  Pleasant  must  be  had  in 
this  distance  of  4 miles. 

Between  Point  Pleasant  and  Andy  Riddle’s  (the  lowest  battery  of  I 
the  enemy)  a gunboat  can  lay  without  molestation  from  the  enemy’s  I 
batteries,  nor  could  they  place  a gun  between  Riddle’s  Point  and  their  I 
battery  at  Andy  Riddle’s.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  section  be-i 
tween  the  enemy’s  battery  at  Dr.  Martin’s  and  his  battery  at  Point! 
Pleasant.  A gunboat  could  lay  on  our  side  entirely  out  of  the  reach  t 
of  the  enemy’s  guns,  and  by  keeping  up  a little  steam  nights  only  could  ] 
be  ready  to  destroy  any  expedition  attempted  by  the  enemy  across  the] 


:uav.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


141 


•iver  from  John’s  Bayou  at  New  Madrid  to  their  lowest  battery  at 
Indy  Kiddle’s,  and  at  the  same  time  not  be  exposed  to  any  injurious 

ire. 

If  it  became  absolutely  necessary  at  any  time  these  two  gunboats 
lould  pass  the  blockade  in  the  night,  as  is  proven  they  can  do,  though 
it  some  little  risk.  The  well  drilled  and  disciplined  crews  of  these 
mats,  with  their  vigilance  at  night  and  shell  guns  ready  at  a moment’s 
lotice,  would  render  our  position  at  Island  No.  10  (with  a judicious  dis- 
ribution  of  our  own  troops  and  guns  and  watchfulness)  secure,  1 feel 
atisfied. 

The  placing  of  two  of  those  gunboats  now  below  Kiley’s  at  the  posi- 
ions  I have  indicated  I believe 'to  be  of  vital  importance,  however  dis- 
agreeable it  may  be  to  their  crews;  but  inconvenience  and  risks  all  of 
is  must  be  subject  to.  Two  full  regiments  could  not  be  as  effective  as 
wo  gunboats  on  the  west  side  of  the-  peninsula.  As  now  located,  to 
>e  signalized  to  by  the  uncertain  explosion  of  rockets,  &c.,  and  move 
ip  in  the  dark,  must  prove  abortive,  if  the  enemy  have  the  slightest 
nergy  and  strategy,  which  must  be  accorded  to  them. 

’A.  B.  GKAY. 

h 

[Inclosure.]  * 

[Note. — The  marginal  notes  were  added  to  the  original  report  May 
27,  1862.] 


Kedan  Fort,  Camp  Polk,  Island  No.  10, 

Thursday , September  18,  1861. 

Captain:  It  becomes  my  duty  to  report  to  you  that  the 
rogress  of  our  work  has  been  so  retarded  by  circumstances 
ver  which  I have  no  control  that  in  my  judgment  any 
irther  drawbacks  may  cause  us  to  lose  (should  certain  The  “contin- 
ontingencies  happen)  one  of  the  finest  strategic  positions  fnehC^flrefePe<2 
>r  the  defense  of  the  Mississippi  Valley.  peneT  bap‘ 

The  multiplicity  of  ma  tters  surrounding  you  at  Columbus  That  of  coium- 
as  caused  this  point,  I am  afraid,  to  become  of  much  less  bus>  &Cl 
insideration  than  it  really  deserves. 

1 am  now  fully  convinced  that  Island  No.  10,  with  its  .The  “connec- 
mnections,  properly  fortified,  would  offer  the  greatest  re-  Nonsio°Le8lthe 
stance  to  a combined  water  and  laud  attack  of  the  enemy,  “ReeifootLake” 
hile  at  the  same  moment  he  would  receive  an  irreparable  J£dtkJn£St S 

ljury.  New  Madrid  and 

the  swamps  of 
New  River  on  the 
west. 

A concentrated  cross-fire  from  the  batteries  I propose  rroven  to  he 
ould  be  irresistible  by  the  boats  of  the  enemy,  and  our  in-  ??ihbMa!ch°fi862t 
enchments  from  the  river  to  the  lake  could  not  be  taken aud  bombard"’ 
y a force  five  times  superior  in  numbers.  Stif  to^asti^of 

__  March. 

We  cannot  be  outflanked,  owing  to  the  proximity  of  the  Ialand  No.  io 
lyou  and  lake  to  the  river,  and  it  would  be  equally  irnpos-  ed4 on ttSe  bright 
ble  to  invest  us.  The  general  character  of  the  ground  is  ^7?'^ 
ie  most  inviting  to  an  attack  and  certain  defeat  of  the  be  through  the 
iemy.  To  an  ordinary  observer  the  absence  of  any  im-  Sd?  wS^tife 
ressively  strong  features  in  the  topography  might  create  left  flank  of  isi- 
i unfavorable  opinion  as  to  its  strength,  but  I am  satisfied  uSo?°city  and 
tat  a close  study  of  the  ground  by  a military  man  would  Obion  River  to 

1116  Tlmlti 


142 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVin.  j 

develop  elements  of  power  that  to  another  might  seem  ob-  j 
jects  of  weakness. 


The  work  I am  now  constructing  is  the  advanced  position 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  1J  miles  above  the  head  of 
Island  No.  10. 

The  high  water  it  was  necessary  to  occupy  this  site  during  the  season  of 
p?^eSsCtthe  e1^  low  water  and  until  the  highest  spring  rise,  to  prevent  the 
The'ViV  watfr  enemy’s  landing  and  flanking  the  island  as  well  as  the 
for  theSm?Bteh  main-land  batteries.  It  is  also  our  strongest  point  of  de- 
SsuaiiySebaTiy  for  ^ense?  should  the  descent  of  the  river  be  attempted  by  the 
the  spring  rise,  enemy  in  the  next  eight  or  nine  months  and  a heavy  force 
be  landed  for  a flank  movement. 


The  distance  from  this  point  (the  redan)  to  the  bayou, 
which  is  said  to  have  5 feet  permanent  water  in  it  and 
increasing  to  the  lake,  2 miles  farther,  is  only  1,100 
yards. 

By  cutting  The  bayou,  with  comparatively  little  labor,  can  be  ren- 
onWthehoff  1TSdeJ  dered  impassable  to  an  enemy.  Upon  the  highest  rise  of 
aSfdammiSbauis r^ver  next  spring  or  summer  nature  will  accomplish 
S^iSTof  thefor  us  what  we  are  artificially  endeavoring  to  do,  that  of 
bayou  only.  forming  a barrier  over  which  the  enemy  cannot  pass,  for 
The  Mississip- the  Mississippi  and  the  lake  will  then  be  united,  and  if  a 
are a now  bun\ted  landing  is  attempted,  it  must  be  within  Sliort  range  of  our 
by  imp  a s sable  other  batteries.  i 

swamps  and.  high  ^ 

water.  s 

it  was  not  in-  Beelfoot  Lake,  as  it  is  called,  is  some  40  miles  long,  lying 
theiedanbatte?v  nearly  north  and  south,  and,  making  a junction  with  the 
at  extreme  high  Mississippi  at  high  water  above  us  and  below  us  by  way  of 
water  is  proven  the  Obion  branch,  renders  our  position  mere,  with  compara- 
plished6  ourC°ob-  tively  little  trouble,  evidently  a very  formidable  one.  The 
ject.  For  nine  lake  in  m any  places  is  very  deep,  and  the  dead  cypress 
“ear^t  could  tbe  timber  scattered  about  it  makes  it  difficult  to  navigate. 

used  very  effect- 
ually. 

tw?1  oints°couid  -^ven  ^ boats  could  be  had  and  a crossiug  effected  by  an 
the  enemy  land  enemy,  a small  body  of  our  troops  could  prevent  a landing.i 
a?dr  It  is  said  to  be  11  miles  wide  in  places  at  overflow  aud  filled 

of  light  battery  „ , f 

with  a few  infan-  with  line  fish  and  wild  game. 

try  would  de- 
stroy him. 

It  is  only  5 or 
6 miles  wide  at 
ordinary  stages 
of  water. 


At  present  We  iulVe  now  onlv  four  32-pounders  at  this  point.  We 
inch  coiumbiads  had  six  pieces  in  position,  but  you  are  aware  that  the  two 
bo?etb32epounder  24-pounder  siege  guns  were  taken  to  Columbus.  Ten  heavy 
cannon  *"  in  this  pieces  could  be  put  in  position  at  once  in  the  redan  if  wt 
?edI?n.CIllIed  the  had  them. 

TJe  channel  is  The  redan  commands  the  channel  of  the  river  500  to  1,00( 
of  the  i?ve“  stho  yards  off.  It  is  our  left  flank  of  the  line  of  intreuchmenta 
other  88idte°boii|coniiecting  the  river  and  Beelfoot  Lake,  aud  two  or  threa 
bare  »mc  thou- of  the  barbette  guns  can  be  made  to  rake  the  entire  fronij 
iow  water.8  ott  at  of  our  line  to  the  bayou. 

The  ldan  of  he  Our  parapet  in  the  redan  is  much  weakened  by  embras 
crJwoHterciin^to  ures,  made  necessary  by  the  32-pounders  being  mounted 
£avouCt  reversed  ul>on  B&val  carriages  or  trucks.  I would  recommend  mount. 


r XVHL]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


143 


t these  guns  upon  siege  carriages  similar  to  the  24-pound-  h.aif  way ; and 
the  weight  of  the  guns  being  about  the  same.  dfnso'nwest^idt 

Our  intrenchments  are  not  completed  at  this  point,  and  tLdSia  throu 
less  we  have  the  assistance  I have  ajsked  for,  and  which  which  it’emptfes 
suppose  could  be  easily  supplied  from  Memphis  or  Fort  {gftj  ParhaW  was 
low,  I fear  this  all-important  work  will  not  be  accom-  never  finished  a* 
shed  in  time  to  be  of  use.  In  a very  short  time  now  it  jJShe piaSd 
!1  be  necessary  to  gather  in  the  crops,  and  our  farmers  jf  n were,  not 
the  bend  mftst  need  their  hands.  We  have  not  had  over  aud^So . lovirul- 
hty  negroes  at  work,  and  no  similar  force  and  facilities^’  re8  2farde 
my  command  could  have  done  more  than  they  have  done,  fenses^bandon- 
you  will  readily  perceive  the  impossibility  of  finishing  ed’ 

1 fortifications  at  an  early  day,  unless  1 could  have  for  This  force 
i or  fifteen  days  some  500  hands  from  Fort  Pillow,  where  would  have  com- 
3arned  2,000  are  at  work.  I have  no  boat  either,  which  Yak/and 
essential  to  a rapid  construction  of  the  batteries  at  Island the  batteries  at 
. 10.  The  Mohawk,  placed  under  my  orders  for  topo-  After1  the°'river 
iphical  service,  was  taken  off  some  time  ago  for  other  falls  n,ow  ^ 
ty  by  orders  from  your  department.  the*  soft  bottoms 

^ince  I have  seen  Columbus  I have  not  lessened  my  opin-  l^nt  the^Trees 
. previously  given  to  the  commanding  general,  of  itsand  works  will 
ong  natural  facilities  for  defense ; but  further  examina-  beasainstus- 
ns  have  strengthened  my  belief  in  the  great  importance 
Island  No.  10,  in  connection  with  a line  of  defense  in- 
ding  New  Madrid  and  Union  City,  as  a powerful  base  of 
3rations  against  the  enemy. 

have  been  put  to  serious  inconvenience  by  an  order 
using  suddenly  my  assistant,  Mr.  Kowley,  and  my  clerk, 

. Miller,  who  had  charge  of  my  commissary  stores  and 

pers,  to  be  taken  away  from  this  point.  The  command-  The  command* 

; general  must  have  been  misled  by  a misapprehension  bS/mfsinfo^ 
facts  in  some  way.  Mr.  Miller  was  a civilian,  appointed  ed>  and  ordered 
me  as  a clerk  to  attend  to  my  commissary  matters,  audited0  immed?- 
was  in  no  way  an  army  officer.  I had  attentively  taught  ateb- 
ui  tenant  Kowley  and  Mr.  Miller  to  assist  me  in  sys- 
oatically  conducting  the  important  duties  confided  to  me, 

1 their  sudden  withdrawal,  without  an  hour’s  notice,  has 
only  inconvenienced  me,  but  been  really  detrimental  to 
1 service. 

fieu tenant  Snowden  is  sick  and  cannot  be  exposed  to 
labors  of  an  assistant  probably  for  some  time.  He  is 
lay  wholly  disabled  by  fever.  I feel  sure  had  the  general 
>wn  of  the  circumstances  I have  related  he  would  not 
/e  ordered  them  away  at  so  necessary  a period  in  the 
'gress  of  this  work  unless  on  some  imperative  occasion, 
will  seud  you,  captain,  in  a day  or  two  a sketch  of  this  Before  an  op- 
tion  of  country,  exhibiting  the  situation  of  our  works,  ^day*t£ 
can  possibly  secure  time  from  my  other  labors.  this  letter  a map 

n the  mean  time,  if  you  can  lay  before  the  commanding  cios5?jde and  m 
ieral  the  necessity,  in  my  opinion,  of  more  speedy  move- 
nt in  the  works  here  I shall  be  better  satisfied.  I shall 
better  satisfied  that  we  will  be  upon  a much  safer  basis 
neet  the  enemy  under  any  circumstances  that  may  arise. 

} 1|(‘  will  give  me  an  order  for  500  negroes  from  Fort 
|l<iW  and  send  me  a small  steamer,  with  authoritj1"  to  get 


144 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS  , AND  IND  T.  [Chap,  XVT: 


the  guns  from  Memphis,  I will  soon  be  enabled  to  say  w< 
are  prepared. 

1 am,  captain,  very  respectfully, 

A.  B.  GRAY, 

Captain,  Topographical  Engineers , <7.  8.  Army. 
Capt.  E.  D.  Blake,  A.  A.  A.  (}.,  Pept . No.  2,  0.  8.  A. 


Memoranda  of  batteries  at  Island  No.  10,  Madrid  Bend,  by  Capt.  A.  B.  Gray,  Engineer 


Batteries. 


Number  of  guns. 


No.  1 (redan  fort) 
No.  2 


6 (3  naval  iron  carriages 
and  3 barbette). 

4 (bigb  barbette  carriages)  - 


No.  3. 
No.  4 

No.  5 


3 (high  barbette  carriages) . 

4 (bigb  barbette  carriages) . 

7 (2  high  barbette  and  5 
medium). 


Caliber. 


3 8-incli  columbiads  and  3 
smooth-bore  32s. 

3 rifled  32s  and  1 smooth- 
bore 32. 

3 rifled  32s. 

3 rifled  32s  and  1 8-inch 
columbiad . 

1 rifled  32.  3 8-inch  colum- 
biads,3 smooth-bore  32s. 


Bemarks. 


i On  the  main-lan< 
left  bank  of  tl 
i MississippiBive 
Tennessee  shore 


24  cannon  in  position  on  the  i 
main-land. 


No.  1 (Belmont  Battery) 

No.  2 

No.  3 

No.  4 

No.  5 

The  naval  floating  bat- 
tery New  Orleans. 


6 (medium-height  car- 
riages). 

4  

5  

2 (siege  carriages) 

2 (siege  carriages) 

9 (iron  naval  carriages) 


28  cannon  in  position  on 
Island  No.  10. 


2 8-inch  columbiads  and  4 
smooth-bore  32s. 

3 smooth-bore  32s  and  1 
rifled  24. 

2 rifled  24s,  1 8-inch  colum- 
biad, 2 smooth-bore  32s. 

2 8-iucli  howitzers. 

2 8-inch  howitzers. 

1 rifled  32  and  8 8-inch  co- 
lumbiads. 


In  Battery  No. 
the  large  rifled  3 

Eounder  Belmo 
urst  at  the  thii 
Are  at  the  euen 
on  March  24.  A 
8-inch  columbis 
takes  its  place. 
On  the  upper  ei 
and  north  side 
Island  No.  10  a 
located  these  ba 
teries. 


Note. — Thirty-five  of  i 


f the  above  guns  have  been  placed  in  position  in  batteries  since  March  1 by  tl 
Engineer  Corps,  including  the  Sappers  and  Miners.  The  three  8-inch  columbiads  in  Battery  No.  1 a 
Tuns  I procured  from  the  naval  floating  battery  at  Columbus,  and  mounted  them  as  they  now  stai 

D 1 1 l . 1*  AT  - : n — 1 mu  ^ l\onn  Knilt  lur  mo  C/tmA  o 


anuary  20  last,  by  order  of  Major-General  Polk.  The  platforms  had  been  built  by  me  some  8 
months  previous,  when  I located  and  constructed  the  redan  at  Island  No.  10.  These  three  eoluinbia< 
mm  ftiH  nnl  v trims  firprl  hv  Captain  Bneker  durinsr  the  eDtrairement  of  March  17.  The  three  sraoot 


were  the  only  guns  fired  by  Captain  Bucker  during  the  engagement  of  March  17.  Tl  . 

bore  32-pounders  were  not  fired.  One  other  similar  8-incli^ columbiad  I placed  at  the  same  time  in  iii 


tery  No.  5,  where  it  now  is.  The  floating  battery  New  Orleans  was  placed  on  the  north  side  of  t 
island,  to  command  the  right  channel  of  the  river,  which  it  effectually  does.  In  all,  at  the  present  dal 
there  are  fifty- two  guns  in  position  for  the  defense  of  Island  No.  10.  -o- 

A.  B.  (jRAY, 


Captain , O.  S.  Army , Chief  Engineer  Island,  No.  10 


Camp  Polk,  Island  No.  10,  Mississippi  Biver, 

Engineer's  Office,  March  24,  1862. 


145 


:rap.  XYIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

[Note. — Differs  but  slightly  from  memoranda  immediately  preceding.] 

Engineer’s  Office,  Island  No.  10,  Mississippi  River, 

March  24,  1862, 

Memoranda  of  batteries  at  Island  No.  10,  Madrid  Bend , with  guns  mounted , <fc. 


Batteries. 


Ho.  1 (redan) 

Ho.  2 

!7o.  3 

Ho.  4 

!fo.  5 


6 

4 

3 

4 

7 

24 


Number  of  guns. 


Caliber. 


Remarks. 


(3  naval  iron  carriages 
and  3 barbette). 

(high  barbette  carriages) . 

(high  barhette  carriages) . 
(high  barbette  carriages) . 

(2  high  barbette  and  5 
medium). 

guns  on  the  main-land. 


3 8-inch  columbiads  and  3 
smooth-bore  32s. 

3 rifled  32s  and  1 smooth- 
bore 32. 

3 rifled  32s. 

3 rifled  32s  and  1 8-inch 
columbiad. 

1 rifled  32,  3 8-inch  colum- 
biads, 3 smooth-bore  32s. 


The  Belmont  heavy 
rifled  32,  while  be- 
ing fired  at  the 
enemy  on  the  21st 
instant,  burst  at 
the  third  fire,  in- 
juring no  one.  An 
8-inch  columbiad 
was  at  once  mount- 
ed in  its  place. 


>To.  1 (Belmont  Battery) 

7o.  2 ... 

To.  3 


sTo.  4. 
To.  5. 


6 (medium  barbette) 

4 (3  barbette  and  1 center 
pintle). 


2 (siege  carriages) 
2 (siege  carriages) 


2 8-inch  columbiads  and  4 
smooth-bore  32s. 

3 smooth-bore  32s  and  1 
rifled  24. 

2 rifled  24s,  1 8-inch  co- 
lumbiad, 2 smooth-bore 
32s. 

2 8-inch  howitzers. 

2 8-inch  howitzers. 


19  guns  on  the  island. 


Note. — In  the  redan,  Battery  No.  1,  but  three  guns  were  used  against  the  attack  of  the  enemy’s  fleet 
nd  during  the  bombardment  of  Island  No.  10.  This  battery,  commanded  by  Captain  Rucker,  "had  six 
uns.  The  three  smooth-bore  32s  were  not  fired  ; only  the  three  8-inch  columbiads.  The  three  latter 
uns  in  the  redan  and  one  other  similar  in  Battery  No.  5 have  been  mounted  and  ready  for  action  for 
ome  two  months  past.  The  four  8-inch  columbiads  are  guns  that  I brought  down  from  the  naval 
oating  battery  and  mounted  them  immediately.  Thirty -five  guns  have  been  mounted  on  platforms 
nd  in  batteries  since  March  1 by  the  Engineer  Corps,  including  the  Sappers  and  Miners.  The  naval 
oating  battery  was  placed  by  us  in  position  on  the  north  side  of  the  island,  and  now  mounts  nine  guns, 
laking,  in  all,  fifty-two  guns  in  position  at  the  present  time. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

A.  B.  GRAY, 

Captain , O.  S.  Army , Chief  Engineer  Island  No.  10. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown. 


10  R R — VOL  VIII 


146 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XY 


[Addenda.] 


B^XVJH.)  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


147 


^lnny  afffht  JiflsKfjs&tppZ-. 
JUray  Chpf  tS&hSZpLEngr. 


"moo' 


148 


OPERATIONS  IN  M£>.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  TND.  T TChap.  XVll 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Capt.  D.  B.  Harris , C.  S.  Engineers. 

Island  No.  10,  March  9,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  the  general  that  there  a 
now  mounted  at  this  point  thirty-four  heavy  guns ; twenty-four  of  the; 
guns,  of  which  nine  are  rifled  32s,  five  8-inch  columbiads,  and  ten  smoot 
bore  32s,  are  distributed  in  five  different  batteries  on  the  main  land.  T] 
other  ten  guns,  composed  of  the  Belmont  rifled  gun,  one  8-inch  Columbia 
and  seven  smooth-bore  32s,  are  in  two  batteries  on  the  head  of  the  islan 
These  guns  are  protected  by  good  parapets,  are  all  in  barbette  on  centt 
pintle  carriages,  and,  with  the  exception  of  Battery  No.  1,  are  in  go< 
fighting  condition ; that  battery,  consisting  of  six  guns,  is  now  ov€ 
flowed  a few  inches  above  the  platforms,  and  cannot  of  course  be 
much  service  until  the  river  falls.  The  floating  battery,  consisting 
one  rifled  32  and  eight  8-inch  columbiads,  has  been  moved  from  the  poi 
tion  indicated  on  the  map  which  Captain  Gray  sent  by  Major  Me: 
wether  to  the  general  to  the  north  side  of  the  island  for  the  better  pi 
tection  of  the  channel  of  the  river  on  that  (the  Missouri)  side.  Anoth 
battery  of  five  guns  on  the  island  will  soon  be  ready  for  use. 

The  banks  of  the  river  are  caving  in  very  fast,  and  we  will  be  und 
the  necessity  of  erecting  new  batteries  in  rear  of  two,  if  not  more, 
those  already  constructed,  and  we  will  be  fortunate  if  we  do  not  lo 
any  of  the  guns,  if  what  we  hear  is  true  in  regard  to  the  land-slid 
that  sometimes  occur  on  the  Mississippi. 

The  banks  of  the  river  both  on  the  main  land  and  island  being  gem 
ally  as  high  as  anywhere  else  makes  it  necessary  to  locate  our  hi 
teries  too  near  the  river  for  permanence  or  even  safety.  The  upp 
portion  of  the  island  is  covered  by  a growth  of  heavy  timber,  which  i 
terferes  with  and  retards  the  construction  of  our  batteries  there, 
very  much  regret  the  general  has  not  been  able  to  make  a personal  i 
spection  of  this  position  and  give  Captain  Gray  and  myself  the  bene 
of  his  suggestions  in  regard  to  the  best  mode  of  defending  it.  We  st 
indulge  the  hope  he  may  yet  do  so. 

After  the  necessary  batteries  are  constructed  we  think  it  would 
advisable  to  turn  our  attention  to  the  eremaillere  lines  and  postpo 
the  construction  of  the  redoubts  which  the  general  contemplated  in  1 
plan  of  defense  on  the  main -land  and  the  island  till  those  lines  are  co 
pleted. 

It  is  very  important  as  soon  as  the  river  falls  to  complete  the  li 
already  commenced  by  Captain  Gray  from  the  river  to  the  lake.  J 
timber  has  yet  been. cut  on  the  Missouri  side  of  the  river ; it  is  ve 
heavy,  and  if  necessary  to  be  cut  with  expedition  will  require  a lar 
number  of  axmen.  Captain  Gray  and  myself  do  not  think  it  advisalj 
to  spend  much  labor  in  that  way  at  this  time,  there  being  a belt 
cleared  land  from  one-half  to  three-fourths  of  a mile  in  width  opposj 
the  island,  which  would  give  us  a good  view  of  the  enemy  should 
attempt  an  approach  in  that  quarter,  which  is  impracticable,  Capts 
Gray  says,  at  the  present  high  stage  of  the  river,  and  not  easy  j 
accomplish  at  any  time. 

There  are  no  very  commanding  positions  on  the  island  or  main-lai 
The  banks  of  the  river  on  the  island  and  this  shore  are,  however,  10 
15  [feet]  higher  than  those  on  the  opposite  shore. 

I spoke  to  General  McCown  several  days  since  in  regard  to  the  c<j 
struction  of  a redoubt,  as  directed  by  the  general,  near  New  Madr 


AP.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  30,  ETC.  149 

id  tendered  him  my  services  in  that  or  any  other  way  they  might  be 
eded  at  that  point. 

The  general  said  he  thought  the  redoubt  would  be  in  the  way  of  the 
mboats,  if  it  were  practicable  to  construct  it  in  the  presence  of  the 
emy,  and  there  was  no  need  of  my  services  at  New  Madrid  at  that 
ne.  My  attention  has,  therefore,  been  confined  to  the  works  at  this 
*int  in  concert  with  Captain  Gray.  There  has  been  no  addition  to  our 
boring  force  since  you  were  here ; it  consists  of  about  200  negroes, 
8 Irishmen,  and  Captain  Wintters’  very  efficient  company  of  Sappers 
d Miners,  numbering  about  40  men.  These  are  aided  by  daily  details 
soldiers  in  the  construction  of  the  works,  but  here,  as  elsewhere, 
ey  are  not  very  efficient  with  the  spade.  Should  a larger  force  be 
at  here,  we  will  need  wheelbarrows,  axes,  spades,  and  shovels  in  pro- 
rtion  to  the  number  sent,  say  for  1,000  laborers  300  axes,  500  wheel- 
rrows,  200  spades  and  shovels,  in  addition  to  what  we  now  have. 
Captain  Gray  thinks  it  would  be  advisable  to  send  a special  messen- 
r from  your  headquarters  to  Memphis  to  see  that  we  are  supplied 
th  the  above-mentioned  implements,  if  it  is  contemplated  to  work  a 
•ge  force  here.  Barrows,  he  says,  can  only  be  procured  from  railroad 
ntractors  at  Memphis  or  from  houses  that  furnish  the  contractors 
th  them. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

D.  B.  HARRIS, 

Captain  Engineers. 

Col.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No  31. 

(Report  of  Capt.  J).  Wintter , C.  8.  Engineers. 

Headquarters  Sappers  and  Miners, 

4 Madrid  Bend , Mo.,  March  26,  1862. 

Teneral  : I have  the  honor  to  lay  before  you  an  extract  of  my 
rnal,  which  shows  the  dates  when  the  different  guns  were  mounted: 
arrived  from  Columbus  Sunday  morning,  February  23. 

February  24,  Monday,  mounted  one  smooth-bore  32-pounder  in  Bat- 
y No.  1. 

February  25,  mounted  two  smooth-bore  32-pounders  in  Battery  No.  1. 
?ebr*ary  26,  laid  platform  and  mounted  one  32-pounder  in  Battery 

■ 5. 

^ebruary  27,  mounted  two  smooth-bore  32 -pounders  in  Battery  No.  5. 
February  28,  mounted  two  smooth-bore  32-pounders  in  Battery  No.  5. 
larch  1,  mounted  Lady  Polk,  jr.,  No.  1 , on  the  island,  and  one  smooth- 
’e  in  Battery  No.  5. 

larch  2,  mounted  one  columbiad,  8-pounder,  on  the  island. 

larch  3,  mounted  one  rifled  gun  in  Battery  No.  3. 

larch  4,  mounted  two  rifled  guns  in  Battery  No.  3. 

larch  5,  mounted  one  rifled  gun  in  Battery  No.  4,  one  rifled  gun  in 

ttery  No.  2,  and  three  smooth-bore  32-pounders  on  the  island. 

larch  6,  mounted  two  rifled  guns  in  Battery  No.  2 and  one  rifled 

i in  Battery  No.  4. 

larch  7,  mounted  one  rifled  gun  in  Battery  No.  4 and  one  smooth- 
'e  32-pounder  in  Battery  No.  2. 


150 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap.  XVm 

March  8,  made  new  chassis  and  carriages  for  three  columbiads  am 
three  Dahlgrens, 

March  9,  mounted  one  columbiad  in  Battery  No.  4 ; dismounted  h 
Battery  No.  5 one  smooth-bore  32-pounder,  and  mounted  for  it  one  32 
pounder  rifled  gun. 

March  10,  dismounted  in  Battery  No.  5 two  smooth-bore  32-pounder 
and  mounted  for  them  two  64-pounders. 

March  11,  mounted  on  the  island  one  Dahlgren  and  one  smooth-bor 
32-pounder. 

March  12, . 

March  13,  mounted  on  the  island  one  Dahlgren  and  two  smooth-bor 
32-pounders. 

March  14,  mounted  on  the  island  one  8-inch  columbiad  and  on 
6mooth-bore  32-pounder. 

March  15,  mounted  on  the  island  one  smooth-bore  32-pounder. 

March  17,  in  the  night,  after  the  battle,  mounted  the  64-pounder  i 
Battery  No.  1,  which  was  thrown  out  of  her  position. 

March  18,  fixed  up  a 64-pounder  in  Battery  No.  1 which  was  out  c 
order. 

March  22,  mounted  on  the  island  one  columbiad  in  place  of  the  burg 
Lady  Polk. 

I have  the  honor,  general,  with  the  highest  consideration,  to  be  you 
obedient  servant, 

D.  WINTTEB, 

Capt.  of  Engrs .,  Comdg.  Sappers  and  Miners , C.  S.  Army 

Maj.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown,  Commanding . 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen . J.  Trudeau , Chief  of  Artillery. 

Hdqrs.  First  Diy.,  West.  Dept.,  C.  S.  Army, 

Camp  Polk , Madrid  Bend , Mo.,  March  29,  1862. 

General  : I left  Columbus  on  March  1 at  7 p.  m.  on  board  the  stearm 
Orampus,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  Maj.  Gen.  L.  Polk,  commandin 
First  Division,  Western  Department,  to  report  to  you  at  this  post.  Tl 
-companies  of  heavy  artillery  under  my  command  had  arrived  alread 
the  same  day,  to  wit:  Capts.  A.  Jackson’s,  B.  Sterling’s,  Humes’,  Hoa< 
ley’s,  Caruthers’,  Jones’,  Dismuke’s.  Pucker’s,  Fisher’s,  and  Hamilton 
(now  Johnston’s)  siege  battery,  the  Southern  Guards.  Captains  IJumei 
Fisher,  and  Jones  had  been  already  ordered  by  General  McCown  t 
the  island  : the  other  companies  were  encamped  in  the  rear  of  Battei 
No.  5. 

1 was  struck  with  a painful  amazement  upon  my  arrival  at  findin 
that  the  post  we  were  about  to  occupy  was  in  no  measure  fortified,  an 
that  unless  we  had  some  days  of  respite  given  us  we  were  in  no  coi 
dition  to  stop  the  gunboats  on  their  way  down  the  river.  We  had  thn 
•64-pounders  mounted  upon  navy  carriages,  three  32s  and  five  smootl 
bores  (32s)  on  the  bend  on  the  island.  The  Belmont  gun,  mounted  i 
haste,  had  to  be  put  in  battle  order  by  setting  the  traverse  circle,  an 
one  8-inch  columbiad. 

Acting  in  obedience  to  your  orders  and  with  all  possible  dispatch 
began  immediately  to  prepare  against  any  emergency  by  commencin 


?•  XYin.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


151 


work  at  once  on  all  points.  Captain  Johnston  was  ordered  to  place 
he  island  his  four  guns  in  battery  (three  24-pounder  siege  guns  and 
12-pounder),  and  to  take  charge  of  the  four  64-pounder  howitzers, 
li  thirty  rounds  of  ammunition  for  each  and  every  piece ; Captain 
mes,  senior  captain,  commanding  at  the  island,  to  commence  imme- 
tely  to  mount  three  rifled  32  and  two”24  pounder  rifled,  the  platforms 
ag  ready ; the  epaulement  of  the  battery  to  be  made  at  leisure.  Cap- 
l Jackson,  with  the  assistance  of  two  companies  of  the  Eleventh 
dsiana,  under  Captain  Flemming,  who  volunteered  to  work  until  the 
tery  was  ready,  was  ordered  to  break  the  ground  where  Battery  No. 

now  placed,  to  set  his  platforms  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  to 
mt  upon  them  three  32-pounder  rifles  and  one  8-inch  columbiad. 
large  battery  still  unfinished,  known  as  Battery  No.  5,  was  placed 
tie  hands  of  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  Captains  Jones,  Dismuke,  and 
uthers  working  on  it  with  their  men  day  and  night  like  all  the  other 
panies  of  artillery.  Captain  Sterling  was  placed  in  charge  of  Bat- 
No.  1,  and  Captains  Bucker  and  Hoadley  were  ordered,  with  heavy 
tils,  to  work  as  speedily  as  possible  on  Batteries  Nos.  2 and  3. 
t this  juncture  the  Sappers  and  Miners  and  their  officers,  especially 
tain  Wintters,  rendered  valuable  assistance  and  executed  the  work 
under  consideration  of  mounting  guns  with  great  dispatch,  espe- 
y when  we  consider  that  everything  had  been  piled  upon  the  steam- 
's in  such  a way,  at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  of  Columbus,  that 
n landing  here  nothing  could  be  found.  The  chassis  of  a gun  would 
t one  point,  the  gun  and  the  carriage  at  another ; the  pintle-blocks 
pintle  pins  had  all  been  stowed  away  in  a flat-boat,  and  we  had 
ady  made  ourselves  such  as  we  required  when  they  were  discovered. 
i a confusion  I have  never  witnessed,  yet  it  kept  us  back  but  little, 
a the  4th  we  had  sixteen  guns  in  battery  at  the  island  and  fourteen 
be  bend,  without  counting  the  ten  guns  of  the  floating  battery.  We 
d now  defend  ourselves,  and  a feeling  of  security  pervaded  the  camp 
n our  men  perceived  the  importance  of  their  forts  for  themselves 
for  their  country. 

b that  time,  the  water  having  risen  in  Battery  No.  1 up  to  the  plat- 
•S,  Captain  Sterling  desired  to  be  transferred  to  Battery  No.  2 and 
iiild  it.  Captain  Rucker,  upon  his  demand,  was  placed  in  charge 
lattery  No.  1,  and  a steamboat  provided  as  a boarding  place  for 
self  and  men. 

ie  Engineer  Corps,  under  Captains  Gray  and  Harris,  were  very 
ent  in  superintending  the  construction  of  the  batteries.  I have, 
3ver,  one,  and  a serious,  objection  to  make  against  their  plan  of 
ng  the  platforms — it  doubles  the  amount  of  labor.  The  platforms 
iver  batteries,  where  the  ground  is  high,  should  always  be  sunk, 
his  mode  the  same  object  is  attained  with  less  labor  and  the  bat- 
is  far  better  protected  against  armed  vessels.  Such  batteries,  with 
aillere  rifle  pits  connecting  the  different  works,  are  impregnable, 
ss  they  are  turned. 

eutenant  Tidmarsh,  being  appointed  ordnance  officer  in  charge  of 
vhole  department,  I have  ordered  him  to  collect  all  the  ordnance 
‘S  in  one  central  building,  with  a depot  at  the  island.  Much  of  the 
unition  has  been  lost  by  being  placed  on  board  of  flat-boats, 
h became  leaky,  and  which  received  a large  quantity  of  gun-car - 
;es,  buck  and  ball,  musket  cartridges,  &c.  All  the  ammunition 
id  on  board  of  steamers  has  been  saved,  except  on  board  of  the 
ce.  Lieutenant  Tidmarsh  has  proved  himself  an  efficient,  reliable 


152  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 

officer,  who  has  given  me  great  satisfaction  in  the  discharge  of  hit 

duties.  , ^ _ _ 

On  the  12th  instant  Batteries  Nos.  2,  3,  4,  and  5 were  ready  for  action 
the  guns  and  calibers  being  distributed  according  to  report  No.  2 
already  furnished.  Battery  No.  1 now  began  to  be  fairly  under  water 
it  rose  up  to  12  inches  above  the  platform.  The  powder  magazine  wa 
then  found  to  be  leaky,  and  the  ammunition  had  to  be  kept  on  the  para 
pet.  The  powder  magazine  of  the  other  four  batteries  was  not  com 
pleted,  but  would  be  so  on  the  next  day.  We  had  then  twenty-two  gun 
mounted,  and  the  batteries  ready  for  action  on  the  bend,  and  twenty-si: 
on  the  island. 

The  herculean  labor  of  mounting  that  number  of  guns  m so  short  i 
time,  of  fitting  the  carriages,  repairing  them  as  well  as  the  chassis,  o 
building  batteries,  with  traverses  between  each  gun,  was  accomplishet 
during  the  incredibly  short  space  of  time  of  twelve  days  by  our  smal 
force.  I can  say  with  pride  that  1,000  men  performed  in  that  time  mor 
and  better  work  than  was  ever  done  at  Columbus  in  three  months,  am 
by  their  incessant  and  assiduous  labor  have  fulfilled  their  task  of  prc 
tecting  the  great  inland  sea  leading  into  the  very  heart  of  their  cour 
try.  With  forty-eight  guns  and  the  ten  guns  of  the  floating  batter 
(now  removed  in  the  upper  channel,  at  Island  No.  10)  we  could  stop  al 
the  fleets  of  the  enemy,  however  powerful  or  numerous. 

At  that  time  I caused  all  the  companies  to  remove  their  camps  in  th 
rear  of  their  respective  batteries.  This  arrangement  has  proved  highl 
satisfactory.  The  batteries  on  the  bend  are  thus  commanded  : 

Battery  No.  1,  Captain  Rucker,  six  guns  (three  smooth). 

Battery  No.  2,  Captain  Sterling,  four  guns  (one  rifle). 

Battery  No.  3,  Captain  Hoadlev,  three  guns  (1  rifle). 

Battery  No.  4,  Captain  Jackson,  four  guns  (three  smooth,  one  rifle). 

Battery  No,  5,  Captains  Jones,  Caruthers,  and  Dismuke,  one  rifle  an 
six  smooth. 

On  the  island  the  batteries  were  thus  distributed  : 

Battery  No.  1,  Captain  Humes,  six  guns  (smooth  bore). 

Batterv  No.  2,  Captain  Humes,  four  guns  (rifle). 

Battery  3,  Captain  Fisher,  five  guns  (2  rifle,  three  smooth). 

Battery  No.  4,  Captain  Johnston,  eight  guns  (siege  howitzers). 

The  floating  battery  under  the  command  of  Captain  Averett,  of  tb 
Navy. 

The  ammunition  for  the  various  batteries  (except  Battery  No.  2,  wine 
has  no  powder  magazine)  was  duly  stored  in  the  powder  magazine  c 
each  battery,  and  the  Read  and  Tredegar  shells  and  shot  distribute 
for  the  rifled  pieces,  both  on  the  island  and  on  the  bend.  Our  powdf 
and  round  32-pounder  shot  would  average  150  rounds  per  piece ; bt 
the  Read  shot,  our  most  reliable,  did  not  average  more  than  from  151 
30  per  piece.  I immediately  ordered,  for  the  third  time,  a full  suppl 
of  those  projectiles  now  on  hand. 

Colonel  Steedman,  of  the  First  Alabama  Regiment,  having  bee 
ordered  to  report  to  me  for  duty,  I made  a detail  of  two  companies  m 
the  island,  one  for  the  floating  battery,  and  a detail  of  65  men  for  Ba 
teries  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5.  This  arrangement  gives  me  four  detac, 
ments  for  each  gun ; an  invaluable  resource  in  a prolonged  action. 

Careful  and  complete  inspection  passed  on  the  14th,  both  here  ar 
on  the  island,  showed  that  our  guns  were  all  well  mounted ; that  tlj 
implements  for  each  were  perfect  and  complete;  that  the  men  woi 
their  .pieces  with  ease  and  facility;  that  they  have  an  unbounded  co 


:hap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  153 

idence  in  their  new  batteries,  and,  in  short,  that  everything  is  as  com- 
plete as  our  limited  means  would  allow. 

I cannot  commend  too  highly  the  captains  commanding  the  batteries 
or  their  zeal  and  perseverance,  for  their  promptness  in  obeying  orders, 
md  for  the  high  state  of  discipline  of  their  respective  commands.  The 
pehavior  of  the  corps  of  artillery  and  the  important  services  rendered 
fom  March  1 up  to  this  day  render  the  corps  worthy  of  the  thanks  of 
heir  commanding  officers. 

THE  ENGAGEMENT  WITH  THE  ENEMY’S  GUNBOATS. 

A little  after  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant  firing  of 
*annon  was  heard  up  the  river,  immediately  followed  by  four  long 
vhistles  from  our  scout  steamer,  the  Grampus,  which  was  soon  seen 
coming  down  the  river  under  a full  head  of  steam.  Following  close 
pehind  came  the  enemy’s  gun  and  mortar  boats,  consisting  of  light 
pmboats,  five  tugs,  towing  as  many  mortar  boats,  and  several  large 
ransports. 

At  a distance  of  4 miles  some  of  the  gunboats  opened  fire,  firing 
;hot  and  shell  slowly,  and  directing  their  fire  at  various  points  in  the 
)end,  evidently  feeling  for  batteries.  At  the  first  alarm  I had  immedi- 
itely  repaired  to  Captain  Sterling’s  battery  and  had  the  four  alarm  guns 
ired  and  the  guns  of  all  the  smooth  bores  shotted.  The  rifled  pieces 
vere  ordered  to  be  loaded  with  cartridges  and  the  shot  to  be  placed  in 
he  guns  in  case  of  an  attack  only.  I signaled  Captain  Humes,  on 
he  island,  to  do  the  same,  and  at  7.30  o’clock  I reported  to  the  major- 
general  all  ready  for  action. 

The  enemy  continued  firing  slowly  during  the  day  from  the  gun- 
>oats.  In  the  evening,  seeing  several  tugs  in  front  of  his  battery,  Cap- 
ain  Eucker  opened  upon  them  with  shot  and  shell,  but  with  no  per- 
ceptible effect,  the  distance  being  too  great  for  the  range  of  our  guns, 
fhe  gun  detachments  were  ordered  to  remain  at  their  pieces  during  the 
light,  the  First  Alabama  Eegiment  relieving  our  gunners  from  mid- 
light  until  daylight. 

At  9 p.  m.  Captain  Cummings,  of  the  signal  service,  went  to  Battery 
^o.  1 and  established  there  a signal  station,  which  proved  of  great  serv- 
ce  during  the  various  engagements. 

The  captains  of  the  batteries  were  notified  at  the  same  time  that  at 
.2  p.  m.  the  steamboat  Winchester  would  be  sunk  by  the  engineers 
n the  wash-channel  on  the  Missouri  shore.  All  went  on  quietly  that 
light,  and  the  obstruction  of  the  channel  was  successfully  performed 
vithout  attracting  the  enemy’s  notice. 

On  the  16th  gunboats  came  from  behind  the  point  on  the  Missouri 
chore,  where  most  of  the  fleet  lay  during  the  night. 

About  11  a.  m.  they  formed  a line  of  battle,  which  was  beautifully 
cept  all  day,  the  mortar  bofits  on  the  wings,  fastened  to  the  shore,  at  a 
*ange  of  4,200  yards,  the  gunboats  forming  the  center  and  the  trans- 
ports fastened  behind  the  point,  out  of  harm’s  way. 

At  11.30  o’clock  the  fire  was  opened  from  three  13-inch  mortar  boats 
ind  from  two  gunboats,  a fourth  mortar  (a  10-inch)  opening  towards 
evening.  Shells  were  thrown  in  Battery  No.  1,  around  the  bend,  and 
)n  the  island ; but  the  fire  seemed  especially  directed  towards  those 
wo  points.  The  range  was  short  and  pointing  inaccurate. 

Towards  9 o’clock  that  morning  I received  a report  from  the  officer 
>f  the  day  that  Captain  Eucker  was  making  signals  of  distress  or  else 
|:hat  he  had  shown  the  white  flag  from  his  battery.  Amazed  and  mor- 


154 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  I^D.  T.  [Chat.  XVin. 


tilled,  I ordered  a skiff,  and  proceeded  to  the  battery,  up  the  river. 
Upon  nearing  it  I discovered  a white  flag  moving  in  various  directions, 
and  a steam-tug  from  the  enemy,  bearing  also  a white  flag,  steering 
upon  the  battery.  Captain  Rucker  was  not  aware  that  his  signal  flag 
•could  be  construed  into  a flag  of  distress  either  by  us  or  by  the 
enemy.  It  was  too  late  to  stop  the  tug;  she  reached  the  battery  as 
soon  as  I did.  An  officer,  a lieutenant  in  the  Navy,  informed  Captain 
Rucker  that  he  had  seen  his  signal  and  had  come  to  inquire  if  he 
wished  to  communicate  with  the  fleet,  to  which  a negative  answer  was 
given.  I explained  the  mistake,  and  told  him  that  the  flag  would  be 
changed,  and  he  left  without  landing.  This  occurrence  is  much  to  be 
regretted,  as  it  gave  the  enemy  a chance  of  seeing  the  condition  of  our 
battery,  all  under  water,  with  its  ammunition  on  the  parapet,  and  also 
perhaps  a good  view  of  our  other  batteries ; but  it  was  unavoidable,  as 
well  as  unexpected. 

The  bombardment  was  kept  up  during  the  whole  day,  the  guns  firing 
8-inch  and  rifled  42-pounder  shells,  and.  the  mortars  pouring  incessantly 
a shower  of  13-inch  shell  in  every  direction. 

I opened  fire  from  the  island  towards  1 o’clock  that  day  from  the 
Belmont  gun  upon  some  of  the  enemy  at  work  on  the  Missouri  shore, 
with  the  effect  of  stopping  their  proceedings  altogether.  Subsequent 
reports  show  that  we  disabled  one  gun  and  killed  and  wounded  several 
men.  During  the  night  the  bombardment  was  kept  up  steadily  at  an 
interval  of  thirty  minutes,  with  no  casualty. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  Major- General  McCown  ordered  Col- 
onel Neely’s  Fourth  Tennessee  Regiment  and  Colonel  Brown’s  Fifty- 
fifth  Tennessee  Regiment  to  report  to  me  for  duty,  he  being  apprehen- 
sive that  the  enemy  might  attempt  a landing,  which  was  evidently  his 
intention.  I placed  Colonel  Brown’s  regiment  on  the  end  of  the  cr6- 
maillere  line,  each  man  having  60  rounds  of  buck  and  ball  cartridges. 
Colonel  Neely’s  was  placed  in  reserve  at  my  headquarters  in  rear  of 
Battery  No.  3.  Colonel  Steedman  was  ordered  to  send  two  detach- 
ments, of  15  men  each,  under  command  of  Lieutenants  Owens  and 
Sandford,  from  his  regiment  and  to  keep  in  front  of  my  headquarters — 
all  the  rest  of  his  forces,  not  detailed  in  the  batteries,  as  a reserve  of 
infantry. 

On  Monday  morning,  the  17th  instant,  the  enemy  having  placed  two 
gunboats  alongside  of  their  four  mortar  boats,  on  the  Missouri  side,  and 
one  13-inch  and  one  10-inch  in  the  bend  above,  on  the  Tennessee  side, 
began  to  form  their  line.  Their  large  boats  were  lashed  together  and 
•dropped  down  slowly  upon  Battery  No.  1.  At  2 miles  above  them  they 
formed  a second  line  with  their  transports,  seven  in  number,  loaded 
with  soldiers.  The  tugs  kept  busy  steaming  from  one  boat  to  another. 

At  10.30  or  11  o’clock  the  enemy  opened  fire  on  Battery  No.  1 with 
their  gunboats  lashed  together,  their  boats  lying  behind  the  point  called 
Willow  Point,  and  all  their  mortars.  Their  fire  was  slow  at  first  but 
increased  in  rapidity  and  precision,  and  was  kept  up  until  dark  with 
great  vigor  and  regularity,  the  enemy  being  well  in  range — 2,000  yards. 

1 signaled  Captain  Rucker  to  commence  firing,  and  at  the  same  time 
I ordered  Colonel  Steedman  to  proceed  to  the  battery  with  my  aide, 
Lientenant  Lane,  fearing  that  a landing  would  be  attempted.  The  bat- 
tery opened  at  noon  with  its  three  navy  shell  guns  (8-inch),  the  other 
three  32-pounders  being  kept  in  reserve  in  case  of  a close  engagement. 
The  navy  guns,  of  large  caliber,  say  8-inch,  require  for  regulation  drill 
12  men  and  1 boy,  the  gun  being  run  in  and  from  the  battery  by  means 
■of  tackle;  but  in  our  case  the  blocks  and  ropes  having  been  ten  or 


155 


AF.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

zelve  days  under  water,  although  worked  every  day,  required  at  least 
1 men  to  manage  them  properly.  It  was  under  these  disadvantages— 
> to  their  waist  in  water,  the  thickness  of  the  parapet  being  reduced 
T the  rising  of  the  river,  its  cohesion  destroyed  by  water  having  hi- 
red through,  with  no  powder  magazine — that  our  brave  men  forced 
,ck  the  enormous  and  well-appointed  heet  of  the  enemy  after  inbict- 
g serious  damage  to  several,  and  sunk  one  or  two  of  them,  it  is  as- 
rted. 

At  1 p.  m.  the  contest  became  general,  hve  gunboats  and  four  or 
e mortar  boats  opening  hre  with  their  heavy  metal  upon  the  devoted 
ttery.  I then  ordered  Battery  No.  2 (34)  and  the  heavy  rihe  from 
e island  to  commence  bring.  This  order  was  soon  extended  to  the 
vy  and  Paixhan  and  the  rihe  (32)  in  Battery  No.  5.  At  this  time 
e most  magnihcent  spectacle  was  presented  to  the  beholder.  One 
ndred  and  fifty  guns  and  mortars  of  heavy  caliber  were  soon  bring 
both  sides  with  the  utmost  precision  and  rapidity ; the  loud,  deep 
oming  of  the  heavy  smooth-bore,  the  sharp  reports  and  warbling  of 
s rihed  pieces,  and  incessant  bursting  of  the  shell  and  shot,  falling  in 
directions. 

Oare  had  been  taken  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  remove 
eh  troops  as  were  not  immediately  needed  far  enough  to  be  out  of 
nger. 

rerrible  cannonading  lasted  until  7 o’clock,  when  the  enemy  hauled 
, evidently  badly  crippled,  as,  in  fact,  we  ascertained  some  days  after - 
rds.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  having  selected  the  battery,  during  the 
iole  engagement  it  was  served  with  great  rapidity,  while  it  never 
ekened,  as  I had  always  ready  heavy  re-enforcements  at  hand,  and  I 
ve  emphatically  declared  the  last  shot  was  bred  by  Captain  Rucker 
3 o’clock. 

laptain  Rucker  having  telegraphed  for  cannoneers,  I could  have 
led  for  volunteers  from  the  battery,  as  all — including  the  officers 
d volunteers— I had  selected  were  designated  by  their  officers;  and 
} gallant  fellows  marched  up  to  their  waists  in  icy  water  to  the  relief 
their  brethern  in  arms.  All  were  told  the  danger  beforehand;  but 
fc  one  backed  out. 

Chis  relief,  from  Captains  Sterling’s  and  Hoadley’s  companies,  was 
nposed  of  15  men  from  Captain  Sterling’s  company,  under  charge 
First  Lieut.  T.  J.  Finnie,  and  12  men  from  Captain  Hoadley’s,  in 
irge  of  Serg.  W.  H.  H.  Lutrell,  the  detachment  under  command  of 
mtenant  Finnie,  and  guided  by  my  orderly,  John  Koontz,  of  Cap* 
n Jackson’s  company.  The  names  of  the  men  will  be  found  in  doc- 
ent B.* 

rVhen  the  reliefs  from  the  various  batteries  arrived  at  the  redan  fort 
y found  that  Captain  Rucker’s  exhausted  men  had  already  been  re- 
zed  by  some  men  from  Colonel  Brown’s  regiment,  then  occupying 
■ cremaillere  parapet,  who  served  the  guns  bravely,  manfully,  and 
h intelligence.  They  had  done  good  and  efficient  service  on  that 
z,  and  their  names  will  be  recorded  in  document  B.#  With  this  new 
istance  the  bre  was  kept  up  with  unabated  vigor  until  night  brought 
action  to  a close. 

U about  4 o’clock  Lieut.  W.  M.  Clark,  of  Battery  No.  1,  was  struck 
the  head  while  standing  manfully  at  his  gun  and  instantly  killed, 
r country  mourns  in  him  one  of  her  best  and  most  efficient  war- 
ds’ Let  his  bereaved  family’s  grief  be  soothed  by  the  assurance  that 

* Not  found. 


156 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


his  death,  although  glorious,  is  felt  deeply  by  the  whole  Artillery 
Corps.  Several  men  were  wounded,  including  Sergeant  Postlethwaite,. 
but  not  seriously,  and  are  all  up  now  and  have  reported  for  duty. 

The  result  of  our  fire  on  that  day  could  not  be  exactly  ascertained  ji 
but  subsequent  information  places  beyond  a doubt  that  one  of  their 
gunboats  sank  that  night  before  reaching  Hickman ; another  one  was 
towed  up  to  Cairo  in  a sinking  condition,  and  that  several  others  were 
badly  crippled. 

The  number  of  killed  and  wounded  on  their  side  has  not  been  ascer- 
tained. 

The  effect  of  the  enemy’s  fire  upon  the  batteries  on  the  bend  and 
upon  the  island  has  been  without  any  result.  No  damage  of  any  kind 
done,  except  to  the  redan  fort,  upon  which  he  seemed  to  have  concen- 
trated all  his  efforts.  It  presented  the  most  appalling  picture  of  ruin 
and  desolation.  The  parapet  was  plowed  up  in  every  direction  and 
torn  to  pieces.  The  water  from  the  river  washed  into  the  battery,  filling 
it  with  mud.  Trees  were  hacked  down  and  torn  to  shreds  by  the  heavy 
shells  and  the  rifled  cannon,  and  yet  only  1 man  was  killed  in  this  ter- 
rific contest. 

I must  now  beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  major-general 
commanding  to  the  heroic  feats  of  bravery  of  the  devoted  little  band 
and  earnestly  request  that  those  who  sit  in  the  councils  of  the  nation 
should  take  such  steps  as  they  deem  proper  to  reward  the  heroism  oi 
my  small  command.  All  brave,  all  gallant,  all  would  have  done  what 
a portion  of  them  have  been  called  upon  to  do  on  the  17th  instant. 

The  artillery  has  saved  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi.  Let  its  in- 
habitants show  their  gratitude  for  the  eminent  service  rendered  the 
cause.  In  the  name  of  my  officers  and  men  I request  that  a small 
marble  tablet  be  placed  on  the  contested  battery;  that  under  it  the  re- 
mains of  our  brother  at  arms  William  M.  Clark  should  be  placed,  and 
that  the  names  of  the  officers  and  men  who  were  present,  and  who  con- 
tributed in  the  defense  of  the  battery,  should  be  recorded. 

Besides  the  artillery  officers  already  mentioned,  who  were  conspicu- 
ous for  their  bravery  and  utmost  coolness  under  the  most  galling  fire, 
I will  [mention]  that  of  Lieut.  J.  E.  Saunders,  Orderly  Sergt.  G.  I.  Chap- 
man, of  Captain  Rucker’s  company;  Lieutenant  Barney  Hughes,  my 
acting  adjutant  (who  has  rendered  valuable  and  efficient  aid,  as  well  in 
the  office  and  on  the  field) ; Lieutenant  Tidmarsh,  ordnance  officer  (who 
through  fire  and  water  kept  the  battery  well  supplied  with  ammuni- 
tion, which  he  caused  to  be  carried  there  under  his  immediate  super- 
vision) ; Signal  Officers  E.  Jones  and  S.  Rose,  who  never  left  their  post] 
one  minute.  While  shot  and  shell  were  tearing  everything  to  pieces] 
Signal  Officer  E.  Jones  had  his  flag-staff  shot  from  his  hands  ; he  coolly] 
picked  up  the  flag  and  continued  to  communicate  his  message.  Also| 
Captains  Harris  and  ‘Gray,  of  the  Engineer  Corps;  Captain  Wintter,] 
of  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  who  came  in  the  afternoon  and  repaired  the* 
damages  done  during  the  day  under  the  fire  kept  up  by  the  enemy] 
during  the  whole  night. 

I may,  during  the  haste  that  this  report  had  to  be  written,  have  for 
gotten  some  of  the  names  of  our  officers  who  deserved  the  honor  to  be 
mentioned  in  it : but  should  it  be  so,  I will  take  especial  care  to  briflgj 
it  before  you,  and  thereby  repair  an  unintentional  wrong  and  injustice. 

I return  my  thanks  to  Colonel  Steedman,  of  the  First  Alabama .Regi- 
ment, for  the  willingness  and  promptitude  with  which  he  carried  out 
all  views  and  regulated  the  relief  details,  enabling  us  thereby  to  keep: 
up  our  fire,  remaining  all  the  time  in  the  battery,  nobly  sharing  the] 


Chap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


157 


dangers  of  those  around  him  ; to  Colonel  Brown,  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Ten- 
nessee Regiment,  who  remained  all  day  with  his  men  on  the  cremaillere , 
but  furnishing  assistance  when  needed,  taking  his  share  of  the  dangers 
surrounding  him;  to  Colonel  Neely,  of  the  Fourth  Tennessee  Regiment, 
who,  although  his  regiment  remained  in  reserve,  and  of  course  could 
not  take  any  part  in  the  engagement,  went  himself  and  remained  a long 
time  in  the  battery,  in  order  to  find  out  the  best  route  to  bring  his  men 
in  action  should  they  have  been  called  upon. 

Captain  Rucker  behaved  throughout  the  day  with  cool  judgment  and 
discretion.  I say  nothing  of  the  bravery  he  displayed  on  that  day. 
Captain  Rucker  is  a hero  and  behaved  like  one.  I propose  to  you  to 
bring  his  name  for  promotion  before  the  general  commanding-in-chief 
in  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi.  No  braver  heart,  no  better  man  could 
be  selected  for  that  distinction  on  March  17.  Captain  Rucker  has  won 
imperishable  laurels. 

The  engagement  of  the  17th  instant  is  one  of  the  most  brilliant  ex- 
ploits of  this  war.  The  enemy  admits  it,  and  claims  to  have  killed 
1,000  of  our  men.  Yes,  it  required  1,000  men  to  perform  what  150  men 
did  on  that  day.  I do  not  know  one  single  instance  on  record  that 
can  be  compared  with  it.  Its  results  are  incalculable.  By  that  victory 
we  have  shown  the  enemy  the  superiority  of  our  land  batteries  over 
their  iron-clad  gunboats.  We  have  effectually  closed  against  him  the 
gates  of  the  Thermopylae  of  the  South,  and  we  have  gained  time  and 
also  confidence  in  ourselves. 

Herewith  is  appended  document  B,*  containing  the  names  of  the 
non-comission ed  and  commissioned  officers  who  have  served  in  the 
battery  during  that  memorable  action. 

The  French  soldiers  prided  themselves  upon  the  battle  of  the  Pyra- 
mids, and  glory  and  honor  was  bestowed  upon  them  who  could  say, 
“I  was  present  at  the  battle  of  the  Pyramids.’7  Before  many  months 
elapse  it  will  be  deemed  not  the  less  glorious  among  us  to  be  able  to 
show  a name  on  the  list  of  the  heroes  of  March  17,  and  say,  “I  was 
present  at  the  attack  upon  the  redan  fort  at  Madrid  Bend.77 

With  much  respect,  general,  I submit  this  report  for  your  considera- 
tion, and  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  TRUDEAU, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding  Artillery , Madrid  Bend , 4 To. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Capt.  A.  Jackson , Jr .,  Tennessee  Artillery. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  16,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  evacuation  of 
the  post  at  Madrid  Bend  and  the  escape  of  the  heavy  artillery  com- 
panies there  under  my  command. 

On  the  night  of  April  6 I was  informed  by  General  Mackall  that  he 
would  take  all  the  available  infantry  force  and  leave  that  night  for 
some  central  point  between  Tiptonville  and  New  Madrid,  and  leave  the 
command  of  the  post  of  Madrid  Bend  to  me  as  ranking  officer  there, 
and  instructed  me  to  hold  the  place  as  long  as  possible,  and  when  I 


Not  found. 


158  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIv.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVm 

could  do  so  no  longer  to  spike  the  guns  and  escape  with  the  command 
if  possible,  by  way  of  Beelfoot  Lake. 

On  the  same  night,  during  a violent  storm,  one  of  the  enemy’s  gut 
boats  passed  the  batteries,  notwithstanding  all  the  guns  opened  a heav; 
fire  immediately  after  the  alarm  from  Battery  No.  1;  but  owing  to  th 
extreme  darkness  the  fire  was  without  effect,  as  nothing  could  be  see’ 
of  thd  boat,  and  only  a slight  noise  heard  on  the  water  occasionally  b, 
some  of  the  cannoneers. 

On  the  morning  of  April  7 I learned  from  our  couriers  and  straggler 
that  the  enemy  were  landing  large  bodies  of  troops  opposite  Poin 
Pleasant  and  below  New  Madrid  and  that  our  forces  were  retreatin. 
before  them. 

About  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cook,  in  com 
mand  of  Island  No.  10,  came  over  to  the  main  shore,  and  informed  m 
that  he  had  it  from  a reliable  source  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  o: 
the  post  unobstructed  and  unopposed  by  our  forces,  and  also  had  sue 
ceeded  in  getting  between  General  Mackall’s  immediate  command  an< 
the  post,  and  that  he  thought  it  advisable  to  evacuate  the  island,  an< 
I understood  him  to  say  that-  he  had  given  the  order  to  do  so,  and  a 
that  time  he  supposed  Captain  Humes,  in  command  of  heavy  ar tiller; 
on  the  island,  was  then  spiking  his  guns  and  preparing  to  leave. 

A few  minutes  after  this  Lieutenant  Averett,  commanding  the  floating 
battery,  informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  taken  the  battery  and  hai 
captured  some  of  his  men ; but  that  before  leaving  it  he  had  openc 
the  valves,  and  shortly  after  it  went  down  in  deep  water,  with  all  th 
ordnance  stores  and  guns  on  board.  I then  learned  that  the  enem, 
were  quite  near  the  steamboats,  lying  about  2 miles  below,  and  gavj 
the  order  to  have  them  scuttled. 

A few  minutes  after  this — not  being  able  to  get  any  communicatio: 
or  instructions  from  General  Mackall,  though  a messenger  had  bee. 
dispatched,  and  knowing  the  enemy  to  be  in  the  immediate  vicinit 
and  advancing  towards  us,  and  would  probably  be  at  the  post  in  hal 
an  hour,  and  having  no  means  of  resistance,  as  the  artillery  are  arme* 
only  with  short  sabers  and  only  two  guns,  and  they  in  Battery  No.  A 
which  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon  any  point  in  the  rear  of  the  bal 
teries — I gave  the  order  to  spike,  double-load  the  guns,  and  wedge  thj 
shot  in,  and  for  each  captain  to  conduct  his  company  to  Beelfoot  Lakd 
in  the  rear  of  the  post,  and  to  follow  it  down  to  Stone’s  Perry,  anl 
there  we  would  probably  find  the  means  of  crossing.  • 

Acordingly  the  command  left  the  post  at  about  2.30  p.  m.,  and  afte 
traveling  20  miles  through  woods  and  swamps  we  arrived,  almoS 
worn-out  with  fatigue,  with  the  greater  portion  of  the  command,  at  th! 
ferry  the  next  day  about  noon,  and  after  much  labor,  difficulty,  an<! 
danger  we  landed  safely  on  the  opposite  shore  of  the  lake  about  sunsd 
on  the  8th  instant.  We  proceeded  thence  to  Dyersburg,  where  the  cilj 
izens  received  us  very  hospitably. 

We  left  the  next  day,  after  the  stragglers  had  come  up,  for  Bell’J 
Station,  on  the  Memphis  and  Ohio  Bailroad,  and  arrived  there  on  thj 
11th  instant,  where  we  remained  two  days  for  stragglers  to  come  ivl 
and  for  orders. 

Having  in  the  mean  time  sent  a dispatch  to  Humboldt,  to  be  foil 
warded  to  the  commanding  officer  at  Corinth,  but  not  hearing  from  ill 
and  finding  it  difficult  for  so  large  a number  of  men  to  be  accommodate! 
at  so  small  a place,  I on  the  14th  instant  proceeded  to  Memphis,  an! 
arrived  here  with  the  following  companies:  Company  K,  in  comman<| 
of  Lieutenant  Brann,  with  (37  men  ; Captain  Sterling,  Company  E,  wifi 


Chap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


159 


66  men;  Captain  Rucker,  with  18  men  (almost  his  original  number)  ^ 
Captain  Hoadley,  with  24  men;  Captain  Jones,  with  33  men,  and  Cap- 
tain Dismuke,  with  36  men.  It  is  impossible  to  give  an  accurate  report 
as  to  the  precise  number  who  effected  their  escape  from  the  post  of 
Madrid  Bend  at  present,  from  the  fact  that  they  are  coming  in  daily. 

I found,  on  reaching  Bell’s  Station,  that,  contrary  to  orders,  Captain 
Caruthers’  company  had  gone  to  Trenton,  Tenn.,  in  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Roe,  who,  having  asked  permission  to  take  his  men  a short  dis- 
tance in  advance,  so  that  they  could  get  accommodations,  as  it  was 
iifficult  to  provide  for  so  many  together,  I granted  his  request,  and  in- 
structed him  to  keep  his  company  together  and  wait  for  the  remainder 
ff  the  command.  To  my  surprise,  on  my  arrival  at  Bell’s  Station,  I 
vas  informed  of  his  having  gone  to  Trenton.  I ordered  Captain  Ca- 
ruthers,  who  had  escaped,  though  sick,  and  had  overtaken  this  com- 
nand,  to  Trenton,  to  collect  the  members  of  his  company. 

I am  much  indebted  to  Captain  Kingman,  quartermaster  of  heavy 
irtillery,  for  the  zeal  and  energy  he  evinced  in  guiding  the  command 
through  the  swamp  to  the  ferry,  and  for  providing,  under  so  many  diffi- 
3ulties,  for  all. 

I regret  not  having  been  able  to  furnish  this  report  sooner,  and  will 
send  a complete  list,  when  it  can  be  procured,  of  all  under  my  com- 
nand  who  effected  their  escape  from  Madrid  Bend. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  JACKSON,  Jr., 

Captain  of  Artillery. 


Colonel  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  34. 

Report  of  Capt.  Edward  W.  Rucker , C.  8.  Artillery. 

Camp  Polk,  Island  No.  10,  Mississippi  River, 

March  26,  1862. 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  order  I submit  the  following 
eport  of  the  occurrences  at  Battery  No.  1 (the  redan  fort)  during  the 
)ombardment  by  the  enemy  since  the  15th  instant,  while  commanding 
aid  battery : 

On  the  morning  of  Saturday,  March  15,  the  Federal  fleet  appeared 
□ sight,  coming  down  the  Seven-Mile  Reach  above  the  fort  at  11  a,  m. 
Tie  enemy’s  advance,  consisting  of  several  gun  and  mortar  boats, 
eemed  to  be  examining  for  a position  to  commence  an  attack.  Shortly 
fter  several  shot  and  shell  were  fired  at  the  battery  and  at  intervals 
luring  the  day. 

At  5 p.  m.,  observing  several  tugs  nearly  in  front  of  my  battery,  re- 
onnoitering  a slough  just  above  the  sand  bar,  and  with  transports  seem- 
ng  to  locate  at  this  point  two  mortar  boats,  I opened  fire  upon  them, 
hrowing  several  shells,  some  falling  short  and  others  ranging  beyond, 
.he  transports  immediately  moved  away,  when  the  gunboats  and  mor- 
ars  replied  to  the  fire. 

At  9 p.  m.  Captain  Cummings,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  came  up  to  my 
attery  to  establish  a signal  station.  He  reported  to  me  that  a large 
teamboat  would  be  sunk  in  the  slough  during  the  night,  which  was 
one  by  Captain  Gray,  of  the  Engineers,  at  about  2 o’clock  Sunday 


160  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIT 

morning,  thus  effectually  preventing  the  passage  of  the  enemy  throng 
that  channel. 

Sunday  morning,  the  16th,  I observed,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  the 
the  enemy  had  in  position  four  mortar  boats,  with  which  they  kej 
up  a slow  but  constant  fire  on  my  battery. 

About  9 o’clock  this  morning,  as  a signal  was  being  made  to  heac 
quarters,  a small  tug  boat,  bearing  a flag  of  truce,  came  down  to  tt 
battery  from  the  gunboats.  The  officer,  a captain  in  the  Federal  Naw 
without  landing,  inquired  if  we  desired  to  communicate  with  the  flee 
as  he  had  observed  a white  flag.  I answered  him,  “ No.”  I would  hei 
state  I had  not  noticed  till  then  the  signal  flag  to  be  a white  one.  A 
this  moment  General  Trudeau  came  up  and  said  to  the  officer  it  was 
signal  to  headquarters,  and  that  the  flag  should  be  changed  to  one  « 
another  color.  I did  not  fire  to-day,  though  the  enemy  kept  up  tl 
bombardment  from  their  gun  and  mortar  boats  at  intervals  during  tl 
twenty-four  hours. 

On  Monday  morning,  the  17th,  the  enemy  having  placed  two  gu: 
boats  alongside  their  four  mortar  boats  on  the  Missouri  side,  were  o 
served  to  move  closer  to  us  and  fix  three  large  gunboats,  apparent' 
lashed  together,  very  near  the  Tennessee  shore,  and  about  1 mile  o: 
evidently,  if  possible,  to  enfilade  the  battery.  They  moved  down  vei 
slowly,  keeping  up  an  incessant  fire  from  the  rifled  guns.  I was  pr 
pared  to  open  fire  on  them  when  a little  nearer,  but  I received  orde 
from  General  Trudeau,  at  headquarters,  through  Colonel  Steedman, 
return  the  enemy’s  fire  immediately. 

The  contest  now  became  general  from  five  gunboats  and  four  mort 
boats.  This  was  at  11  a.  m.,  the  17th.  Our  batteries,  from  No.  1 to  tl 
island,  inclusive,  now  engaged  also  in  the  defense.  From  their  great 
distance  they  ceased  to  fire  after  a while,  when  the  enemy  turned  tin 
whole  force  on  my  little  forts,  pouring  an  incessant  fire  from  the  me 
tars  and  broadsides  from  rifled  cannon  of  the  heaviest  caliber.  Th 
terrible  cannonading  lasted  until  7 o’clock  in  the  evening,  when  t’ 
enemy  hauled  off,  evidently  having  the  appearance  of  being  crippled 

During  this  engagement  only  three  guns  (8-inch  columbiads)  we 
used  by  me.  They  were  mounted  upon  kon  carriages,  constructed 
New  Orleans  for  the  Navy,  and  were  situated  in  the  principal  salie 
angles  of  the  fort.  Three  others,  smooth-bore  32s,  which  I did  not  fii 
make  the  complement  of  six  guns  in  Battery  No.  1. 

At  about  4 o’clock  on  the  17th  I had  the  sad  misfortune  to  lose  i 
second  lieutenant  (William  M.  Clark)  while  nobly  standing  to  his  gu 
which  he  had  so  skillfully  served.  Lieutenant  Clark  died  imme< 
ately,  and  the  country  and  our  cause  has  sustained  a loss  in  the  dea 
of  so  gallant  and  excellent  an  officer. 

Seven  of  my  men,  including  Sergeant  Postleth waite,  were  wounde 
but,  fortunately,  not  severely.  The  Result  of  our  shot  from  the  colu 
biads  could  not  be  told  with  precision  ; but  the  coolness  of  the  cannc 
eers  and  officers,  the  accuracy  of  aim,  and  excellence  of  the  guns  mi 
have  had  a telling  effect  on  the  enemy.  The  effect  of  the  enemy’s  f 
upon  our  little  fort  was  very  severe  by  the  continuous  discharge  of  broa 
sides  from  so  many  guns  of  heavy  caliber.  The  enemy  fired  42-pound 
rifled  cannon,  8 and  10  inch  columbiads,  with  13  and  15  inch  shell  frd 
their  mortars.  The  parapet,  which  was  originally  24  feet  thick,  hjl 
been  very  much  washed  by  the  freshet  in  the  river  now  existing,  tfl 
water  being  within  1 inch  of  the  top  of  the  platform  inside  the  fojl 
Many  shot  and  shell  fell  immediately  in  the  rear  of  our  guns,  whij1 


;hap.  XVin  J NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  161 

)thers  passed  through  the  parapet,  plowing  up  the  earth  and  destroy- 
n g much  of  the  work. 

To  the  peculiarly  well-located  faces  of  the  fort  for  preventing  an  en- 
ilading  fire  from  the  most  favorable  position  which  the  enemy’s  boats 
‘ould  take  I attribute  chiefly  the  loss  of  only  one  of  my  command, 
lad  the  fort  been  differently  constructed  at  this  point  we  must  cer- 
ainly  have  met  with  far  greater  casualties.  The  redan  connects  with 
he  cremaillere  line  a part  of  a series  of  works  planned  by  Captain 
tray,  of  the  Engineer  Corps,  for  the  defense  of  the  valley— of  the  Mis- 
issippi  Valley — at  Island  No.  10. 

Through  the  night  of  the  17th  the  enemy  kept  up  the  bombardment 
tom  lifted  guns  - and  mortars.  Since  then  they  have  not  returned  to 
he  close  position  occupied  by  them  on  that  day,  although  they  have 
ept  up  a continual  fire  with  heavy  shell  and  shot  at  a greater  distance 
irtunately  doing  but  little  damage  to  us. 

First  Lieut.  J.  E.  Saunders  and  Orderly  Sergt.  George  J.  Chapman 
f my  company,  together  with  E.  Jones  and  Samuel  Jones,  of  the 
ignal  Corps,  were  engaged  with  me  the  whole  day  in  the  defense 
f the  redan,  all  of  whom  bore  themselves  with  great  coolness  and  gal- 
intry.  Signal-Officer  Jones,  having  the  staff  of  his  signal-flag  shot 
way  thrice  during  the  engagement,  seized  the  flag  in  his  hand  without 
►oking  around  to  listen  to  exclamations,  and  continued  his  important 
lessage  to  headquarters. 

First  Lieut.  Thomas  J.  Finnie,  with  a detachment  of  10  men  from 
aptain  Sterling’s  battery  (No.  2)  and  7 men  from  Captain  Hoadley’s 
ittery  (No.  3)  came  to  my  relief  at  4 o’clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
tli  and  gallantly  served  a gun  amid  a most  terrible  fire  of  the  enemy 
Colonel  Steedman  was  with  me  most  of  the  afternoon,  aiding  me  in 
■ ery  possible  way,  bringing  up  re-enforcements  through  the  water 
mch  entirely  surrounded  the  fort,  and  a detachment  from  the  First 
labama  Regiment,  with  Lieutenants  Sanford  and  Owens,  remained  in 
e fort  assisting  me  until  the  arrival  of  Lieutenant  Finnie. 

During  the  afternoon  Lieutenant  Tidmarsh,  of  the  Ordnance  and 
iptams  Harris,  Wintter,  and  Gray  also  came  to  assist  me. 

C >ief +tngia  ee r’  and  Wintter>  Lieutenant  McMahon, 
the  Engineers,  with  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  and  a force  of  hands 

UD+der  Ma|01'  Kstls;  ot  Haywood  County,  Tennessee,  rendered 
enr  T™6’ J repairing  damages,  under  fire  of  the  enemy,  and 
itting  the  fort  m a defensible  condition. 

Notwithstanding  the  bombardment  has  been  continued  by  the  enemy 
ch  day  and  night  since  the  17th  instant,  but  very  little  return  fire  has 

osim  ' thVy  U‘VV°m  H',6  faCt  the  lon8'  ran8'e  at  wliich  they  have 
vn.ni  Position.  But  to  the  officers  who  have  relieved  me  from 
y to  day  I respectfully  refer  to  for  detailed  reports. 
i°J s 'ooel  Steedman  and  all  the  above  officers  and  men  with  me 

inSta,lt  1 deSirU  t0  eXpreSS 

udeau/  thief*  of  artTlffiryfwho  hLeTu^L^me’in  The^efeTsHf 
' redan,  I desire  to  return  my  sincere  thanks. 

VII  ot  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

EDWARD  W.  RUCKER, 

. Capt.  of  Arty.,  C.  S.  Army,  Comdg.  Bat.  No.  1. 

4aj.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown, 

Commanding. 

H r r — vol  viii 


162 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  ISP.  T.  [Chap.  XVUI 


Xo.  35. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  P.  Stewart , C.  S.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  First  Diy.,  First  Corps,  Army  of  Mississippi,  ^ 

April  15,  looJ. 

Colonel  : I inclose  (as  early  as  it  has  been  possible  for  me  to  mak 
it)  a copy  of  my  report  to  General  Polk  of  the  evacuation  of  ^e 
Madrid,  hoping-  it  may  contain  the  information  desired  by  Genen 

B Allow  me’ to  say  that  1 believe,  though  I am  not  positively  certaii 
the  evacuation  was  proposed  and  insisted  on  by  the  naval  offlceis,  vh 
seemed  to  have  little  confidence  in  the  ability  of  their  gunboats  t 
withstand  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns;  also  that  while  Ate 
perfectly  willing  myself  to  remain  and  endeavor  to  hold  the  place! 
long  as  my  superiors  required  or  deemed  proper,  I felt  that  it  ve  | 
warned  a day  or  two  longer  surrender  was  inevitable. 

The  character  of  the  weather  the  night  of  the  evacuation  was  sue 
as  to  render  the  removal  of  the  guns  impossible.  I presume  the  watt 
was  a foot  in  depth  over  Fort  Thompson  and  the  soil  a perfect  musl 
I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ gTEWART 

Brigadier- Genera  l 


Col.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.] 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  First  Division, 

First  Grand  Div.,  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Corinth,  Miss.,  March  31,  lbhJfl 

In  a communication  received  from  you  on  yesterday,  to 
full  and  detailed  account  of  the  condition  of  the  respective  armies,  Fe 

eral  and  Confederate,  immediately  preceding  the  evacuation  of 

Madrid also  “ a full  and  detailed  statement  of  the  circumstances 
that  evacuation,  so  far  as  they  came  under  your  (my)  observation  — 
1st  As  to  the  Federal  Army,  the  Federal  cavalry  made  its  appe< 
ance  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  New  Madrid  during  the  afternoon 
Sundav  March  2.  A large  body  of  infantry  came  m the  follow  ing  chi 
and  their  camp  was  established  within  sight  of  the  town  and  somd 
to  4 miles  distant.  On  Wednesday,  the  12tli,  1 learned  that  two  i 
liable  citizens,  living  not  far  from  Sikeston,  estimated  the  ent  i J 
that  had  passed  down  towards  New  Madrid  up  to  SulfltlaLUI| A,1 
ceding  at  35,000  to  40,000,  with  some  seventy  pieces  of  held  ait  lie  i 
A portion  of  these  had  gone  down  to  Point  Pleasant,  some  miles  beH 
New  Madrid,  but  how  many  I could  not  ascertain.  A day  oi  twoj 
fore  the  evacuation  it  was  reported  that  they  had  just  reced  ed  ie  4 
forcements  to  the  number  of  10,000  men  and  also  some  pieces  of  heal 
artillery.  This  information  was  brought  in  by  a rehable^ citizen, 

I had  sent  in  a canoe  up  the  Bayou  Saint  Johns  for  the  puip(*H 
gaining  intelligence.  At  the  time  of  the  eyacution  I supposed  tin 
was  probably  an  army  of  25,000  men,  of  al  arms,  with  some  hft> 
sixty  pieces  of  light  and  some  of  heavy  artillery,  around  New  M^d 


i’ll.  As  to  the  Confederate  Army,  in ‘the  upper  work,  or  Fort  Baij 
" - " ’ TTr~11-ers,  and  Baker’s  regiment*] 


bead,  as  it  was  called,  were  Travis’,  Walker  o,  —“r  i 

infantry  and  Bankhead’s  field  battery  of  six  pieces,  fins  woik  UadJ 


iap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


163 


een  commenced  when  I arrived  at  New  Madrid  on  the  night  of  March 
At  the  time  of  the  evacuation  it  consisted  of  a strong  parapet  ditch, 
id  beyond  the  latter  a sort  of  abatis  of  brush  and  felled  trees.  It  was 
a irregular  line,  extending  from  the  bayou  above  the  town  to  the  river, 
>me  300  or  400  yards  below  the  bayou.  Bankhead’s  guns  were  placed 
l platforms  behind  the  parapet ; also  four  smooth-bore  32-pounders, 
ort  Thompson,  a mile  below  the  town,  is  a bastioned  work  of  four 
outs,  each,  I suppose,  400  feet  long.  The  garrison  consisted  of  Gantt’s 
id  Smith’s  regiments  of  infantry  and  J.  W.  Stewart’s  and  Upton’s  com- 
mies of  heavy  artillery,  and  its  armament  of  live  32-pounders,  five 
ts,  siege,  and  some  smaller  pieces.  There  was  a siege  12-pounder  not 
ounted.  There  were  a good  many  sick.  I made  one  or  two  returns 
- General  McCown’s  headquarters  of  the  entire  command,  but  do  not 
>w  remember  the  details.  There  were,  however,  in  the  works  less 
an  3,000  for  duty.  The  garrison  of  the  upper  work  was  encamped 
ithin  it.  Of  the  lower,  on  the  bank  of  the  river  below  the  fort,  then 
sing  protected  on  the  land  side  by  a rifle  ditch.  [Sic.] 

3d.  As  to  the  circumstances  of  the  evacuation : During  the  night  of 
Wednesday,  the  42th  instant,  the  enemy  planted  a battery  some  three- 
larters  of  a mile  from  Fort  Thompson.  It  contained  24-pounders,  a 
ece  from  which  8-inch  shell  were  thrown  (I  supposed  a howitzer),  and 
me  smaller  rifled  pieces.  The  fire  from  this  battery  upon  Fort  Thomp- 
n and  the  gunboats  commanded  by  Commodore  Hollins  commenced 
me  time  before  daylight  next  morning  and  continued  at  intervals  till 
te  in  the  afternoon.  Lieutenant  Bobinson,  of  Upton’s  artillery  corn- 
uy,  and  a private  (whose  name  I do  not  remember)  of  Captain  Stew- 
t’s  company,  were  killed,  and  Lieutenant  Moses,  of  the  latter  com- 
ny,  was  wounded,  but  not  seriously.  There  was  no  damage  done  to 
e fort.  I do  not  know  what  injury,  if  any,  was  sustained  by  the  gun- 
ats.  In  the  afternoon  a demonstration  with  infantry,  cavalry,  and 
;ht  artillery  was  made  against  the  upper  fort,  which  was  repulsed  by 
e fire  from  the  Pontchartrain  and  from  Bankhead’s  battery.  It  was 
ported  also  by  the  pickets  that  the  enemy  had  commenced  the  erec- 
m of  batteries  against  the  upper  fort,  and  another,  more  advanced, 
ainst  Fort  Thompson.  About  the  middle  of  the  day  I saw  General 
sCown  on  the  Mohawk,  at  the  upper  fort.  He  mentioned  the  subject 
evacuation ; desired  me  to  consider  it,  and  stated  that  he  would  re- 
in from  above  at  night  and  have  a conference  on  board  the  McRae, 
i asked  me  if  I thought  the  guns  in  the  lower  fort  could  be  removed 
tween  10  o’clock  at  night  and  5 o’clock  in  the  morning.  I replied 
at  I thought  it  possible  ; but  that  I would  go  down  again  to  the  lower 
;t,  examine  the  guns  and  the  ground,  and  would  then  be  able  to  ex- 
css  an  opinion. 

On  returning  to  the  upper  fort,  about  dark,  I learned  that  General 
•Cown  had  gone  aboard  the  flag-ship,  and  desired  me  to  follow  him 
JTe-  I did  so,  but  was  unavoidably  delayed  in  reaching  the  McRae, 
i arriving  there  I found  General  McCown,  Commodore  Hollins,  and 
feral  officers  of  the  gunboats  in  consultation.  I did  not  hear  any  of 
pm  express  an  opinion  in  regard  to  the  evacuation.  My  own  being 
xed  for,  I said  that  if  we  could  get  sufficient  re-enforcements  within 
jliort  time  to  enable  us  to  take  the  field  we  could  and  ought  to  hold 
1 longer.  General  McCown  replied  that  he  could  not  expect  further 
l in  less  than  ten  days.  I then  expressed  the  Opinion  that  we  could 
t hold  out  so  long.  There  were  only  enough  artillerymen  to  furnish 
1 detachment  to  each  gun,  not  enough  for  reliefs,  and  I thought  they 
uld  be  exhausted  in  a day  or  two  more.  The  infantry  were  also 


164  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 

greatly  fatigued,  especially  at  the  upper  works,  from  guard  duty,  labo 
on  intrenchments,  and  frequent  alarms  by  day  and  often  at  mgj 
There  was  then  a general  assent  to  an  evacuation  that  night.  Th 
gunboats  General  Polk  and  Livingston,  under  the  command  of  Caf 
tain  Carter  (who  expressed  the  opinion  that  they  would  be  sufficien 
for  the  purpose),  were  to  proceed  to  Port  Thompson,  to  remove  tb 
garrison  and  property  to  Tiptonville.  I was  directed  to  accompanj 
Captain  Carter  and  give  orders  for  the  evacuation  of  Fort  Thompsoi 
while  General  McCown,  as  I understood,  was  himself  to  give  direction 
at  the  upper  fort.  We  were  then  out  in  the  river,  opposite  to  tb 
town.  On  arriving  near  Fort  Thompson,  on  board  the  Polk,  Captai 
Carter  called  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  McRae  and  Ponchi 
train  were  moving  down  the  river,  instead  of  remaining  behind  tj 
cover  our  retreat.  They  passed  on  below  us,  and  did  not,  as  1 ai 
aware,  return.  M^e  reached  the  fort  near  10  o’clock.  Captain  Caitd 
and  myself  went  ashore  and  sent  into  the  fort  for  General  Gant] 
Colonel  Smith,  and  Captain  Stewart.  On  inquiry  I learned  that  tb 
pickets  thrown  out  from  the  fort  had  been  driven  in,  and  none  wel 
then  posted.  Three  of  Colonel  Smith’s  companies  were  then  in  tl 
rifle  ditch.  I directed  him  to  take  the  balance  of  his  regiment  ad 
post  a strong  guard,  and  to  advance  it  as  far  towards  the  enemy  as  n 
could  without  bringing  on  a skirmish.  These  three  officers  were  the 
notified  what  was  to  be  done,  and  informed  that  the  ammunition  wou] 
first  be  removed,  then  the  guns,  and  lastly  the  men  and  their  baggagl 
They  were  duly  cautioned  as  to  conducting  the  work  in  silence.  Ca  l 
tain  Carter  then  said  to  them  that  they  must  hasten  the  matter ; tin 
he  intended  to  save  his  boats,  and  that  if  the  enemy  fired  upon  the 
he  would  leave,  and  that  they  must  shift  for  themselves.  I then  call 
for  the  ordnance  officer  (Lieutenant  Isnard),  and  directed  him  to  supel 
intend  the  removal  of  the  ammunition.  The  sailors,  artillerymen,  ail 
most  of  the  infantry  remaining  were  set  to  work  at  this.  In  the  courl 
of  an  hour  it  began  to  rain.  I had  previously  directed  an  officer  | 
begin  the  removal  of  the  24-pounder  guns  with  his  men.  One  of  the. 
was  limbered  up  and  pulled  off  its  platform  onto  the  ramp  in  the  rea 
where  it  sunk  so  deep  in  the  mud  that  it  was  impossible  to  move  I 
The  rain  was  unusually  violent,  and  the  night  became  so  dark  that  j 
was  difficult  to  see,  except  by  the  flashes  of  lightning.  The  men  11 
came  sullen  and  indifferent — indisposed  to  work.  I spent  some  tin 
in  collecting  together  such  of  them  as  were  idle,  and  urged  them 
carry  off  the  boxes  of  ammunition  from  the  magazine  and  pass  the 
aboard  the  boats.  At  length  I learned ‘from  Captain  Stewart  that  a 
the  guns  had  been  spiked ; that  rat-tail  files  had  been  sent  up  for  ti 
purpose  from  one  of  the  gunboats,  with  orders  to  spike  the  guns,  j 
replied  that  no  such  orders  had  been  given  by  me ; that  the  spiking 
the  guns  should  have  been  the  last  thing  done,  and  directed  him  I 
make  another  effort  with  his  artillery  companies  to  remove  the  guij 
and  if  it  could  not  be  done,  to  cut  up  the  carriages. 

Soon  after  this  an  artillery  officer  informed  me  that  Gantt’s  regime] 
was  going  aboard  the  boats;  that  Captain  Carter  was  hurrying  then 
telling  them  he  intended  to  save  his  boats,  and  would  leave  them  1 
shift  for  themselves  if  the  enemy  fired,  and  that  he  had  told  Gcneij 
Gantt  to  hurry  his  men  aboard.  There  was  an  old  wharf-boat  at  tj 
landing  used  as  a hospital,  which  contained,  as  I was  informed,  sod 
hundred  sick  persons  and  their  attendants.  I gave  directions  to  hal 
as  much  baggage  put  aboard  it  as  it  could  safely  hold,  and  the  rema* 
der  on-  the  two  gunboats ; sent  out  for  Colonel  Smith  and  his  regimeil 


165 


HAP.  XVIIL]  new  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

ncl  stood  on  the  hank  of  the  river  as  they  came  in  to  direct  them  where 
) go.  Colonel  Gantt  was  sent  to  put  some  of  his  men  to  work  with 
ses  to  cut  up  the  gun-carriages,  and  also  to  make  sure  that  all  of  his 
ad  Smith’s  men  had  come  in.  Subsequently  I sent  Captain  Stewart 
o’ain,  with  such  of  his  men  as  he  could  find,  to  see  that  the  gun-car- 
ages  were  as  thoroughly  demolished  as  was  possible.  The  ordnance 
•ficer  had  reported  to  me  at  once  that  all  the  ammunition  was  out  of 
le  magazine.  Some  of  it  was  left  behind,  piled  up  near  the  magazine, 
ow  much  I am  unable  to  say,  but  do  not  think  it  possible  that  any 
rge  amount  could  have  been  left.  The  men  had  intended  passing  the 
ight  in  the  fort,  and  had  taken  with  them  from  their  quarters  their 
srsonal  effects.  These  were  carried  aboard  the  gunboats  or  put  on 
ie  wharf  boat.  After  seeing,  as  I supposed,  that  the  men  were  either 
1 board  or  on  their  way  to  the  boats,  and  learning  from  Colonel  Gantt 
•at  he  had  himself  called  in  the  companies  from  the  rifle  trench  and 
id  been  through  his  camp  to  see  that  no  stragglers  were  left,  I went 
>oard  the  Polk  and  did  not  return  again  to  "the  shore.  I had  gone 
l the  boat  twice  before  to  hunt  officers  to  send  after  their  men,  and 
so  to  get  a few  minutes’  relief  from  fatigue  and  the  violence  of  the 
orm.  There  was  no  appearance  of  a panic  among  the  men.  Between 
and  4 o’clock  the  boats  left,  the  Livingston  having  the  wharf  boat  in 
w and  steamed  down  to  Tiptonville,  whence  I was  ordered  to  Island 
o.  10  by  General  McCown  about  7 o’clock  in  the  evening.  I did  not 
ink  it  possible  to  get  what  mules  Colonel  Gantt  had  in  his  command 
>oard  the  boats,  and  suggested  to  him  that  they  ought  to  be  turned 
ose,  in  which  I understood  Captain  Carter  to  concur.  " I did  not  think 
e boats  had  capacity  enough  for  them.  The  two  artillery  companies 
cupied  tents,  the  infantry  being  mostly  in  huts.  I directed  the  artil- 
ry  officers  before  the  boats  left  to  make  an  effort  to  get  their  tents 
board.  They  subsequently  reported  that  they  could  not  get  many 
the  men  together  in  the  darkness  and  rain  nor  induce  the  few  whom 
ey  did  collect  to  do  anything  at  it. 

The  above  is,  so  far  as  1 can  remember,  a correct  account  of  that 
rt  of  the  evacuation  which  came  under  my  own  observation.  It  was 
possible  for  me  to  see  much  of  what  was  done  by  others,  or  to  con- 
>1  the  men  under  the  circumstances,  to  whom  1 was  personally  a 
mparative  stranger. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALEX.  P.  STEW  APT, 
Brigadier- General,  C.  8.  Army. 


Xo.  36. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  E.  W.  Gantt , G.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade, 
Madrid  Bend , Mo.,  March  17,  1862. 
Sir  : About  midnight  on  the  evening  of  the  12th  instant  firing  on 
r picket  lines  in  front  of  Fort  Thompson  was  announced  to  me,  and 
3rtly  afterwards  a courier  came,  in  notifying  me  that  some  movements 
the  enemy  (who,  you  are  aware,  were  in  force  some  two  and  a half 
les  from  us  for  more  than  a week)  were  about  taking  place.  I dis- 
tclied  discreet  scouts  from  my  command  to  repair  there  at  once  and 
certain  definitely,  if  possible,  the  character  of  the  enemy’s  move- 


166 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

ments.  Not  being  satisfied  with  tlieir  reports  I repaired  to  the  pickel 
line  in  person,  and  was  soon  convinced  that  they  were  moving  up 
with  pieces  of  artillery,  in  front  of  Fort  Thompson.  I immediately 
ordered  the  pickets  strengthened;  they  already  constituting  one-fifth  o 
my  entire  command.  The  enemy’s  picket  line,  numbering  as  much  as 
the  whole  garrison  of  the  fort,  was  pressed  forward,  and  our  pickets 
forced  to  retire  a distance  of  300  paces.  Protected  by  a strong  force 
of  cavalry  and  infantry,  as  well  as  by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  the 
enemy  succeeded  in  planting  two  batteries  in  front  of  the  fort,  1 mihj 
distant.  This  we  could  not  prevent  without  bringing  on  a general 
engagement  at  night  on  the  enemy’s  ground,  which  would  have  beeil 
disastrous  to  us  beyond  question. 

About  2 o’clock  I sent  Captain  Jordan  to  report  to  General  Stewar 
the  movements  of  the  enemy,  &c.  Apprehending  an  attack  not  fron 
the  front  (properlv  the  rear,  as  the  fort  was  intended  to  front  the  river)! 
but  from  the  flank  down  the  river,  which  is  the  most  vulnerable  pom! 
of  the  fort,  I directed  Capt.  R.  A.  Stewart,  commanding  Artillery  Corps! 
to  send  into  the  fort  at  once  detachments  to  move  a portion  of  the  gunl 
bearing  both  in  front  and  on  the  left  of  the  fort.  1 also  went  in  persoil 
to  Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Eleventh,  and  Colonel  Cook,  commanding  tbu 
Twelfth,  Arkansas  Regiments,  instructing  them  to  hold  their  command] 
in  readiness,  a portion  of  which  I desired  to  enter  the  fort  and  the  resij 
due  the  rifle  pits  below  the  fort.  These  dispositions  were  ordered  abou « 
2 a.  m.,  March  13. 

Just  at  day-dawn  the  enemy’s  batteries  in  front  of  the  fort  opened 
fire  upon  us.  Our  guns  from  the  northern  bastion  of  the  fort  rej 
sponded  promptly  and  with  animation,  and  a brisk  cannonading  wa 
kept  up  for  half  an  hour.  I 

The  morning  turned  out  to  be  dark  and  foggy,  which,  with  tli 
smoke  from  the  guns,  rendered  it  impossible  to  ascertain  anything  oj 
the  enemy’s  movements  or  to  direct  the  firing  from  the  fort  with  propel 
accuracy.  I therefore  directed  a cessation  of  firing  from  our  guns.  Thl 
enemy  kept  up  firing  from  their  batteries,  which  seemed  to  be  directed 
not  at  us,  but  at  the  transports  in  the  river,  the  chimneys  of  whitil 
were  visible  above  the  fog.  The  smoke  clearing  off  revealed  to  us  tli 
enemy’s  batteries,  with  four  regiments  of  infantry  more  than  half  a mill 
from  them,  partly  secreted  from  view  by  the  timber  in  front  of  us.  1 
ordered  a fire  from  three  of  the  four  guns  from  the  northern  bastio: 
and  the  two  12-pounders  on  the  curtain  in  front  to  be  directed  at  tli 
infantry,  and  from  three  of  the  24-pounder  guns  in  the  northwester 
bastion  upon  the  enemy’s  batteries.  This  was  done  with  such  accuracj 
and  effect  that  the  infantry  were  forced  to  retire  from  view.  I the 
directed  the  fire  to  be  concentrated  upon  the  battery  in  the  field  fo  thl 
left.  This  was  kept  up  for  nearly  an  hour.  The  smoke  and  fog  agai 
becoming  dense,  Ave  were  compelled  to  suspend  firing.  Observing  tha 
the  fog  was  heavy  oATer  the  gunboats,  I directed  our  firing  fo  be  hell 
until  such  times  as  they  might  be  enabled  to  ascertain  the  locality  cj 
the  enemy. 

In  the  course  of  a half  hour  the  fire  of  the  gunboats,  heretofore  i 
regular  and  desultory,  Avas  opened  warmly  upon  the  battery  on  the  lef 
This  was  kept  up  for  some  time,  our  fort  in  the  mean  time  remain  in 
silent. 

After  the  firing  from  the  gunboats  had  slackened  I directed  tlial 
every  a\Tailable  gun  in  the  fort  should  be  concentrated  upon  tli 
enemy’s  battery  on  the  left ; that  the  first  should  be  fired  from  tlij 


hap.  XVIII.  1 NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


167 


astion  on  the  east,  and  twenty-five  seconds  thereafter  the  second,  and 
tie  residue  in  quick  succession. 

Taking  a position  where  I could  distinctly  see  the  effect  of  our  shots, 
was  gratified  to  find  that  every  shot  told  upon  their  works,  and  that 
wo  of  their  guns  were  dismounted.  This  was  repeated  upon  the  same 
attery,  and  their  firing  ceased,  except  from  one  gun.  Our  next  fire 
'as  directed,  after  a similar  manner,  upon  the  works  to  the  right.  After 
wo  rounds  from  the  first  their  battery  made  no  further  response. 

I am  gratified  to  say  that,  notwithstanding  our  Artillery  Corps  had 
ever  before  been  under  fire,  they  acted  with  great  coolness  and  cour- 
ge. The  firing  of  the  enemy  was  spirited  and  directed  with  great  pre- 
ision.  The  guns  of  Lieutenant  Isnard,  on  the  curtain  fronting  the 
nemy,  were  managed  with  great  coolness  and  effect.  They  drew  a. 
arm  fire  from  the  enemy,  many  shots  passing  over  and  around  them, 
Idle  others  struck  the  parapet  between  the  guns,  bounding  over  the 
eads  of  the  gunners.  The  shots  were  generally  picked  up  and  sent 
ack. 

A gun  managed  by  W.  H.  Toler,  of  Captain  Upton’s  company,  by  its 
nerring  aim  provoked  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  Three  balls  in  quick  suc- 
ession  passed  directly  over  it,  while  the  fourth  (a  32-pounder)  passed 
irectly  under  the  muzzle,  striking  the  axle,  the  ball  shivering  it  in 
ieces.  Fragments  of  it  struck  Mr.  Toler,  who,  not  the  least  discon- 
erted,  promptly  asked  and  obtained  leave  to  return  the  fire.  Night 
oming  on,  our  men  slept  on  their  arms  in  the  fort. 

About  10  a.  m.  I received  orders  from  General  Stewart  to  evacuate 
le  fort.  I was  not  surprised  at  this,  as  without  receiving  re-enforce- 
tents  we  could  not  iiossibly  hold  the  place,  the  enemy  numbering,  as 
e had  learned,  eighty  regiments,  with  seventy  pieces  of  artillery, 
hile  our  whole  force  in  both  forts  could  not  exceed  3,500.  I was  sat- 
;fied  that  the  order  was  made  because  such  re-enforcements  could  not 
e obtained,  and  because  there  was  no  reason  to  sacrifice  a force  whose 
lose  proximity  to  another  point  would  render  them  invaluable,  and 
here  a sacrifice  of  them,  if  necessary,  would  have  an  inconceivable 
loral  effect.  I think  the  enemy  intended  no  immediate  assault.  His 
lan  evidently  was  to  throw  around  us  at  night  new  batteries,  sup- 
orting  them  with  a force  larger  than  our  entire  garrison,  thus  com- 
elling  us,  at  the  loss  of  the  co-operation  of  the  gunboats  and  guns 
om  the  forts,  to  go  out  to  meet  him,  or  to  be  reduced  by  the  increased 
trength  of  our  [his]  artillery  and  ultimately  and  speedily  overwhelmed. 
Ve  dared  not  go  out  to  meet  him.  There  was  no  time  when  we  could 
ave  done  so  or  even  harassed  him  on  his  march.  His  cavalry  force 
lone  was  as  large  as  the  garrison  at  Fort  Thompson,  and  his  advance 
uard  outnumbered  all  the  Confederate  troops  at  that  time  on  the 
lississippi  River  above  Memphis,  or,  as  I am  advised,  which  could 
ossibly  have  been  spared  to  us. 

In  obedience  to  instructions  from  General  Stewart  I ordered  Lieu- 
‘nant-Colonel  Miller  to  remain  quietly  in  the  rifle  pits,  with  six  com- 
anies  under  his  command,  and  Colonel  Smith  to  take  seven  com- 
anies  of  the  Eleventh  Arkansas  and  press  his  way  quietly  as  close  up 
> the  enemy’s  lines  as  he  well  might,  so  as  to  keep  back  the  enemy’s 
ickets,  who,  just  looking  around,  had  fired  upon  ours.  This  he  exe- 
uted  promptly  and  effectively,  the  only  difficulty  he  experienced  being 
) restrain  his  men  from  precipitating  themselves  upon  the  enemy, 
3gardless  of  numbers.  I then,  with  the  aid  of  Captain  Hatcher, 
rnsed  Tip  the  seven  remaining  companies  and  the  two  companies  of 
rtillery,  and  put  them  under  charge  of  officers  to  remove  the  stores 


168 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIv.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai>.  XYIII. 


from  the  fort  to  the  boat.  My  first  effort,  however,  was  to  get  the  guns 
on  board.  After  we  had  succeeded  in  getting  two  of  them  to  the  river 
a terrible  and  almost  unprecedented  storm  came  up,  and  rendered  it 
impossible  to  remove  the  others.  The  mud  and  water  soon  became 
so  deep  as  to  render  the  road  to  the  river  next  to  impassable.  I then 
directed  the  removal  of  all  the  stores  of  every  kind  that  could  be 
placed  on  board. 

In  this  we  were  kindly  aided  by  assistance  furnished  us  by  the 
officers  of  the  gunboats  Lady  Polk  and  Livingston.  The  difficulty  hi 
getting  aboard  the  boats  was  very  great  and  consumed  much  time, 
but  created  no  confusion,  everything  being  placed  on  the  boats  that 
they  could  carry.  I then  ordered  the  men  to  embark.  To  assure  my- 
self that  all  were  on  board  I went  around  the  rifle  pits  to  the  picket 
stand  in  front  of  the  fort,  through  the  fort,  and  to  such  tents  as  had 
lights  in  them,  and  returning,  reported  to  General  Stewart  the  fact 
above,  and  obtained  permission  to  come  on  board  myself. 

The  evacuation  was  conducted  and  accomplished  in  good  order. 
With  the  aid  of  transports  we  could  have  succeeded  in  bringing  ofl 
our  tents,  camp  equipage,  wagons,  and  teams;  but  the  bringing  oi 
transports,  and  it  already  garrisoned,  could  not  have  been  mistaken 
by  the  enemy.  The  undertaking  of  an  evacuation  in  sight  and  hearing 
of  overwhelming  numbers,  hazardous  and  delicate  in  itself,  might,  1 
feel  safe  in  saying,  have  been  defeated  by  the  bringing  of  transports: 
or,  if  not  defeated,  accompanied  with  great  destruction  of  life  and  the 
entire  loss  of  our  stores  and  other  property.  As  it  is,  we  have  sucj 
eeeded  in  saving  our  military  stores,  small-arms,  and  the  clothing  and! 
baggage  of  the  soldiers.  The  guns  in  the  fort  were  spiked,  and  the 
carriages  of  most  of  them  cut  and  left  behind.  It  was  utterly  impossi 
ble  to  save  them.  Except  them,  our  loss  is  trifling. 

Our  loss  in  killed  was  2,  wounded  1,  and  missing  13.  These  last  art 
principally  from  the  Eleventh  Arkansas  Regiment,  who  left  the  rifld 
pits  during  the  storm,  and,  seeking  shelter  near  some  of  the  unoccu 
pied  tents,  fell  asleep  and  were  left  behind.  We  had  no  means  oil 
ascertaining  the  enemy’s  loss.  Ambulances  were  seen  several  timea 
to  go  and  return  from  their  batteries. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  your  brave  soldiers  of  this  com 
maud,  who,  worn  down  with  fourteen  days  and  nights  of  toil  and  watch 
ing  in  the  face  of  an  enemy  numbering  twenty  to  one,  in  the  midst  o: 
a terrible  storm,  and  through  mud,  rain,  and  co*ld,  worked  patienthj 
and  perseveringly  to  save  our  stores  from  the  enemjy  preserving  thd 
best  of  order  and  discipline,  and  leaving  reluctantly  and  suddenly  i| 
place  they  had  pledged  themselves  to  each  other  and  their  immediate 
commanding  officers  to  hold  or  perish  in  the  attempt. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Third  Brigadj}.  I 

Maj.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown,  Commanding . 


Atlanta,  Ga.,  August  27,  1802.|j 
Major-General  Polk,  Chattanooga , Tenn. : 

Dear  Sir  : For  more  detailed  account  of  my  course  and  conduct  a' 
and  during  the  evacuation  of  New  Madrid  I beg  leave  to  refer  you  b : 
Captain  Hatcher,  who  is  now,  I am  told,  on  General  Stewart’s  staff.  Hi 


:hap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  169 

vTas  with  me  all  the  clay;  we  lay  down  together  at  night;  were  asleep 
;t  9 or  10,  when  the  messenger  came  to  us.  He  will  tell  you  that  I 
lever  even  hacl  an  opportunity  of  becoming  intoxicated. 

I only  saw'  General  Stewart  when  he  first  came  and  once  afterward, 
rhen  I told  him  he  could  not  get  the  guns  away.  I last  saw  him  on 
Captain  Carter’s  boat.  We  lamented  the  loss  of  the  guns.  Captain 
barter  seemed  much  mortified.  General  S.  remained  with  Captain  C. 
took  my  blankets  and  went  down  to  the  steamboat  Louisville.  This 
ras  after  we  landed  and  about  4 o’clock  a.  m. 

This  is  a strange  accusation  to  have  been  brought  against  me.  In 
11  my  life  put  together  of  wine  and  ardent  spirits  I never  drank  so 
mch  as  one  gallon ; with  all  opportunities,  I have  not  tasted  even  the 
iglitest  drink  for  four  months.  I could  never  accustom  myself  to  it. 
t has  only  been  in  extreme  cases,  since  in  the  service,  that  I have 
ouchecl  it.  I am  determined  to  be  put  right  in  this  thing. 

My  kindest  regards  to  Colonel  Bichmond. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

E.  W.  GANTT. 


No.  37.  , 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  L.  M.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army. 

Saint  Francis  County,  Arkansas, 

April  9,  1862. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  order,  dated  March  29,  1862,  I have 
ie  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  facts  connected  with  the 
vacuation  of  that  portion  of  New  Madrid  called  the  Upper  Fort,  or 
’ort  Bankhead,  Avhich  was  commanded  by  me  : 

On  Thursday,  March  13,  at  about  8 p.  m.,  I was  ordered  to  report  to 
reneral  McCown,  commanding,  and  received  from  him  a verbal  order 
> evacuate,  and  the  steamer  De  Soto  assigned  to  me  for  that  purpose, 
ly  command  consisted  of  three  regiments  of  infantry,  one  of  which 
mtaiiied  twelve  companies,  and  one  battery  of  light  artillery.  My  first 
bep  was  to  place  three  companies  of  infantry  on  duty  at  the  parapet, 
i addition  to  the  picket  guard  of  180  men.  I informed  the  command 
lg  officers  of  regiments  and  battery  to  proceed  to  evacuate,  and  speci- 
ed  the  manner  in  which  it  was  to  be  done. 

I placed  the  steamer  under  command  of  Col.  Alpheus  Baker,  First 
labama,  Tennessee,  and  Mississippi  Begiment,  the  next  highest  in 
mk  to  myself.  I applied  to  Captain  Dunnington,  of  the  gunboat 
pntekartrain,  to  assist  me  to  the  extent  of  transporting  my  picket 
uard  and  police  guard ; also  the  three  above-mentioned  companies, 
le  expressed  his  willingness  to  do  so.  A sufficient  detail  was  made  to 
lace  on  board  the  steamer  the  ammunition  for  small-arms,  of  which 
fere  were  some  40  boxes,  which  was  safely  accomplished.  At  the  same 
me  1 was  indebted  to  Captain  Dunnington  for  the  use  of  his  crew  in 
‘moving  on  board  the  fixed  ammunition  of  the  32-pounders,  of  which 
>e  fort  contained  four. 

All  was  going  on  under  my  personal  superintendence  as  far  as  I was 
ble  to  extend  it.  I was  repeatedly  informed  by  Colonel  Baker,  and 
iso  by  the  captain  of  the  steamer,  that  it  was  impossible  to  carry  any 
tore  ; that  the  steamer  was  sinking  or  would  sink.  Four  pieces  of  the 
eld  guns  and  two  limbers  were  on  board.  I had  much  difficulty  in 


170 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IXD.  T.  [Chav,  xviii. 


wetting-  the  limbers  off  the.  boat  and  placing  on  the  two  pieces'.  At  this 
time  the  boat,  seemed  to  me  to  be  more  than  laden,  and  she  was  allowed 

t0 /then1  dispatched  my  acting  aide-de-camp,  Lieut.  I 0.  Alexander,' 
to  draw  ill  the  picket  guard,  with  specific  instructions  to  the  otticei  Jn 
command  how  it  was  to  be  conducted.  Upon  their  arrival  the  four  3-- 
pounders  were  securely  spiked  with  excellent  steel  files  for  that  pm- 
nose.  While  the  pickets  were  coining  in  diligent  search  was  made 
throughout  the  camp,  and  I am  gratified  to  say  that  not  a single  man 
of  my  command  was  left.  The  wagons  and  teams  had  been  sent  ta 
island  No.  10  several  days  previous,  being  of  no  use  at  the  fort.  Ko 
commissary  stores  were  abandoned.  . , . , 

My  .estimate  of  loss  is  about  one-half  ol  the  tents  belonging  to  the 
command,  many  of  which  were  taken  to  the  boat,  but  could  not  be 
carried  on  board.  There  being  no  means  of  transporting  the  limbers 
and  caissons  belonging  to  the  field  pieces,  it  was  with  much  soirow 
that  I gave  the  order  for  them  to  be  thrown  over  into  the  river  to  pie- 
vent  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

I desire  to  notice  Lieutenant  Alexander,  acting  mde-de-camp  and 
Capt.  I.  D.  Thomas,  quartermaster  of  the  Fortieth  Regiment,  Pioms- 
ional  Army,  for  their  efficient  aid  during  the  night  of  the  - 13th. 

1 have  given  details,  as  specified  m the  ordei  of  March  29,  186^. 

In  justice  to  myself  I will  state  that  this  report  would  have  been 
regularly  forwarded  at  an  earlier  date  but  for  ill-health. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, ^ 

Brigadier-  General. 


Col.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Saint  Francis  County,  Arkansas, 

April  9,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  opera 

• A ^4-  IV  T n A Y.1  A T>  rm  A • 


Colonel:  a mr,.  i 

tions  while  I was  in  command  at  Madrid  Mena : , 

On  Sunday,  March  1C,  about  1 p.  m.,  General  J.l  • McCown  placed 
me  in  command,  in  accordance  with  an  order  ^ted  Headquarters  Anri^ 
of  the  Mississippi,  Jackson,  Tenu.,  March  15,  1862  I brigaded  aj 
disposed  of  the  forces  under  my  command  as  seemed  to  me  most  ach  an 
tageous,  adopting  all  the  suggestions  in  the  order  above  » l^}f. to' . 

The  main  operations  were  transpiring  at  Island  No.  10  and  at  t 
batteries  on  the  main  shore  near  and  above  the  island,  and  wheie,  oi 
Monday,  March  17,  the  enemy  opened  their  fire  at  10  a.  in.  on  the  uppe 
iiattery,  or  Battery  No.  1,  which  was  kept  up  vigorously  until  •>  p.  m.,  a. 


which  time  tne  gunuoais  remeu.  ~ v - - , • v 

dav  threw  an  incessant  shower  of  shells  on  the  main-land  and  ^land 
which  was  continued  during  the  night  at  intervals  of  fifteen  minutes 
The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  sufficiently  returned  by  Captain  Fucker,  | 
Battery  No.  1,  and,  from  the  best  information  obtained,  seriously  lnjuiec 

two  of  their  gunboats.  ' . T . , . 

The  casualties  of  the  day  on  our  side  were— killed,  Lieutenant  Clark 
wounded,  slightly,  5 privates.  There  were  severe  breaches  made  a 
Batterv  No.  1 during  the  day,  which  were  repaired  during  the  night  D. 


time  the  gunboats  retired.  The  enemy’s  mortar  boats  during  tin 


171 


:ha}\  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

some  300  negroes,  in  charge  of  the  Sappers  and  Miners,  and  on  Tuesday 
norning  was  in  better  condition  than  it  ever  had  been. 

Tuesday,  March  18.— By  10  a,  m.  the  enemy  had  their  gunboats  in 
wsition  and  again  opened  fire  on  Battery  No.  1,  at  the  same  time  tlirow- 
ng  shells  as  on  the  day  before.  The  firing  on  both  sides  was  brisk  for 
i short  time;  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  was  kept  up  until  3 p.  m. 

Wednesday,  March  19.— This  morning  the  enemy  opened  fire,  but  at 
greater  intervals,  and  it  was  so  kept  up  during  the  day.  On  this  day 
ve  had  the  misfortune  to  burst  the  128-pounder  on  the  island. 

Thursday,  March  20.— But  few  rifled  missiles  from  the  enemy  to-day. 
1 continuation  of  shells  from  their  mortar  boats. 

Friday,  March  21.— Shells  from  the  mortar  boats ; no  damage  to  us. 
So  reply  from  any  of  our  guns.  In  the  afternoon  Major-General  McCown 
irrived  with  orders  to  reassume  the  command. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  M.  WALKER, 

Brigadier- General. 


Col.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  38. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  Jeff.  Thompson , Missouri  State  Guard. 

Headquarters, 

New  Madrid , February  28,  1862. 

Dear  Sir  : I inclose  you  General  Thompson’s  letter.  Since  he  wrote 
it  the  enemy’s  cavalry  have  got  in  his  rear,  they  being  at  Sikeston  and 
tie  beyond.  Can  you  send  us  cavalry?  The  entire  force  of  the  enemy, 
20,000  strong,  is  at  Benton.  The  troops  at  Cape  Girardeau,  with  six 
pieces  of  artillery,  are  with  the  command.  Could  you  come  down  tor 
a few  hours  ? I do  not  fear  for  the  general,  but  would  like  to  have  the 
cavalry,  if  possible. 

In  haste,  vour  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  P.  McCown,  Columbus , Ky. 

[Inclosure.  J 

Sikeston,  February  28,  1862. 

(Friday,  4 a.  m.) 

General  John  P.  McCown,  New  Madrid  : 

Dear  General  : The  enemy  returned  beyond  the  swamp  before 
night  yesterday.  There  was  but  the  one  squadron  (125).  I remained 
here  to  recruit  the  horses,  but  will  start  in  a few  minutes  for  Jones’ 
and  Hunter’s  Fords,  which  I will  endeavor  to  make  impassable  to-day. 
1 will  then  remain  up  here  as  long  as  I can  keep  my  numbers  secret. 
1 have  only  65  men  all  fold,  and  it  will  take  considerable  talent  to  hold 
20,000  in  check  more  than  a few  days.  They  report  a large  force  of 
cavalry,  which  might  possibly  overrun  me.  Should  any  horsemen 
arrive  at  New  Madrid,  send  them  up  to  support  me. 


172  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

I send  this  down  by  Mr.  Scott,  whom  I have  requested  to  try  to  get 
up  an  excitement  among  the  Missourians,  so  that  I can  get  more  of 
them.  It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  have  a large  siege  train,  and  that 
one  of  the  mortars  required  twenty-six  horses  to  pull  it  from  Commerce 

to  Benton.  _ ,, 

It  is  also  reported  that  a body  of  cavalry  have  come  out  from  Bird’s 
Point  to  Charleston,  but  Kalfus  will  report  them  to  you  if  true.  I would 
be  pleased  if  you  would  send  up  a man  to  let  Kalfus  or  Price  know  that 
I am  up  here,"  as  it  will  make  them  more  vigilant. 

Mr.  Scott  can  give  you  all  the  gossip. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

’ M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON,  M.  8.  G. 


Gayosa  House,  Memphis,  Tenn., 

March  28,  1862—7  p.  m 

General:  Your  favor  of  the  26th  instant  is  at  hand.  I have  not 
been  at  New  Madrid  since  March  3,  at  4 p.  m.,  and  could  only  repeat 
rumor  of  the  conduct  of  affairs  at  that  place  after  that  time  5 but  as  I 
think  the  most  serious  mistakes,  if  any,  which  have  been  committed 
were  prior  to  that  time,  I will  report  what  came  under  my  observation 
after  my  leaving  you  at  Columbus  on  February  26. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  New  Madrid  I found  the  citizens  terribly  fright- 
ened at  rumored  reports  of  the  approach  of  the  eneniy.  I could  hear 
nothing  definite  as  to  his  whereabouts,  and  as  the  Missouri  Legislature 
was  to  meet  at  New  Madrid  on  March  3,  and  as  it  was  very  important 
that  the  session  should  be  punctually  held,  I proposed  that  I would  go 
with  a few  volunteers  to  discover  his  whereabouts,  and,  if  possible,  to 
prevent  his  coming  too  near  Madrid. 

I will  beg  leave  here  to  digress  a moment  and  state  Avhy  I desired  lie 
should  not  come.  You  will  probably  remember  that  I never  was  111 
favor  of  works  at  New  Madrid,  and  only  assisted  in  building  such  as  j 
were  ordered,  aud  did  not,  upon  my  suggestion,  finish  the  work  which 
was  called  Fort  Bankhead,  because  I believed  the  proper  front  to  defend  | 
the  position  was  the  causeway  known  as  Jones’  Ford  (Moore’s  Ford), 
believing  that  any  work  could  be  turned  from  the  nature  of  the  country,  | 
and  nothing  but  numbers  could  command  the  country  after  the  enemy 
had  crossed  the  fords  above  mentioned.  While  I consulted  with  Colonel ! 
Gantt,  commandant  at  this  post,  and  Brigadier-General  McCown,  and 
thev  approved  of  my  expedition,  I must  here  again  remark,  for  the  truth 
of  history,  that  General  McCown  remarked  to  me  that  I might  go  to 
see  where  the  enemy  was,  but  that  I must  parley  ; not  to  count  on  him 
to  frighten  him  away  j to  tole  him  in.  I remarked  that  after  Wednes- 
day he  might  come  as  soon  as  he  pleased,  as  by  that  time  the  Legisla- 
ture would  adjourn,  and  you  had  ordered  me  to  report  to  General  V an 
Dorn  after  that  time ; but  that  they  must  be  kept  away  until  then  if 

possible.  ... 

I left  New  Madrid  at  noon  on  Thursday,  July  [February]  27,  with 
66  volunteers,  some  of  whom  were  Confederate  volunteers,  some  Mis- 
souri State  Guards,  and  some  amateurs.  That  night  we  stopped  at 
Sikeston,  where  wre  found  a supper  prepared  for  the  Federals,  who  had 
been  expected  the  same  night,  which  supper  we  ate.  I was  informed 
that  1,000  had  been  expected  there  that  night. 

On  the  morning  of  July  [February]  28  we  started  for  o ones  Ford, 
which  is  30-odd  miles  from''  New  Madrid.  Wre  reached  the  place  early 


Chap.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  173 

in  the  day,  and  sending  a vedette  towards  Benton  (where  we  knew  the 
enemy  to  be),  we  commenced  burning  the  bridges  and  chopping  down 
trees  across  the  road.  I went  with  a small  party  to  the  Sumter  Ford, 
some  miles  distant,  and  threw  the  plank  off  the  bridges  into  the  water 
to  float  away.  I had  scarcely  returned  to  Jones’  Ford  before  a courier 
arrived,  in  hot  haste,  to  inform  me  that  the  enemy  had  reach  Sikeston 
in  large  force  by  the  railroad,  and  were  preparing  to  cut  off  my  retreat. 
I immediately  ordered  my  men  to  retreat  by  a swamp  road  known  only 
to  the  guides,  and  to  await  at  a specified  safe  position  for  my  orders. 
L,  with  4 men,  passed  down  towards  the  enemy,  and  avoiding  him  at 
Sikeston,  came  into  the  road  2 miles  below.  I here  met  Lieutenant 
Grant,  of  the  Twelfth  Arkansas,  who  had  charge  of  the  picket.  Lieu- 
tenant Grant  informed  me  that  a messenger  had  been  sent  to  New 
Madrid,  informing  the  officer  there  that  I was.  surrounded,  and  that 
Colonel  Kitchen,  with  a considerable  force  of  my  old  brigade,  now  Con- 
federate soldiers,  and  others,  would  be  up  that  evening  to  relieve  me. 

I at  once  sent  a courier  to  my  men  in  the  swamp  to  meet  me  at 
that  spot  in  the  morning  early.  In  the  mean  time  I sent  into  Sikeston 
to  see  the  enemy’s  force,  and  was  credibly  told  that  there  were  but 
300  infantry  and  100  cavalry  in  the  town.  I then  started  to  New  Mad- 
rid, expecting  at  each  moment  to  meet  the  relieving  party  ; but  after 
dark,  and  immediately  at  the  town,  I met  20  of  my  men  to  relieve  me. 

Hearing  from  citizens  that  nothing  had  been  done  towards  sending 
re-enforcements,  and  it  being  late  at  night,  I did  not  report  to  the  officer 
commanding;  but  after  a short  rest  I started  before  day  to  join  my 
men.  They  were  promptly  at  the  point  designated  and  in  plain  sight 
of  the  enemy;  fed  our  horses  and  waited  on  him.  Then  I concluded 
to  attack  them  in  that  form.  Finding  me  south  of  them  instead  of 
north,  as  they  expected,  that  I might  confuse  and  probably  whip  them, 
I opened  one  of  my  small  cannon  at  them,  and,  to  my  astonishment, 
Keller’s  [Kellogg’s]  cavalry  and  the  cavalry  of  Hamilton’s  brigade  de- 
ployed before  me.  I immediately  ordered  my  men  to  push  for  New 
Madrid,  or  until  they  met  support,  as  fast  as  possible,  while  I and  a 
dozen  selected  men  attracted  the  attention  of  the  enemy. 

1 answered  them  for  thirty  or  forty  minutes,  when  they  discovered 
my  men  and  charged  them.  For  16  miles  the  run  was  kept  up  by  the 
enemy,  overtaking  and  capturing  three  of  my  little  cannon. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  New  Madrid  I reported  that  the  cavalry  of  the 
Federals  was  within  4 miles,  but  that  the  infantry  had  not  crossed 
Jones’  Ford,  and  advised  an  attack  upon  him.  Nothing  was  done. 

On  Sunday,  2d  instant,  about  noon,  the  enemy  appeared  immediately 
on  the  outskirts  of  New  Madrid.  Bankhead’s  battery  was  sent  to  the 
saw-mill,  and  a regiment  (I  think  Walker’s)  was  sent  through  the  park 
to  meet  them.  A few  rifle  shots  had  been  fired  by  the  enemy  at  some 
of  my  men  in  the  road,  when  Bankhead  threw  a shell  among  them, 
when  they  retired.  All  of  ours,  as  far  as  I could  learn,  returned  to 
I quarters. 

On  Monday,  3d  instant,  the  whole  force  was  reported  as  approaching, 
and  at  noon  the  gunboats  commenced  firing  shell  over  the  town  and 
among  them.  I saw  that  it  had  been  determined  to  await  an  attack  be- 
hind the  defenses,  and  having  with  me  about  200  men,  many  of  whom 
were  my  brigade  officers,  and  as  the  Legislature  had  failed  to  meet,  I 
asked  permission  of  General  McCown  to  take  my  men  to  the  plank 
road,  at  the  west  end  of  which  most  of  my  men  were  stationed.  Gen- 
eral McCown  approved  of  my  course,  and  at  sundown  I started. 

We  halted  near  Point  Pleasant  for  a few  hours,  and  early  in  the 


174 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  INI).  T.  [Chap.  XYIII. 

morning  pushed  ahead  for  tlic  plank  road,  which  place  we  had  not 
reached  before  the  enemy  appeared  in  Point  Pleasant  and  arrested  a 
number  of  stragglers  and  citizens.  I still  have  possession  of  the  plank 
road,  and  my  men  have  orders  to  defend  it  or  destroy  it.  ' 

Since  the  before-mentioned  time  I have  not  been  m -New  Madrid, 
and  therefore  can  give  no  information  as  to  the  subsequent  events. 
When  I left,  on  Monday,  the  23d,  I supposed  that  the  7,000  men  who 
had  been  at  Benton  had  reached  New  Madrid  with  the  cavalry  that 
had  arrived  from  Bird’s  Point  via  Sikeston.  There  were  reported  to 
be  at  Commerce  5,000  men,  but  previous  and  current  report  places  the 
number  of  General  Pope’s  command  at  20,000. 

I will  beg  leave  here  to  remark  that  I have  always  contended  that 
without  aline  of  works  from  the  river  westward  to  the  swamps  (be 
tween  0 and  7 miles)  the  holding  of  New  Madrid  was  useless  as  t 
river  defense,  and  without  these  works  a large  number  of  men  would 
be  required ; and  after  the  enemy  made  his  approach  before  the  foit 
that  was  built  a dogged  and  determined  resistance  would  have  only 
proved  our  valor  and  not  our  wisdom,  and  after  it  was  found  that  oui 
gunboats  could  not  defend  the  river  bank  the  evacuation  of  the  place 
was  a military  necessity. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

’ M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier -Genera],  Missouri  State  Guard. 


No.  39. 


Report  of  Col.  J.  G.  W.  Steedman , First  Alabama  Infantry. 


Hdqrs.  First  Regiment  Alabama  Volunteers,  ^ - 

Island  No.  10,  Mississippi  River , March  28,  1862. 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  report  that  on  the  17th  instant  two  detachments, 
of  15  men  each,  under  command  of  Lieutenants  Owens  and  Sanford, 
from  the  First  Alabama  Regiment,  constituted  a portion  of  the  gain 
son  of  Battery  No.  1. 

At  12  in.,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  General  Trudeau,  1 went  t< 
the  battery  in  person.  The  battery  had  not  yet  opened  fire  on  the  gun 
boats,  three  of  which  previously  (a  half  hour)  had  dropped  down  within 
a mile  of  the  battery  and  opened  fire  upon  it.  Upon  reaching  the  bat 
tery  and  finding  the  gunboats  in  full  range,  I ordered  the  battery  t< 
open  at  once.  The  men  received  the  order  with  loud  cheers  and  went 
into  the  action  most  gallantly. 

In  the  course  of  an  hour  their  shots  were  telling  well  on  the  enemy, 
we  having  but  three  guns  (8-inch  ship  guns)  which  could  reach.  1 
would  remark  that  the  battery  was  in  miserable  condition,  the  men 
standing  to  their  knees  in  mud  and  water  to  serve  the  guns.  1 he  watei 
having  just  receded  from  an  overflow  of  the  whole  battery,  it  required 
20  men  to  work  one  gun.  We  had  no  magazine,  our  ammunition  being 
set  on  the  parapet  to  keep  it  out  of  water. 

In  two  hours  the  first  detachment  from  my  regiment  and  Captai* 
Rucker’s  company  were  exhausted.  Colonel  Brown’s  Tennessee  regi 
ment  being  near  at  hand,  I called  upon  him  for  assistance  until  I coul< 
get  artillerists  from  the  other  batteries.  Forty  men  came  cheerfully 
and  served  the  guns  until  relief  came  from  General  Trudeau,  consist 
ing*  of  detachments  from  the  various  artillery  companies  near  his  head 


/ h ap . XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


175 


quarters.  With  the  assistance  of  this  relief  and  the  original  garrison 
be  battery  was  manfully  served  until  darkness  had  rendered  further 
aring  unadvi  sable. 

When  darkness  came  the  battery  was  almost  a wreck ; the  parapet 
orn  in  many  places,  one  gun  dismounted,  another  badly  injured,  and 
ill  working  exceedingly  hard  ; our  men  were  exhausted. 

During  the  action  one  lieutenant  (Clark),  of  Captain  Rucker’s  com- 
jany,  was  killed  by  a shot  passing  through  the  parapet.  Five  men 
rom  the  same  company  were  wounded,  but  none  of  them  seriously. 

The  detach mept  from  my  regiment  acted  as  gallantly  as  men  could 
ict.  Lieutenants  Owens  and  Sanford  I refer  to  especially  as  gallant 
md  efficient. 

I cannot  speak  in  terms  of  too  great  praise  concerning  the  whole  of 
lie  artillery  force  engaged  at  Battery  No.  1 on  that  day;  they  stood 
mmoved  for  eight  hours  in  a terrific  fire  from  at  least  twenty  rifled 
runs  and  four  13-inch  mortars,  all  at  almost  point-blank  range. 

The  damage  since  reported  by  the  enemy  himself  shows  with  what 
efficiency  the  battery  was  served. 

I refer  with  especial  emphasis  to  the  gallant  conduct  of  Captain 
Rucker  during  the  whole  action. 

I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  W.  STEEDMAN, 
Colonel  First  Regiment  Alabama  Volunteers. 

Captain  Hughes. 


i 

No.  40. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  D.  8.  Cook , Twelfth  Arkansas  Infantry. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  13,  1802. 

Having  to-day  arrived  in  this  city  from  Island  No.  10,  all  the  field 
md  general  officers  recently  at  that  point,  except  myself,  having  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  I deem  it  my  duty  to  make  a brief  state- 
ment of  the  manner  in  which  the  place  was  lost  to  us. 

1 had  for  about  two  weeks,  with  my  regiment,  been  stationed  in 
Madrid  Bend,  on  the  Kentucky  shore,  to  guard  it  against  the  landing 
of  troops  and  protect  our  batteries  there.  We  were  here  engaged  day 
and  night  in  mounting  guns  and  digging  rifle  pits,  under  the  fire  con- 
stantly kept  up  from  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  on  the  opposite  shore. 
Three  several  regiments,  commanded  by  Colonels  Smith,  Clark,  and 
Henderson,  were  assigned  to  share  the  labors  and  dangers  of  the  posi- 
tion. 

O11  the  evening  of  the  4th  instant  I was  ordered  by  General  Mackall 
to  move  with  my  command,  without  delay,  to  Island  No.  10.  We  ar- 
rived at  night,  in  the  midst  of  a severe  storm,  during  which,  as  we 
could  see  by  the  constant  flashes  of  lightning,  one  of  the  enemy’s  large 
gunboats  passed  our  batteries.  Guns  were  fired  from  nearly  all  of  them, 
but,  owing  to  the  intense  darkness  intervening  the  lightning,  could  not 
be  so  pointed  as  to  disable  her. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  I was  ordered  to  relieve  Colonel  Brown’s 
Tennessee  regiment,  then  performing  guard  duty  on  the  island,  being 
assured  that  I should  be  in  turn  relieved  the  following  morning. 

During  the  day  and  the  early  part  of  the  night  we  placed  and  mounted 
a gun  on  the  north  side  of  the  island.  In  the  afterpart  of  the  night  it 


176 


OPERATIONS  LN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 

became  exceedingly  dark  and  stormy,  the  rain  falling*  in  torrents,  llie 
enemy,  taking  advantage  of  this  favorable  opportunity,  ran  down 
another  of  his  large  gunboats,  which  passed  the  island  under  the  inef 
fectual  fire  of  the  batteries,  both  on  the  main  land  and  on  the  island. 

I caused  the  musketry  to  fire  as  it  arrived  opposite,  in  order  to  indicate 
its  position  and  aid  in  directing  the  fire  ot  the  guns,  but  the  darkness 
was  too  great  to  point  them  with  accuracy,  and  she  passed  unharmed; 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  (my  men  drenched  with  rain,  worn  down 
with  fatigue  and  with  fasting),  while  anxiously  expecting  to  be  relieved, 
I received  an  order  from  General  Mackall,  placing  me  in  command  of  the 
island,  and  Captain  Jackson,  of  the  artillery,  in  command  of  the  main 
land.  I then,  for  the  first  time,  learned  that  General  Mackall  had  gone, 
in  the  early  part  of  the  night,  with  all  the  remaining  infantry  and  light 
artillery,  to  join  Brigadier-General  Gantt  in  Madrid  Bend,  to  dispute 
the  landing  of  the  enemy  there. 

During  the  day  messengers  came  and  assured  me  that  the  enemy  was 
landing  in  force;  had  captured  and  spiked  our  guns;  had  driven  oui 
friends  back  to  Tipton ville,  and  occupied  the  ground  between  us.  Latex 
in  the  evening  his  cavalry  came  within  about  1 mile  of  the  lower  point 
of  the  island,  captured  a gun  mounted  at  Harris’  Meadow,  and  came  up 
in  rear  of  the  floating  battery.  On  their  approach  those  in  charge  sunt 
the  battery  and  attempted  to  escape.  Some  succeeded,  others  were 
killed,  and  others  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  number  oi 
each  I am  not  able  to  report. 

In  the  mean  time  my  officers  were  importunate  that  I should  order  the 
evacuation  of  the  island.  I would  not  consent  to  do  so  until  I had  con- 
sulted Captain  Jackson,  who  commanded  the  land  forces,  which  I did. 
as  also  Captain  Humes,  in- charge  of  the  batteries  on  the  island.  All 
concurred  in  the  expression  of  the  conviction  that  it  was  impossible  tc 
hold  the  place  against  the  enemy  should  he  have  effected  a landing  on 
the  main-land  below,  --as  we  were  assured  he  had  done.  j 

There  were  no  guns  mounted  intended  to  be  used  against  a land 
attack  except  one  or  two  small  pieces  upon  the  new  fort  just  erected 
above  the  island.  There  was  literally  nothing  to  oppose  the  ascent  of 
gunboats  up  the  channel  on  the  Tennessee  side  of  the  island  except  my 
little  command,  at  that  time  but  little  exceeding  300  effective  men,  ex-1 
elusive  of  thpse  left  at  camp  on  the  main-land. 

We  therefore  determined  to  evacuate  at  an  early  hour  in  the  evening, 
leaving  tents  standing,  that  our  movements  might  not  be  discovered  to 
the  enemy.  It  was  agreed  between  Captain  Jackson  and  Captain 
Humes  that  the  former  should  send  up  two  rockets  as  a signal  for  mov- 
ing ; but  on  my  suggesting  the  impropriety  of  the  course,  Captain  Jackj 
son  failed  to  give  the  signal.  Of  this  I had  Captain  Humes  advised 
by  Mr.  Clagget,  of  the  Signal  Corps. 

While  I was  off  the  island  making  arrangements  for  the  evacuation 
the  officers  of  my  regiment  moved  their  several  companies  away  in  good 
order,  but  rather  earlier  than  I intended.  I rode  back  to  the  boat  land- 
ing, opposite  the  batteries  on  the  island,  and  ordered  the  steamer  De 
Soto  over  to  bring  away  Captain  Humes  and  his  command. 

There  was  some  delay,  as  the  captain  told  me,  for  want  of  the  Bn 
gineers.  I remained,  however,  until  the  De  Soto  landed  on  the  island, 
where  the  Champion  already  lay,  subject  to  Captain  Humes’  orders 
This  done,  I turned  away  to  overtake  my  regiment,  then  on  the  march 

1 have  no  positive  knowledge  of  the  fate  of  that  gallant  officer  Cap 
tain  Humes,  but  fear  that  he  and  his  whole  command  are  in  the  hands 
of  the  enemy. 


A P.  XVIII.]  new  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  177 

The  night  becoming  very  dark,  those  of  my  command  became  sepa- 
,ted,  and  many  of  them,  going  into  the  enemy’s  lines,  were  taken 
isoners.  I was  not  able,  during  the  night  and  amid  the  swamp  upon 
te  border  of  Reelfoot  Lake,  to  get  them  together,  or  even  to  find  any 
‘ them,  and  had  to  content  myself  with  the  several  companies  of  heavy 
•tillery,  which  were  so  fortunate  as  to  have  a guide. 

The  next  morning  (the  8th),  after  a long  and  fatiguing  march,  we 
•rived  at  the  ferry  across  the  lake,  where  many  were  already  before 
5.  Here  we  found,  as  means  of  transportation  across,  three  ferry-flats 
id  a number  of  canoes  and  skiffs,  but  the  boats  were  in  the  hands  of 

iptain  Hudson’s  cavalry,  under  Lieutenant . They  persistently 

►ntinued  to  cross  their  horses,  while  a great  number  of  footmen  were 
anding  in  the  water,  some  to  their  arm-pits,  waiting  an  opportunity 
cross.  I ordered  the  horses  to  be  left  until  the  men  could  all  be 
ossed  over,  yet  the  boats  were  stopped  far  out  in  the  water,  where 
uses  were  taken  aboard.  One  of  the  compauy  (officer  or  soldier) 
ized  an  ax,  threatening  to  sink  the  boat  if  men  other  than  the  com- 
iny  should  take  possession  or  go  aboard.  One  of  these  boats  soon 
nk,  being  injured  by  the  horses,  and  thus  were  those  on  the  other 
:le  the  lake  greatly  retarded  in  crossing. 

During  the  day  my  regiment  came  up,  as  well  as  about  130  of  the 
rst  Alabama  Regiment.  I drew  up  such  of  these  as  had  saved  their 
ms  to  oppose  the  enemy,  should  he  be  in  pursuit,  as  we  were  informed 
i then  was. 

Obtaining  the  boats  that  were  fit  for  use,  we  labored  vigorously  cross- 
g the  men.  Some  had  hastily  constructed  rafts  of  timber,  upon  which 
ey  crossed  in  great  peril,  the  water  being  more  than  a mile  wide,  the 
rrent  rapid,  and  amid  a dense  cypress  brake.  Night  setting  in  dark 
d stormy,  with  a driving  wind  and  rain,  the  boats  could  no  longer 
oss,  though  many  of  the  soldiers  were  still  on  the  other  side,  in  the 
iter,  without  shelter  or  food $ many  recently  from  the  hospital,  some 
th  measles,  mumps,  and  other  diseases  still  upon  them. 

In  the  morning  we  were  still  in  the  water,  the  snow  falling  fast, 
ith  the  most  vigorous  exertions  on  the  part  of  those  already  over,  by 
on  or  soon  after  my  whole  command  was  over,  though  many  of  them 
nost  lifeless  with  cold. 

With  but  little  rest  or  sleep,  after  five  days  of  almost  unparalleled 
fifering  and  exposure,  we  arrived  at  Bell’s  Station,  and  are  now  here. 
To  the  credit  of  those  under  my  immediate  command  I must  be  per- 
tted  to  say  that,  although  worn  down  with  the  fatigues  of  the  march, 
eir  feet  all  blistered,  without  means  of  transportation  most  of  the 
ty — for  the  road  was  cleared  of  wagons  or  horses  by  those  before  us — 
ough  their  knapsacks  and  blankets  had  to  be  abandoned,  they  have 
red,  most  of  them,  their  arms.  In  fact  my  men,  except  the  sick  and 
ose  just  from  the  hospital,  are  better  armed  to-day  than  ever  before, 
ving  secured  better  arms  abandoned  by  others.  We  are  not  able  to 
e these  arms  now.  We  are  without  clothing,  tents,  and  other  com- 
;ts,  but  hope  soon  to  be  able  to  take  the  field  again. 

About  300  of  the  Twelfth  Arkansas,  150  of  the  First  Alabama,  and 
few  of  the  Eleventh  Arkansas  are  with  me.  A few  men  from  the 
reral  commands  of  Colonels  Henderson,  Brown,  Baker,  and  Clark 
caped  with  me,  but  I have  lost  sight  of  them. 

I am  under  obligations  to  the  officers  for  the  aid  they  gave  on  the 
irch  and  to  the  men  for  the  propriety  of  their  conduct ; but  afii  par- 
ularly  indebted  to  Capt.  J.  R.  White,  of  Company  C,  for  his  untir- 
12  r r — VOL  VIII 

. 


178 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


jrjrr  efforts  to  lighten  my  labors  and  to  facilitate  the  march.  Capt.  V 
J.  Wyatt  also  rendered  efficient  service  in  aiding  the  sick  and  rescuu 

thI  tmToT  able  to  report  the  number  of  our  troops  fallen  into  tl 
hands  of  the  enemy.  Nearly  all  the  officers  and  men  of  Colonels  B 
ker’s  . Brown’s,  Henderson’s,  Clark’s,  and  Smith’s  regiments,  togeth 
with ’Brigadier-Generals  Mackall  and  Gantt,  surrendered,  as  I a 
credibly  informed,  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  as  also  mostoi  Colon 
Steedman’s  First  Alabama  Regiment;  as  I judge,  about  2,000  in  all. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  Captain  Wheeler’s  cavalry  company  will  y 
moirpi  or  have  made,  their  escape. 

All’ the  ammunition,  quartermaster’s,  and  most  of  the  commissa 
stores  as  well  as  the  guns  on  the  island,  and  two  transport  boats— tl 
S and  the  De  Soto-fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  w<  D S-  COOK, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Commanding  Twelfth  Arkansas  Regiment 


Col.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  41. 


Report  of  Col . J.  B.  G.  Kennedy  ,*  Twenty-first  Louisiana  Infantry 


Hdqrs.  Twenty-first  Regiment  Louisiana  Vols., 

Camped  at  Tupelo , July  4,  1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  note  of  the  3d  instant,  requesting 
statement  of  the  condition  of  Island  No.  10  and  Madrid  Bend  on  b 
arrival  and  subsequent  condition  on  the  2d  day  of  March,  1862, 
affords  me,  general,  great  pleasure  to  give  you  all  the  information  nc 
in  my  memory,  having  lost  all  my  books  and  papers  at  the  evacuatu 
of  Corinth,  except  your  orders  in  regard  to  that  particular  post. 

On  the  23d  of  February,  1862,  I embarked  at  Columbus,  Ky.,  wi 
25  men,  of  Company  A,  of  my  regiment,  and  200  negroes,  per  steaml 
Marie,  after  loading  the  boat  with  commissary  stores  and  lumber.  V 
proceeded  to  Island  No.  10,  and  arrived  at  that  port  on  the  morning 
the  24th.  Captain  Harris  and  Captain  Gray,  Engineer  officers,  Captai 
Wintter,  with  one  company  of  Sappers  and  Miners,  and  the  Forty-sixi 
Tennessee  Regiment,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  W.  Johnso; 
mustering  total  400  men,  of  which  but  155  were  present  for  duty,  ma 
ing  my  working  force  405  men.  There  were  at  the  time  ot  my  arriv 
two  batteries,  known  as  Rucker’s,  or  upper  battery,  andtlielower  battei 
directly  opposite  the  head  of  the  island ; these  batteries  are  one  m 
and  a half  apart.  Rucker’s  battery  had  three  32-pounders  mounte: 
the  lower  battery  had  one  32-pounder  mounted,  and  nine  guns  we 
at  the  landing  dismounted. 

I immediately  divided  my  forces,  and  proceeded  to  mount  guns  a] 
repair  the  upper  battery,  which  at  the  time  was  much  out  ot  rept 
and  the  magazine  inundated.  Five  additional  guns  were  mounted^ 
the  lower  battery  and  four  on  the  upper;  these  guns  were  rifled  c 
pounders.  Other  places  were  selected  in  the  bend  for  batteries,  ai 


Col.  J.  B.  G.  Kennedy  does  not  appear  on  the  records  of^Twenty-first  Louisia 
found  in  the  War  Department.  He  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Fifth  Louisia 
Battalion. 


lp.  XVin.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC.  179 

nmenced  before  General  McCown  arrived,  all  of  which  was  approved 
the  general. 

3n  or  about  the  27th  February  General  McCown  arrived,  and  I was 
mediately  placed  in  command  of  the  island,  with  my  own  regiment 
il  the  Forty-sixth  Tennessee,  making  my  working  party  in  all  555 
n.  Batteries  were  immediately  commenced  upon  the  island.  The 
5t,  or  battery  nearest  the  Tennessee  shore,  was  mounted  with  one 
pounder,  one  rifled  32-pounder,  and  four  smooth-bore  32-pounders, 
e second  battery  had  two  rifled  32-pounders,  the  Belmont  (one  128- 
mder  rifled  gun),  and  four  smooth-bore  32-pounders.  The  third 
ttery  was  composed  of  32-pounders,  also  the  fourth  battery,  making 
all  twenty-two  guns  at  the  head  of  the  island,  besides  four  siege 
as  and  four  howitzers  facing  the  Missouri  shore.  The  floating  battery 
s also  on  that  side  of  the  island. 

Phis  is  the  armament  I left  on  the  island  the  17th  day  of  March, 
>2.  The  first  two  batteries  on  the  island  toward  the  Tennessee  shore 
re  finished  and  guns  mounted  previous  to  the  2d  day  of  March  and 
command  of  Captain  Hume;  also  the  siege  guns  and  howitzers, 
out  this  time  the  floating  battery  was  moved  to  the  island.  On  the 
in  shore  there  was  completed  what  was  afterward  known  as  battery 
. 2,  mounting  four  32-pounder  rifled  guns.  From  this  time  my 
ole  attention  was  directed  to  the  island.  In  regard  to  the  ammuni- 
n,  what  I found  was  in  the  lower  battery,  on  the  platform,  covered 
h a canvas,  and  not  suited  to  the  guns  mounted.  I began  to  receive 
munition  with  the  guns  from  Columbus,  which  was  placed  in  a barn 
ow  the  batteries,  out  of  the  enemy’s  range.  Stores  and  plunder  of 
>ry  description  came  in  profusion.  Store-houses  there  were  none, 
all  the  lumber  that  could  be  obtained  was  taken  for  platforms.  Pro- 
ions  were  stored  and  properly  cared  for.  In  regard  to  tools,  there 
s always  a proficiency.  The  work  was  rapidly  done.  Negroes  had 
;n  procured  in  the  mean  time,  and  the  work  went  on  night  and  day. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

J.  B.  G.  KENNEDY, 

Colonel , Twenty -first  Louisiana  Volunteers. 
laj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk. 


No.  42. 

Report  of  Col.  Alexander  J.  Brown , Fifty  fifth  Tennessee  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Upper  Brigade, 
Madrid  Bend , Mo .,  March  28,  1862. 
>ir  : In  compliance  with  an  order  of  the  major-general,  requiring 
to  transmit  immediately  to  division  headquarters  a report  of  the 
jion  of  myself  and  command  on  the  17th  instant,  during  the  terrific 
ick  of  the  enemy’s  Mississippi  flotilla  on  Battery  No.  1,  I submit 
following : 

>n  the  morning  of  the  17th  I received  the  following  order: 

Headquarters,  Madrid  Bend,  Mo.,  March  17,  1862. 
>lonel  Brown  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that  you  will  move 
' regiment  according  to  previous  arrangements,  holding  it  in  readiness  to  support 

«ry  No.  1. 

B.  N.  MATHIS, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


180  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 

Almost  simultaneously  with  the  receipt  of  the  above  General  Ti 
deau,  chief  in  command  of  artillery  at  this  place,  rode  hurriedly  up 
mv  quarters  and  gave  me  to  understand  that  he  had  every  reason 
apprehend  an  attack  on  our  battery  by  an  infantry  force  from  the  re; 
and  directed  me  to  proceed  with  all  possible  haste  to  prevent  the  cc 
summation  of  such  a plan.  A few  moments  only  elapsed  before  i 
regiment  was  in  rapid  march  for  Battery  No.  1,  a mile  and  a half 
two  miles  distant,  the  greater  portion  of  the  way,  owing  to  the  flush 
condition  of  the  river,  being  from  2 to  3 feet  deep  in  water.  My  m 
plunged  this  with  an  alacrity  which  bespoke  hearts  filled  with  the  hi 
resolve  to  meet  the  enemy  in  whatever  manner  or  on  whatever  eleme 

he  dare  present  himself.  0 , _ , , 

By  the  time  we  reached  the  battery,  between  8 and  9 a.  m.,  the  enei 
had  already  opened  a brisk  fire  from  their  gun  and  mortar  boats  on  o 
battery,  and  the  shot  and  shell  were  now  falHng  thickly  around  l 
Despite  this  we  pressed  on  unwaveringly  forward,  and  amid  the  w 
whistle  of  rifle  shot  and  terrific  explosion  of  enormous  shells,  the  ir£ 
ments  of  which  fell  like  hail  around,  I formed  my  regiment  along  t 
cremaillere  line  on  the  right  of  Battery  No.  1,  there  to  await  the  anti 
pated  attempt  of  the  enemy  on  our  battery  by  assault. 

From  this  time  the  enemy’s  fire  grew  fiercer  and  fiercer,  the  ent 
fleet  having  taken  position  about  2,000  yards  distant,  with  the  view 
concentrating  their  fire  upon  this,  our  weakest  battery,  intending 
doubt  to  silence  it  before  making  a demonstration  upon  any  ot  t 
other  lower  batteries. 

Our  battery  did  not  at  first  respond,  hoping  by  silence  to  entice  t 
enemy’s  fleet  within  a more  destructive  range;  but  failing  in  this,  a 
finding  our  battery  was  beginning  to  sustain  considerable  damage  tr< 
the  enemy’s  rifle  shot,  Captain  Bucker,  in  command  of  the  battery, 
length  opened  a slow  fire  on  them.  This  seemed  to  provoke  the  enei 
to  a more  determined  effort  to  silence  the  battery,  and  by  this  time- 
o’clock— the  conflict  had  assumed  a most  terrific  aspect.  The  enem  i 
heavy  shot  and  shell,  aimed  with  almost  unerring  accuracy  maul 
against  the  battery  on  our  left,  poured  an  almost  incessant  volu]j 
upon  our  meager  earthwork,  riddling  the  parapet  in  front  of  our  gin, 
plowing  up  the  earth  in  every  direction,  and  tearing  down  unmet! 
trees  in  a manner  baffling  description.  The  scene  was  the  most  tern: 

conceivable.  _ „ _ , , A 

The  conflict  continued  to  rage  with,  if  possible,  augmented  tu 
until  3 p.  m.,  when  the  darkest  hour  of  the  day  was  upon  us.  It  v 
at  this  time — when  the  enemy  poured  their  most  destructive  fire  up 
our  poorly-protected  battery;  when  their  128-pound  shot  and  13-m 
shells  had  completely  riddled  our  earthwork ; when  Lieutenant  Ola 
was  killed  by  a shot  penetrating  the  parapet  and  his  entire  deta< 
ment  disabled ; when  the  cannoneers  were  completely  exhausted, 
long-continued  exertion,  and  when  everything  seemed  to  yield  ben 
the  pressure  of  the  storm  which  poured  forth  its  iron  shafts  arou 
us,  save  an  unwavering  determination  never  to  surrender  the  batter} 
I learned  through  Colonel  Steedman,  of  the  First  Alabama  Begimc 
(who  had  been  gallantly  aiding  in  defense  of  the  battery),  of  the  o 
tressing  condition  of  the  artillerists,  who  had  up  to  that  time  ^c 
serving  their  guns  without  intermission,  and  saw  at  once  that  unn 
immediate  relief  was  rendered  them  the  battery  would  necessarily 
silenced,  if  not  abandoned.  I immediately  laid  the  facts  before  i 
men  and  called  upon  them,  by  all  that  was  dear  and  sacred  to  the 
never  to  let  that  battery  be  silenced.  But  little  time  had  elaps 


181 


P.  XVIII.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 

ore  the  requisite  number  had  laid  aside  their  guns  and  cartridge- 
's and  were  ready,  with  no  other  qualifications  for  the  service  they 
v proposed  rendering  save  their  strong  arms  and  resolute  hearts,  to 
er  the  battery.  It  was  a spectacle  worthy  of  the  highest  admira- 
n to  see  men,  in  the  face  of  such  terribly  adverse  circumstances, 
h almost  certain  destruction  overshadowing  their  pathway,  reso- 
ely  enter  where  the  missiles  of  death  fell  as  thickly  as  hail,  with  no 
Section  against  them,  to  perform  a service,  too,  with  which  they 
re  totally  unacquainted.  Such  determination  pointed  unmistakably 
the  issue  of  this  day’s  contest. 

n this  manner  the  firing  was  constantly  kept  up  for  several  hours, 
bil  a relief  of  experienced  artillerists,  under  Lieutenant  Finnie, 
ched  us  from  below. 

Che  engagement  continued  to  rage  with  unabating  fury  until  after 
;ht,  when  the  enemy’s  fleet  drew  off,  our  battery  giving  the  last  shot, 
e victory  being  ours,  wet  and  worn  down  by  exhaustion  we  began 
dously  to  look  for  relief,  which  did  not  reach  us  until  12  o’clock, 
en  Colonel  [John  M.]  Clark  came  with  his  regiment  to  relieve  us. 

At  this  late  hour,  shivering  with  cold  and  almost  famished  with 
ager,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march  for  camp,  where  we  arrived  in  a 
>rt  time,  after  traversing  our  watery  path,  with  fully  as  much  eager- 
5S  as  we  had  the  morning  before,  well  satisfied  with  the  issue  of  the 
y’s  work  for  our  side. 

t affords  me  great  pleasure  to  offer  my  hearty  acknowledgments  to 
I officers  and  men  of  my  command  for  distinguished  bravery  and 
ermination  which  characterized  their  conduct  under  these  most 
ing  circumstances,  and  to  express  the  confident  hope  that  they  may 
jr  act  with  the  same  spirit  when  similarly  situated, 
tespectfullv  submitted. 

ALEX.  J.  BEOWN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fifty -fifth  Begt . Tennessee  Volunteers . 
Maj.  H.  S.  Bradford, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  43. 

Confederate  report  of  guns , carriages , ammunition , (fee.,  <w  Tennessee  shore , Madrid  Bend , .Mo. 


182 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap. 


•BoSpiijiBa  aaptmod-g  Jo  joquinj£  j 

. • CD  <M  • 

• • rH  • 

00 

•saSpujiBO  japanod-9  jo  jaqumj^  j 

• 0<M<M  • 

• co  co  t*  ; 

$ 

•saSpujiBO  aaptmod-i  jo  jaqmnyx 

• <M  • £ • 

• rH  • Ci  * 

1 

•BaSpxjjJBO  iapimod-8  jo  J9qranj<[ 

OOHOlO 

05  <0  CO 

|l,  756 

•saSptJjJ'eo  japunod-oi  jo  jaqranj^ 

m m 

s 

• O wO 

• CO  00 

§ 

•J9JBIUB0  aapuuod-f  9 jo  aaqranji 

§ : 

; ; j 

O 

<0 

•adnaS  jgptraod-f  9 jo  sptrejs  jo  aaqumfl; 

O • 

*0  ; 

• 0 0 
. 0 c- 

0 

a 

•BJ9piraod-t9  ‘^oqs  pixos  jo  aaqnmj^ 

*H  • 

I 0 10 

• 0 rH 

a 

CO 

qiaqs  J9punod-f-9  poqgau  jo  jgqainj^ 

CO  • 
Of  • 

i 

1 

•X^aqs  papnox  japunod-f  9 jo  jaqura 

■ ■ 

| M ® | O 

qiaqs  pap^ox  aapanod-gg  jo  jaqam& 

i <?q 

i i i 

|a 

•adiuS  jepanod-gg  jo  laqraag 

• OO  • rH 

:52 

•jajsiTrBO  japunodgg  jo  jaqranfci 

00  0 • • • 

O)  C*  • • • 

00 

*Xiaqe  pagu  jo  aaqnmji 

i rH  O • • 

• o>  <M  ; ; 

g 

•Bjapunod-gg  joj  joqs  ptmoa  jo  jaqarajj 

«o  0 0 • 0 
rH  in  05  *m 

(NNH  (M 

1 

— — — — 9 

•joqs  JBSapaJX  J° 

- rH  CD  • 00 
• ^ CO  | rH 

1 ' 

C5 

•joqs  p^aa;  jo  aaqnmjj; 

I IO  WO  • fH 

| CO  t*  • CO 

Is 

•joqs  pagij  jo  jaqumji 

ia  i a 

Kind  of  carriage. 

Sliding  center-pintle  navy  and  barbette  carriages 

Weller  barbette 

Weller  barbette 

Barbette  carriages -----  ----- 

1 navy  carriage  and  6 center- pintle  barbette 

•sunS  xioqs  £a.bu  qaui-8 

CO 

i M h 

•Bp^iqtnnxoo  qotn*8 

j 

j rH  05  I HP 

•Bgg  ajoq-qjoorag 

MH 

i :«  *> 

•8S8  P8FTK 

j 05  05  05  rH  O 

•Bjapunod-gg 

05  •»*  05  05  h* 

•8im3  jo  jaqnmx; 

<0  Hp  05  HP  t-  I h(| 

•Xaajjnq  jo  aaqrauK 

: : : i : 3 

rH  C5  05  HP  in  -g 

66000  H 

[ap.  xvm.]  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


183 


Report  of  guns , carriages , and  ammunition  on  Island  No.  10. 


imber  of  guns 19 

-pounders  (Dahlgren,  rifled) 3 

-pounders,  smooth 9 

ncli  columbiads - 3 

ncli  siege  howitzers 4 

•cher  shot 110 

-pounder  solid  shot 800 

-pounder  solid  shot - - 196 

-pounder  loaded  shell 30 

-pounder  loaded  shell 40 

-pound  charges - 400 

pound  charges - 800 

iound  charges  for  Dahlgrens 120 


KIND  OF  CARRIAGES. 

4 guns  on  center-pintle  carriages. 

3 guns  on  casemate  carriages. 

2 guns  on  barbette  carriages. 

3 24-pounder  Dahlgrens  mounted  on  Weller  carriages,  their  proper  carriages  having 
been  lost. 

2 columbiads  on  columbiad  carriages. 

1 columbiad  on  Belmont  gun-carriage. 


port  of  the  approximate  amount  of  the  fixed  heavy-gun  ammunition  on  the  Tennessee 
shore,  independent  of  that  placed  in  position  at  the  batteries. 


CARTRIDGES. 

tfo. 

36 — 12  pounder. 

07 —  10  pounder. 

00 — 8 pounder. 

[00 — 6 pounder. 

I AMMUNITION  FOR  8-INCH  GUN. 

02 — 8-inch  shell,  not  charged. 

29 — 8-inch  shell,  charged. 

10 — 8-inch  grape. 

08 —  8-inch  shot. 

AMMUNITION  FOR  10-INCH  GUN. 

91 — 10-inch  shell.  • 

AMMUNITION  FOR  32-POUNDER  GUNS. 

14 — Elongated  shot  for  32-pounder  Dahl- 
gren,  rifled. 

1 15 — 32-pounder  shot. 

54 — 32-pounder  shell,  charged. 

194 — 32-pounder  shell,  not  charged. 


ammunition,  etc. — Continued. 

No, 

816—32-pounder  canister. 

954 — 32-pounder  grape. 

AMMUNITION  FOR  24-POUNDER  GUN. 

92 — 24-pounder  shell,  charged. 

204 — 24-pounder  shell,  unstrapped  and  not 
charged. 

650 — 24-pounder  shot. 

103 — 24-pounder  grape. 

428 — 24-pounder  canister. 

AMMUNITION  FOR  32-POUNDER  HOWITZER. 

28 — 32-pounder  howitzer  shell,  loaded. 

AMMUNITION  FOR  24-POUNDER  HOWITZER. 

24 — 24-pounder  howitzer  shell,  strapped 
and  charged. 

150 — 2^-pound  cartridges  for  24-pounder 
howitzer. 


Report  of  the  heavy-gun  ammunition  on  Island  No.  10  for  distribution. 


So. 

j 50 — 8-pound  charges. 

45 — 10-pound  charges. 

7 — 12-pound  charges. 

76 — 6-pound  charges. 

64 — 4-pound  charges. 

96 — Impound  charges. 
35—32-pounder  shot. 

16 — 32-pounder  shell,  charged. 


No. 

295 — 32-pounder  grape. 

191 — 32-pounder  canister. 

10 — 64-pounder  shot. 

101 — 64-pounder  shell,  charged. 
224 — 64-pounder  grape. 

717 — 24-pounder  shot. 

150 — 24-pounder  grape. 


184  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVi: 

No.  44. 

Reports  of  Flag-Officer  George  N.  Hollins , C.  S.  Navy. 

Flag-ship  McEae, 
Tiptonville , Tenn .,  March  15,  1862. 

General:  I deem  it  proper  to  communicate  with  you  direct  ; 
regards  the  position  of  my  command  in  this  vicinity.  My  force  co 
sists  of  six  gunboats ; two  of  them  are  ironed  over  their  engines,  whi( 
protects  them  from  small-arms  and  light  artillery,  but  affording  litt 
protection  against  heavy  guns;  all  the  others  are  very  vulnerable, 
feel  that  the  preservation  of  these  boats  are  of  the  last  importance 
our  country,  and  am  therefore  unwilling  to  risk  their  loss  or  beir 
crippled  by  the  guns  of  the  land  forces  of  the  enemy  except  in  the  la 
extremity. 

If  the  gunboats  should  pass  No.  10  I will  do  the  best  I can  to  stc 
them ; in  that  case  I will  of  course  run  the  risk  of  loss  or  capture  i 
keep  them  back.  Nearly  all  the  guns  at  New  Madrid  were  left  behir 
(as  you  will  have  heard  from  the  general  commanding)  when  that  plai 
was  evacuated;  though  they  were  spiked,  still  my  impression  is  th: 
they  could  be  rendered  useful  in  twenty-tour  hours,  if  not  less  time.  ( 
this  you  will  be  a better  judge  than  myself.  I think  if  the  gunboa 
do  not  or  cannot  pass  No.  10  I will  fall  back  below  the  lowest  poi 
that  the  enemy  can  fortify  below  this  place,  should  they  attempt  it, 
we  are  unable  to  prevent  it.  Our  gunboats  can  and  have  driven  tl 
enemy  from  the  banks  of  the  river,  but  as  soon  as  they  cease  their  fi] 
they  return  and  lire  into  the  transports  as  they  come  up  and  dow: 
This  they  did  at  Point  Pleasant,  and  may  continue  to  do  down  son 
miles  below  this  place,  when  they  will  be  stopped  by  the  nature  of  tl 

country.  „ _ . 

The  Manassas  has  been  ordered  back  to  New  Orleans,  as  you  r 
quested,  though  from  some  injury  received  from  a “ snag”  I fear  she  wi 
be  detained  some  days  in  Memphis  to  repair. 

I am  not  overburdened  with  ammunition  in  any  of  the  gunboats,  i 
you  may  suppose,  and  do  not  wish  to  throw  it  away  without  son 
return  from  the  enemy  for  it.  My  crews  are  all  short.  I have  bee 
kindly  furnished  by  General  McCown  with  some  from  his  command, 
merely  state  these’to  let  you  see  the  difficulties  under  which  I am  wor 
ing.  Any  suggestions  from  you  will  meet  with  all  attention,  and  n 
co-operation  will  be  hearty  and  to  the  extent  of  my  ability. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ G.  N.  HOLLINS, 

Flag-Officer , Commanding  Naval  Forces  on  the  Mississippi. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding  Confederate  Armies  on  the  Mississippi. 


Flag-ship  McEae,  March  30,  1862. 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  27th  instant,  asking  for  information  h 
regards  the  necessity  of  evacuating  New  Madrid,  has  been  receive* 
It  was  my  opinion,  from  the  manner  in  which  the  enemy  progressed  l 
their  work  under  the  fire  of  the  gunboats  and  Fort  Thompson,  that  i 
twenty-four  hours  more  Fort  Thompson  would  be  cut  oft  from  comim 
nication  with  the  upper  fort  entirely,  and  that,  if  a necessity  arose  fi 


185 


jap.  XVIII.l  NEW  MADRID,  MO.,  AND  ISLAND  NO.  10,  ETC. 


bancloning  the  works  later,  it  would  be  impossible  to  take  off  the  com- 
mand at  that  point.  I had  been  assured  by  all  who  appeared  to  know 
le  character  of  the  country  that  no  heavy  guns  could  be  brought  to 
ew  Madrid ; but  found  that  they  opened  with  24-pounders,  and  they 
ad  an  8-inch ; one  shell  of  that  caliber  was  thrown  into  our  works.  I 
slieved,  therefore,  that  if  the  evacuation  was  to  take  place  it  should 
3 done  at  once.  Generals  McCown  and  Stewart  were  both  present  at 
us  consultation.  General  Stewart  remarked  that  the  artillerymen 
the  fort  were  worn  out  already,  and  the  only  chance  of  relieving 
tern  was  by  taking  men  from  No.  10,  and  they  would  have  to  be  sent 
lere  and  the  others  taken  away  under  fire  of  the  enemy,  which  to 
ly  vessel  that  had  approached  the  fort  during  the  day  had  been  more 
lan  dangerous. 

The  enemy  were  throwing  up  works  on  the  lower  part  of  the  fort,  as 
as  proved  by  their  opening  fire  the  next  morning  from  that  side, 
ifilading  the  entire  camp  and  position,  and  it  would  have  rendered  it 
lpossible  to  send  transports  to  the  post  at  all.  Their  force  was  too 
rong  for  the  small  force  we  had  at  Madrid  in  the  works  erected  there 
hold  out  very  long  under  any  circumstances,  particularly  if  regular 
>proaches  were  made,  which  to  my  mind  evidently  was  their  inten- 
m.  Our  fire  had  not  seemed  to  stop  their  progress,  though  our  shot 
id  shell  appeared  to  do  great  execution,  as  we  could  see  their  arnbu- 
nces  going  continually.  Whenever  their  columns  appeared  on  the 
>en  field  we  could  disperse  them  and  drive  them  back ; but  in  their 
enches  I doubt  if  we  were  as  successful  ; at  least  we  did  not  appear 
stop  their  works. 

Under  these  circumstances  I thought  if  our  force  was  not  strong 
iough  to  stop  their  work  intrenching  we  had  better  evacuate.  It  was 
y opinion,  and  so  expressed  to  both  generals;  and  that  if  it  was  to  be 
me,  the  sooner  it  was  done  the  better,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  accom- 
ished.  What  the  facilities  were  for  moving — I told  General  McCown 
at  three  of  the  gunboats  would  give  such  assistance  as  would  be  re- 
ared. I ordered  the  Livingston,  Commander  Pinkney ; the  gunboat 
)lk,  Lieutenant-Commander  Carter ; and  the  Pontchartrain,  Lieu- 
nant-Cominander  Dunnington,  to  that  duty.  The  Pontchartrain 
is  employed  at  the  upper  fort;  the  other  two  vessels  at  Fort  Thomp- 


I was  not  myself  on  shore  during  the  embarkation  of  the  troops  nor 
e dismantling  of  the  forts,  but  will  refer  you  for  all  this  information 
the  honorable  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  to  whom  I inclosed  the  reports 
their  movements  on  that  night.  I would  be  unwilling  to  say  what 
ght  or  could  be  done  under  the  circumstances,  not  having  been 
esent;  but  I believe  much  more  might  have  been  saved  if  stricter 
scipline  had  been  maintained  among  the  troops ; but  from  my  own  ob- 
rvation  I doubt  the  possibility  among  volunteers,  raised  and  officered 
many  of  our  regiments  are. 

I remain,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 


Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk, 

Corinth , Tenn. 


GEO.  N.  HOLLINS, 

Flag-Officer. 


186 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH 

NO.  45. 


Abstract  from  Major-General  PoWs 
Me  Gown's  command  at  New  Madrid 


memorandum  of  Brigadier- Generc 
and  Island  No.  10  in  the  latter  pai 


of  February , 1862. 


Command. 

Effective  strength. 

Infantry.. 

Heavy  artil- 

lery. 

Light  artil- 

lery. 

Cavalry. 

Aggregate. 

1, 036 
887 
1,714 
1, 103 
1,271 

120 

100 

1,25 

1,01 

1,71 

1,00 

1,83 

132 

441 

95 

173 

300 

~ M71 

656 

305 

400 

7,  43 

Orqanization  of  Brigadier- General  McCown’s  command  at  New  Madrid  and  Island  No. 
J about  February  28,  1862.* 


Col.  E.  W.  Gantt’s  Brigade. 

llth  Arkansas. 

12th  Arkansas. 

Stewart’s  heavy  artillery  (1  company). 
Upton’s  heavy  artillery  (1  company). 
Missouri  Cavalry  (1  company). 

Col.  R.  P.  Neely’s  Brigade. 

12th  Louisiana. 

4th  Tennessee. 

31st  Tennessee. 


Col.  S.  F.  Marks’  Brigade. 

11th  Louisiana. 

5th  Louisiana  Battalion. 
Bankhead’s  battery. 


Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Stewart’s  Brigade. 

4th  Arkansas  Battalion. 

5th  Tennessee. 

[55th]  Tennessee. 

' Heavy  artillery  corps. 


NOT  BRIGADED. 


1st  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and  Mississippi. 
40th  Tennessee. 

46th  Tennessee. 

Johnson’s  siege  artillery  (1  company). 
Point  Couple  Artillery. 


Rucker’s  artillery  (1  company). 
Haywood’s  cavalry  (1  company). 
Hudson’s  squadron. 

Neely’s  cavalry  (1  company). 
Wheeler’s  cavalry  (1  company) 


MARCH  3-7,  1862.— Reconnaissance  to  Berry ville,  Ark. 

Report  of  Col,  Galvin  A.  Fllis , First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  First  Missouri  Cavalry, 

Gamp  on  Sugar  Greek , Ark .,  March  9,  1862. 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  order  of  the  2d  instant,  to  procec 
to  Keetsville  and  send  forward  a commissary  train  reported  to  be  the. 
and  then  to  make  a reconnaissance  of  the  country  east  of  the  positu 
occupied  by  our  forces,  I marched  with  140  men  on  the  morning  ol  t 
3d,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Pease,  of  your  staff,  to  Keetsville,  and  o 
warded  the  train  as  directed.  I then  proceeded  east  to  the  Koani 
River,  and  north  8 miles  northeast  of  Cassville,  Mo.,  and  finding  i 

* Original  says  “in  latter  part  of  February,  1862.” 


Chap.  XVIII.l  LACLEDE,  WRIGHT,  AND  DOUGLAS  COUNTIES,  MO.  187 

appearance  of  the  enemy,  bivouacked  for  the  night.  At  daylight  of 
the  morning  of  the  4th  I again  moved  forward  in  the  direction  of  Mor- 
ris’ Mill,  on  White  Eiver,  where  a camp  of  the  rebels  was  reported  to 
be  in  that  vicinity.  I reached  the  mills  about  4 p.  m.  Finding  no  enemy 
there,  I at  once  moved  forward  in  the  direction  of  Berryville,  over  the 
most  broken  country  it  is  possible  to  conceive,  crossing  the  White  ltiver 
six  times  in  traveling  8 miles.  At  10  p.  m.,  having  found  forage  for  our 
horses,  I camped  for  the  night,  and  again,  at  daylight  of  the  5th,  moved 
forward  on  the  road  to  Berryville.  When  about  2 miles  I arrested  two 
men  of  suspicious  appearance,  and  from  them  obtained  information 
that  a company  was  organizing  at  Berryville  to  leave  on  the  following 
morning. 

Moving  forward  as  rapidly  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  would  admit 
I soon  came  to  the  suburb  of  the  town,  and  observed  a body  of  horse- 
men moving  north  on  the  road  leading  in  that  direction.  Taking  two 
companies  I went  in  pursuit ; Colonel  Pease,  with  the  balance  of  the 
command,  in  the  mean  time  surrounded  the  town,  taking  some  50  pris- 
oners, 22  horses,  and  50  stand  of  arms. 

My  horses  being  much  worn,  I was  unable  to  overtake  those  that  had 
Left,  and  after  destroying  three  wagons  partially  loaded  with  stores 
belonging  to  the  enemy,  I returned  to  King’s  Eiver  and  bivouacked. 

At  early  dawn  next  morning  the  command  was  ordered  to  saddle,  and 
rs  men  and  horses  were  exhausted  and  a snow  storm  prevailing  I con- 
3luded  upon  returning  to  camp,  which  I reached  at  2 a.  m.  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  7th.  I found  forage  exceedingly  scarce,  failing  to  secure 
sufficient  over  the  whole  region  I scoured  in  that  direction  to  supply 
the  immediate  wants  of  my  command. 

I would  respectfully  state  that  I had  neither  field  officer  nor  captain 
ind  but  three  lieutenants  with  the  command,  and  take  this  opportunity 
:o  return  my  acknowledgment  to  your  aide-de-camp,  Col.  Henry  Pease, 
or  his  valuable  co-operation  and  encouragement  to  my  men,  and  his 
gallantry  and  bravery,  displayed  in  their  presence  on  this  and  other 
occasions  of  more  perilous  adventure. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  A.  ELLIS, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Brig.  Gen.  Jeff.  C.  Davis, 

Commanding  Third  Division. 


ftARCH  4-11, 1862. — Scout  through  Laclede,  Wright,  and  Douglas  Counties, 
Mo.,  including  skirmishes  at  Fox  Creek  (March  7)  and  Mountain  Grove 
(March  9). 

Report  of  Col.  George  E.  Waring , jr .,  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  of  Post, 

Lebanon , Mo .,  March  12,  1862. 

General  : I have  to  respectfully  report  that  the  patrol  of  cavalry 
mder  Captain  Ludlow  (Company  E),  of  my  regiment,  consisting  of  42 
aen,  which  left  here  on  the  4th  instant,  and  which  was  re-enforced  by 
>0  cavalry,  under  Captain  Heiden  (Company  F),  accompanied  by  Cap- 
am  Wuerpel,  assistant  provost-marshal,  returned  to  this  post  last 
veiling,  after  an  extended  scout  in  Laclede,  Wright,  and  Douglas 
counties,  bringing  in  21  prisoners. 


188  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  LChap.  XVIII. 


On  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant,  just  at  daybreak,  the  detachment 
under  Captain  Ludlow,  which  was  encamped  at  Fox  Creek,  Douglas 
County,  7 miles  southeast  of  Yera  Cruz,  was  attacked  by  a body  of 
riflemen  concealed  in  the  bush.  Five  of  our  men  were  wounded  (one 
mortally)  and  several  horses  killed.  The  detachment  formed  under  a 
continued  fire,  and  made  a charge  upon  the  enemy,  who  eluded  the 
cavalry  bv  retreating  through  the  wood  trails.  Captain  Ludlow  then 
fell  back 'upon  Hartville,  where  he  was  joined  in  the  evening  by  the 
re-enforcements  under  Captain  Heiden.  This  latter  body  I had  dis- 
patched on  the  7th  instant,  having  received  information  of  the  presence 
of  a considerable  body  of  marauders  at  Yera  Cruz  or  its  vicinity.  The 
wounded  were  sent  back  from  Hartville,  and  the  next  day  occupied  in 
scouting  the  country  southward  from  Hartville.  ~ . 

On  this  day  (the  8th)  my  men  were  joined  by  some  Home  Guard 
scouts,  and  about  18  of  Bowen’s  cavalry,  under  Lieutenant  Flint,  from 
the  post  at  Marshfield.  During  the  day  information  was  had  of  a body 
of  men  (supposed  to  be  the  same  party  which  had  attacked  Lap  tain 
Ludlow  on  Fox  Creek)  being  at  a place  called  Mountain  Grove,  2 miles 
west  of  Montreal,  on  the  borders  of  Texas  and  Wright  Counties.  Dis- 
position was  made  to  surround  this  place,  and  after  a most  fatiguing 
march  over  rough  mountain  roads,  in  the  mid^t  of  a terrible  storm,  the 
settlement  (lying  on  the  summit  of  the  hill)  was  reached  about  noon  of 
the  9th.  As  the  cavalry  was  surrounding  the  principal  buildings  a ^ 
sharp  fire  was  opened  on  it  from  a small  blacksmith  shop.  The  enemy  j 
broke  for  the  bush  and  for  a tavern  building  near  by.  All  those  who 
did  not  gain  the  tavern  were  killed  by  the  cavalry,  except  one,  who  I 
escaped  on  his  horse.  Fire  was  then  opened  on  our  men  from  the] 
tavern,  but  it  was  speedily  taken  after  a sharp  fight.  Notwithstanding 
the  enemy  were  armed  with  rifles  and  protected  by  the  buildings  none 
of  our  men  were  killed  and  but  a few  trifling -flesh  wounds  received.] 
Eleven  of  the  marauders  were  killed  j 6 wounded,  2 of  these  mortally  j 
and  the  rest,  21  in  number,  taken  prisoners. 

Being  satisfied  that  the  band  was  thus  thoroughly  broken  up  the 
command  returned  to  Lebanon,  and  the  prisoners  are  now  safely  con-; 
fined  in  the  jail  here.  Previous  to  their  return  there  had  been  sent  m 
here  at  different  times  19  other  prisoners  who  had  been  taken  during 
the  week.  Over  30  horses  were  captured  and  as  many  rifles  and  guns, 
which  last  were  turned  over  to  Union  citizens,  who  are  at  once  organ- 1 
izing  a company  to  keep  down  any  further  attempt  to  make  up  their  j 

In  the  upper  story  of  the  tavern  were  found  saddles  and  an  overcoat 
lost  in  the  attack  at  Fox  Creek.  On  the  person  of  one  of  the  prisoners 
(J.  C.  Campbell,  a justice  of  the  peace  in  Wright  County)  was  found 
a document  of  which  the  following  is  a copy: 


[Special  authority.] 

Headquarters  M.  S.  G.,  February  7,  1862. 


Authority  is  hereby  given  to  J.  C.  Campbell  to  organize  all  the  men  that  he  can  re- 
e xi, ~ x in  onorotA  tvtt  n gu Hfii  force  m the  Sixth  ana 


cruit  for  that  purpose  into  companies,  to  operate  as  a g— ----- 
Seventh  Military  Districts.  He  is  instructed  to  disarm  all  Home  Guards  and  other 
hostile  organizations  in  those  districts,  and  to  place  the  arms  thus  taken  m the  hands 
of  his  own  forces.  He  will  at  the  same  time  embarrass  the  enemy  as  much  as  possible 
by  cutting  off  their  re-enforcements,  scouting  parties,  and  supplies.  He  is  particular  y 
instructed  to  prevent  depredations  upon  private  property,  the  unnecessary  disturbance 
of  any  person  whatever,  either  by  the  men  under  his  own  command  or  by  others,  and 
he  will  report  his  actions  to  this  army. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Price : ^ ^ gray 

Acting  by  Special  Authority. 


;hap.  xvhl] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


189 


There  was  also  found  on  him  a memorandum  hook,  containing  various 
lotes  of  camp  guards,  expenses  for  provisions,  lists  of  ammunition, 
>ressed  horses,  arms,  &c.  One  of  the  gang  was  one  Preston  Todd,  who 
ras  a “ Union”  candidate  for  the  State  Convention.  The  Seventh  Dis- 
rict,  referred  to  in  the  commission  under  which  the  gang  assumed  to 
tct,  comprises  eighteen  counties  in  the  southern  portion  of  the  State 
lereabouts,  including  Springfield  and  Rolla.  For  the  past  fortnight 
hese  men  have  been  seizing  horses,  wagons,  arms,  and  other  private 
property,  and  a portion  of  the  plunder  has  been  sent  down  to  Arkan- 
as.  Information  was  had  of  some  of  this  being  on  the  way,  but  it  was 
Iready  too  far  off  to  expect  to  recover  it  with  our  small  force  and  jaded 
torses.  I presume  these  prisoners  come  under  the  designations  of  Sec- 
ion  I of  circular  from  your  headquarters  dated  February  14,  for  I be- 
ieve  from  the  entire  appearances  of  the  paper  above  referred  to  that 
b was  a mere  pretext  to  gain  over  men  to  their  gang,  and  I respectfully 
uggest,  if  their  case  is  to  be  disposed  of  by  a military  commission,  that 
uch  court  convene  here  as  soon  as  possible,  that  the  example  of  pun- 
shment  may  have  its  greatest  effect. 

I take  the  liberty  of  sending  this  communication  direct  to  your  head- 
uarters,  in  order  to  avoid  the  delay  arising  from  sending  it  through 
he  regular  channels  at  this  time. 

Awaiting  your  orders  in  the  premises,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  gen- 
ral,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  E.  WARING,  Jr., 

Colonel  Fourth  Missouri  Car .,  Comdg.  Fost  at  Lebanon. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri. 


MARCH  6-8,  1862.— Battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  or  Elkhorn  Tavern,  Ark. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

o.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  Army. 

o.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest, 
correspondence  with  the  Confederate  commander,  and  congratulations  from 
General  Halleck. 

o.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  and  Second  Divisions, 
o.  4. — CoL  Peter  J.  Osterhaus,  Twelfth  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  First  Division, 
o.  5.— Col.  William  N.  Color,  Twenty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry,  First  Brigade, 
o.  6. — Maj.  Richard  H.  Nodine,  Twenty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry, 
o.  7. — Col.  Charles  Knobelsdorff,  Forty-fourth  Illinois  Infantry, 
o.  8. — Col.  Nicholas  Greusel,  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Bri- 
gade, First  Division. 

o.  9. — Maj.  Hugo  Wangelin,  Twelfth  Missouri  Infantry. 

o.  10. — Capt.  Albert  Jenks,  Illinois  Cavalry. 

o.  11. — Capt.  Henry  A.  Smith,  Illinois  Cavalry. 

o.  12. — Col.  Cyrus  Bussey,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry. 

o.  13. — Capt.  Martin  Welfley,  Missouri  Light  Artillery. 

o.  14. — Capt.  Louis  Hoffmann,  Fourth  Independent  Battery  Ohio  Light  Artillery, 
o.  15. — Brig.  Gen.  A.  Asboth,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division, 
o.  16. — Col.  Joseph  Nemett,  Fifth  Missouri  Cavalry  (Benton  Hussars), 
o.  17. — Col.  Jeff.  C.  Davis,  Twenty-second  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  Third 
Division. 

o.  18. — Col.  Thomas  Pattison,  Eighteenth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  First  Bri- 
gade. 


190  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


No.  19. 
No.  20.—' 


No.  21.—' 
No.  22. 
No.  23. 
No.  24. 
No.  25. 
No.  26. 


No.  27.— 


No.  28.- 
No.  29.- 
No.  30.- 
No.  31.- 
No.  32. 
No.  33. 
No.  34.- 
No.  35, 


No.  36.— 


No.  37, 
No.  38, 
No.  39, 
No.  40, 
No.  41, 
No.  42, 
No.  43. 


No.  44. 
No.  45, 
No.  46 
No.  47, 


No.  48, 
No.  49 
No.  50, 
No.  51. 
No.  52. 


No.  53. 

i 


No.  54, 


No.  55. 
No.  56, 


Lieut.  Col.  David  Shunk,  Eighth  Indiana  Infantry. 

■Col.  Julius  White,  Thirty-seventh  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Bn 

-cfhEugene  A.  Carr,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  Fourth  Division. 
Col.  Grenville  M.  Dodge,  Fourth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 
-Capt.  Junius  A.  Jones,  First  Independent  Battery  Iowa  Light  Artillery. 

-Col.  William  Vandever,  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 
■Capt.  Mortimer  M.  Hayden,  Third  Independent  Battery  Iowa  Light  Artillery.  ■ 
-Maj.  William  D.  Bowen,  Bowen's  Missouri  Cavalry,  and  including  operations! 

since  February  10,  1862.  e ..  I 

-Maj.  Eli  W.  Weston,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry,  provost-marshal  South-  , 

western  District. 

-Capt.  Thomas  A.  Reed,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 

-Capt.  Robert  W.  Fyan,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 

-Capt.  Sampson  P.  Barris,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 

-Lieut.  James  J.  Lyon,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 

-Capt.  Barbour  Lewis,  First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

-Maj.  Joseph  Conrad,  Third  Missouri  Infantry. 

-Mai.  August  H.  Poten,  Seventeenth  Missouri  Infantry.  ...... 

_Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Trans-Mississippi  Dis- 

Brig^Gen.  Albert  Pike,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  Indian  Ter- 

ritory.  . . 

-Col  E.  Greer,  Third  Texas  Cavalry,  commanding  division. 

—Col.  Evander  McNair,  Fourth  Arkansas  Infantry. 

—Col.  E.  Greer,  Third  Texas  Cavalry. 

—Lieut.  Col.  Walter  P.  Lane,  Third  Texas  Cavalry. 

—Col.  B.  W.  Stone,  Sixth  Texas  Cavalry.  . 

-Mai  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  commanding  Missouri  State  Guard  (Confederate). 
-Col.  Henry  Little,  commanding  First  Brigade  Missouri  Volunteers  (Confed- 

— Col.  Thomas  H.  Rosser,  commanding  Second  Brigade  Confederate  Cavalry. 
—Col.  John  T.  Hughes,  Confederate  Cavalry. 

,— Col.  G.  W.  Riggins,  Confederate  Cavalry. 

—Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green,  commanding  Second  Division  Missouri  State 

.—Col.  John  B.  Clark,  jr.,  commanding  Third  Division  Missouri  State  Guard. 

Adit.  J.  M.  Snyde,  Fourth  Regiment,  Third  Division. 

-Col.  James  P.  Saunders,  commanding  Fifth  Division  Missouri  State  Guard. 

Mai.  D.  H.  Lindsay,  commanding  Sixth  Division  Missouri  State  Guard. 

.—Brig.  Gen.  D.  M.  Frost,  commanding  Seventh  and  Ninth  Divisions  Missouri^ 

State  Guard.  m 

-Col.  Colton  Greene,  commanding  Third  Brigade  Missouri  Volunteers  (Con-, 

•Brig.  Gen.  James  S.  Rains,  commanding  Eighth  Division  Missouri  State 
Guard. 

_ Maj.  D.  Todd  Samuels,  commanding  Price's  escort. 

. — Confederate  orders. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  TJ.  8.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  March  10,  18bJ. 

The  Army  of  the  Southwest,  under  General  Curtis,  after  threedays’ 
hard  fighting  near  Sugar  Creek,  Arkansas,  has  gained  a most  glorious 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


191 


Ictory  over  the  combined  forces  of  Yan  Dorn,  McCulloch,  Price,  and 
-Iclntosh.  Our  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  estimated  at  1,000;  that  ol 
he  enemy  still  larger.  Guns,  flags,  provisions,  &c.,  captured  in  large 
uantities.  Our  cavalry  in  pursuit  of  the  flying  enemy. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 

Major-General  McClellan, 

Washington . 


Ho.  2. 

leports  of  Brig,  Gen . Samuel  B.  Curtis , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Army 
of  the  Southwest , correspondence  with  the  Confederate  commander,  and 
congratulations  from  General  Hallech . 


Sugar  Creek  Hollow,  Ark., 

March  6,  1862. 

Captain:  Yan  Dorn,  Price,  and  McCulloch  are  moving  down  on  us. 
lave  ordered  all  my  detachments  to  concentrate  here,  and  I am  locat- 
lg  my  force  to  repel  an  attack.  The  enemy  is  reported  at  from  20,000 
3 30,000  fighting  men.  They  burned  the  Seminole  College,  in  Fay- 
tteville,  night  before  last,  and  last  night  their  advance  camp  was  at 
dm  Springs,  about  21  miles  from  here.  Sigel  last  night  was  4£  miles 
outhwest  from  Bentonville,  14  miles  from  here,  but  he  was  to  march 
1 2 this  morning,  and  must  be  near  by.  A detachment  under  Colonel 
randever  entered  and  took  Huntsville  last  night,  taking  2 prisoners, 
hat  detachment  will  also  be  in  before  the  enemy  can  reach  me.  We 
■ill  give  them  the  best  show  we  can.  The  weather  is  very  cold  and 
[lowing. 


Capt.  H.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Southwest, 

Bea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  9,  1862. 

Sir  : On  Thursday,  the  6th  instant,  enemy  commenced  the  attack  on 
ly  right,  assailing  and  following  the  rear  guard  of  the  detachment 
ruler  General  Sigel  to  my  main  lines  on  Sugar  Creek  Hollow,  but  on 
lat  occasion  ceased  firing  when  he  met  my  re-enforcements  about 
p.  m.  During  the  night  I became  convinced  he  had  moved  on  so  as 
> attack  my  right  or  rear.  Therefore,  early  on  the  7th,  I ordered  a 
hange  of  front  to  the  right  on  my  right,  my  right  thus  becoming  my 
ift,  still  resting  on  Sugar  Creek  Hollow.  This  brought  my  line  cross- 
ig  Pea  Kidge,  my  new  right  resting  on  the  head  of  Cross  Timber  Hol- 
>w,  which  is  the  head  of  Big  Sugar  Creek.  I also  ordered  an  immediate 
d vance  of  cavalry  and  light  artillery— Colonel  Osterhaus’ — with  orders 
) attack  and  break  what  I supposed  would  be  a re-enforced  line  of  the 
uerny.  This  movement  was  in  progress  when  the  enemy,  at  11  a.  m., 
3inmenced  an  attack  on  my  right.  The  fight  continued  mainly  at 
lese  points  during  the  day,  the  enemy  having  gained  my  position  so 


192 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Cap.  xvm 


SMfiis-a  sns  A.°=2S  ssa  a 

° tKV.v!;?  s»  «-™j  5 

rnaml  which  remained  till  near  the  close  of  the  day  on  the  leii 

t(?face  the  enemy  where  he  had  deployed  on  my  right  flank  i 
11osition  The  change  was  only  partially  effective,  but  fully ^i| 

wimmsmm 

advancing  steadily  toward  the  head  of  the  hollows.  I immediate  I 

^s&attsss^s^S& 

throughout  the^hole  line  completely  routed  the  wholerebelforcj 
whfoh  retired  in  great  confusion,  but  rather  safely,  through  the  dee 

im^)urSloss  isheavy!  °The  enemy";  can  never  be  ascertained,  for  tl 
dead  are  scattered  over  a large  field,  and  their  wounded  too  may  mai 
nrtbem  be  Ct  tnd  pm-ish.  The  foe  is  scattered  in  all  directions,  b. 
fthlXhis  main  force  has  returned  to  Boston  Mountains.  Generj 
Sio-el  follows  towards  Keetsville,  while  my  cavalry  is  pursuing 
toward  the  mountains,  scouring  the  country,  bringing  in  prisoned 
and  trying  to  find  the’  rebel  M!jor-General  Van .Don i,  who  had  co. 
Tnnnri  of  the  entire  force  of  the  enemy  at  this  battle  of  Pea  iiidge.  I 
Ce  not  as  S the  statements  of  the  dead  and  wounded  so  as  . 
justify  a report,  but  I will  refer  you  to  dispatch  I will  forward  ve 

S°The  officers  and  soldiers  in  this  command  have  displayed  sir 
unusual  gallantry  I hardly  dare  to  make  distinctions.  1 must,  no 
over  name  all  my  commanders  of  divisions:  General  Sigel,  who  g< 
lantlv  carried  the  heights  and  drove  back  the  left  wing  of  the  eneni 
Brigade  General  Asboth,  who  is  wounded  in  the  arm,  in to 
pffort  to  re-enforce  the  right;  Colonel  and  Acting  Bngadier-Gene 
Ss  Who  commands  theceAter,  where  McCulloch  fell  on  the  7th,  a 
pressed  forward  the  center  on  the  8th;  Col.  and  Acting  Brig.  Gen. 
A.  Carr,  who  is  also  wounded  in  the  arm,  and  was  under 3 
nf  flip  enemy  during  the  two  hardest  days  struggling, 
scatterecdleaTof  friends  and  foe  attest  the  hardest  of  the  strugg 

Commanders  of  brigades  Colonels  Dodge,  Osterhaus,  Yandeve  ,Wl| 

Schaefer  Pattison,  and  Greusel,  distinguished;  but  tor  tneir  gainmu 
and  tot’of  others’l  must  refer  to  -ports  of  dms  on  com^anders^ 
I must  also  tender  my  thanks  to  my  staff  officer^  Capt.  • • " 
ny,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general;  Capt.  Stark Acting  aid 

Ahlfeldt,  and  Lieuts.  J.  M.  Adams  and  R.  A- Stott,  a acun  a 
and  Lieut.  A.  H<*ppner,  my  only  engineer  officer.  All  the  sta  , 


HAP.  XVIH.l  PEA  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  193 

ers  did  gallant  service  in  conveying  orders  and  aiding  in  tlieir  prompt 
xecution. 

Indiana,  Illinois,  Iowa,  Ohio,  and  Missouri  very  proudly  share  the 
onor  of  victory  which  their  gallant  heroes  won  over  the  combined 
irces  of  Yan  Dorn,  Price,  and  McCulloch  at  Pea  Eidge,  in  the  Ozark 
Fountains  of  Arkansas. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAME.  E.  CUETIS, 

Brigadier- General .. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  oe  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  10,  1862'. 

rigadier-General  Curtis, 

Commanding  in  Arkansas : 

I congratulate  you  and  your  command  on  the  glorious  victory  just 
ained.  You  have  proved  yourselves  as  brave  in  battle  as  enduring 
? fatigue  and  hardship.  A grateful  country  will  honor  you  for  both, 

H.  W.  HALLECI^, 

Major-  Genera  L 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Pea  Ridge,  March  10,  1802. 

Captain  : The  main  force  of  the  rebel  Army,  under  Generals  Van 
orn,  Price,  and  Pike  retreated  by  a short  turn  and  by-road  from  Cross 
imber  Hollow  toward  Huntsville,  camping  the  first  night  at  Yan 
7 inkle’s  Mill,  on  War  Eagle,  south  of  White  Eiver.  Green,  with  some 

000  or  10,000,  moved  through  Benton  ville,  my  cavalry  driving  his 
ar  guard  out  of  that  place,  with  the  loss  of  one  man.  These  two 
ovements  probably  contemplate  a junction  in  Boston  Mountains. 

1 move  two  divisions  a few  miles  forward  to-day.  A detachment  of 
»0  men,  under  Captain  Schaumberg,  with  a white  flag,  from  General 
an  Dorn,  comes  to  assist  in  collecting  and  burying  the  dead. 

The  enemy  has  lost  very  heavily.  Among  their  officers  are  Gen- 
als  McCulloch,  McIntosh,  and  Slack,  killed;  also  Colonel  McCul- 
ch,  a nephew  of  the  general ; Captain  Clark,  son  of  Maj.  Meriwether 
ark,  is  killed,  besides  many  more  whose  names  may  be  furnished. 

I send  copy  of  correspondence  with  General  Yan  Dorn. 

SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 
Brigadier-  General , Com  man  d ing. 

Capt.  K.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

March  0,  1862. 

> the  Commanding  Officer 

Of  the  U.  S.  Troops  on  Sugar  Creek,  Arkansas : 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  the  usages  of  war  I have  the  honor  to  re- 
est  that  you  will  permit  the  burial  party  whom  I send  from  this  army 
13  R R — VOL  viii 


194 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVm. 


with  a fla«'  of  truce  to  attend  to  the  duty  of  collecting  and  interring  the 
bodies  of  the  officers  arid  men  who  fell  during  the  engagements  of  the 

7th  and  8tli  instant.  ' , 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedientservant,  ^ 

Major-General , Confederate  Army.* 


f Inclosure  .No.  2. 


Headquarters 


Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Pea  Ridge,  Arte..  March  9,  1862. 


Earl  Van  Dorn, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces . 

Sir  • The  central  commanding  is  in  receipt  of  yours  ot  the  9th,  say 

raSiSal'ssI  as 

Sssassi 

.mangled,  and* expresses  a hope  that  this  important  struggle  may  no. 
degenerate  to  a savage  warfare. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Curtis:  ^ ^ McKENNY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwestv  J 
Pea  Ridge , Arlc .,  March  11, 180^.  I 

ojt'd  . T have  finished  burying  the  dead  and  made  the  best  provision! 
t ® Two  divisions  have  advanced  6 miles,  and  ra 

PrTnnreerfereSncTto°a'  verbal  communication  from  General  Van  Dorn, I 

as ssrssss «,«  hx  i« ».™.  tat  Ik.*  n»<» "I 

were  both  absent.  What  is  the  matter  out  there 

Respectfully,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


?Ar.  xvm.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


195 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Wear  Bentonville , Arlc.,  March  13,  1862. 
Captain  : I visited  Bentonville  yesterday.  Everything  is  quiet  in 
le  vicinity.  During  the  battle  we  lost  six  guns,  but  we  recovered  all 
ick  and  took  five  from  the  enemy.  I have  also  taken  a large  number 
7 small-arms  which  the  rebels  threw  away.  My  loss  of  killed  and 
ounded  will  exceed,  my  estimate  of  1,000.  General  Pike  commanded 
te  Indian  forces.  They  shot  arrows  as  well  as  rifles,  and  tomahawked 
id  scalped  prisoners.  I am  credibly  informed  that  Colonel  Rector, 

* Arkansas,  lias  disbanded  his  regiment. 

Was  my  dispatch  of  the  5th  instant,  telling  you  of  the  approach  of 
te  enemy  and  my  arrangements  to  receive  him,  taken  by  the  enemy 

• received  at  headquarters  ? Much  mail  matter  was  taken  by  him. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Oapt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , ArZr.,  March  14,  1862. 

eneral  Samuel  R.  Curtis: 

General  : I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Van  Dorn,  commanding 
is  district,  to  express  to  you  his  thanks  and  gratification  on  account 
the  courtesy  extended  by  yourself  and  the  officers  under  your  com- 
and  to  the  burial  party  sent  by  him  to  your  camp  on  the  9th  instant. 
He  is  pained  to  learn  by  your  letter  brought  to  him  by  the  command- 
g officer  of  the  party  that  the  remains  of  some  of  your  soldfers  have 
en  reiiorted  to  you  to  have  been  scalped,  tomahawked,  and  otherwise 
utilated. 

lie  hopes  you  have  been  misinformed  with  regard  to  this  matter,  the 
dians  who  formed  part  of  his  forces  having  for  many  years  been  re- 
i-rded  as  civilized  people.  He  will,  however,  most  cordially  unite  with 
n in  repressing  the  horrors  of  this  unnatural  war,  and  that  you  may 
-operate  with  him  to  this  end  more  effectually  he  desires  me  to  in 
rm  you  that  many  of  our  men  who  surrendered  themselves  prisoners 
war  were  reported  to  him  as  having  been  murdered  in  cold  blood  by 
eir  captors,  who  were  alleged  to  be  Germans. 

The  general  commanding  feels  sure  that  you  will  do  your  part,  as  he 
11,  in  preventing  such  atrocities  in  future,  and  that  the  perpetrators 
them  will  be  brought  to  justice,  whether  German  or  Choctaw. 

The  privileges  which  you  extend  to  our  medical  officers  will  be  recip- 
cated,  and  as  soon  as  possible  means  will  be  taken  for  an  exchange  of 
isoners. 

I am  sir,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

DABNEY  H.  MAURY, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Cross  Timber , Arlc .,  April  1,  1862. 
Captain  : The  brief  telegraphic  report  which  I gave  on  the  9th  ultimo 
not  sufficient  to  present  even  the  general  outline  of  the  battle  of  Pea 


196 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  1Chap-  xvill. 


Ridge,  and  with  the  report  of  my  commanders  of  divisions  I now  sub- 
mit a more  general  detail.  _ ...  . , 

My  pursuit  of  General  Price  brought  me  to  Fayetteville,  Ark.  lhel 
entire  winter  campaign  from  the  26th  January  to  this  time,  including 
the  march  from  Eolla  to  the  Boston  Mountains,  240  miles,  was  attended 


IDe  nr  ire  ii  lrum  xwua  uu  ? f 

\vith continual  Exhibitions" ofioi^  privations,7  conflict,  and  gallantry, 
some  of  which  I have  telegraphed  to  headquarters,  and  may  hereaftei 
deserve  more  full  development.  After  reaching  Arkansas  the  forces  oi 
General  Price  were  rapidly  re-enforced  by  regiments  which  had  been 
stationed  in  Arkansas  and  the  Indian  Territory.  I therefore  expected 
these  combined  forces  would  return  upon  us  to  give  us  battle,  and  in 
conformitv  with  the  orders  of  the  general  of  the  22d  ot  February 
selected  Sugar  Creek  as  the  strongest  of  several  strong  places  taken 
from  the  enemv  to  make  a stand  against  any  and  all  odds.  . B 

I reported  my  force  to  you  on  the  12th  February,  alter  Colonel  Davis 
division  had  joined  me,  at  12,095  men  and  fifty  pieces  of  artillery,  m 
eluding  four  mountain  howitzers.  My  long  line  of  communications  le 
quired  garrisons  at  Marshfield,  Springfield,  Cassville,  and  Keetsvillel 
besides  a constant  moving  force  to  guard  my  train.  My  force  m Ar 
kansas  on  the  7th  ultimo  was  therefore  not  more  than  10,500  cavalry  anc 

....  . . - nr  <>•  TY1  <^11  T1  t till 


infantry,  with  forty -nine  pieces  of  artillery,  including  the  mount  aii 
howitzers,  one  piece  having  been  sent  out  into  Missouri  and  thus  pre 

vented  from  joining  us  in  the  battle.  ■ 

The  scarcity  of  forage  and  other  supplies  made  it  necessary  tor  me 
to  spread  out  my  troops  over  considerable  country,  always  trying  t<J 
keep  it  within  supporting  distance,  convenient  to  rally  on  the  position; 
selected  for  battle.  On  the  4th  of  March  this  force  was  located  as  fol 

The  First  and  Second  Divisions,  under  Generals  §igel  and  Asbothl 
were  4 miles  southwest  of  Bentonville,  at  Cooper’s  farm,  under  genera 
orders  to  move  around  to  Sugar  Creek,  about  14  miles  east. 

The  Third  Division,  under  Col.  Jefferson  C.  Davis,  acting  brigadiers 
general,  had  moved  and  taken  position  at  Sugar  Creek,  under  oidei.s 
make  some  preparatory  arrangements  and  examinations  lor  a stain : 

against  the  enemy.  , , , , J 

The  Fourth  Division  was  at  Cross  Hollow,  under  command  ot  Col 
E.  A.  Carr,  acting  brigadier-general.  My  own  headquarters  were  ids' 
at  this  place,  within  about  12  miles  from  Sugar  Creek,  on  the  main  tel 
egrapli  road  from  Springfield  to  Fayetteville. 

Large  detachments  had  been  sent  out  from  these  several  camps  o 
forage  and  information.  One  from  Cross  Hollow  to  Huntsville,  unde 
command  of  Colonel  Vandever,  and  three  from  Cooper’s  farm  to  Map 

ville  and  Pineville.  One  of  these,  under  Major  Conrad,  with  a piecM 

artillery  and  about  250  men,  did  not  reach  us  till  after  the  battle.  Ail 

the  others  came  in  safe  and  joined  in  the  engagement.  I 

The  enemy  had  taken  position  in  the  Boston  Mountains,  a high  rang 
that  divides  the  waters  of  the  White  River  and  Arkansas.  Genera 
Price  had  rallied  the  forces  that  had  fought  at  Carthage,  \\  i Ison 
Creek,  and  Lexington,  augmented  by  his  exertions  to  recruit  m Mi> 
souri  during  the  winter.  On  his  arrival  from  ‘E1 \ w 

he  reported  to  Governor  Rector  that  between  4,000  and  o,000  ot  the> 

_ . . . „ , ■ lii  o laoA’in  (V  SlM'ITl  O’llftU 


had* joined  the^ Confederate  service  previous  to  liis  leaving  Springfield 
The  circulation  of  all  manner  of  extravagant  fa 


me  circuuiLiuu  ui  cm  alsehoods  on 

induced  the  whole  country  to  leave  their  homes,  and  for  fear  we  v oui 
kill  them  thousands  joined  his  ranks.  General  McCulloch  bioug  i < 
least  eleven  regiments  to  the  field  and  General  Pikefi\c.  Lesu  ; 


iAl\  XY.IIL] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARIv. 


197 


iese  regularly-organized  Confederate  troops  which  General  Price  met 
i Arkansas,  there  were  many  companies  and  regiments  of  Arkansas 
alunteers,  most  of  the  country  people  being  required  to  take  up  arms, 
rom  this  data  and  the  general  opinion  of  the  country  I estimated  the 
>rce  of  the  enemy  to  have  been  at  least  30,000  or  40,000.  This  was  the 
>rce  in  and  near  Boston  Mountains,  rallying  to  drive  us  from  Arkansas 
ad  Missouri. 

The  two  armies  thus  constituted  and  located  were  within  hearing  of 
vch  other’s  cannon,  about  30  miles  apart.  I submit  an  accompanying 
ap,#  showing  some  of  the  topographic  features  of  the  country  on  the 
>ads  which  we  traversed.  Our  troops  were  weary  and  somewhat  ex- 
austed  in  their  long  forced  marches  and  frequent  conflicts.  Our  cav- 
Iry  had  especially  suffered  in  the  breaking  down  and  loss  of  horses, 
ut  our  troops  were  generally  well  armed,  drilled,  and  anxious  to  en- 
mnter  the  enemy  at  any  reasonable  hazard.  They  were  all  intelligent, 
L*dent,  flushed  with  our  repeated  success  in  many  encounters  on  our 
ay,  and  all  conscious  of  the  righteousness  of  their  country’s  cause. 
The  arrival  of  Major-General  Van  Dorn  on  the  2d  of  March  in  the 
imp  of  the  enemy  was  the  occasion  of  great  rejoicing  and  the  firing  of 
>rty  guns.  The  rebel  force  was  harangued  by  their  chiefs  with  boast  - 
il  and  passionate  appeals,  assuring  them  of  their  superior  numbers 
ad  the  certainty  of  an  easy7,  victory.  Dispatches  were  published  falsely 
anouncing  a great  battle  at  Columbus,  Ky.,  in  which  we  had  lost  three 
anboats  and  20,000  men;  and  thus  the  rebel  hordes  were  assembled, 
he  occasion  was  now  opened  to  drive  the  invaders  from  the  soil  of 
rkansas  and  give  a final  and  successful  blow  to  a Southern  Confed- 

-acy 

The  5th  of  March  was  cold  and  blustering.  The  snow  fell  so  as  to 
iver  the  ground.  NTo  immediate  attack  was  apprehended,  and  I was 
ugaged  writing.  About  2 o’clock  p.  m.  scouts  and  fugitive  citizens 
line  in,  informing  me  of  the  rapid  approach  of  the  enemy  to  give  me 
attle.  His  cavalry  would  be  at  Elm  Springs,  some  12  miles  distant, 
lat  night,  and  his  artillery  had  already  passed  Fayetteville.  Satisfied 
f the  truth  of  this  report,  I immediately  sent  couriers  to  General  Sigel 
ad  Colonel  Vandever,  and  ordered  them  t®  move  immediately  to  Sugar 
reek,  where  I also  ordered  Colonel  Carr  to  move  with  his  division. 

I also  sent  you  a dispatch,  which  may  have  been  lost  with  other  mail- 
latter  which  I have  since  learned  was  captured  by  the  enemy.  I told 
cm  I would  give  them  the  best  reception  possible.  All  my  messengers 
ere  successful  in  delivering  their  orders.  Colonel  Carr’s  division 
Loved  about  6 p.  m.  Colonel  Vandever  had  intelligence  of  the  move- 
ient  of  the  enemy  before  my  messenger  reached  him,  and  made  imme- 
iato  change  in  his  march,  so  that  with  great  exertion  he  arrived  on  the 
th.  General  Sigel  deferred  his  march  from  Cooper’s  farm  till  2 o’clock 
i the  morning  of  the  6th,  and  at  Benton ville  tarried  himself  with  a 
^giment  and  battery  till  he  was  attacked  about  9 a.  m. 

1 arrived  at  Sugar  Creek  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  6th,  and  imrnedi- 
tely  detailed  parties  for  early  morning  work  in  felling  timber,  to  ob- 
truot  certain  roads  to  prevent  the  enemy  having  too  many  approaches 
ud  to  erect  field  works  to  increase  the  strength  of  my  forces.  Colonel 
(avis  and  Colonel  Carr  early  in  the  day  took  their  positions  on  the 
igh  projecting  hills  commanding  the  valley  of  the  creek,  leaving  the 
ght  of  the  line  to  be  occupied  by  the  First  and  Second  Divisions,  which 
ere  anxiously  expected.  The  valley  of  the  creek  is  low,  and  from  a 


To  appear  in  Atlas. 


198 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XVIK 


quarter  to  a half  mile  wide.  The  hills  are  high  oil  both  sides,  and  tin 
main  road  from  Fayetteville  by  Cross  Hollow  to  Keetsville  intercept* 
the  valley  nearly  at  right  angles.  The  road  from  Fayetteville  by  Ben 
tonville  to  Keetsville  is  quite  a detour,  but  it  also  comes  up  the  Sugai 
Creek  Valley;  a branch,  however,  takes  off  and  runs  nearly  parallel  t( 
the  main  or  Telegraph  road,  some  3 miles  from  it.  The  Sugar  Creel 
Valley,  therefore,  intercepts  all  these  roads. 

The  Third  and  Fourth  Divisions  had  before  noon  of  the  6th  deployec 
their  lines  and  cut  down  a great  number  of  trees,  which  thoroughly 
blockaded  the  roads  on  the  left.  Later  in  the  day  I directed  some  o: 
the  same  work  to  be  done  on  the  right.  This  work  was  in  charge  o: 
Colonel  Dodge,  who  felled  trees  on  the  road  which  runs  parallel  to  tht 
main  road  to  which  I have  before  referred.  This  proved  of  great  ad 
vantage,  as  it  retarded  the  enemy  some  two  hours  in  their  flank  move 
ment.  Breastworks  of  considerable  strength  were  erected  by  the  troop* 
on  the  headlands  of  Sugar  Creek  as  if  by  magic,  and  a battery  near  the 
road  crossing  was  completely  shielded  by  an  extensive  earthwork 
erected,  under  the  direction  of  Colonel  Davis,  by  a pioneer  company 
commanded  by  Captain  Snyder.  About  2 o’clock  p.  m.  General  Asbotl 
and  Colonel  Osterhaus  reported  the  arrival  of  the  First  and  Second 
Divisions.  This  good  news  was  followed  immediately  by  anothei 
report  that  General  Sigel,  who  had  remained  behind  with  a detach 
ment,  had  been  attacked  near  Bentonville  and  was  quite  surrounded 
by  the  enemy’s  advance  forces.  I immediately  directed  some  of  the 
troops  to  return  to  his  relief.  In  the  mean  time  he  had  advanced  wit! 
his  gallant  little  band,  fighting  its  way  within  3 or  4 miles  of  our  maid 
forces.  The  two  divisions  turned  back  in  double-quick,  and  a large] 
cavalry  force  also  started,  all  being  anxious  to  join  in  a rescue  of  theii 
comrades  in  peril. 

Part  of  the  First  Division,  under  Colonel  Osterhaus,  soon  met  thel 
retreating  detachment,  and  immediately  opened  with  artillery  and  in- 
fantry, which  checked  the  further  advance  and  terminated  the  action  t 
for  the  day.  In  the  retreat  and  final  repulse,  which  occupied  several 
hours,  our  loss  was  some  25  killed  and  wounded.  The  enemy  must  have) 
suffered  more,  as  our  artillery  had  telling  effect  along  the  road,  and  thei 
rebel  graves  in  considerable  numbers  bear  witness  of  the  enemy’s  loss.) 

The  firing  having  ceased,  I sent  back  other  troops  that  had  joined! 
the  movement  and  designated  the  positions  on  the  right,  which  werei 
promptly  occupied  by  the  First  and  Second  Divisions.  Our  men  rested! 
on  their  arms,  confident  of  hard  work  before  them  on  the  coming  day.i 
The  accompanying  map  of  the  battle  ground  will  fully  illustrate  the] 
positions  then  and  subsequently  assumed.*  In  my  front  was  the  deep,: 
broad  valley  of  Sugar  Creek,  forming  the  probable  approaches  of  the 
enemy,  our  troops  extending  for  miles,  and  generally  occupying  the' 
summits  of  headlands  on  Sugar  Creek.  In  my  rear  was  a broken  plateau 
called  Pea  Bidge,  and  still  farther  in  my  rear  the  deep  valley  of  Big 
Sugar  Creek,  or  Cross  Timber.  My  own  headquarters  and  those  of 
Generals  Sigel,  Asboth,  and  other  commanders  of  divisions  were  near 
Pratt’s  house.  The  lines  A,  B,  and  C show  the  different  fronts  assumed 
during  the  progress  of  the  battle. 

The  approach  by  Bentonville  brought  the  enemy  to  my  extreme  right, 
and  during  the  night  of  the  5th  and  6th  he  began  a movement  around 
my  flank  by  the  road  before  mentioned,  which  crosses  Pea  Bidge  some 
3 miles  northwest  of  the  main  Telegraph  road.  I ascertained  in  the 

* To  appear  in  Atlas. 


CHAP.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


199 


morning  this  flank  movement  of  the  enemy,  which  I perceived  was  de- 
signed to  attack  my  right  flank  and  rear.  I therefore  immediately 
called  my  commanders  of  divisions  together  at  General  Asboth’s  tent, 
and  directed  a change  of  front  to  the  rear,  so  as  to  face  the  road  upon 
which  the  enemy  was  still  moving.  At  the  same  time  I directed  the 
organization  of  a detachment  of  cavalry  and  light  artillery,  supported 
by  infantry,  to  open  the  battle  by  an  attack  from  my  new  center  on  the 
probable  center  of  the  enemy  before  he  could  fully  form.  I selected 
Colonel  Osterhaus  to  lead  this  central  column,  an  officer  who  displayed 
great  skill,  energy,  and  gallantry  each  day  of  the  battle. 

The  change  of  front  thus  directed  reversed  the  order  of  the  troops, 
placing  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  on  the  left,  their  left  still  rest- 
ing on  Sugar  Creek,  Osterhaus  and  the  Third  Division  in  the  center, 
and  the  Fourth  Division  became  the  extreme  right.  While  I was  ex- 
plaining the  proposed  movement  to  commanders  and  Colonel  Osterhaus 
was  beginning  to  rally  and  move  forward  this  attacking  column,  a mes- 
senger brought  me  intelligence  that  my  picket,  commanded  by  Major 
Weston,  of  the  Twenty -fourth  Missouri,  had  been  attacked  by  infantry. 
This  was  at  Elkhorn  Tavern,  where  the  new  right  was  to  rest.  Colonel 
Carr  being  present,  he  was  ordered  to  move  into  position  and  support 
the  major  as  soon  as  possible. 

This  was  the  commencement  of  the  second  day’s  fight.  It  was  about 
10.30  o’clock,  and  the  officers  separated  to  direct  their  several  com- 
mands. The  fire  increased  rapidly  on  the  right  and  very  soon  opened 
in  the  center.  After  visiting  the  right,  where  I perceived  the  enemy 
was  making  a vigorous  attack,  and  finding  Colonel  Carr,  under  a brisk 
fire  of  shot  and  shell,  coolly  locating  and  directing  the  deployment,  I re- 
turned to  my  central  position  near  Pratt’s  house,  and  sent  orders  to 
Colonel  Davis  to  move  near  to  Colonel  Carr,  to  support  him.  In  the 
mean  time  Colonel  Osterhaus  had  attacked  the  enemy  and  divided  his 
forces  5 but  he  was  soon  pressed  with  greatly  superior  numbers,  that 
drove  back  our  cavalry  and  took  our  flying  battery,  which  had  advanced 
with  it.  The  colonel,  however,  was  well  supported  by  his  infantry,  and 
soon  checked  a movement  that  threatened  to  intercept  the  deployment 
of  other  forces.  I considered  the  affair  so  imminent  that  I changed  my 
order  to  Colonel  Davis,  and  directed  him  to  move  to  the  support  of  the 
center,  which  was  his  proper  place  according  to  my  order  for  the  change 
of  front.  My  new  line  was  thus  formed  under  the  enemy’s  fire,  the 
troops  generally  moving  in  good  order  and  gallant  bearing.  Thus 
formed,  the  line  was  not  continuous,  but  extended  entirely  across  Pea 
Eidge,  the  divisions  in  numerical  order  from  left  to  right,  Colonel  Os- 
terhaus remaining  in  command  of  a detachment  and  operating  with 
Colonel  Davis  in  resisting  McCulloch  and  McIntosh,  who  commanded 
the  enemy’s  foroes  in  the  center.  I did  not  err  in  sending  Colonel  Davis 
to  tin's  point,  although  Colonel  Carr,  on  the  right,  also  needed  re-enforce- 
inents. 

The  battle  raged  in  the  center  with  terrible  fury.  Colonel  Davis  held 
the  position  against  fearful  numbers,  and  our  brave  troops  nobly  stood 
or  charged  in  steady  lines.  The  fate  of  the  battle  depended  on  success 
against  this  flank  movement  of  the  enemy,  and  here  near  Leetown  was 
the  place  to  break  it  down.  The  fall  of  Generals  McCulloch,  McIntosh, 
and  other  officers  of  the  enemy,  who  fell  early  in  the  day,  aided  us  in 
our  final  success  at  this  most  critical  point ; and  the  steady  courage  of 
officers  and  men  in  our  lines  chilled  and  broke  down  the  hordes  of  In- 
dians, cavalry,  and  infantry  that  were  arrayed  against  us.  While  the 
battle  thus  raged  in  the  center  the  right  wing  was  sorely  pressed,  and 


200 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

the  dead  and  wounded  were  scattered  over  the  field.  Colonel  Carr  sent 
for  re-enforcements,  and  I sent  a few  cavalry  and  my  body-guard,  with 
the  little  mountain  howitzers,  under  Major  Bowen.  These  did  good 
service  at  a most  critical  period.  I urged  Colonel  Carr  to  stand  firm — 
that  more  force  could  be  expected  soon.  Subsequently  Colonel  Carr 
sent  me  word  that  he  could  not  hold  his  position  much  longer.  I could 
then  only  reply  by  sending  him  the  order  to  “ persevere.”  He  did 
persevere,  and  the  sad  havoc  in  the  Ninth  and  Fourth  Iowa  and 
Phelps’  Missouri  and  Major  Weston’s  Twenty  fourth  Missouri  and  all 
the  troops  in  that  division  will  show  how  earnest  and  continuous  was 

their  perseverance.  ■,  T 

Seeing  no  signs  of  approaching  foes  by  the  Telegraph  road,  I sent 
him  three  pieces  of  artillery  and  a battalion  of  infantry  of  Colonel  Ben- 
ton’s command  (part  of  the  Third  Division),  which  had  been  located  at 
Sugar  Creek  to  guard  the  approaches.  Each  small  accession  to  the 
Fourth  Division  seemed  to  compensate  an  overpowering  force.  As  to 
the  left,  I was  repeatedly  informed  it  stood  safe  and  firm,  although  I 

threatened  by  the  foe.  . ... 

About  2 p.  m.  my  aide,  Captain  Adams,  who  had  communicated  with 
that  wing,  informed  me  he  had  just  seen  Generals  Sigel  and  Asboth  on 
Sugar  Creek,  and  there  was  still  no  attack  in  'that  quarter  and  no  ap- 
pearance of  an  enemy.  About  this  time  the  enemy’s  forces  melted 
away  in  the  brushy  center,  and  the  fire  gradually  ceased.  Believing 
the  left  and  center  were  no  longer  menaced,  and  the  enemy  was  con- 
centrating on  the  right,  I again  sent  word  to  Colonel  Carr  that  he  would 
soon  be  re-enforced.  I had  now  resolved  to  bring  up  the  left  and  center 
to  meet  the  gathering  hordes  near  Elkhorn  Tavern.  To  inform  myself 
of  the  condition  of  the  extreme  left  I went  in  person  to  that  point.  On 
my  way  I ordered  forward  the  remainder  of  Colonel  Benton’s  command, 
three  pieces  and  a battalion,  which  had  remained  guarding  the  crossing 
of  the  main  Telegraph  road. 

I found  Generals  Sigel  and  Asboth  with  the  troops  on  the  hill  near 
the  extreme  left,  where  all  was  quiet,  and  the  men,  not  having  been 
under  fire,  fresh  and  anxious  to  participate  in  the  fight.  It  was  now 
safe  to  make  a new  change  of  front,  so  as  to  face  Sugar  Creek.  I 
therefore  ordered  this  force  forward.  General  Asboth  moved  by  the 
direct  road  to  Elkhorn  Tavern,  and  General  Sigel  went  by  Leetowii  to 
re-enforce  Davis  if  need  be,  but  to  press  on  to  re-enforce  Carr  if  not  1 
needed  in  the  center.  Both  generals  moved  promptly.  I accompanied 
General  Asboth,  collecting  and  moving  forward  some  straggling  com-  j 
mands  that  I found  by  the  way. 

It  must  have  been  near  5 o’clock  when  I brought  this  force  to  the  \ 
aid  of  Colonel  Carr.  He  had  received  three  or  four  shots,  one  a severe  i 
wound  in  the  arm.  Many  ol  his  field  officers  had  fallen  and  the  dead  j 
and  wounded  had  greatly  reduced  his  force.  He  had  been  slowly  forced 
back  near  half  a mile,  and  had  been  about  seven  hours  under  constant 
fire.  His  troops  were  still  fiercely  contesting  every  inch  of  ground. 
As  I came  up  the  Fourth  Iowa  was  falling  back  for  cartridges  in  line,  J 
dressing  on  their  colors  in  perfect  order.  Supposing  with  my  re-en- 1 
forcements  I could  easily  recover  our  lost  ground,  I ordered  the  regi- 
ment to  halt  and  face  about.  Colonel  Dodge  came  up,  explaining  the 
want  of  cartridges ; but,  informed  of  my  purpose,  I ordered  a bayonet  i 
charge,  and  they  moved  again  with  steady  nerve  to  their  former  posi-  < 
tion,  where  the  gallant  Ninth  was  ready  to  support  them.  These  two 
regiments  won  imperishable  honors. 

General  Asboth  had  planted  his  artillery  in  the  road  and  opened  a 


AP.  XYIII.]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  201 

^menduous  fire  on  the  enemy  at  short  range.  The  Second  Missouri 
fantry  also  deployed  and  earnestly  engaged  the  enemy.  About  this 
ne  the  shades  of  night  began  to  gather  around  us,  but  the  fire  on 
th  sides  seemed  to  grow  fierce  and  more  deadly.  One  of  my  body- 
ard  fell  dead,  my  orderly  received  a shot,  and  General  Asboth  was 
cerely  wounded  in  the  arm.  A messenger  came  from  General  Sigel, 
ying  he  was  close  on  the  left  and  would  soon  open  fire.  The  battery 
General  Asboth  ran  out  of  ammunition  and  fell  back.  This  caused 
other  battery  that  I had  located  on  the  right  of  the  road  to  follow, 
is  latter  fearing  a want  of  support.  The  infantry,  however,  stood 
m or  fell  back  in  good  order,  and  the  batteries  were  soon  restored, 
t the  caissons  got  quite  out  of  reach.  The  artillery  firing  was  re- 
wed, however,  and  kept  up  till  dark,  the  enemy  firing  the  last  shot, 

• I could  not  find  another  cartridge  to  give  them  a final  round;  even 
3 little  howitzers  responded,  u No  cartridges.”  The  enemy  ceased 
ing,  and  I hurried  men  after  the  caissons  and  more  ammunition. 
>antime  I arranged  the  infantry  in  the  edge  of  the  timber,  with  fields 
front,  where  they  lay  on  their  arms  and  held  the  positions  for  the 
>ht.  I directed  a detail  from  each  company  to  bring  water  and  pro 
dons,  and  thus  without  a murmur  these  weary  soldiers  lay  and  many 
them  slept  within  a few  yards  of  the  foe,  with  their  dead  and  wounded 
nrades  scattered  around  them.  Darkness,  silence,  and  fatigue  soon 
aired  to  the  weary  broken  slumbers  and  gloomy  repose.  The  day 
cl  closed  in  some  reverses  on  the  right,  but  the  left  had  been  unas- 
led,  and  the  center  had  driven  the  foe  from  the  field. 

My  only  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  the  next  day  was  the  new  front  which 
vas  necessary  to  form  by  my  weary  troops.  I directed  Colonel  Davis 
withdraw  all  the  remainder  of  his  reserve  from  the  center  and  move 
ward  so  as  to  occupy  the  ground  on  Carr’s  immediate  left.  Although 

• troops  had  been  fighting  hard  most  of  the  day  and  displayed  great 
3rgy  and  courage,  at  12  o’clock  at  night  they  commenced  their  move- 
nt to  the  new  position  on  the  battle-field,  and  they  too  soon  rested 
their  arms. 

(Nothing  further  had  been  heard  from  General  Sigel’s  command  after 
> message  at  dark  that  he  was  on  or  near  the  left.  His  detour  carried 
a around  a brushy  portion  of  the  battle-field  that  could  not  be  ex 
red  in  the  night.  About  2 o’clock  he  reported  at  my  headquarters 
h his  troops,  who,  he  said,  were  going  to  their  former  camps  for 
visions.  The  distance  to  his  camp,  some  2 miles  farther,  was  so 
-at  I apprehended  tardiness  in  the  morning,  and  urged  the  general 
rest  the  troops  where  they  then  were,  at  my  headquarters,  and  send 
provisions,  as  the  other  troops  were  doing.  This  was  readily  con 
red  in,  and  these  troops  bivouacked  also  for  the  night.  The  arrange - 
nt  thus  completed  to  bring  all  four  of  my  divisions  to  face  a position 
icli  had  been  held  in  check  all  the  previous  day  by  one,  I rested, 
tain  of  final  success  on  the  coming  day. 

Che  sun  rose  above  the  horizon  before  our  troops  were  all  in  position 
1 yet  the  enemy  had  not  renewed  the  attack.  I was  hardly  ready  to 
m fire  on  him,  as  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  had  not  yet  moved 
o position.  Our  troops  that  rested  on  their  arms  in  the  face  of  the 
any,  seeing  him  in  motion,  could  not  brook  delay,  and  the  center, 
ier  Colonel  Davis,  opened  fire.  The  enemy  replied  with  terrible 
u*gy  from  new  batteries  and  lines  which  had  been  prepared  for  us 
ring  the  night.  To  avoid  raking  batteries  the  right  wing  fell  back 
| good  order,  but  kept  up  a continuous  fire  from  the  new  position 


202 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVi 


immediately  taken.  The  First  and  Second  Divisions  soon  got  unci 
way,  and  moved  with  great  celerity  to  their  position  on  the  left. 

This  completed  the  formation  of  my  third  line  of  battle.  It  v 
directly  to  the  rear  of  the  first,  and  was  quite  continuous,  much  oi 
on  open  ground.  We  then  had  our  foe  before  us,  where  we  well  kn. 
the  ground.  The  broken  defiles  occupied  by  him  would  not  admit 
easy  evolutions  to  repel  such  as  could  be  made  by  us  on  the  open  pla! 
Victory  was  inevitable.  As  soon  as  the  left  wing  extended  so  as 
command  the  mountain  and  rest  safely  upon  it,  I ordered  the  right  wi 
to  move  forward  so  as  to  take  position  where  I placed  it  the  night  p 
vious.  I repaired  myself  to  the  extreme  right,  and  found  an  elevat 
position  considerably  in  advance  which  commanded  the  enemy’s  cen1 
and  left.  Here  I located  the  Dubuque  battery,  and  directed  the  ri£ 
wing  to  move  its  right  forward  so  as  to  support  it,  and  give  directi 
to  the  advance  of  the  entire  right  wing.  Captain  Hayden  soon  open 
a fire  which  proved  most  galling  to  the  foe  and  a marker  lor  our  line 
move  upon.  Keturning  to  the  center,  I directed  the  First  Iowa  Batte 
under  Captain  David,  to  take  position  in  an  open  field,  where  he  coi 
also  direct  a fire  on  the  central  point  of  the  enemy.  Meantime  t 
powerful  battery  of  Captain  Welfley  and  many  more  were  bearing 
the  cliff,  pouring  heavy  balls  through  the  timber  near  the  cent 
splintering  great  trees  and  scattering  death  and  destruction  with  te 

pestuous  fury.  _ _ , , 

At  one  time  a battery  was  opened  in  front  ol  Hayden's  batter > 
the  extreme  right,  so  near  I could  not  tell  whether  it  was  the  enem\ 
an  advance  of  Hayden’s,  but  riding  nearer  I soon  perceived  its  ti 
character,  and  directed  the  First  Iowa  and  the  Peoria  battery,  Capt; 
Davidson,  to  cross-fire  on  it,  which  soon  drove  it  back  to  the  comm 
hiding  place,  the  deep  ravines  of  Cross  Timber  Hollow.  While  1 
artillery  was  thus  taking  position  and  advancing  upon  the  enemy  j 
infantry  moved  steadily  forward.  The  left  wing,  advancing  rapid 
soon  began  to  ascend  the  mountain  cliff,  from  which  the  artillery  li 
driven  most  of  the  rebel  force.  The  upward  movement  of  the  galls 
Thirty-sixth  Illinois,  with  its  dark-blue  line  of  men  and  its  glean# 
bayonets,  steadily  rose  from  base  to  summit,  when  it  dashed  forws 
into  the  forest,  driving  and  scattering  the  rebels  from  these  eommai 
ing  heights.  The  Twelfth  Missouri,  far  in  advance  of  others,  nisi 
into  the  enemy’s  lines,  bearing  off  a flag  and  two  pieces  ot  artille 
Everywhere  our  line  moved  forward  and  the  foe  as  gradually  wi 

drew.  ,.  I 

The  roar  of  cannon  and  small-arms  was  continuous,  and  no  to] 
could  then  have  withstood  the  converging  line  and  concentrated  era 
fire  of  our  gallant  troops.  Our  guns  continued  some  time  alter  1 
rebel  fire  ceased,  and  the  rebels  had  gone  down  into  the  deep  cave] 
through  which  they  had  begun  their  precipitate  flight.  Finally  <j 
firing  ceased.  The  enemy  had  suddenly  vanished.  Following  doj 
the  main  road,  which  enters  a deep  canon,  I saw  some  straggling  tea; 
and  men  running  in  great  trepidation  through  the  gorges  of  the  mom 
ains.  I directed  a battery  to  move  forward,  which  threw  a few^  sir 
at  them,  followed  by  a pursuit  of  cavalry  comprised  of  the  Bent 
Hussars  and  my  escort  from  Bowen’s  battalion,  which  was  a*l  1j 
cavalry  convenient  at  the  time.  General  Si  gel  also  followed  in  tj 
pursuit  towards  Keetsville,  while  I returned,  trying’  to  check  a mo 
ment  which  led  my  forces  north,  where  1 was  confident  a frigntci 
foe  was  not  likely  to  go.  I soon  found  the  rebel  forces  had  dme 
and  gone  in  every  direction,  but  it  was  several  hours  before  I learr 


HAT.  XVIII.  ] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


203 


hat  the  main  force,  after  entering  the  canon,  had  turned  short  to  the 
ight,  following  obscure  ravines  which  led  into  the  Huntsville  road  in  a 
ue  south  direction.  General  Sigel  followed  some  miles  north  towards 
[eetsville,  firing  on  the  retreating  force  that  ran  that  way.  Colonel 
>ussey,  with  cavalry  and  the  little  howitzers,  followed  beyond  Benton- 
ille. 

I camped  on  the  field  and  made  provision  for  burying  the  dead  and 
are  of  the  wounded.  The  loss  in  the  seyeral  divisions  was  as  follows  : * 


This  sad  reckoning  shows  where  the  long-continued  fire  was  borne 
ad  where  the  public  sympathy  should  be  most  directed.  The  loss  of 
le  enemy  was  much  greater,  but  their  scattered  battalions  can  never 
irnisli  a correct  report  of  their  killed  and  wounded. 

The  reports  of  division  and  other  officers  of  my  command  are  all 
ibmitted,  with  such  details  as  were  seen  or  understood  by  local  com- 
anders.  They  give  interesting  incidents  and  notice  many  deserving 
3roes. 

I mentioned  in  my  telegraphic  report  of  the  9th  March  with  high 
immendations,  and  I now  repeat,  the  names  who  have  done  distin- 
lished  services.  These  are  my  commanders  of  divisions,  Generals 
igel  and  Asboth,  Colonel  and  Acting  Brigadier-General  Davis,  and 
olonel  and  Acting  Brigadier-General  Carr.  They  commanded  the 
ur  divisions.  I also  again  present  commanders  of  brigades,  Colonels 
odge,  Osterhaus,  Vandever,  White,  Schaefer,  Pattison,  and  Greusel. 
fie  three  first  named  I especially  commend.  I also  renew  the  just 
tanks  due  to  my  staff  officers,  Capt.  T.  I.  McKenny,  acting  assistant 
ljutant-general,  Capt.  W.  H.  Stark,  Capt.  John  Ahlfeldt,  Lieut.  J.  M. 
dams,  and  Lieutenant  Stitt,  all  acting  aides ; also  A.  Hceppner,  my 
dy  engineer.  To  these  I must  now  add  Major  Bowen,  who  commanded 
y body-guard,  and  with  the  mountain  howitzers  did  gallant  service 
every  battle-field,  in  the  pursuit,  and  especially  at  Pea  Ridge.  Cap- 
in  Stephens,  Lieutenant  Madison,  and  Lieutenant  Crabtree,  of  this 
ittalion,  also  deserve  honorable  mention.  Major  Weston,  of  the 
sventy-fourth  Missouri,  provost-marshal,  in  camp  and  in  battle  did 
dlant  service.  Lieutenant  David,  ordnance  officer  on  my  staff,  took 
large  of  the  First  Iowa  Battery  after  Captain  Jones  was  wounded, 
id  did  signal  service.  I must  also  thank  my  commanders  of  posts, 
ho  supported  my  line  of  operation  and  deserve  like  consideration, 

. their  duties  were  more  arduous— Colonel  Boyd  at  Rolla,  Colonel 

* See  also  revised  list  appended. 


204 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO. 


ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVID 


Waring  at  Lebanon,  Colonel  Mills  at  Springfield,  and  Lieutenant 

Colonel  Holland  at  Cassville.  , « ,,  -p 

To  do  iustioe  to  all  I would  spread  before  you  the  most  of  the  roll 
of  this  army,  for  I can  bear  testimony  to  the  almost  universal  goo 
conduct  of  officers  and  men  who  have  shared  with  me  the  long  marc! 
the  many  conflicts  by  the  way,  and  final  struggle  with  the  combine 
forces  of  Price,  McCulloch,  McIntosh,  and  Pike,  under  Major-Gener, 
Van  Dorn,  at  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  is.  IjUisllb, 

Major-General. 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean,  . . ,r 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Saint  Louis,  Mo. 


[Addenda.] 


Return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the  Southwest,  commanded  tyBrig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Cv 
tis,  U.  S.  Army,  at  the  lattle  of  Pea  Ridge,  ArTc.,  March  6-8,  1862. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 


FIRST  AND  SECOND  DIVISIONS. 
Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Col.  Peter  , J.  Osterhaus. 

First  Brigade. 


17tli  Missouri 
25th  Illinois.. 
44th  Illinois.  - 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Nicholas  Greusel. 


12th  Missouri 

36th  Illinois : * * - 

Jenks’  and  Smith’s  companies  Illinois  cavalry 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Artillery. 


Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Welfley’s  battery. 
4th  Ohio  Battery 


Total  artillery 

Total  First  Division 

SECOND  DIVISION. 
Brig.  Gen.  A.  Asboth. 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


or  missing. 


21 


10 


63 


11 


2 

26 


35 


49 


Staff 


iaf.  XVIII.]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark. 

Return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the  Southwest— Continued. 


205 


Command. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Frederick  Schaefer. 


I Missouri, 
th  Missouri. 


Total  First  Brigade 

Not  Brigaded. 


Ohio  Battery 

issouri  Horse  Artillery,  1st  Flying  Battery 

nton  Hussars,  Missouri  Cavalry 

-6mont  Hussars,  Missouri  Cavalry 


Total  not  brigaded  — 

Total  Second  Division 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Col.  Jeff.  C.  Davis. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  Thomas  Pattison. 


th  Indiana 

th  Indiana 

d Indiana 

st  Indiana  Battery. 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 
CoL  Julius  White. 


th  Illinois 

th  Illinois 

d Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  A . 


Total  Second  Brigade 

t Missouri  Cavalry,  detachment 

Total  Third  Division 

FOURTH  DIVISION. 
Col.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 


aff . 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Grenville  M.  Dodge. 


th  Iowa 

th  Illinois 

st  Iowa  Battery. 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  William  Vandever. 

hlowa 

helps’  Missouri  regiment 

1 Ulinois  Cavalry 


1 Iowa  Battery 

Total  Second  Brigade. . 
Total  Fourth  Division 


Killed. 


Wounded.  or°» 


11 


17 


14 


20 


29 


45 


34 


4 34 

1 11 

9 
2 


34 


56 


34 


11 


14 


27 


61 


85 


112 

55 

17 


184 


271 


22 


64 


55 

T20 


135 

44 

12 


90 


191 


171 

64 

32 

15 


11 


144 

66 

17 


227 


344 


ICO 

113 

17 

290 


282 

473 


3 218 

9 1 93 

13  58 

3 ! 22 


391 

682 


206 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvmj 
Return  of  casualties  in  the  Army  of  the  Southwest — Continued, 


* — — — 

Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded,  j 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

UN  ASSIGNED . 

1 

1 

2 

2 

Bowen’s  battalion  Missouri  cavalry - 

24 

1 

16 

9 

51 

3 

28 

3 

33 

18 

8. 

RECAPITULATION . 

t 

11 

4 

90 

1 2 

49 

151 

17 

3 

61 

36 

121 

O 

3 

45 

14 

271 

11 

34' 

0 

90 

28 

473 

8 

77 

68! 

28 

3 

33 

| 

18 

8: 

Grand  total  Army  of  the  Southwest 

12 

191 

52 

928 

10 

191 

1, 38 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Camp  near  Batesville , Ark.,  May  21,  1862. 

Hon.  B.  F.  Wade,  ^ w 

Chairman  of  Committee  on  Conduct  of  the  Present  War. 

Sir  : The  absence  from  my  immediate  command  of  those  men  ant 
officers  who  are  best  acquainted  with  the  facts  in  regard  to  the  employ 
ment  of  Indian  savages  has  delayed  my  reply  to  your  commumeatioi 
of  April  2,  1862,  f until  this  time. 

I have  the  honor  to  now  lay  before  the  committee  the  statement} 
and  affidavits  inclosed,  from  which  it  will  appear  that  large  forces  o 
Indian  savages  were  engaged  against  this  army  at  the  battle  ot  Fej 
Ridge,  and  that  the  warfare  was  conducted  by  said  savages  with  au 
the  barbarity  their  merciless  and  cowardly  natures  are  capable  of. 
Very 'respectfully,  your  obedient  servau^  r CURTIS 

Major-General,  j 


[Inclosures.]  ' 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Forsyth , Mo.,  April  12,  1862.  ? 

Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  Commanding:  J 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  your  request,  conforming  to  the  wish  of  th( 
ioint  committee  of  Congress  “to  inquire  into  the  fact  whether  Indiai 
savages  have  been  employed  by  the  rebels  in  their  military  service,  an 
how  such  warfare  has  been  conducted  by  such  savages  against  the  Gov 
ernment  of  the  United  States,”  I hereby  certify  upon  honor  that  . 
was  present  at  the  engagement  near  Leetown,  Ark.,  on  the  Uh  o 
March  ultimo,  when  the  main  charge  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  was  mau 
upon  our  line ; that  there  were  Indians  among  the  forces  making  salt 


No  loss  reported. 


t Not  found. 


at.  XVIII.] 


PEA.RID^E,  OR  ELK  HORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


207 


arge ; and  that  from  personal  inspection  of  the  bodies  of  the  men  of 
e Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  who  fell  upon  that  part  of  the  field,  I discov- 
ed  that  8 of  the  men  of  that  regiment  had  been  scalped.  I also  saw 
dies  of  the  same  men  which  had  been  wounded  in  parts  not  vital  by 
llets,  and  also  pierced  through  the  heart  and  neck  with  knives,  fully 
tisfying  me  that  the  men  had  first  fallen  from  the  gunshot  wounds 
reived  and  afterwards  brutally  murdered. 

The  men  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  who  were  taken  prisoners  by  the 
emy,  and  who  have  since  returned,  all  state  that  there  were  great 
rubers  of  Indians  with  them  on  the  retreat  as  far  as  Elm  Springs, 
teir  affidavits  will  be  furnished  to  you  as  soon  as  possible. 
Respectfully  submitted. 

JOmsT  W.  NOBLE, 
Adjutant , Third  Iowa  Cavalry. 


vited  States  of  America, 

Southwestern  District  of  Missouri : 

I,  Daniel  Bradbury,  on  my  oath,  say  that  I am  orderly  sergeant  of 
mpany  A,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  and  that  I was  present  at  the  battle 
Pea  Ridge,  near  Leetown,  Ark.,  on  the  7th  of  March,  1862,  and  I then 
d there  saw  about  300  Indians  scattered  over  the  battle-field,  without 
mmanders,  doing  as  they  pleased.  On  the  8th  of  March  I saw  what 
vould  judge  to  be  about  3,000  Indians  marching  in  good  order  towards 
3 battle-field,  under  the  command  of  Albert  Pike. 

DANIEL  BRADBURY, 

First  Sergeant  Company  A , Third  Ioiva  Cavalry . 


Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me  this  the  30th  day  of  April,  1862. 

GLENN  LOWE, 
Adjutant , Third  Iowa  Cavalry. 

'jited  States  of  America, 

Southwestern  District  of  Missouri : 

I,  John  H.  Lawson,  on  my  oath,  say  that  I am  a private  in  Company 
Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  and  that  I was  present  at  the  battle  of  Pea 
dge,  near  Leetown,  Ark.,  on  the  7th  of  March,  1862,  and  I then  and 
?re  saw,  as  near  as  I could  judge,  about  150  Indians,  scattered ; 
ey  were  afterwards  formed  into  companies  and  marched  out  of  my 
»ht  in  good  order. 

On  the  8th  of  March  i saw  about *2, 000  Indians,  said  to  be  under  the 
rnmand  of  Albert  Pike  and  Martin  Green,  marching  towards  the 
ttle-ground  in  good  order,  These  were  all  mounted,  armed  with 
ot-guns,  rifles,  and  large  knives. 

JOHN  H.  LAWSON. 

Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me  this  the  30th  day  of  April,  1862. 

* GLENN  LOWE, 
Adjutant , Third  Iowa  Cavalry.  . 


Headquarters  Third  Iowa  Cavalry, 

Jaclcsonport , ir/c.,  May  11,  1862. 

ij.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest: 

General  : On  the  morning  of  the  7th  of  March  I was  on  the  battle- 
id  of  Pea  Ridge.  While  my  command  was  engaging  the  enemy  near 
etown  I saw  in  rebel  army  a large  number  of  Indians,  estimated  by 
* at  1,000. 


208 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS..  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  xt|i 


After  the  battle  I attended  in  person  to  the  burial  of  the  dead  ot  m; 
command.  Of  25  men  killed  on  the  field  of  my  regiment,  8 were  scalpei 
and  the  bodies  of  others  were  horribly  mutilated,  being  fired  into  witl 
musket  balls  and  pierced  through  the  body  and  neck  with  long  knives. 
These  atrocities  I believe  to  have  been  committed  by  Indians  belong! 
ing  to  the  rebel  army. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, jjxJSSEY 

Colonel.  I 


Ko. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  TJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  First  <m| 

Second  Divisions. 


Headquarters  First  and  Second  Divisions, 

Camp  Pea  Ridge , Arlc.,  March  15,  1862.  I 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  lay  before  you  the  following  report! 
in  regard  to  the  actions  of  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  from  the  otl 
to  the  9th  day  of  this  month  : 


I. — Expedition  to  Pineville  on  the  5th  of  March. 


On  the  evening  of  the  5th  the  inhin  body  of  the  two  divisions  waj 
encamped  near  McKisick’s  farm,  3}  miles  southward  of  Bentonvill 
and  1 mile  from  the  fork  of  the  roads  leading  west  to  Maysville  an! 
northeast  to  Pineville.  The  Second  Missouri,  under  Colonel  Schaetei 
and  one  company  of  cavalry  were  stationed  at  Osage  Mills,  otheiwis 
called  Smith’s  Mill,  5£  miles  southeast  of  McKisick  s farm,  whilst  on 
pickets  guarded  all  the  other  avenues  to  the  camp.  For  the  purpose  J 
reconnoitering  the  country  towards  the  Indian  Territory  and  to  detai 
the  rebels  of  Southwest  Missouri  from  following  Price’s  army  by  th 
State  line  road,  Major  Conrad,  with  five  select  companies  ol  mlantrj 
60  men  of  cavalry,' and  two  pieces  of  Welfley’s  battery,  was  ordered  t, 
proceed  on  the  first  day  to  Lindsey’s  Prairie,  where  he  arrived  in  tli 
evening,  16  miles  southwest  of  McKisick’s  farm,  on  the  2d  (the  otli)  t 
Maysville,  and  to  return  on  the  thiifl  day  to  oui>own  camp. 

Such  was  our  position  on  the  evening  of  the  5th,  when  1 receive! 
orders  from  you  to  send  a detachment  of  cavalry  to  Pineville,  wliei 
there  were  said  to  be  some  200  or  300  rebels,  who  disturbed  and  efl 
dangered  the  Union  people  of  McDonald  County.  I directed  ilajoj 
Meszaros,  with  80  men,  to  march  at  10  o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  northwester 
road  to  Pineville,  whilst  Capt.  von  Kielmansegge  was  sent  to  Majc 
Conrad  at  Maysville,  to  lead  his  60  men  of  cavalry,  with  one  piece  q 
artillery  and  20  infantry,  at  10  o’clock  in  the  night,  from  Maysville  tj 
Rutledge  and  Pineville,  and  to  act  in  concert  with  Major  Meszaros.  - 
Home  Guard  company,  stationed  between  Pineville  and  KeetsyU* 
was  ordered  to  occupy  at  night  the  roads  leading  to  Neosho  and  Ken 
and  thereby  prevent  the  secesh  to  escape  in  that  direction.  - laj  > 
Meszaros  and  Capt.  von  Kielmansegge  should  approach  the  town  iroi 
the  east,  southeast,  and  southwest.  It  was  understood  that  tins 
detachments  should  attack  the  town  simultaneously  at .»  o clock  in  in 

morning.  . . 

•lust  a few  minutes  before  10  o’clock  in  the  evening,  when  Meszait 


F.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


209 


s prepared  to  leave  the  camp,  I received  news  from  Colonel  Schaefer, 
Osage  Mills,  that  his  pickets  posted  in  the  direction  of  Elm  Springs 
re  fired  upon  by  the  enemy.  This,  in  addition  to  your  own  dispatches 
>orting  the  enemy’s  force  at  Fayetteville  and  a strong  party  of  cav- 
y advancing  towards  Middletown,  and,  besides  this,  your  order  to 
rch  to  Sugar  Creek,  made  me  at  once  aware  of  the  dangerous  posi- 
u of  my  command.  I therefore  ordered  Colonel  Schaefer  to  break  up 
camp  immediately,  to  send  the  cavalry  company  to  Osage  Springs 
cover  his  right  flank,  and  to  march  with  his  regiment^o  Bentonville, 
ving  Osage  Springs  to  the  right  and  McKisick’s  farm  to  the  left. 
[ other  troops  I ordered  to  be  prepared  to  march  at  2 o’clock  in  the 
rning.  In  regard  to  the  expedition  to  Pineville,  it  was  too  late  to 
mtermand  the  movement  under  Captain  von  Kielmansegge,  and  I 
before  ordered  Major  Meszaros  to  begin  his  march  and  to  accomplish 
task  with  his  own  detachment  and  that  of  Captain  von  Kielman- 
^ge,  but  to  return  to  Sugar  Creek  as  quickly  as  possible,  without 
rung  his  horses,  so  that  they  could  be  of  some  use  in  the  ensuing 
:tle.  Major  Conrad  was  made  aware  of  our  situation,  and  instructed 
join  us  at  Sugar  Creek  by  some  circuitous  road  leading  northeast, 
e result  of  the  expedition  was  not  very  great,  but  satisfactory. 

Che  attack  was  made  according  to  the  instructions  given  and  at  the 
jcise  time,  but  only  1 captain,  1 lieutenant,  and  15  men  of  Price’s 
ay  were  found  in  the  town  and  made  prisoners  ; the  others  had  left 
ae  days  previous.  The  commands  of  Major  Meszaros  and  Captain 
l Kielmansegge  arrived  safely  on  the  6th  in  our  camp  at  Sugar  Creek, 
aging  with  them  their  prisoners.  Unfortunately  they  had  to  leave 
lind  and  to  destroy  a printing  press  and  types  taken  at  Pineville,  as 
> roads  they  took  were  too  bad  to  bring  this  important  material 
mg. 

ilajor  Conrad,  with  his  detachment,  found  his  way  to  Keetsville  and 
ssville,  which  place  he  left  on  the  9th,  and  arrived  at  the  former 
ce,  with  Colonel  Wright,  some  time  after  I had  opened  the  road  to 
ssville  on  the  pursuit  of  Price’s  force,  which  retired  from  Keetsville 
Berry  ville. 

—Retreat  from  McKisicWs  farm , by  Bentonville , to  Camp  Halleck , on 

Sugar  Creek. 

Yt  2 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  6th  the  troojis  encamped  at  Mc- 
sick’s  farm  moved  forward  towards  Bentonville  in  the  following 

ler : 

Ydvance  guard,  under  Asboth : One  company  of  Fourth  Missouri 
valry  (Fremont  Hussars) ; Second  Ohio  Battery,  under  command  ot 
■utenant  Chapman;  Fifteenth  Missouri  Yolunteers,  under  command 
Colonel  Joliat.  Train  of  First  and  Second  Divisions,  escorted  and 
irded  by  detachments  of  the  respective  regiments.  The  First  Divis- 
, under  Colonel  Osterhaus.  The  flying  battery,  the  Fifth  Missouri 
valry  (Benton  Hussars),  and  the  squadron  of  the  Thirty-sixth  111 i- 
s Cavalry,  Captain  Jenks. 

before  leaving  camp  I detached  Lieutenant  Schipper,  of  Company  A, 
n ton  Hussars,  with  20  men,  to  Osage  Spriugs,  tb  communicate  with 
lonel  Schaefer,  and  to  bring  news  to  Bentonville  as  soon  as  the  enemy 
aid  approach  that  place. 

Hie  advance  guard  of  General  Asboth  arrived  at  Bentonville  at  4 
lock,  when  I directed  him  to  halt  until  the  train  had  come  up  more 
se.  Ele  then  jiroceeded  to  Sugar  Creek,  followed  by  the  train. 

14  R R — VOL  VIII 


•210 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KAN*.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiir.  xvo 


Meanwhile  the  Second  Missouri,  Colonel  Schaefer,  and  one  part  ot  1 1 
First  Division  arrived  in  town.  I ordered  this  regiment  as  well  as  tb 
Twelfth  Missouri,  under  command  ot  Major  Wangelm,  the  tiding  ba 
terv,  under  Captain  Elbert,  and  the  whole  disposable  cavalry  tore, 
under  Colonel  Nemett,  comprising  the  Benton  Hussars,  the  Thirty  -sixt 
Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Jenks,  and  a squad  ot  1>  men  ot  I ni 
mont  Hussars,  under  Lieut.  Fred.  W.  Cooper,  to  occupy  and  guard  tl 
town,  to  let  the  whole  train  pass,  and  remain  at  my  disposition  as 
tmircl 


rear 


At  8 o’clock  the  train  had  passed  the  town  and  was  moving  on  tl 
road  to  Sugar  Creek.  With  the  intention  not  to  be  too  close  to  the  trai| 
and  awaiting  report  from  Lieutenant  Schipper’s  picket  at  Osage  bprin*: 
two  hours  elapsed,  when  ten  minutes  after  10  it  was  reported  tometju 
large  masses  of  troops,  consisting  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  were  moviii 
from  all  sides  towards  our  front  and  both  flanks.  I 

After  some  observation  I had  no  doubt  that  the  enemy  s ad\  an. 
ward  was  before  us.  I immediately  called  the  troops  to  arms  Sif 


made  them  ready  for ’battle.  As  Benton  ville  is  situated  on  the  edge . 


Osage  Prairie,  easily  accessible  in  front  and  covered  on  the  right  an 
left  and  rear  by  thick  woods  and  underbrush,  I ordered  the  troops  l 
evacuate  the  town  and  to  form  on  a little  hill  north  ot  it.  Looking  f. 
the  Second  Missouri,  I learned  to  my  astonishment  that  it  had  ahead 
left  the  town  by  a misunderstanding  of  my  order.  lam  glad  to  siij 
that  this  matter  is  satisfactorily  explained  by  Colonel  Schaefer,  but 
the  same  time  I regret  to  report  that  this  regiment  was  ambuscaded  c 
its  march  and  lost  in  the  conflict  37  men  in  dead,  wounded,  and  pn 


The  troops  now  left  to  me  consisted  of  about  eight  companies  ot  tl 
Twelfth  Missouri,  with  an  average  strength  of  45  men,  live  eompaun 
of  Benton  Hussars,  and  five  pieces  of  the  flying  battery ; in  all  abov 
flOO  men.  The  troops  I directed  to  march  ill  the  following  order : iv 
companies  of  the  Twelfth  at  the  head  of  the  column,  deployed  on  tl 
right  and  left  as  skirmishers,  followed  by  the  flying  battery  ; one  cor 
naav  of  the  same  regiment  on  the  right  and  one  on  the  left  ot  the  piece, 
inarching  bv  the  flank,  and  prepared  to  fire  by  ranks  to  the  right  ai 
left,  the  remainder  of  the  regiment  behind  the  pieces,  two  compani 
of  cavalry  to  support  the  infantry  on  the  right  and  left,  and  the  rest, 
the  cavalry,  under  command  of  Colonel  Neinett,  with  one  piece  of  arti 

'i  n n • -T./XOT » Tn  tliisa  frvrma.t/irm.  modlfipcl  IrOIIl  tlUBB  i 


tUG  Ca  > dll  \ 1 UllU.t>i  voiouv  # ' 7 , ^ ^ , • 

lery.  following  in  the  rear.  In  this  formation,  modified  from  time 


time  according  to  circumstances,  the  column  moved  forward  to  bre< 
through  the  lines  of  the  enemy,  who  had  already  taken  position  m o 
front  and  in  both  flanks,  whilst  he  appeared  behind  us  in  the  town 
line  of  battle,  re-enforced  by  some  pieces  of  artillery.  The  troops  a 
s auced  slowlv,  fighting  and  repelling  the  enemy  m front,  tiankwar 


and  rear,  wherever  he  stood  or  attacked. 

From  the  moment  we  left  the  town,  at  10.30  m the  morning,  until  3. 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  we  met  the  first  re-enforcements-| 
Second  Missouri,  the  Twenty-fifth  Illinois,  and  a few  companies  of  t 
Forty-fourth  Illinois— we  sustained  three  regular  attacks,  and  we 
uninterruptedly  in  sight  and  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  AY  hen  t. 
first  re -enforcement  had  arrived  I knew  that  we  were  safe,  and  e 
to  the  Twentv-fifth  and  Second  Missouri,  and  afterwards  to  Cold 
Osterhaus,  to  take  care  of  the  rest,  which  he  did  to  my  satisfaction. 

It  would  take  too  much  time  to  go  into  the  detail  of  this  most  v\V 
ordinary  and  critical  affair,  but  as  a matter  of  justice  I feel  it  mv  j 11 
to  declare  that  according  to  my  humble  opinion  never  troops  lia 


AP.  XVIII. ] PEA  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ARK.  211 

own  themselves  worthier  to  defend  a great  cause  than  on  this  dav  of 
e 6th  of  March. 

HI. — Battle  of  the  7th , near  Leesville  [ Leetown ] and  on  Pea  Ridge. 

In  the  night  of  the  6th  the  two  divisions  were  encamped  on  the 
iteau  of  the  hills  near  Sugar  Creek  and  in  the  adjoining  valley  sep- 
ating  the  two  ridges  extending  along  the  creek.  The  Second  Division 
Id  the  right,  the  First  the  left  of  the  position,  fronting  towards  the 
ist  and  southwest,  in  order  to  receive  the  enemy  should  he  advance 
>m  the  Bentonville  and  Fayetteville  road.  Colonel  Davis’  division, 
miing  the  center,  was  on  our  left,  and  Colonel  Carr  covered  the 
ound  on  the  extreme  left  of  our  whole  line. 

Early  in  the  morning  report  came  in  that  troops  and  trains  of  the 
emy  were  moving  the  whole  night  on  the  Bentonville  road  around 
r rear  towards  Cross  Timber,  thereby  endangering  our  line  of  retreat 
d communication  to  Keetsville,  and  separating  us  from  our  re-en- 
•cements  and  provision  trains.  This  report  was  corroborated  by  two 
my  guides,  Mr.  Pope  and  Mr.  Brown,  who  had  gone  out  to  recon- 
iter  the  country.  I immediately  ordered  Lieutenant  Schramm,  of 
T staff,  to  ascertain  the  facts,  and  to  see  in  what  direction  the  troops 
re  moving.  On  his  return  he  reported  that  there  was  no  doubt  in 
?ard  to  the  movement  of  a large  force  of  the  enemy  in  the  aforesaid 
ection.  You  then  ordered  me  to  detach  three  pieces  of  the  flying 
ttery  to  join  Colonel  Bussey’s  cavalry  in  an  attack  against  the  enemy 
the  direction  of  Leesville.  Colonel  Osterhaus  was  directed  to  follow 
n with  three  regiments  of  infantry  and  two  batteries. 

\t  about  11  o’clock  the  firing  began  near  Elkhorn  Tavern  and  Lees- 
le.  To  see  how  matters  stood,  I went  out  to  Colonel  Carr’s  division 
1 found  him  a short  distance  beyond  the  tavern,  engaged  in  a brisk 
liionade.  Several  pieces,  partly  disabled  and  partlv  without  amrnu- 
mn,  were  returning,  whilst  another  advanced  from  the  camp.  As 
‘ enemy’s  fire  was  directed  to  the  place  where  I halted,  I ordered  two 
ces  of  the  battery  which  came  up  to  take  position  on  an  elevated 
>und  to  the  left  and  to  shell  the  enemy.  After  a few  shots  the  fire 
the  enemy  opposite  our  position  became  weaker,  and  I sent  the  two 
ces  forward  to  join  their  battery.  I then  returned  to  look  after  mv 
n troops,  and  passing  along  the  road  met  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry, 
ich  had  been  sent  in  advance  of  Colonel  Osterhaus,  and  which  now 
oi'ted  their  lieutenant-colonel,  who  was  severely  wounded,  back  into 
camp.  I immediately  sent  to  you  to  order  the  regiment  back  to 
‘sville,  which  order  was  given,  and  the  regiment  returned.  I met 
ntenant  Gassen,  of  the  flying  battery,  who  reported  to  me  that  our 
ally  had  been  driven  back  by  an  overwhelming  force,  and  our  three 
;ces  taken  by  the  enemy,  as  there  was  no  infantry  to  support  them, 
ow  ordered  Major  Meszaros  and  the  two  other  pieces  of  the  flying 
i re*enf°ree  Colonel  Osterhaus,  but  during  their  march  I learned 

t Colonel  Davis  had  been  directed  to  advance  with  his  whole  divis- 
to  Leesville,  which  induced  me  to  send  only  Major  Meszaros  to  that 
jit,  and  directed  the  two  pieces  of  the  flying  battery  to  act  as  reserve 
1 to  join  the  troops  left  in  their  encampment.  Proceeding  to  the 
:ip  to  see  what  was  going  on  there  and  whether  we  were  safe  in  our 
r (towards  Bentonville),  I found  the  following  troops  assembled  in 
u respecti  ve  positions  : The  Seventeenth  Missouri  and  a detachment 
, men  of  the  Third  Missouri  • the  Twenty-fifth  and  the  Forty-fourth 
nois;  two  pieces  of  Welfley’s  battery  (12-pounders) ; two  companies 


212 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  t^HAP.  XYlllI 


“SPS»tS'«“rtlSnS?DO..  when  .he  cannonading  .. 

ground.  I therefore  sent  General  Asboth,  with  four  companies  of  * 
Second  Missouri,  under  Colonel  Schaefer,  and  four  pieces  Se™“ 

"Battery,  wider  Lieutenant  Chapman,  to  assist  Colonel  Car 
Maior  Poteii  with  the  Seventeenth  Missouri,  one  company  of  the  Thir 
MssourL  two  companies  of  the  Fifteenth  Missouri,  two  ineces  of  h 
d vbm  artillery  under  Captain  Elbert,  and  two  companies  of  the  Bento 
Hussars  under  Major  Heinrichs,  I ordered  to  advance  on  the  Sugs 
('reek  road  towards Bentonville,  to  demonstrate  against  the  rear  of  th 
enemy  Two  pieces  of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery,  with  six  companies « 
the  Second  Missouri,  remained  in  their  position  to  guard  the  camp,  a 
Iwo  comnanies  of  the  Forty-fourth  Illinois,  with  20  men  of  the  Thirt; 
sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Bussell,  were  sent  forward  in  I 
northwestern  direction,  to  remain  there  as  a picket  between  Leesvill 
and  the  Sugar  Creek  road.  With  all  other  troops — the  Fifteenth  Mil 
souri  the  Twenty -fifth  and  Forty-fourth  Illinois,  and  the  two  pieces  .3 
Cantoin  Welfley’s  battery-1  marched  to  Leesville,  to  re-enforce  Cd 
onels  Davis  and  Osterhaus.  My  intention  was  to  throw  back  the  cnen 

from  Leesville  into  the  mountains  and  towards  ^Asboth  ai 

by  a change  of  direction  to  the  right  to  assist  General  Asboth  ai 

Colonel  Carr  by  deploying  on  their  left. 

On  my  march  to  Leesville,  I heard  Major  Poten  s fi  g 
tonville  road.  Arrived  at  Leesville,  the  firing  in  front  had  ceatt 
whilst  it  commenced  with  new  vehemence  on  the  right,  at 
Tavern.  * At  this  moment  Captain  McKenny,  acting  assistant  adjutan 
general  requested  me,  by  order  of  General  Curtis,  to  send  some  mo 
ro-enforcements  to  the  right,  which  I did,  by  (totaching  fi'recor^iam 
of  the  Twenty-fifth  Illinois  and  four  pieces  of  Captem  Hoffmann  s b 
tery,  stationed  in  reserve  at  Leesville,  to  Elkhorn  Tavern  I then  p 
ceeded  beyond  the  town  to  the  battle-field,  which  I fo“n‘f  ^ ^ 

sion  of  Colonels  Davis  and  Osterhaus.  As  no  enemy  ool1es1 
except  a small  detachment  on  a distant  hill, 1 requested  Colonel  Dat 
to  protect  my  left  flank,  by  sending  Ins  skirmishers  and  one  ie„ 
of  infantry  forward  through  the  woods,  whilst  b.' 

Twenty-fifth  Illinois  and  four  pieces  of  \V  elfiey’s  and  Hoffmann  s b 
teries  on  the  road  to  the  northeast,  which  was  already  opened  by  . 
Forty-fourth  Illinois  and  Fifteenth  Missouri.  After  making  1 L mi  e 
passing  two  hospitals  of  the  enemy  I ordered  Colonel  Osterhaus  , 
follow  me  with  the  Twelfth  Missouri  and  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  and 
section  of  artillery,  which  troops  came  up  promidly,  exP®Pt 
pieces,  12-pounders,  that  remained  with  Colonel  Davis.  W« > ad vane 
slowly,  and  after  making  half  a mile  more  we  reached  an  open  ft el 
where  we  took  our  position,  and  from  which  we  could  easdy  discei  n 
camp-fires  of  our  friends  and  those  of  our  enemies  near  Elkhorn  law 
1 sent  immediately  to  General  Curtis  to  apprise  him  of  rny  positionja 
that  I was  ready  to  co-operate  with  him.  Meanwhile  night  had  tai 
in,  and  although  the  cannonading  was  renewed  on  the  right,  I ™ 
believe  that  after  a hard  day’s  work  the  enemy  would  make  a i nal  J. 
decisive  attack.  In  order,  therefore,  to  disguise  our  position  tn 


<?.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


213 


lick  I intended  to  advance  in  the  morning  1 kept  the  troops  in  the 
rictest  silence,  and  did  not  allow  the  building  of  camp-fires  or  any 
ovement  farther  than  200  to  300  paces  distance.  Sd  we  remained 
itil  1 o’clock  in  the  morning,  when  I found  it  necessary  to  remove  the 
oops  by  a short  and  convenient  road  into  our  common  camp,  to  give 
em  some  food,  sleep,  and  a good  fire,  and  to  prepare  them  for  battle. 
To  show  the  whole  position  of  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  on  the 
ening  of  the  7th,  allow  me,  general,  to  make  the  following  statement: 
Beginning  on  the  left,  Major  Poten,  with  the  Seventeenth  Missouri, 
e company  of  the  Third  Missouri,  two  companies  of  the  Fifteenth 
Issouri,  two  pieces  of  the  flying  artillery,  and  two  companies  of  the 
inton  Hussars  were  stationed  on  the  Sugar  Creek  and  Benton ville 
ad,  3 miles  from  the  camp.  The  entrance  of  the  road  from  this  side 
is  guarded  by  two  pieces  of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery  and  six  com 
nies  of  the  Second  Missouri.  Towards  the  north  (Leesville)  two 
mpanies  of  the  Forty-fourth  Illinois  and  20  men  of  the  Thirty-sixth 
inois  Cavalry  remained  on  picket.  On  the  right,  near  Elkhorn  Tav 
a,  were  the  following  troops : Four  companies  of  the  Second  Missouri, 
e companies  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Illinois,  four  pieces  of  the  Second 
lio  Battery,  and  four  pieces  of  Captain  Hoffmann’s  battery.  In  the 
Id  to  the  left  of  General  Asbotli  and  Colonel  Carr,  under  my  imme- 
ite  command,  were  the  Twelfth  Missouri,  the  Fifteenth  Missouri,  the 
renty-fifth,  Thirty-sixth,  and  Forty-fourth  Illinois,  two  pieces  of  Cap- 
in  Welfley’s  and  two  pieces  of  Captain  Hoffmann’s  batteries.  The 
•6mont  and  Benton  Hussars  and  one  section  of  Captain  Welfley’s 
ttery  returned  to  camp  with  Colonel  Davis. 

The  detachment  of  Major  Conrad,  consisting  of  six  companies  of  in- 
itry  detailed  from  the  Third,  Fifteenth,  and  Seventeenth  Missouri 
d Thirty-sixth  Illinois,  and  one  piece  of  Captain  Welfley’s  battery, 
is  encamped  a few  miles  west  of  Keetsville. 

One  piece  of  Captain  Welfley’s  battery  was  spiked  and  then  taken 
the  enemy,  but  retaken  and  unspiked.  Thuee  pieces  of  Captain 
bert’s  flying  battery  had  been  lost  near  Leesville,  the  trails  burned  by 
3 enemy,  and  the  guns  left  on  the  battle-field.  Another  piece  of  this 
ttery  had  broken  down  on  the  retreat  from  Bentonville  to  Sugar  Creek, 
t the  gun  was  recovered  and  brought  into  camp. 

IV. — Battle  of  the  8th , near  Elkhorn  Tavern. 

The  different  combats  of  the  7th  had  fully  developed  the  plans  of  the 
emy.  It  was  evident  that  his  main  forces  were  stationed  near  and 
Elkhorn  Tavern,  and  that  he  would  make  all  efforts  to  break  through 
r lines  on  the  Fayetteville  road,  and  thereby  complete  his  apparent 
ptory.  I therefore  resolved  to  recall  all  troops  and  different  detach - 
puts  of  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  from  wherever  they  were  sta- 
lled (with  the  exception  of  four  companies  of  the  Second  Missouri  and 
ir  pieces  of  artillery  from  the  Second  Ohio  Battery  sent  to  their  orig- 
d position  on  Sugar  Creek),  and  to  fall  upon  the  right  flank  of  the 
3my  should  he  attack  or  advance  from  Elkhorn  Tavern.  At  daybreak 
the  8th  the  following  troops  were  assembled  near  and  around  my 
adquarters  awaiting  orders  : 

First  Division,  Colonel  Osterhaus : Two  companies  Third  Missouri 
>lunteers ; Twelfth  and  Seventeenth  Missouri ; Twenty-fifth,  Thirty- 
th,  and  Forty-fourth  Illinois;  Welfley’s  battery,  five  pieces;  Hoff- 
iim’s  battery,  six  pieces ; Captain  Jenks’  squadron  of  the  Thirty-sixth 

inois. 


214  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  Tw  [Chap.  XVuB 

Second  Division,  General  Asboth:  Second  Missouri,  six  companiel 
Fifteenth  Missouri:  two  pieces  Second  Ohio  Battery,  Lieutenant  Cha' ) 
man:  battalion  (four  companies)  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalry  (FrdmoU 
Hussars) ; six  companies  Fifth  Missouri  Cavalry  (Benton  Hussars 
two  pieces  of  Captain  Elbert’s  flying  battery. 

It  was  about  7 o’clock  in  the  morning  when  the  firing  began  on  t» 
Keetsville  road,  this  side  of  Elkhorn  Tavern.  I was  waiting  for  Cci 
on  el  Osterhaus  and  Lieutenant  Asmussen,  of  my  staff,  who  had  goii 
out  to  reconnoiter  the  ground  on  which  I intended  to  deploy  and  II 
find  the  nearest  road  to  that  ground.  The  Forty-fourth  Illinois  M } 
already  been  sent  in  advance  to  form  our  right,  when  the  above-naim  i 
officers  returned  and  the  movement  began.  In  less  than  half  an  hon 
the  troops  were  in  their  respective  positions,  the  First  Division  forij 
ing  the  first  line,  the  Second  Division,  with  all  the  cavalry,  the  reserv  i 
250  paces  behind  the  first  line.  To  protect  and  cover  the  deploymej 
of  the  left  wing  I opened  the  fire  on  the  right  with  a section  of  Capta  j 
Hoffmann’s  battery,  under  Lieutenant  Frank,  and  the  five  pieces  of  Cal] 
tain  Welfley’s  battery.  The  enemy  returned  the  fire  promptly  and  wii 
effect,  but  was  soon  outflanked  by  our  position  on  the  left  and  expose! 
to  a concentric  and  most  destructive  fire  of  our  brave  and  almost  ne^  e 1 

failing  cannoneers.  I 

After  the  first  discharges  on  a distance  of  800  paces  1 ordered  Ca> 
tain  Welfley  and  Lieutenant  Frank  to  advance  about  250  yards,  to  con  j 
into  dose  range  from  the  enemy’s  position,  whilst  I threw  the  Twenty 
fifth  Illinois  forward  on  the  right,  to  cover  the  space  between  the  ba  * 
tery  and  the  Keetsville  road.  Colonel  Schaefer,  with  the  Secohj 
Missouri,  was  ordered  to  proceed  to  the  extreme  left,  and  by  formir 
against  the  cavalry,  to  protect  our  left  flank.  This  movement  prov(j 
of  great  effect,  and  I now  ordered  the  center  and  the  left  to  advanl 
200  paces  and  brought  the  reserve  forward  on  the  position  which  oi  i 
first  line  had  occupied.  I then  took  a battery  commanded  by  Capta  j 
Klauss,  and  belonging  to  Colonel  Davis’  division,  nearer  to  my  ngM 
and  reported  to  you  that  the  road  towards  Elkhorn  Tavern  was  ope 
and  we  were  advancing.  About  this  time,  when  the  battle  had  lashfl 
about  one  hour  and  a half,  the  enemy  tried  to  extend  his  line  farthl 
to  the  right,  in  occupying  the  first  hill  of  the  long  ridge  commandii 
the  plain  and  the  gradually  rising  ground  where  we  stood.  His  i 
fant-ry  was  already  lodged  upon  the  hill,  seeking  shelter  behind  tl! 
rocks  and  stones,  whilst  some  pieces  of  artillery  worked  around  to  ga 
the  plateau.  I immediately  ordered  the  two  howitzers  of  the  reserl 
(Second  Ohio,  under  Lieutenant  Gansevoort)  and  the  two  pieces  « 
Captain  Elbert’s  living  battery  to  report  to  Colonel  Osterhaus  on  til 
left,  to  shell  and  batter  the  enemy  on  the  hill.  This  was  done  in  coj 
cert  with  Hoffmann’s  battery  and  with  terrible  effect  to  the  enemy,  i 
the  rocks  and  stones  worked  as  hard  as  the  shells  and  shot.  The  e 
emy’s  plan  to  enfilade  our  lines  from  the  hill  was  frustrated,  and  he  w; 
forced  to  lead  a precipitate  retreat  with  men  and  cannon.  Encouragj 
by  the  good  and  gallant  behavior  of  our  troops,  I resolved  to  draw  tl 
circle  a little  closer  around  the  corner  into  which  we  had  already  press* 
the  enemy’s  masses,  and  ordered  a second  advance  of  all  the  batten* 
and  battalions,  changing  the  position  of  the  right  wing  more  to  the  lei 
and  bringing  the  troops  of  the  reserve,  the  Fifteenth  Missouri,  and  tl 
whole  cavalry  behind  our  left. 

Assisted  by  Klauss’  battery  on  the  right,  and  co-operating  with  tl 
troops  of  the  Third  and  Fourth  Divisions,  who  advanced  with  ne 
spirit  on  the  Keetsville  road,  the  enemy  was  overwhelmed  by  the  dean 


at.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


2 If) 


wer  of  our  artillery,  and  after  about  an  hour’s  work  the  bring  on  his  side 
gan  to  slacken,  and  nearly  totally  ceased.  To  profit  this  favorable 
iment  I ordered  the  Twelfth  Missouri,  the  Twenty -fifth  and  Forty - 
irth  Illinois  to  throw  forward  a strong  force  of  skirmishers  and  take 
e woods  in  front,  where  the  enemy  had  planted  one  of  his  batteries, 
the  same  time  I ordered  the  Seventeenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  which 
d arrived  during  the  battle  from  Bentonville  road,  to  climb  the  hill 
our  left  and  to  press  forward  against  the  enemy’s  rear.  The  Thirty  - 
dh  Illinois  was  also  ordered  to  assist  this  movement  and  to  hold  com- 
inication  between  the  Twelfth  and  Seventeenth  Missouri  Volunteers, 
filst  Colonels  Schaefer  and  Joliat,  with  the  Second  and  Fifteenth  Mis- 
itri,  followed  slowly,  and  Colonel  FTemett,  with  his  cavalry,  guarded 
e rear. 

The  rattling  of  musketry,  the  volleys,  the  hurrahs,  did  prove  very 
on  that  our  troops  were  well  at  work  in  the  woods,  and  that  they 
•re  gaining  ground  rapidly.  It  was  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers, 
der  Major  Wangelin,  which  at  this  occasion  took  Dallas’  artillery  and 
eir  flag,  followed  close  behind  and  on  the  right  by  part  of  the  Third 
ssouri,  the  Forty-fourth  Illinois,  and  Twenty-fifth  and  on  the  left  by 
? Thirty-sixth  Illinois.  The  Seventeenth  Missouri,  under  Major  Poteii, 
d meanwhile  arrived  on  the  top  of  Pea  Eidge,  forming  the  extreme 
t of  our  line  of  battle. 

The  enemy  was  routed  and  fled  in  terror  and  confusion  in  all  direc- 
ts. It  was  a delightful  moment  when  we  all  met  after  12  o’clock  on 

3 eminence,  where  the  enemy  held  positions  with  his  batteries  a few 
nutes  before,  and  when  you  let  pass  by  the  columns  of  your  victori- 
es army. 

fo  pursue  the  enemy  I sent  Captain  von  Kielmansegge  with  one  coin- 
»y  of  Fremont  Hussars  forward.  The  Seventeenth  and  Third  Mis- 
iri  followed  in  double-quick  time,  assisted  by  two  pieces  of  Elbert’s 
mg  artillery,  other  troops  of  the  First  Division,  all  under  Colonel 
terhaus,  came  up  and  continued  their  march  towards  Keetsvilie. 

&t  the  fork  of  the  Benton  and  Keetsvilie  roads  I detached  the  Forty  - 
irth  Illinois  (Colonel  Knobelsdorff ),  two  pieces  of  artillery  of  the  fly- 
? battery,  and  a squad  of  30  men,  Fremont  Hussars,  to  proceed  a 
irt  distance  on  the  road  to  Bentonville  and  to  guard  that  road.  Ar- 
ed  at  Keetsvilie  with  the  greatest  portion  of  my  command.  I found 
it  one  part  of  the  enemy  had  turned  the  Eoaring  Eiver  and  Berry  - 
le,  while  others  had  turned  to  the  left.  I also  received  your  order  to 
urn  to  Sugar  Creek,  which  I did,  and  met  the  army  on  Sugar  Creek 

4 o’clock  in  the  evening  of  the  9th. 

1 list  of  the  dead,  wounded,  and  missing  of  this  command  has  al- 
idy  been  transmitted  to  you,  and  a special  report  mentioning  those 
cers  and  men  of  my  command  who  deserve  consideration  for  their 
‘duct  in  action,  together  with  the  reports  of  the  different  command  - 
of  regiments  and  corps,  will  follow  to-day,  as  some  of  the  reports 
ce  not  come  in  yet. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  SIGEL, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  First  and  Second  Divisions. 
3rig.  Gen.  Samuel  E.  Curtis, 

Commanding  S.  W.  Army. 


216 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvn 


No.  4. 


Report  of  Col  Peter  J.  Osterhaus , Twelfth  Missouri  Infantry , commas  % 

ing  First  Division . 


Headquarters  First  Division,  I 
Camp  Welfley , ArA\,  March  14,  1862.  I 

Captain:  Iu  compliance  with  special  orders  from  headquarters*. I 
Southwest  District  I have  the  honor  to  .report  the  part  taken  by  tl 
First  Division  in  the  three  days’  battle  of  the  6th,  < th,  and  8th  ot  th.l 

m At  9 o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  night  of  the  5th  instant  (I  was  then  at  j 
tioned  at  McKisick’s  farm,  3 miles  southwest  of  Bentonville,  Ark.il 
was  officially  informed  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  receiving  at  til 
same  time  orders  to  march  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.  next  morning,  m order  I 
ioin  the  other  divisions  of  the  army  at  Pea  Bulge,  on  Fayetteville  I 
Tele °raph  road.  We  left  camp  at  the  hour  mentioned,  and  on  arnvii  I 
at  Bentonville  General  Sigel  ordered  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteer  1 
Mai  or  Wangelin  commanding,  to  remain  there  and  re-enforce  the  refl 
ouard  (composed  of  the  Second  Missouri  Volunteers,  Colonel  Schaetti 
the  flying  battery,  and  the  Fremont  and  Benton  Hussars).  This  tori] 
was  to  stay  at  Bentonville  under  the  immediate  command  of  Gener  s 
Sigel,  while  I myself  proceeded  to  Sugar  Creek  with  the  other  reg« 
ments  and  batteries  of  the  First  Division.  On  my  arrival  there: 
learned  by  rumor,  afterwards  confirmed  officially,  that  General  Sig 
had  been  attacked  at  Bentonville,  and  that  his  egress  from  that  to vn 
was  disputed  by  a strong  rebel  force.  I immediately,  after  givn 
notice  to  General  Curtis,  ordered  all  the  regiments  and  Captain  Ho 
mann’s  battery  to  return  with  the  utmost  speed  to  the  support  ot  o; 
o-eneral.  They,  together  with  the  Fifteenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  of  1 1 
Second  Division,  responded  promptly  to  my  sudden  call,  and  tkout 
tired  by  a 16-mile  march,  hurried  back  in  double-quick  to  the  held 

^fkad  almost  arrived  at  the  head  of  Sugar  Creek  Hollow  with  til 
force  when  I met  General  Sigel  and  his  small  force,  who  had  brokj 
through  the  enemy.  The  latter  was  still  following  them.  On  a ben 
in  the  narrow  defile  formed  by  Sugar  Creek  Hollow  I planted 
pieces  of  Hoffmann’s  battery,  while  the  Fifteenth  Missouri  Volunteci 
(Second  Division)  formed  in  line  of  battle  in  support  of  the  battei, 
while  the  Seventeenth  Missouri  Volunteers  were  deployed  as  sk 
mishers  over  the  whole  breadth  of  the  valley  and  the  crests  of  the  b< 

dering  hills.  . , , 

The  enemy  advanced  towards  us  with  artillery  m the  valley  and  sk 
mishers  on  the  hills,  when  a few  rounds  of  spherical  case  and  canisfl 
stopped  him.  His  artillery  played  without  success.  I then  order 
the  two  pieces  back,  as  well  as  the  infantry,  with  the  exception  ot  t; 
Seventeenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  which  covered  our  retreat  m ni<- 
admirable  style,  exchanging  an  occasional  shot  with  the  enemy.  Ma 
Poten,  commanding  the  Seventeenth  Missouri  V olunteers,  deserves 
highest  credit  for  the  determination  and  coolness  exhibited  on  this  * 

casion.  , , _j 

We  arrived  in  camp  without  any  further  molestation,  and  prepai 
to  bivouac  on  the  northern  ridges  skirting  Sugar  Creek  Hollow,  nt 
the  camp  of  the  other  divisions,  fortifying  our  position  at  once  in  aT 
cipation  of  a night  attack.  The  enemy  did  not  molest  us,  however. 
March  7. — Early  morning  brought  us  in  the  intelligence  that 


1Ar.  XVIII.J 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


217 


nited  forces  of  the  Confederate  and  Missouri  rebels  had  passed  our 
ght  flank  and  were  deploying  also  on  onr  line  of  retreat  near  Elkhorn 
avern.  They  advanced  during  the  night  by  the  direct  road  leading 
•om  Benton ville,  Ark.,  to  Cassville,  Mo.  This  road  joins  the  Tele 
rapli  road  from  Fayetteville  to  Cassville  at  a point  a few  miles  north 
f the  above-mentioned  Elkhorn  Tavern.  To  prevent  the  enemy  from 
ill  more  strengthening  their  position  in  our  rear  and  to  engage  a part 
f his  forces  General  Curtis  ordered  me  to  make  a demonstration  on 
ieir  right  flank  towards  Leetown,  and,  if  necessary,  on  the  Bentonville 
ud  Cassville  road.  The  forces  detailed  for  this  purpose  were  mainly 
ivalry  (battalions  of  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  First  and  Fifth  Missouri 
avalry),  and  three  pieces  of  the  flying  battery,  all  under  the  immedi- 
te  command  of  Colonel  Bussey,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry;  and,  further,  the 
welfth  Missouri,  Thirty-sixth  Illinois,  and  Twenty-second  Indiana 
egiments,  three  pieces^  12-pounder  howitzers,  of  Captain  Welfley’s 
littery,  and  Captain  Hoffmann’s  battery.  This  command  started  after 
) o’clock  a.  m.  I arrived  at  Leetown,  having  no  knowledge  whatever 
f the  wiiereabouts  of  the  enemy,  and  took  position  in  the  open  fields 
orth  of  Leetown,  going  forward  myself  with  the  cavalry  and  three 
ieces  of  the  flying  artillery.  The  field  in  which  the  infantry  and  artil- 
•ry  were  posted  is  divided  from  auother  tract,  of  cultivated  land  by  a 
elt  of  timber  with  thick  undergrowth.  Debouching  from  this  timber 
came  in  sight  of  a large  force  of  the  enemy,  mostly  cavalry.  All 
le  open  fields  to  my  front  and  right  were  occupied,  and  the  road  from 
entonville  was  filled  with  new  regiments  arriving. 

As  appears  from  the  accompanying  sketch,*  this  gathering  of  the  en- 
my’s  forces  was  accomplished  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the 
ead  quarters  of  our  army,  being  only  1J  miles  distant,  and  it  was 
atent  that  the  enemy  was  preparing  a most  energetic  attack  on  our 
ght  flank  at  the  same  time  that  they  opened  fire  on  our  rear.  Not- 
ithstanding  my  command  was  entirely  inadequate  to  the  overwhelm - 
lg  masses  opposed  to  me,  which  I learned  afterwards  were  under  the 
nmediate  command  of  Generals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh,  and  com- 
»ised  some  of  the  very  best-drilled  regiments  in  the  Confederate  serv- 
e and  Indian  regiments,  I could  not  hesitate  in  my  course  of  action, 
he  safety  of  our  position  was  dependent  upon  the  securing  of  our  right 
ank  and  the  keeping  back  of  the  enemy  until  I was  re-enforced.  I 
lerefore  ordered  the  three  pieces  of  the  flying  battery  to  form,  support - 
i g them  by  companies  from  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  provided  with 
wolvers  and  revolving  carbines,  forming  the  remainder  of  the  cavalry 
1 line  of  attack.  The  battery  opened  fire  with  the  most  disastrous 
Sect  on  the  enemy,  and  in  order  to  cut  off  fresh  supports  two  companies 
f cavalry  were  ordered  to  charge  dowTn  the  road.  When  I saw  the 
Sect  of  the  artillery,  creating  a panic  in  the  lines  of  our  opponents,  I 
rdered  Colonel  Bussey  to  charge  from  the  right,  attacking  the  left  of 
ae  rebels.  While  these  preparations  were  making,  a wild,  numerous, 
nd  irregular  throng  of  cavalry,  a great  many  Indians  among  them, 
ished  towards  us,  breaking  through  our  lines.  A general  discharge 
f fire-arms  on  both  sides  created  a scene  of  wild  confusion,  from  which 
ur  cavalry,  abandoning  the  three  pieces  of  artillery,  retreated  towards 
ieir  old  camping  ground,  while  that  of  the  enemy  made  their  way 
cross  the  fields  towards  the  Bentonville  road. 

It  being  evident  that  the  cavalry  could  not  be  formed  again  for  the 
resent,  I had  to  rely  solely  on  the  infantry  and  artillery  to  achieve  my 


Not  found. 


218 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII« 

purpose.  Fearful  of  the  impression  which  the  above  scene  of  confusio  i 
might  have  made,  I went  to  meet  them.  They  had  stood  without  flincll 
ing,  and  in  a few  minutes  they  were  in  such  shape  that  I could  attac* 

the  enemy  again.  . , x . , , . 1 

The  Twenty-second  Indiana  on  my  right,  Captain  W elfley’s  two  piece® 
(one  piece  had  been  disabled),  the  Twelfth  Missouri,  Captain  Hoffmann* 
battery,  and  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  on  my  left  formed  the  line.  Fc| 
the  reserve  I had  to  rely  on  the  re-enforcements  for  which  I sent  tfl 
General  Curtis. 

The  enemy  soon  made  his  appearance  with  colors  fly  mg  on  the  opp(| 
site  side  of  the  field  which  I occupied.  Our  batteries  opened  their  fir  i 
on  him,  sweeping  everything  from  our  sight.  I ordered  skirmisher! 
from  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers  to  advance  and  scour  the  wood! 
on  our  right  and  front  and  sent  one  company  of  Benton’s  Hussars  ( whicj 
had  reassembled)  to  our  left.  I 

On  approaching  the  wood  they  were  received  by  the  enemy  with  j 
heavy  musketry  fire,  to  which  the  infantry  replied  so  successfully,  thsl 
they  were  able  to  bring  back  (from  a very  exposed  position)  the  pieci 
of  Captain  Welfley’s  artillery  which  had  been  disabled.  This  piecij 
afterwards  did  very  good  service.  For  several  hours  the  enemy  repea: 
edly  attempted  to  advance,  on  each  occasion  bringing  fresh  troops  int 
action.  However,  they  invariably  had  to  give  way  to  the  unflinchm 
courage  of  my  men.  McCulloch  and  McIntosh  led  their  troops  in  pei 
son  and  both*  fell— the  former  by  a ball  from  a soldier  of  the  Thirty 
sixth  Illinois  Volunteers,  Peter  Pelican.  The  enemy’s  cannon  playe 
for  a time  pretty  severely  on  our  ranks,  and  it  became  necessary  t 
silence  them.  My  instructions  to  that  effect  were  so  well  executed  thar 
the  rebels  were  unable  even  to  carry  away  the  three  pieces  of  the  fly  in  : 
artillery  abandoned  by  our  cavalry  in  the  early  part  of  the  day.  The 
had  to  leave  them  on  the  field. 

About  2 o’clock  p.  m.  General  Jefferson  C.  Davis  arrived  with  som 
of  his  regiments  and  was  joined  by  the  Twenty-second  Indiana,  up  t 
this  time  under  my  command.  The  gallant  officer  deployed  his  reg 
inents  at  once  on  my  right,  advancing  towards  any  foe  who  might  sti 
be  in  the  timber.  The  report  of  musketry  which  followed  told  me  thfl 
a lively  fight  was  going  on.  To  act  in  concert  with  him  I ordered  m 
tirailleurs  forward  in  front,  also  some  cavalry  which  had  partly  reaf 
sembled.  I advanced  with  my  whole  line,  when  the  enemy  showed  hi! 
colors  again.  Cavalry  and  infantry  came  around  the  left  of  Genera 
Davis  and  opened  their  fire  on  my  now  unsecured  right.  In  double 
quick  I threw  the  Twelfth  Missouri  on  this  exposed  flank,  supporte 
them  by  Captain  Welfley’s  battery,  who  had  wheeled  to  the  right,  an 
forming  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  in  close  column  on  the  extreme  left  (9 
this  neV  position,"  to  be  ready  for  any  cavalry  attack,  protecting  at  th 
same  time  Captain  Hoffmann’s  battery.  The  enemy’s  plan  being  d< 
feated  by  a raging  fire  from  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers  and  Cai 
tain  Welfley’s  artillery,  they  made  a feeble  attempt  to  cut  off  our  lin 
of  retreat,  which  was  frustrated  by  skirmishers  thrown  out  from  th 
Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers.  As  my  infantry  force  was  not  eqm 
to  the  artillery  (having  only  the  Twelfth  and  Thirty-sixth  with  me 
and  also  to  counteract  any  further  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  outflan 
me,  I thought  it  judicious  to  send  four  pieces  of  Captain  Hoffmann 
battery  back  to  Leetown,  which  affords  a very  commanding  positioi 
This,  with  some  of  General  Davis’  infantry,  formed  my  reserve.  Ca\ 
airy  flankers  and  infantry  skirmishers  having  thoroughly  scoured  th 
ground  in  front  of  where  the  battle  had  raged  for  hours,  reported  tnj 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


219 


nemy  gone,  and  his  train  could  be  seen  in  the  distance  moving  towards 
lentonville.  Similar  news  was  brought  me  from  the  right,  when  a brave 
ndiana  regiment  (Colonel  Davis’)  held  aloft  the  Stars  and  Stripes, 
iiich  emblem  of  our  country  was  hailed  with  enthusiastic  cheers  by  the 
rave  men  around  me. 

General  Sigel  now  arrived  with  the  rest  of  the  First  and  Second  Divis- 
)ns,  and  as  we  passed  on  the  ground  the  enemy’s  dead  and  wounded, 
mounting  to  hundreds,  gave  evidence  of  the  fearful  execution  done 
y our  soldiers.  On  our  extreme  right,  where  Colonel  Carr  was  engaged, 
lie  cannon  were  still  thundering,  although  night  was  not  far  distant' 
VTe  marched  to  the  assistance  of  our  friends,  planted  our  battery,  and 
rough  t the  infantry  into  line,  but  it  was  too  late  to  open  fire.  General 
igel  was  of  opinion  that  it  was  best  to  wait  until  morning,  and  not  to 
etray  our  position  by  a few  shots,  which  could  be  of  no  avail,  as  it  was 
Iready  night.  Our  men  laid  down  to  rest  in  a wet  corn  field,  having 
iten  nothing  since  morning,  but  not  a murmur  was  heard ; they  waited 
i patience.  So  ended  the  second  day  of  battle. 

I cannot  pass  over  the  occurrences  of  this  day  without  again  paying 
tribute  to  the  indomitable  courage  and  devotedness  of  the  officers 
ad  men.  They  all  deserve  the  highest  encomiums  for  their  bravery 
tid  endurance.  To  mention  names  is  almost  impossible  when  everv- 
ody  has  such  noble  claims. 

Under  my  immediate  observation  were  all  the  artillery  officers 
resent,  Captain  Welfley,  the  unterrified,  and  Lieutenant  Bencke,  both 
[“  Battery  A,  and  Captain  Hoffmann  and  Lieutenants  Froehlich,  Pid- 
it,  and  Frank,  of  Battery  B (Ohio);  Major  Wangelin,  commanding 
welfth  Missouri  Volunteers,  and  Colonel  Greusel,  of  the  Thirty-sixth 
linois  V olunteers ; furthermore,  two  reliable  officers  who  were  detailed 
> me  for  the  occasion  as  orderly  officers,  viz,  Captain  von  Kielmansegge, 
remont  Hussars,  of  General  Sigel’s  staff,  and  Captain  Ahlfeldt,  Twelfth 
issouri  V olunteers,  of  General  Curtis’  staff,  and  also  the  gentlemen 
my  staff.  I have  also  to  mention  Captain  McKenny,  assistant  adju- 
nt-general  on  General  Curtis’  staff,  who  was  with  me  part  of  the  day, 
ul  rendered  great  assistance  in  bringing  Hoffmann’s  battery  to  Lee- 
wn,  as  well  as  the  general  arrangements  for  the  disposition  of  my 
ties. 

March  8.— The  commencement  of  this  day  still  found  our  troops  on 
ie  corn  field,  without  food  or  fire.  Several  messengers  sent  off  for 
’oyisions  returned,  having  been  unable  to  procure  them.  It  being- 
dispensable  that  our  men  should  eat  something  before  entering  on 
lother  day’s  struggle  General  Sigel,  at  2 a.  m.,  gave  the  order  to  return 
camp  (about  1 mile  distant),  where  we  arrived  at  3 o’clock  a.  nn 
ie  men  slept  till  daybreak,  and  provisions  having  been  brought  up  in 
e mean  time,  fell  in,  after  a hasty  breakfast,  to  deliver  another  and 
st  blow  on  the  enemy. 

The  ground  selected  for  this  last  attack  by  Lieutenant  Asmussen, 
General  Sigel’s  staff,  and  myself  was  a field  forward  of  and  cou- 
nting with  the  one  in  which  we  had  taken  position  during  the  fore- 
irt  of  the  night.  The  Forty-fourth  Illinois  Begiment  was  first  brought 
) and  formed  in  line  on  the  left  of  the  right  wing  (Third  and  Fourth 
•visions)  of  our  army.  General  Sigel  then  arrived  and  took  com- 
and  in  person,  while  I was  engaged  in  bringing  out  the  regiments 
id  batteries  of  my  division. 

The  first  position  on  the  field  was  as  follows : The  Twenty-fifth  Illi- 
>is  Volunteers  on  my  extreme  right,  connecting  with  the  left  of  our 
ght  wing  of  our  army  (Third  and  Fourth  Divisions).  On  the  left  of 


220 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  Xi 


and  in  advance  of  that  regiment  I had  posted  the  F°rty-fourth  Illmoi 
Volunteers,  with  Captain  Welfley’s  battery  on  the  left.  To  the  left  cf 
the  battery  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers  was  brought  into  positior 
while  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers  formed  the  extreme  lett  1 
column  by  division  at  half  distance,  Hoffmann’s  battery  occupying  th 
interval  between  the  Twelfth  Missouri  and  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois 
The  Third  and  Seventeenth  Missouri  Volunteers  were  formed  as  reserv* 

in  rear  of  my  center.  . , _ _ , , , 1 

The  enemy  fired  from  several  batteries  with  the  utmost  vehemence 
their  shot  and  shell  falling  thickly  around  our  lines  and  on  our  batteriM 
so  much  so,  that  the  troops  to  our  right  were  forced  to  fall  back  tor  I 
while.  At  this  critical  moment  the  batteries  of  the  hirst  Divisio  i 


opened  on  the  enemy,  bearing  mainly  on  the  extreme  rel)el:t| 


l)  [ ;t  ULCU  A/ll  tllci  cncuij  , UVjai  A1Ab  c V -P  4-1 

The  effect  was  proportionate  to  the  skill,  courage,  and  coolness  ot  to 
officers  and  men.  The  enemy,  seeing  that  his  right  was  endangered 
concentrated  all  his  energies  on  that  wing,  the  fire  of  their  other  baj 
teries  slackening  off  considerably.  General  Sigel  ordered  the  batteruj 
to  advance,  and  at  the  same  time  dispatched  me  to  General  Curtis  t| 
report  progress.  By  this  maneuver,  in  which  the  right  wing  ol  ov 
army  co-operated,  the  enemy’s  entire  line  of  retreat  was  brought  undo! 

the  concentrated  fire  from  our  lines.  . . , j 

To  execute  this  movement,  on  my  return  all  our  batteries  wheeled 
the  left,  and  I ordered  the  skirmishers  of  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volin 
leers  forward  towards  a grove  of  timber,  from  which  the  heaviest  ba 
tery  of  the  enemy  was  firing  against  us.  The  men,  under  command  « 
the  gallant  Captain  Lightfoot,  of  Company  F,  advanced  like  veteran 
In  connection  and  to  the  left  the  skirmishers  of  the  Thirty -sixth  an 
Forty-fourth  Illinois  Volunteers  were  also  thrown  out,  and  all  the  reg 
mentsof  the  First  Division  began  their  march  forward  in  support 
the  skirmishers.  They  were  received  with  an  intense  fire  by  the  euem. 

The  Twelfth  Missouri,  supported  by  the  Twenty-fifth  Illinois,  Colon- 
Coler,  entered  the  grove  on  our  right,  when  the  enemy’s  infantry  lire 
heavy  volleys,  disputing  every  inch  of  ground.  Major  Wangelm,  cor 
manding  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers,  here  had  his  horse  shot  uncl< 
him,  and  the  two  regiments,  going  on  in  gallant  style,  soon  obtame 
possession  of  the  main  road.  Two  brass  pieces  and  the  Hag  ol  tl 
Dallas  Artillery  were  taken  by  the  Twelfth  Missouri  in  this  charge. 

During  these  struggles  the  movements  on  our  extreme  left  were  ju 
as  fast,  powerful,  and  successful.  The  Seventeenth  and  Third  Missou 
and  the  Thirtv-sixth  Illinois,  supported  by  the  gallant  soldiers  ot  tl 
Second  and  Fifteenth  Missouri  and  the  artillery  of  Lieutenant  Chapma 
(Second  Division),  advanced  steadily,  the  cavalry  on  the  left,  towarc 
the  rocks  over  which  the  enemy  was  retreating.  Soon  we  saw  the  nob 
regiments  Seventeenth  and  Third  Missouri  and  Thirty-sixth  Ulmow  c 
the  crest  of  the  steep  rocks,  and  with  this  position  the  field  ot  the  a 
feated  rebel  army  was  in  our  possession. 

We  had  conquered.  The  rebels  were  retreating  in  all  directions- 
one  force  by  the  Cassville  road,  which  we  followed  in  close  pursuit  ar 

° . _ i i i . XK,  • nn-nin  A OTT’Ant  TOflTlV  lUl 


prevented  everv  attempt  of  theirs  to  form  agaiu.  A great  many  pri 

, l. , . n _x ...  : rrro  rrrrn a nil 


«>ners  and 


munitions  of  war,  muskets,  caissons,  baggage  wagons,  ot 
one  more  cannon  were  taken  by  us  in  this  pursuit.  General  big 
ordered  me  to  drive  the  rebel  column  as  far  as  Keetsville,  which  < e 
arriving  in  the  neighborhood  of  that  place  at  5 o’clock  p. _m.  * c 

morning  (March  9)  we  entered  the  town  of  Keetsville,  and  dispatchc 
a cavalry  force  a few  miles  beyond,  but  it  being  evident  that  the  enem,> 
forces  in  that  direction  had  dispersed,  General  Sigel  ordered  us  to  retin 


jap.  XYin,]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  221 

> the  battle  ground,  where  lie  encamped  our  command  near  the  other 
ivisions. 

In  conclusion  I ought  to  add  the  names  of  those  who  excelled.  They 
11  were  brave,  and  I only  could  repeat  the  names  mentioned  before, 
irst  Lieutenant  Jacoby,  of  Captain  Welfley’s  battery,  who  was  not  in 
le  battle  of  Leetown,  did  great  service  and  immense  execution  with 
is  12-pounder  guns  on  the  8th.  He  is  a worthy  comrade  of  his  brother 
Eficers.  It  also  becomes  my  pleasant  duty  to  acknowledge  the  very 
ind  assistance  I repeatedly  received  on  the  8th  from  Colonel  Schaefer, 
econd  Missouri  Volunteers,  and  his  command. 

Herewith  you  will  find  the  reports  of  the  different  regiments  and 
atteries  composing  my  command.  The  list  of  casualties  was  previously 

?nt  in. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Division , Army  of  the  Southwest . 
Capt.  T.  I.  McKenny, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  S.  W.  Dist .,  Army  of  the  Missouri. 


No.  5. 

eport  of  Col.  William  X.  Coler , Twenty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry , First 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 
Camp  near  Pea  Ridge , Benton  Co.,  Ark.,  March  9,  1862. 
Colonel  : At  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of.  the  6th  instant  six  com- 
mies of  the  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  of  Illinois  Volunteers  marched  with 
le  main  body  of  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  from  camp  near  Ben- 
mville  to  Sugar  Creek  Hollow.  Scarcely  had  we  reached  the  latter 
lace,  a distance  of  16  miles,  when  he  received  a dispatch  saying  that 
eneral  Sigel,  with  our  rear  guard,  was  surrounded  and  engaged  by  a 
istly  superior  force  of  the  enemy ; that  unless  re-enforced  quickly  he 
ould  certainly  be  cut  off  and  defeated.  Without  waiting  for  orders- 
ordered  an  about  face,  and  retraced  our  steps  on  a double-quick  a dis- 
mce  of  about  5 miles,  where  we  met  the  brave  Sigel,  who  had  most 
illantly  cut  his  way  through  the  enemy’s  lines.  Here  the  four  com- 
mies which  had  been  detached  on  the  day  previous  to  take  possession 
' some  flouring  mills  rejoined  the  regiment.  Night  approaching  and 
ie  enemy  not  appearing  in  any  considerable  force,  I was  ordered  to 
turn  and  take  position  on  the  heights  overlooking  the  valley  of  Sugar 
reek,  put  out  pickets,  rest  upon  our  arms,  and  await  further  orders. 
The  morning  of  the  7th  came,  and  with  it  the  intelligence  that  the 
iemy  in  full  force  had  succeeded  in  gaining  our  rear  and  were  drawn 
> in  line  of  battle.  Soon  was  heard  the  booming  of  cannon,  announc- 
g that  the  batteries  of  both  armies  were  engaged.  Every  officer  and 
an  stood  to  his  place  in  ranks  and  awaited  impatiently,  anxiously 
qiecting  every  moment  to  be  ordered  forward  to  take  part  in  the 
*adly  strife.  Thus  we  stood  until  4 o’clock  p.  m.,  under  the  most  pain- 
i suspense,  all  confident  of  victory,  but  fearful  we  would  not  be 
lowed  to  take  a part  in  achieving  it.  A stern  joy  was  felt  when  Gen- 
al  Sigel  rode  up  in  person  and  ordered  the  regiment,  together  with 
ie  Forty-fourth  Illinois  Volunteers,  to  move  forward  to  the  support  of 


222 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK., 


KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIll 


the  ieft  wing  of  our  line  of  battle.  On  our  arrival  at  the  scene  of  actiori 
it  was  ascertained  that  the  enemy  had  retired,  leaving  that  part  of  the 
field  to  our  troops. 

At  this  time  heavy  firing  was  heard  far  to  our  right,  where  a doubt! 
ful  contest  seemed  to  be  raging  between  the  troops  under  command  o j 
Colonel  Carr  and  those  comprising  the  left  wing  of  the  enemy’s  line 
General  Sigel  being  called  upon  for  help,  I,  by  his  order,  dispatched 
the  five  companies  comprising  the  left  wing  of  the  regiment  to  re-en 
force  Colonel  Carr,  while  the  right  wing  moved  forward  in  the  line  o 

battle,  supporting  two  pieces  of battery.  After  moving  forward 

from  1,000  to  1,500  yards  without  meeting  the  enemy,  it  became  api 
parent  that  for  the  time  he  declined  further  battle.  As  darknesiil 
gathered  over  the  field  of  blood  our  moving  columns  were  brought  t<| 
a halt  to  lay  down  and  rest  upon  their  arms,  and  the  firing  ceased 
throughout  the  entire  length  ot  the  line,  not  to  be  renewed  until  th« 
coming  day. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  the  two  wings  of  the  regiment  werl 
again  united,  and  I was  ordered  to  take  a position  in  an  open  field,  unde  fi 
cover  of  a fence  and  log  barn,  about  100  yards  in  front  of  Welfley’ii! 
battery,  and  not  over  900  yards  from  the  batteries  of  the  enemy.  Thi  [ 
point  was  gained  in  excellent  order,  altnough  to  reach  it  we  were  com 
pelled  to  pass  through  a shower  of  shot  and  shell  over  an  open  field,  ii 
full  view  of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  Arrived  in  position,  I ordered  th  : 
men  to  drop  flat  upon*  the  ground,  in  which  manner  they  remained  fo 
one  hour  and  thirty  minutes,  exposed  to  a terrible  fire  from  the  enemy’  1 
guns,  aimed  principally  at  our  batteries  on  the  rising  ground  in  oul 
rear,  which  were  returning  the  fire  with  deadly  precision. 

As  the  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  began  to  slacken,  the  able  ami 
ever-ready  tactician  General  Sigel  ordered  the  batteries  to  advance)] 
and  at  the  same  time  ordered  me  to  proceed  under  cover  ot  a thicl 
underwood  to  a point  within  400  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line.  My  let! 
flank  opposite  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  and  resting  upon  the  Cass 
ville  and  Fayetteville  road,  I approached  this  new  position  unobserved 1 
moving  at  a double-quick  over  the  open  ground,  but  at  a slow  and  car 
tious  step  through  the  underwood,  keeping  well  covered,  so  as  not  t 
attract  the  attention  of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  In  our  front  was  an  opei 
field,  about  400  yards  across,  immediately  beyond  which  was  woodlan 
covered  with  trees,  logs,  and  an  uncommonly  thick  growth  of  oal 
underbrush,  from  which  the  leaves  had  not  yet  fallen.  Here  the  enem, 
was  posted  in  strong  force  a few  rods  from  the  fence,  so  as  not  to  attrac] 
the  fire  of  our  batteries. 

By  this  time  several  regiments  on  my  left  were  closely  engaging  th 
enemy.  The  thunders  of  the  artillery  and  the  incessant  volleys  c 
musketry  from  both  our  own  and  the  enemy’s  lines  argued  to  me  tha 
victory  was  trembling  in  the  balance. 

At  this  seemingly  critical  moment  General  Curtis  rode  up  and  ordere. 
me  to  gain  the  fence  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  field,  and  at  the  sam 
time  ordered  forward  the  several  regiments  on  my  right.  We  dashe 
across  the  field,  and  reached  the  place  in  good  order  before  the  enem; 
could  bring  his  pieces  to  bear  on  our  line.  When  I reached  the  fenc 
1 found  that  the  ever-gallant  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers  were  clos 
upon  my  left,  but  that  I was  without  immediate  support  upon  my  riglil 
I halted  for  a moment,  and  sent  forward  a few  resolute  skirmishers  t 
find  the  precise  position  of  the  foe.  They  soon  returned,  and  reporte' 
them  in  large  force  about  75  yards  distant.  During  this  short  interva 
of  time  the  men  disencumbered  themselves  of  blankets  and  knapsack* 


ai\  xvm.j 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


223 


tying  they  would  conquer  or  never  leave  the  brush.  My  right  being 
)w  supported,  I ordered  a movement  forward  into  the  brush.  We  had 
>t  advanced  over  50  yards  when  a loud,  clear  voice  was  heard  to  cry 
it,  “Ready.”  I instantly  gave  the  command,  “ Cover.” 

The  men  had  scarcely  dropped  upon  the  ground  when  the  enemy  from 
s coverts  let  loose  a terrific  volley  of  musketry,  which  was  promptly 
turned  by  our  ranks  with  deadly  effect.  At  the  same  time  Welfley’s 
ittery  belched  forth  death  into  their  thinning  ranks,  yet  the  greater 
imber  stood  their  ground  and  fought  bravely  until  about  the  sixth 
und,  when  they  all  gave  way  in  the  wildest  disorder.  After  giving 
em  a few  parting  rounds  to  increase  the  velocity  of  their  speed  I 
dered  the  fire  to  cease.  The  victory  was  with  the  Stars  and  Stripes, 
The  regiment  entered  the  action  400  strong.  Early  on  the  morning 
the  8th  Company  A,  in  command  of  Lieutenant  Mitchell,  was  de- 
cked to  support  two  pieces  of  Captain  Welfley’s  battery— a duty 
rich  he  gallantly  performed.  1 am  proud  to  report  that  in  every  posi- 
>n  in  which  they  were  placed  officers  and  privates  showed  the  coolest 
urage  and  most  determined  bravery.  They  obeyed  every  order  and 
rformed  their  duty  well. 

Where  all  did  so  well  it  would  be  invidious  to  make  distinctions, 
it  I cannot  close  this  report  without  making  mention  of  the  gallant 
nduct  of  First  Lieut.  John  F.  Isom,  of  Company  G,  who  by  the  burst- 
? of  a shell  received  a severe  and  painful  wound  in  the  hand  and  was 
tierwise  injured ; yet  he  refused  to  leave  the  field,  and  remained  in 
mrnand  of  his  company  until  the  close  of  the  action. 

The  following  officers  took  part  in  the  action:  Maj.  E.  H.  Nodine: 
Ijt.  George  W.  Flynn;  Captains  Clark,  Boyden,  Wall,  Taggart,  Os^ 
rn,  Summers,  and  Andrews;  First  Lieutenants  Hall,  Skeehs,  Isom, 
ickner,  and  Brown ; Second  Lieutenants  Mitchell,  Lake,  Brazelton, 
mderen,  Knapp,  and  Richards.  I append  a list  of  our  killed,  wounded, 
d missing.*  1 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  my  dear  general,  vour  obedient  servant, 

„ 7 , ■ . . W.  K.  COLER, 

Colonel  Twenty -fifth  Regiment  Illinois  Vols .,  Commanding . 
Col.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus, 

Commanding  First  Division. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Maj.  Richard  H.  Nodine , Twenty  fifth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Leetown,  March  10,  1862. 
Alter  receiving  your  orders  to  re-enforce  Colonel  Carr  on  the  after- 
on  ot  the  7th  ot  March,  1 proceeded  with  the  left  wing  of  tbe  regi 
nt  to  a point  opposite  the  enemy’s  center,  where  I took  a position 
a small  piece  of  brush.  General  Curtis  soon  after  ordered  me  to 
>ve  across  the  meadow  and  to  charge  upon  the  enemy,  and  if  pos- 
>le  to  drive  him  from  his  position.  In  pursuance  of  this  order  we 
vanced  across  the  open  field  and  penetrated  the  brush  on  the  oppo- 
o side  about  300  yards,  when  some  scattering  shots  were  fired  from 
; rear  of  our  left.  Supposing  them  to  be  from  some  of  our  own  men 
jp  had  got  behind  their  company,  I ordered  them  to  stop.  I halted 


See  p.  204. 


224 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chac.  xvm 


the  command  and  moved  toward  the  left  wing  to  ascertain  the  caus. 
of  the  firing,  when  a prisoner  was  brought  to  me,  who  had  been  sen 
to  ascertain8 who  we  were  by  the  commander  of  the  enemy  s lorce  a, 

uaiu  T _ o ,,  , T,nmciar)a,  TfAfnmP/Il 


th^po™1,  and  who  informed  me  that  the  Seventh  Louisiana  Regimen 1 
and  two  others  were  lying  to  our  left  about  40  yards.  Owing  to  th< 
darkness  and  thickness  of  the  underbrush  I found  it  impossible  tj 
distinguish  friend  from  foe,  and  also  from  the  fact  that  one  of  our  owl 
batteries  were  playing  upon  us  from  the  angle  of  the  brush  and  load) 
ilhonght ft  best to  retire,  which  I did,  recrossing  the  meadow,  an| 
taking  position  in  the  brush  about  400  yards  from  the  enemy,  wher| 
we  lay  on  our  arms  all  night,  at  the  request  of  Colonel  Carr.  In  th 
morning  we  rejoined  your  command. 

Very  truly,  your  obedient  servant,  r NODINE, 

Major , Twenty-fifth  Illinois  Volunteers . ] 
Col.  William  K Colee,  Comdg.  Twenty  fifth  III.  Vol. 


No.  7. 


Report  of  Col.  Charles  Knobelsdorff,  Forty-fourth  Illinois  Infantry d 


Headquarters  Forty-Fourth  Illinois  Regiment, 

Camp,  Pea  Ridge , March  11,  180— 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  action  of  this  regiment  from  tb| 

6th  to  the  9th  of  March,  inclusive : • x . I 

The  regiment,  stationed  at  Camp  Cooper,  near  Benton ville,  rccei  <1 
marching  orders  at  11  o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  5th,  and  at  - of  tM 
6th  commenced  a retrograde  movement  towards  Sugai  Cieek  Hollorl 
When  marching  orders  were  received  Company  F,  under  commanJ 
of  Lieutenant  Hicks,  were  stationed  at  Williams’  Mill,  7 miles  wes 

grinding  flour  for  the  use  of  the  regiment.  A messenger  was  immj 

diately  sent  for  them,  and  they  made  a very  rapid  march,  redc  J 
the  regiment  in  time  to  march  with  us,  bringing  also  a quantity  of  flon 
The  regiment,  with  the  First  Division,  passed  BentonviUe  at  sunnsl 
and  arrived  at  Sugar  Creek  Hollow  at  11  a.  m.  We  had  hardly  stadj 
our  arms  before  (information  having  been  received  that  the  lwelM 
Missouri  was  cut  off  by  the  enemy)  we  were  ordered  by  you  to  has| 

back  to  their  assistance,  which  was  immediately  done,  the  le^imei 
going  double-quick  some  G miles,  but  as  the ( enemy  .hacl 
were  ordered  back,  and  took  our  position  on  tlie  btiiH  vvest  ^ . 

low  Contrary  to  all  expectations  the  enemy  attacked  our  forces A# 
next  morning  on  the  northwest  side,  and  the  battle  of  Leetown  eoi 
mencfd  Sf  regiment,  together  with  the  Twenty-fifth  Illinois,  Sevej 
teenth  Missouri,  and  part  of  Welfley’s  battery,  were  he  in  ie^  j 
until  about  1 o’clock  p.  m.,  when  we  were  all  ordered  by  General 
onto  the  field  and  to  the  rescue.  Companies  C and  A,  under  coumitf 
of  Captain  Russell,  were  previously  ordered  to  skirmish  the  woods  I 
front  of  our  position  and  secure  the  march  of  the  reserve  to  the  battl 
field.  Captain  Russell  succeeded  by  skillful  management  mdiivW 
back  scattering  parties  of  the  enemy,  who  threatened  our  left  fian 
and  in  taking  many  prisoners.  Light  companies  proceeded  dc  . 
quick  to  the  battle  ground  near  Leetown.  Arriving  on  the  'field,  t 
were  ordered  by  Brigadier-General  Davis  to  take  position  on  the  i g 
of  the  road,  where  the  hardest  fighting  had  been.  A line  of  skirm| 
ers  was  immediately  tlirown  out,  and  the  reginwnt  followed  with  t 
greatest  promptness,  passing  over  the  dead  and  wounded,  who  l t 


"sap.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  225 

svery  direction.  Finding  the  enemy  were  retreating,  I followed  them 
rapidly,  taking  a number  of  prisoners  and  keeping  up  a lively  skirmish- 
ing lire.  After  pursuing  them  over  a mile  I took  position  on  a high  ridge 
commanding  the  surrounding  ground. 

At  this  moment  General  Sigel  arrived  with  artillery  and  other  forces, 
md  ordered  us  forward  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  Night  overtaking 
is,  we  were  ordered  into  an  open  field  on  the  left,  and  slept  on  our 
irms  in  front  and  near  the  enemy.  Early  the  next  morning,  together 
vith  other  regiments,  we  changed  position,  and  went  towards  the 
leadquarters  of  General  Curtis,  near  Pea  Eidge.  At  7 o’clock  on 
fie  morning  of  the  8th  we  took  position  on  the  left  of  Colonel  Carr’s 
'egiment,  fronting  northeast.  I had  hardly  thrown  out  skirmishers 
)efore  the  enemy  commenced  a heavy  fire  on  our  right  flank,  forcing 
Jolonel  Carr’s  regiment  and  the  two  batteries  they  were  supporting 
o retire.  Part  of  the  infantry  broke  through  our  line,  but  our  men 
jehaved  coolly,  and  did  not  fall  back  until  ordered  to  do  so.  General 
Jurtis  then  ordered  me  to  take  a new  position,  supporting  the  First 
owa  and  one  other  battery.  The  order  was  obeyed  with  promptness, 
is  the  battery  advanced  the  regiment  also  advanced,  exposed  to  a 
leavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries.  General  Sigel  ordered  us  at 
his  instant  to  the  support  of  Welfley’s  and  Hofiinann’s  batteries,  sta- 
ioned  on  the  open  field  in  front  of  the  high  ridge  occupied  by  the  ene- 
□y,  which  was  done  with  the  greatest  alacrity. 

Having  taken  this  position,  I ordered  Companies  A,  C,  G,  and  K 
orward  to  support  General  Sigel’s  troops,  who  were  then  storming 
he  ridge,  which  they  did  in  the  most  spirited  manner,  our  companies 
oining  with  other  regiments  in  driving  the  enemy  from  their  strong 
•osition,  whilst  the  balance  of  the  regiment  followed  as  a reserve.  The 
nemy  having  been  driven  forward,  we  pursued  them  some  4 miles  on 
he  road  towards  Keetsville.  On  arriving  at  the  junction  of  the  Ben- 
onville  road  I was  ordered,  after  being  joined  by  two  companies  of  the 
fiirty-sixth  Illinois  and  one  company  of  the  Benton  Hussars,  to  con- 
inue  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  on  the  Benton ville  road.  At  9 o’clock 
tie  next  morning  I marched  towards  Benton  ville,  going  within  5 miles 
f the  place.  Having  no  orders  to  proceed  farther,  and  Colonel  Ellis’ 
avalry  regiment  having  overtaken  me,  I returned  to  within  1 mile  of  the 
^eetsville  road,  and  the  next  day  joined  your  command,  leaving  two 
ompanies  to  guard  the  road.  Owing  to  the  coolness  and  discipline  of 
tie  soldiers  and  the  fortunate  positions  which  were  selected,  the  loss  of 
tie  regiment  is  astonishingly  small,  amounting  to  1 man  killed  and 
wounded.  Officers  and  soldiers  behaved  with  the  greatest  spirit 
nd  courage.  I especially  have  to  mention  the  following  officers,  who 
y their  activity,  courage,  and  the  abilities  they  displayed  as  soldiers 
eserve  especial  praise,  viz : Capt.  W.  W.  Barrett,  acting  major,  Capt. 
.Russell,  Capt.  L.  M.  Sabin,  Capt.  Max  Krone,  and  Lieutenant  Davis. 
Xhe  regiment  in  this  engagement  has  taken  over  150  prisoners,  among 
lem  the  colonel  of  the  Third  Louisiana  Regiment,  acting  brigadier- 
eneral ; also  1 colonel,  1 major,  3 captains,  and  2 lieutenants,  and  have 
^so  captured  1 stand  of  colors,  230  stand  of  arms,  60  horses,  and  38 
mdles,  all  of  which  have  been  delivered  over  to  the  proper  author- 
xes. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

C.  KNOBELSDORFF, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Forty-fourth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers . 
General  Osterhatts, 

Commanding  First  Division. 

15  R r — VOL  VIII 


226 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  ICllAr-  x7nl 


No.  8. 


r wort  of  Col.  Nicholas  Greusel,  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  common 
1 J ing  Second  Brigade,  First  Division. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  First  Division,  i 
Camp  at  Bose  Dill,  A.rh.,  March  12, 186-,.  > 

The  following  report  of  the  action  taken  by  Second  Brigade,  Fir 
Division,  in  the  engagements  of  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  March  is  respeci 

March  6,  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  I received  your  order  to  march  ti  l: 
brigade  from  Sugar  Creek  back  to  your  assistance,  and  immediate* 
halted  the  regiments  and  the  batteries  on  the  road  and  marched  the! 
back  on  the  double-quick  about  3 miles,  where  I found  you  hotly  pu  l 
sued  by  the  enemy. Q I formed  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  in  line  of  bj 
tie  anil  then,  by  your  order,  fell  back  slowly  about  1 mile,  where  1 1 j 
formed  four  Companies  in  ambush  and  marched  the  other  six  compaml 
1 mile  to  the  west  and  formed  them  in  line.  The  enemy  having  givj 
up  the  pursuit,  I reformed  my  regiment  and  returned  to  camp  at  Sugj 

ClMar’ch  7 I received  your  order  at  9 o’clock  a.  m.,  and  marched  u| 
command  to  an  open  field  or  farm  a little  north  of  Leetown,  andformj 
in  the  following  order : Thirty-sixth  Illinois  on  the 
batterv  next  on  the  right,  Twelfth  Missouri  next  on  the  right,  and  tlirl 
pieces ^of  Welfley’s  battery,  supported  by  Company  E,  Thirty-sixth  j 
hnoist  on  the  extreme  right.  While  forming  this  line  we  were  sil 
prised  with  a precipitate  retreat  of  cavalry,  but  niy  command  stol 
like  veteran  soldiers,  and  just  as  the  enemy  made  his  appearance  tl 
hind  the  cavalry  1 opened  up  a brisk  fire  from  the  artillery,  which  p 
vented  his  following  up  the  retreat.  Soon  after  this  I directed  Lied 
tenant  Bencke’s  section  of  Welfley’s  battery  to  throw  three  shells  tej 
high  and  steep  hill  on  our  right  and  about  a mile  m advance,  wha 
appeared  to  be  occupied  by  officers,  directing  the  movements  of  d 
enemy.  These  shells  dispersed  them.  After  this  I threw  out  Co 
panies  B and  G of  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers  Company  B 
skirmish  and  Company  G to  cover.  These  companies  soon  discover 
three  regiments  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  lying  in  ambush  and  oi 
formed  in  square,  whom  they  engaged  for  about  fifteen  minutes,  retin, 
in  good  order,  but  with  the  loss  of  20  wounded— 13  in  Company  G a 
7 in  Company  B.  It  was  during  this  skirmish  that  the  officer  supposi 
to  be  General  Ben.  McCulloch  was  shot  by  Peter  Pelican,  of  Compal 
r Thirtv-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers.  I then  directed  the  artilk  } 
fire  upon  the  ambushed  enemy,  and  moved  forward  theThirtynd 
Illinois,  but  the  enemy  retreated  m great  confusion,  when  I ret*ie 
mv  first  position.  Soon  after  this  I skirmished  tlie  wpods  oyer  an  ai 
of  a mile  square  with  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  and  Twelfth  Mis* 
taking  several  prisoners,  when  1 received  your  order,  and  rnarche 
command  to  a large  field  about  2 miles  in  advance  of  our  position  in  t 
morning  and  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  where  we  remained  unti  m 
night,  when  we  marched  to  the  Keetsville  road  and  camped  until  m 
ing,  my  command  suffering  greatly  from  fatigue,  ig! 

posure,  having  had  nothing  to  eat  or  drink  for  twenty-four  hours,  a 
neither  blankets  nor  shelter  during  the  night. 

March  8,  about  8 o’clock  a.  m.,  I formed  my  command  on  the  gron 
you  assigned  me  in  the  following  order : Welfley  s battery  on  the  rig 
joined  by  tbe  Twelfth  Missouri  and  Hoffmann  s battery,  and  the  Thi ! 


Chap.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  227 

sixth  Illinois  on  the  left,  in  close  columns  by  division.  Soon  after  I 
directed  two  companies  of  the  Twelfth  Missouri  and  two  from  the  Thirty- 
sixth  Illinois,  which  I increased  to  four  companies  from  each  of  these 
regiments,  to  skirmish  the  hill  and  slopes.  These  skirmishers  advanced 
in  splendid  style  and  drove  the  enemy  before  them,  those  of  the  Twelfth 
Missouri  capturing  three  cannon  and  a very  fine  silk  rebel  flag  from 
the  Dallas  Battery. 

At  about  10  o’clock  a.  m.  my  command  joined  in  skirmishing  to  the 
Telegraph  road,  repulsing  the  enemy  and  taking  a number  of  prisoners 
and  guns  and  a large  quantity  of  ammunition,  flour,  and  salt.  We  then 
followed  up  the  repulsed  and  retreating  enemy  7 or  8 miles,  when  we 
^ent  into  camp.  The  next  morning  (9th  instant)  we  marched  to  Keets- 
rille,  and  then  returned  to  camp  near  Elkhorn  Tavern. 

Our  loss  is  as  follows : Thirty-sixth  Illinois,  3 killed,  32  wounded 
[2  of  whom  have  since  died),  and  1 lieutenant  and  30  enlisted  men 
prisoners.  This  regiment  brought  into  action  830  men  and  officers, 
md  nearly  all  the  casualties,  except  the  capture  of  the  prisoners,  oc- 
jurred  on  the  7th.  In  the  Twelfth  Missouri  3 were  killed,  28  wounded 
md  2 are  missing.  This  regiment  brought  360  officers  and  men  into 
lie  field.  This  light  loss,  I am  convinced,  is  due  to  the  good  disci- 
pline and  courage  of  the  men  and  to  the  coolness  and  valor  of  the 
)fficers;  for  while  the  men  charged  upon  the  enemy  under  the  severest 
ire  with  alacrity  and  determination,  the  skill  of  the  respective  officers 
tept  them  in  perfect  order  and  protected  them  from  unnecessary  ex- 
)osure. 

Where  every  man  did  his  duty  it  may  be  unjust  to  particularize,  but 
7hile  I tender  my  heartfelt  thanks  to  all  my  command  for  their  prompt- 
ness in  obedience  and  for  their  valor  in  battle,  and  especially  for  the 
laring  and  courageous  stand  which  they  made  on  the  morning  of  the 
th,  I would  respectfully  mention  the  unflinching  courage  and  the  col- 
acted  bravery  of  Major  Wangelin,  of  the  Twelfth  Missouri,  and  the 
mtiring  energy  and  valor  of  my  acting  assistant  adjutant-general, 
reorge  A.  Willis,  and  of  my  aide-de-camp,  Lieut.  Robert  M.  Denning, 
vho  executed  my  orders  with  promptness  in  the  midst  of  storms  of  shot 
nd  shell.  I would  also  mention  the  intrepidity  and  determined  bold- 
iess  of  Capt.  Silas  Miller,  Company  B,  and  Capt.  Irving  W.  Parkhurst 
vompany  G,  Thirty-sixth  Illinois,  who  led  their  commands  against  an  * 
verwhelming  fore 3 of  the  enemy  and  brought  them  off  with  little  loss 
nd  also  the  brilliant  charge  made  by  Companies  H and  K,  Thirty- 
lxth  Illinois,  under  the  command  of  Capts.  Merritt  L.  Joslyn  and  J. 
ffimey  Adams,  which  drove  a large  force  of  the  enemy  like  chaff  before 
tie  wind. 

Respectfully, 

„ 7 K.  GREUSEL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brig .,  First  JDiv .,  S.  W.  D . 

Colonel  Osterhaus, 

Commanding  First  Division. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Maj.  Hugo  Wangelin,  Twelfth  Missouri  Infantry. 

Camp  Rose  Hill  Battle-pield. 
Colonel:  In  accordance  with  your  instructions,  just  received,  I do 
ereby  respectfully  submit  my  report  of  the  movements  and  actions  of 


228  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVinB 

the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers  on  the  days  of  battle,  March  6,  7 

and  8, 1862:  , ^ , I 

Arriving  in  Bentonville  March  6,  at  about  10  a.  m.,  I was  ordered  b J 
you  to  remain  in  town  until  receiving  further  orders.  The  regimeni 
had  their  arms  stacked  in  front  of  a large  unfinished  frame  church! 
The  Second  Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers  marched  from  the  south  mt| 
our  road  and  .followed  the  main  army,  of  which  the  Twelfth  Missouri 
formed  the  rear.  In  the  rear  of  the  Second  Missouri,  and  apparent!! 
from  the  same  direction,  appeared  a large  body  of  troops,  who  after  1 
short  time  were  discovered  to  be  the  enemy,  how  strong  1 am  unabll 
to  say.  The  effective  strength  of  the  Twelfth  at  that  day  was  onli 
some  325  men,  as  two  companies  had  been  ordered  off  several  day! 
previous.  The  enemy  outnumbering  us  and  the  other  troops  m towi 
greatly  spread  out,  his  men  on  both  sides  of  the  road  and  parall<| 
with  it,  in  order  to  intercept  all  egress  I was  then  ordered  by  General 
Sigel  to  march  in  the  rear  of  a company  of  flying  artillery  on  the  saml 
road  as  our  whole  army  had  taken.  Shortly  after,  however,  the  wholil 
regiment  was  ordered  forward,  with  the  exception  of  one  company,  whl 
remained  as  protection  behind  the  artillery  almost  the  whole  day.  W| 
had  hardly  left  town  when  it  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  enemy.  Geil 
eral  Sigel  ordered  the  Twelfth  (the  only  infantry  present)  to  throw  or  ' 
skirmishers  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  and  to  march  the  balance  ot  tH 
regiment  on  both  sides  of  the  artillery  by  the  flank,  fronting  outward 
This  way  we  marched  without  any  molestation  for  several  miles,  whe 
we  were  suddenly  attacked  by  a large  body  of  cavalry,  who  were,  aftel 
an  engagement  which  to  me  seemed  to  last  about  a quarter  of  an  horn 
driven  from  the  field,  leaving  many  of  their  dead  and  wounded  on  th 

This  was  the  first  time  the  men  stood  in  fire,  but  all  without  excel 
tion  behaved  gallantly,  pouring  in  their  shot  with  deliberation  an 
coolness.  The  enemy,  so  severely  repulsed,  withdrew,  and  we  marches 
forward  on  our  road  without  any  further  molestation. 

The  casualties  of  the  day  were  3 wounded.  One  ambulance,  with  tt 
driver,  was  taken,  with  some  sick  soldiers  of  some  other  regiments.  W 
marched  on,  and  meeting  you  after  a few  hours’  further  march  wei 

into  camp.  _ , , „ . i] 

This  morning  (March  7)  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  follow  m n 
march  the  Thirty  sixth  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  finally,  after  an  hour- 
march,  deployed  on  a large  field,  protecting  Captain  Hoffmann  s ba 
tery.  After  a while  two  companies  were  ordered  to  deploy  as  ski 
mishers  towards  the  woods,  about  a quarter  of  a mile  in  front  of  us,  1 
protect  some  horses  and  drivers  who  were  sent  to  recover  a canno 
which  had  been  lost  in  a previous  engagement  of  the  day,  which  ordt 
was  executed  in  gallant  style.  The  gun  was  recovered  and  brougl 
back.  We  were  then  several  times  ordered  to  change  our  position,  wM 
finally,  while  the  regiment  was  marching  into  the  timber  by  the  rig! 
flank  and  was  about  half  in  the  thicket,  a large  body  of  the  enemy 
infantry  appeared,  which  was  soon  engaged  by  the  regiment  s left  win; 
and  after  considerable  execution  driven  back. 

This  ended  the  second  day’s  engagement  as  far  as  this  regiment 
concerned.  After  some  marching  without  coming  to  any  other  gener. 
engagement  we,  in  company  with  several  other  regiments,  encampe 
in  a large  corn  field,  without  fire,  water,  or  food.  The  casualties  of  wj 
day  were  12  wounded,  some  of  whom  severely. 

It  is  with  great  satisfaction  that  I can  bear  testimony"  to  the  coolne; 
and  bravery  of  all  the  ofiicers  and  men  under  my  command  during  U 


hap.  xvm.] 


229 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


'hole  day.  The  comparatively  small  loss  I attribute  solely  to  their 
rmness,  which  enabled  them  to  drive  the  enemy  off*  with  great  loss, 
'ithout  being  subject  themselves  to  a very  protracted  fire. 

On  the  third  day  (March  8),  commenced  with  a march  at  12.30  a.  m.  to- 
ards  the  Telegraph  road,  whereon  we  encamped  for  the  rest  of  the 
ight,  and  the  regiment  finally  obtained  some  food— the  first  for  twenty- 
>ur  hours.  The  battle  was  commenced  by  the  enemy  by  throwing  round- 
mt  over  and  sidewards  of  our  camp,  without  hurting  anybody.  We 
ere  marched  about  7 a.  m.  into  a large  corn  field,  occupying  about  the 
mter  of  the  left  wing  of  the  army,  which  was  placed  in  a large  semicircle, 
n our  right  was  Welfley’s  and  afterwards  some  other  battery  j on  our 
ft  Hoffmann’s  battery.  This  position  we  occupied  for  some  hours,  the 
ittle  being  for  that  length  of  time  only  an  artillery  engagement.  After 
lis  time,  the  enemy’s  cannon  having  been  almost  silenced  by  the  well- 
irected  fire  of  our  artillery,  General  Osterhaus  ordered  two  companies 
► deploy  as  skirmishers  towards  the  enemy,  to  which  was  presently 
lded  another  company.  The  men  had  to  pass  over  a pretty  large  field 
ithout  any  shelter  before  reaching  the  woods  in  which  the  enemy  was 
►ncealed,  which  was  done  in  double-quick  time.  Following  up  the 
lemy  into  the  timber,  there  composed  of  large  trees  without  any  un- 
irgrowth,  the  enemy  retreated  rapidly  behind  a fence  at  the  other  end 
* the  timber,  from  where  they  poured  a destructive  fire  on  us.  The 
ilance  of  the  regiment  in  the  mean  time  coming  up,  and  the  Twenty- 
*th  Illinois  skirmishing  on  our  right  and  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  on 
ir  left,  we  went  forward,  routing  the  enemy  completely  before  our 
ont,  and  achieving,  in  connection  with*  the  other  brave  troops  on  our 
[?ht  and  left,  a complete  and  decided  victory. 

This  ended  the  battle,  as  far  as  I am  aware  of — at  least  as  far  as  this 
giment  is  concerned.  The  officers  and  men  engaged  in  battle  this 
ly  numbered  less  than  400,  but,  I say  it  with  pride,  showed  them- 
lves  worthy  of  the  distinguished  commander  whose  name  the  regi- 
ent  bears.  The  casualties  of  this  day  were  3 killed  and  12  wounded, 
e majority  severely.  My  horse  was  killed  by  a shot  in  the  neck. 
Respectfully  submitted. 


HUGO  WANGELIN, 

Major , Commanding  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  Albert  Jeriks , Illinois  Cavalry. 

Camp  Sherer,  Ark.,  March  14,  1862. 
Sir:  I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  my 
uadron  of  cavalry  took  in  the  battles  of  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  of 

ircli,  1862 : 

By  your  order  we  took  the  extreme  rear  of  all  the  forces  on  leaving 
mp  Cooper,  acting  as  rear  guard.  Arrived  at  Bentonville,  by  your 
ler  we  halted  and  reported  to  General  Sigel,  who  remained  with  two 
rnpanies  of  Benton  Hussars,  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Infantry,  and  one 
ttery  of  flying  artillery.  Remaining  here  an  hour  and  a half,  the 
erny  was  discovered  approaching  in  large  numbers.  They  immedi- 
fiy  surrounded  the  town.  General  Sigel  then  ordered  my' squadron 
take  the  rear  of  column.  We  moved  out  of  the  town  and  drew  up 


230 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


in  line  with  the  Benton  Hussars  to  oppose  the  advancing  enemy,  see- 1 
ing  which  they  halted  and  formed  in  line  of  battle. 

Remaining  here  a short  time  we  were  ordered  to  advance,  covering  d 
the  retreat  of  our  column.  General  Sigel  having  planted  some  cannon 
about  H miles  out  of  the  town  on  the  Sugar  Creek  road,  sent  back  for  , 
one  companv  of  cavalry.  I took  Company  A,  of  my  squadron,  and} 
galloped  forward.  On  approaching,  General  Sigel  made  this  remark:  i 
« Captain  Jenks,  we  are  surrounded ; the  enemy  is  on  all  sides  of  us , i 
blit  we  must  go  through;  we  must  cut  our  way  through;  we  will  go  1 
through”  He  then  ordered  me  to  support  the  battery.  Some  hotil 
firing  occurred  here  between  skirmishers.  We  soon  moved  forward  I 
with  the  battery  into  an  open  space,  when  before  us,  at  the  distance  n 
of  half  a mile,  stood  the  enemy,  drawn  up  in  the  edge  of  the  woods.  1 
Some  shell  were  put  in  with  telling  effect  on  them,  scattering  them  m 
every  direction.  A feint  was  now  made  with  part  of  my  company  (A)  , 
as  if  to  charge  them,  the  men  advancing  some  rods  at  a rapid  gallop. 
This  was  to  cover  a removal  of  the  guns,  which  were  withdrawn  and 
moved  up  the  road  with  the  whole  column.  Coming  to  an  ammunition- 
wagon  standing  beside  the  road  belonging  to  the  Thirty-sixth  Kegi-I 
ment,  I detailed  3 men  to  bring  it  forward;  but  1 mule  having  been« 
shot  and  2 taken  by  the  enemy,  the  remaining  ones  could  not  draw  the 
load,  so  it  was  abandoned.  About  3 miles  farther  on,  going  through 
a ravine  between  two  bluffs,  the  whole  column  was  fired  upon  by  the 
enemy  from  the  bluff  on  our  left,  the  bullets  raining  down  upon  us  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill.  After  a sharp  fight  of  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes 
our  infantry  dislodged  the  rebels.  The  cavalry  could  not  be  used  on 
account  of  the  thick  underbrush.  Passing  this  defile,  the  enemy  still 
advancing  in  onr  rear,  a battery  was  planted  in  our  front,  and  fired 
some  shell  over  us  into  the  enemy’s  column  coming  down  the  road.  A 
mile  farther  on  we  came  to  the  Thirty-sixth  Regiment,  drawn  up  in  lme 
of  battle.  The  enemy  soon  left  us  for  the  night.  Four  of  my  men 

were  taken  prisoners  by  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  by  your  order,  my  squadron,  with  some 
infantry,  remained  at  camp  as  guard  for  the  tram.  About  noon  Gen- 
eral Sigel  ordered  one  company  to  advance  in  the  direction  of  the  left 
of  our  battle  ground  to  reconnoiter.  My  company  (B),  under  command 
of  Captain  Smith,  went,  and  returned  to  camp  with  30  prisoners,  in- 
cluding a colonel  and  several  other  officers,  belonging,  I think,  to  the 
Third  Louisiana  Regiment.  About  2 o’clock  p.  m.  Company  A received! 
orders  from  General  Sigel  to  report  to  the  left  wing  at  the  battle 
ground.  We  did  so,  remaining  there  till  7 o’clock  p.  m.  General 
Davis  then  ordered  Company  A to  reconnoiter  along  the  road  leadings 
from  Leetown  to  Elkhorn  Tavern,  supposed  to  be  occupied  by  the 
enemy.  We  did  so,  and  finding  the  road  clear,  I reported  to  General 
Curtis  that  the  communication  was  open  between  the  right  and  leitj 
wing.  Returned  to  the  left  wing  with  orders  from  General  Curtis  lor 
General  Davis  to  join  him  on  the  right.  Remained  on  the  field  till  JM 

p.  m.,  then  returned  to  camp.  , , 

At  sunrise  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  by  your  order,  reported  with 
my  company  (A)  at  the  battle-field.  At  10  a.  m.  was  ordered  by  Ge^- 
eral  Curtis’  aide  to  reconnoiter  from  Sugar  Creek  along  the  right 
the  Telegraph  road,  to  see  if  the  enemy  were  making  any  demonstra- 
tion on  our  right  flank.  I deployed  Company  A as  skirmishers  to  t 
right  of  the  road,  our  line  extending  about  1 mile  to  the  east.  Ad- 
vancing toward  Elkhorn  Tavern,  we  came  up  to  the  right  wmg  ol  our 
forces,  my  men  getting  between  the  cross-fires  of  our  forces  and  that  o 


j>.  XYIU.  ] 


231 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 

i enemy.  I now  ordered  them  to  close  np  to  the  left.  Having  formed, 
joined  Company  B,  of  my  squadron,  and  followed  our  regiment,  who 
re  pursuing  the  flying  enemy  toward  Keetsville.  Camped,  after  a 
1 of  9 miles,  with  SigePs  division,  near  Keetsville. 

Yours,  with  respect, 

ALBERT  JENKS, 

Captain  Co,  A ( Cav .),  Comdg,  Squadron  Thirty -sixth  III,  Vols, 
3ol,  Nicholas  Greusel. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Capt.  Henry  A.  Smith , Illinois  Cavalry. 

Iir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  to  you  an  account  of  the  proceed- 
s of  my  command  during  the  6th,  7th,  8th,  and  9th  instant,  which 
ase  find  below : 

larch  6 left  Camp  Cooper  soon  after  daylight,  reaching  Bentonville 
9 a.  m.  with  47  men,  Lieutenant  Chapman,  with  20  men,  having 
le  on  scout  to  Pineville  the  evening  before.  Three  of  my  men 
ag  on  provost  guard,  were  not  relieved  in  time  to  join  the  company! 
L were  in  consequence  taken  prisoners  by  the  enemy.  After  remain- 
at  Bentonville  about  half  an  hour  the  enemy  appeared  in  sight  on 
h flanks  and  in  the  rear,  their  cavalry  on  the  right  moving  rapidly 
vard,  with  the  evident  intention  of  cutting  us  off,  which  they  suc- 
led  in  doing  about  1 mile  east  of  the  town,  where  we  were  ordered 
ict  as  flankers  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  road.  The  artillery  and 
tntry  were  here  engaged  with  the  enemy  for  fifteen  minutes,  and 
Ay  succeeded  in  driving  them  back,  our  company  being  under  fire 
ing  the  time,  but  unable  to  make  a charge  on  account  of  the  brush 
ig  so  thick  in  which  the  enemy  were  concealed, 
iter  passing  forward  for  2 miles  farther  (a  continued  fire  being 
t up  by  the  enemy  and  our  skirmishers  on  the  left  and  in  our  rear), 
were  again  obliged  to  halt  and  remain  in  a very  exposed  situation 
he  road  (the  bluffs  on  each  side  being  inaccessible  to  cavalry)  for 
e twenty  minutes,  during  which  time  the  firing  was  incessant.  As 
i,  however,  as  the  artillery  opened  upon  them  in  front  the  road 
soon  cleared,  and  we  passed  forward  to  camp  without  further 
ible,  Lieutenant  Chapman  and  his  party  coming  in  about  an  hour 
r us  by  a different  road. 

t 8 a.  m.  on  the  7th  Lieutenant  Chapman,  with  the  second  platoon, 
e sent  into  the  valley  on  the  Telegraph  road  to  act  as  patrol,  where 
7 remained  until  3 p.  m.,  when  they  received  an  order  to  join  Com- 
y ^ remained  with  the  wagons  until  3 p.  m.,  when  X received 
General  Sigel  to  proceed  to  the  left  wing  of  our  division 
l 20  men  and  report  what  I could  learn  in  that  direction.  After 
seeding  in  this  direction  about  1 mile  we  fell  in  with  and  captured 
uivates  and  the  following  officers:  Colonel  Hubert,  Major  and  Cap- 
Vigilmi,  of  the  Louisiana  regiment,  of  McIntosh’s  division,  the  first, 
>nei  Hubert,  being  an  acting  brigadier-general  in  said  division; 
Lolonel  Mitchell  and  a captain  of  the  Fourteenth  Arkansas  were 
ae  number  taken,  and  had  we  been  left  there  until  night  I believe 
captured  at  least  200  of  the  enemy.  The  prisoners 
ed  that  they  had  become  separated  from  their  commands  in  a 
?ge  made  in  the  morning,  and  had  been  unable  to  rejoin  them.  At 


232 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap. 


xvhij 


i 


5 o’clock  received  an  order  from  General  Sigel  to  return  to  camp  and! 

guard  the  prisoners  and  baggage  tram.  , ,1 

At  3 a m on  the  8th  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Sigel,  ane| 
was  assigned  a position  on  the  left  wing  of  our  division,  near  wher I 
the  Benton  and  Fremont  Hussars  were  m line,  where  we  remainecl 
until  a short  time  before  the  firing  ceased,  when  we  were  ordered  t(| 
a position  farther  to  the  left,  in  a plowed  field,  where  we  remained  iij 
line  until  11  a.  m.,  when  we  received  orders  to  move  forward  on  th<| 
Telegraph  road  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  We  camped  with  our  regij 

m March  9 moved  forward  to  Keetsville  with  the  advance,  when  1 
received  an  order  from  General  Sigel  to  proceed  to  Cassville,  but  aftel 
advancing  3 miles  on  the  road  met  Colonel  Wright,  with  troops  anJ 
train  from  that  place,  and  returned  with  him,  the  object  of  my  order* 
being  accomplished.  Beached  our  camp  at  Bose  HiJl  at  7 p.  m. 

All  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Yours,  to  command,  H.  A.  SMITH, 

Captain,  Comdg.  Co.  B (Cav.),  Thirty-sixth  Begt.  III.  Vols.  < 


Col.  Nicholas  Greusel,  . . 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , First  Division. 


No.  12. 


Report  of  Col.  Cyrus  Bussey , Third  Iowa  Cavalry. 


Headquarters  Third  Iowa  Cavalry, 

Pea  Ridge 3 Ark.,  March  14,  1862.  | 

Sir:  I have  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  orders  received  froi 
vou,  I,  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant,  proceeded  with  Companies  A 
B,  6,  b,  and  M,  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  under  command  ot  Liei 
tenant-Colonel  Trimble,  numbering  235  men  and  officers;  the  Bento 
Hussars,  under  command  of  Colonel  Nemett ; four  companies  of  the  1 ira 
Missouri  Cavalry,  under  command  of  Colonel  Ellis ; two  companies  ( 
the  Fr6mont  Hussars,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Howe,  and  tlirq 
guns  of  Captain  Elbert’s  battery,  from  your  camp,  towards  Leetown,  tj 
attack  the  advancing  column  of  the  enemy,  myself  and  the  force  unda 
mv  command  acting  in  connection  with  the  infantry  and  artilleiy 
General  Osterhaus’  brigade,  and  subject  to  his  command.  My  colunu 
left  camp  in  advance  of  the  other  force  of  General  Osterhaus  at  aboij 
9.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  and  proceeded  cautiously  west  about  a mile  ana 
half  to  a large  open  field  beyond  Leetown,  and  which  was  about ; 
quarter  of  a mile  wide  from  east  to  west  and  running  south  about 
miles,  but  which  was  intersected  by  fences,  dividing  it  into  small* 
fields.  The  field  first  entered  by  my  force  was  surrounded  on  the  eas 
north,  and  west  by  a thick  wood  of  small  oaks  and  underbrush.  Hei 
I sent  two  companies  of  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry  to  reconnoitei 
woods  surrounding  this  field.  At  the  same  time,  about  2 mlj®s  "?. 
south,  the  wagon  train  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  moving  m the  hire 
tion  of  Bentonville.  As  my  immediate  command  was  proceeding  aero, 
this  field  in  a westerly  course  General  Osterhaus  in  person  overtoo  u 
and  immediately  ordered  the  three  guns  to  the  front,  they  having  up 
this  time  been  in  rear  of  the  First  Missouri  and  Third  Iowa  Cavair 


/BAr.  xvni.j 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


233 


We  advanced  in  this  new  order  across  the  field  and  entered  the  woods 
>n  the  west  side  by  a narrow  road  going  west.  Following  this  road 
ihout  a quarter  of  a mile  we  came  upon  a small  prairie  extending  300 
rards  west  and  about  150  yards  wide  to  the  north.  On  the  south  open 
ields  under  fence  extended  for  a quarter  of  a mile  to  the  west.  This 
jrairie  was  surrounded  on  the  north  and  west  by  timber  and  low  brush. 

At  this  point  we  came  in  full  view  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  passing 
ilong  about  a half  mile  distant  to  the  north.  No  other  force  being  dis- 
covered, the  three  guns  were  immediately  advanced  by  General  Oster- 
laus,  who  was  present  and  in  command,  about  200  yards,  and  immedi- 
ately opened  fire  on  the  cavalry  of  the  enemy  on  the  road  to  the  north- 
west. One  company  of  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry  was  in  line  of  bat- 
le  on  the  left  of  the  guns  and  one  company  of  the  same  troops  on  the 
ight. 

The  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  were  formed  in  line  of  bat- 
le  in  rear  of  the  guns,  parallel  with  the  road  and  facing  to  the  north. 
Vhile  forming  the  Benton  Hussars  in  line  on  the  right  of  the  Third 
owa  Cavalry  and  facing  the  west,  I was  ordered  by  General  Osterhaue 
o send  two  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  down  the  road  to  the 
pest,  to  charge  the  enemy’s  line  at  a point  supposed  to  be  about  a half 
aile  distant.  This  order  was  communicated  by  me  to  Lieutenant-Col- 
nel  Trimble,  who  immediately  advanced  with  columns  of  fours,  which 
ras  necessary,  the  road  leading  along  a fence  on  the  south  and  thick 
•rush  and  woods  being  on  the  north.  The  Benton  Hussars  were  now 
a line  about  100  yards  to  the  right  and  rear  of  the  battery  of  three 
uns,  and  the  Fremont  Hussars  were  yet  in  column  of  fours  at  the  edge 
f the  prairie,  having  just  arrived  on  the  ground.  The  Third  Iowa 
Javalry  galloped  down  the  road,  and  going  beyond  the  edge  of  the 
mods  or  timber  on  the  west  side  of  the  prairie  they  unexpectedly  found 
hemselves  in  front  of  several  lines  of  infantry  heretofore  unseen,  and 
dio  were  drawn  up  in  line  to  the  front  and  right  of  our  men,  at  short 
rasket  range.  This  large  force  I afterwards  learned  from  rebel  officers 
rko  were  taken  prisoners  was  the  divisions  of  McCulloch,  McIntosh^ 
nd  Pike,  and  consisted  of  several  regiments  of  Arkansas,  Louisian  ay 
nd  Texas  troops,  who  were  concentrating  there,  evidently  intending  to 
ttack  your  camp  from  the  direction  of  Leetown. 

The  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  were  immediately  wheeled 
ito  line  facing  the  enemy,  it  being  impossible  for  them  to  advance  in 
olumn  farther,  when  they  at  once  received  a deadly  fire  from  the  near 
nd  overwhelming  numbers  of  the  foe,  who  were  also  partly  concealed 
nd  protected  by  the  woods  and  brush.  A large  number  of  my  men  and 
orses  were  here  killed  and  wounded,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Trimble, 
t the  head  of  the  column,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  head.  This  fire 
as  returned  by  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  from  their  revolvers  with  con- 
derable  effect. 

Just  at  this  moment  a large  force  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  charged 
om  the  north  upon  different  portions  of  our  cavalry  line,  and,  passing 
irough  the  lines,  went  into  the  fields  in  our  rear.  The  Third  Iowa  Cav- 
Iry  companies  now  charged  this  cavalry  force,  and  an  exciting  running 
ivalry  fight  ensued  between  these  forces,  the  enemy  fleeing  and  being 
ursued  by  my  men  to  the  south.  The  enemy  was  followed  in  this  di- 
jiction  by  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  alone  to  the  brush  on  the  other  side 
the  large  open  fields.  The  loss,  of  the  enemy  in  this  running  fight 
as  very  heavy,  and  estimated  by  me,  from  the  most  reliable  informa- 
on  I have  been  able  to  obtain,  at  82. 

In  this  same  charge  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  a portion  of  them  came 


234 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


I 


in  the  direction  of  the  three  guns,  and  the  companies  of  the  First  Mis- 
souri Cavalry  being  compelled  to  give  way,  I ordered  the  Benton  Hussars 
to  charge,  which  they  failed  to  do,  but  fell  back.  The  Fremont  Hussars 
being  in  rear  and  not  in  position,  were  compelled  to  give  way.  The  guns 
were  thus  left  unsupported,  and  were  taken  by  the  enemy  and  burned. 
These  cavalry  forces,  failing  to  rally,  fell  back  through  the  woods  to  the 
large  open  fields  through  which  we  had  first  marched,  when  they  met 
the” infan  try  and  artillery  of  General  Osterhaus  m line  of  battle.  Being 
left  on  the  field  of  the  first  action  without  any  force  (the  cavalry  in  re- 
serve having  failed  to  obey  my  orders),  I followed  to  the  open  field, 
where  I found  two  companies  of  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry  being 
formed  in  line  by  Major  Hubbard.  After  seeing  the  cavalry  mentioned 
in  line,  I sent  Adjutant  Noble,  who  had  remained  with  me  on  the  field 
during  the  whole  time,  to  bring  up  the  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa 
Cavalry  to  our  new  position,  they  having  pursued  the  enemy  through 
the  fields  as  above  stated  and  not  yet  made  their  appearance.  He  soon 
returned  with  all  the  companies,  having  met  them  coming  in  perfect  I 
order  to  the  place  desired,  the  companies  having  returned  towards  the  d 
camping  ground,  Major  Perry  being  in  command  (Lieutenant-Colonel  I 
Trimble  having  been  wounded  early  in  the  engagement,  as  heretofore  l) 
mentioned).  The  enemy  immediately  advanced  to  the  western  edge  of  i 
the  field  in  which  our  new  position  was  taken,  when  a general  engage- 1 
ment  ensued.  At  this  time  I ordered  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry  to 
take  position  on  the  extreme  left  in  the  woods,  which  was  on  the  east  of 
our  main  nosition.  A force  of  the  enemy  made  their  appearance  here, 
evidently  attempting  to  turn  our  left  flank.  I sent  the  Third  Iowa; 
Cavalry  to  support  Colonel  Ellis.  When  our  force  appeared  the  enemy  I 
withdrew,  were  followed  by  Colonel  Ellis  about  2 miles,  and  did  not  I 
again  show  themselves  in  this  quarter.  The  Benton  Hussars  and  ErM  . 
mont  Hussars,  having  reformed,  remained  on  the  field  to  the  lett  ot  tne 
batteries  until  the  close  of  the  engagement,  having,  however,  been  sev| 
eral  times  sent  to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy.  This  duty  they.! 
performed  satisfactorily.  The  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  were  then  formed 
in  line  of  battle  immediately  in  rear  of  the  artillery,  and  maintained  I 
this  position  until  the  close  of  the  action,  when  they  were  ordered  to 
conduct  a battery  to  re-enforce  General  Carr,  who  was  still  engaged  on; 
the  right.  I went  with  them,  leaving  the  remainder  of  the  cavalry  torce 
under  command  of  General  Osterhaus.  This  was  at  5 o’clock  p.  m. 

The  accompanying  report  of  the  killed,  missing,  and  wounded  ol  the 
Third  Iowa  Cavalry  is  hereby  referred  to  as  a part  of  this  report*  Ike. 
loss  of  the  other  forces  will  be  reported  to  you  by  their  immediate  com-| 
manders.  The  three  guns,  after  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy, 
were  not  spiked  nor  taken  from  the  field,  and  have  been  recovered, 
except  the  carriages,  which  had  been  burned,  as  heretofore  mentioned. i 
On  reporting  to  General  Carr,  in  pursuance  of  the  order  requirmg'me 
to  do  so,  my  companies  took  position  on  the  right  in  rear  of  our  bat 
teries,  where  we  remained  until  after  the  darkness  of  night  closed  tne 

action  of  the  7th.  ^ 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  pursuant  to  order,  I went  with  my  com- 
mand, now  being  the  five  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  into  t e 
field  on  the  road  leading  to  the  Elkhorn  Tavern,  and  was  then  ordeiec 
to  take  position  on  the  right  flank,  where  the  enemy  was  expected  o 
attack.  This  position  was  held  by  my  command,  with  other  cavalry 
forces,  until  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  after  the  middle  of  the  day. 

In  pursuance  of  your  direct  order,  my  command,  at  2 o clock  p.  m.^ 


* See  p.  206. 


VP.  XVIII.]  PEA  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  235 

irted  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  towards  Keetsville,  on  the  road  leading 
st,  and  continued  to  be  thus  engaged  until  night.  I took  59  pris- 
ers,  with  some  horses  and  arms,  on  this  expedition.  Among  the  pris- 
ers  was  Major  Rucker,  First  Missouri  Volunteers,  who  was  slightly 
>unded: 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th  1 proceeded,  in  command  of  the  Third  Iowa 
•valry  companies,  Bowen’s  cavalry,  with  four  pieces  of  mountain 
witzers,  and  one  battalion  of  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  command 
Major  Hubbard,  on  the  road  to  Bentonville.  After  advancing  on 
3 Bentonville  road  about  6 miles  I found  where  the  enemy  had  en- 
nped  the  night  before  in  large  force.  We  followed  on  until  I reached 
ntonville,  near  which  place  we  overtook  a party  of  the  cavalry  of 
} enemy,  who  fired  upon  us  and  fled.  My  advance  guard  pursued, 
ling  1 man.  We  reached  Bentonville  at  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  and  en- 
ed  the  town.  Seeing  a small  party  of  cavalry  at  some  distance  be- 
nd the  town  in  the  brush,  I ordered  Major  Bowen  to  fire  on  them 
-h  the  howitzers.  Two  shots  were  fired,  the  enemy  retreating  in 
)at  haste.  Here  we  learned  the  enemy  in  force  had  left  the  town  a 
r hours  before  our  arrival,  taking  the  road  leading  to  Elm  Springs, 
e horses  of  my  command  having  been  for  three  days  without  any- 
ng  to  eat,  it  was  not  possible  to  pursue  the  enemy  farther.  There- 
e,  having  seen  to  the  wounded  who  had  been  left  in  the  town,  I 
urned  to  camp.  There  were  taken  on  this  expedition  about  50  pris- 
es, with  some  horses  and  arms.  This  march,  close  upon  the  heels 
a force  largely  superior  in  numbers  to  our  own,  was  not  unattended 
h great  risk,  and  I have  to  express  my  admiration  for  the  prompt- 
ly with  which  my  commands  were  obeyed  by  all  the  troops  and  for 
:ir  general  good  soldierly  conduct. 

n conclusion,  I beg  leave  to  express  my  satisfaction  with  the  con- 
it of  my  own  men,  who,  in  their  first  action,  having  been  the  first 
1 most  directly  of  the  cavalry  forces  engaged  with  the  enemy,  and 
fered  a severe  loss  from  a near  and  unexpected  fire,  yet  evinced 
at  coolness  and  courage  in  their  attack  upon  the  foe ; and  although 
loss  of  my  command  is  greater  in  proportion  to  my  force  than  per- 
)s  any  other  engaged,  being  24  killed,  17  wounded,  and  9 missing 
of  235  men  and  officers,  yet  it  was  retaliated  upon  the  rebels  by  a 
5 to  them  of  double  the  number.  You  will  perceive  that  8 of  my 
a were  scalped.  That  their  brave  comrades,  fighting  in  support  of 
national  banner,  the  emblem  of  all  that  is  good  and  great  in  the 
sent  civilization  of  the  world,  should  thus  be  butchered  and  man- 
d by  rebel  savages  has  excited  among  my  men  an  indignation  that 
l,  I assure  you,  exhibit  itself  on  every  field  where  they  may  in  future 
allowed  to  engage  the  enemy,  in  a relentless  determination  to  put 
m the  flag  that  calls  to  its  support  bands  of  rapacious  and  murder- 
Indian  mercenaries. 

have  to  acknowledge  valuable  assistance  rendered  me  on  the  7th 
A.djt.  John  W.  Noble,  who  acted  that  day  as  my  aide,  and  of  the  offi- 
5 who  came  under  my  notice  I mention  Capt.  T.  I.  McKenny,  assist- 
adjutant-general,  of  your  stall,  whose  conduct  was  that  of  a gen- 
1,  and  a brave  one,  and  whose  valuable  service  contributed,  in  my 
tiion,  much  to  the  success  of  our  arms  at  the  battle  of  Leetown. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CYRUS  BUSSEY, 

Colonel , Third  Iowa  Cavalry . 

laj.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest . 


236 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIlt1 


TRe  killed  were  buried  on  Saturday,  after  the  battle  was  over  ani 
the  pursuit  ended.  Hearing  it  reported  by  my  men  that  several  of  th< 
killed  had  been  found  scalped,  I had  the  dead  exhumed,  and  on  perl 
sonal  examination  I found  that  it  was  a fact  beyond  dispute  that  8 of 
the  killed  of  my  command  had  been  scalped.  The  bodies  of  many  of 
them  showed  unmistakable  evidence  that  the  men  had  been  murderecl 
after  they  were  wounded ; that  first  having  fallen  in  the  charge  from' 
bullet  wounds,  they  were  afterwards  pierced  through  the  heart  an<| 
neck  with  knives  by  a savage  and  relentless  foe.  I then  had  the  bodie* 
returned,  each  in  a separate  grave,  properly  marked. 

By  order  of  Col.  Cyrus  Bussey : Jom  ^ 

Adiutant.  I 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Capt.  Martin  Welfley , Missouri  Light  Artillery. 

Camp  Pea  Eidge,  March  11,  1862.  1 
General  : Below  I have  the  honor  to  hand  you  a report  of  the  pari 
my  battery  took  in  the  battle  of  Pea  Eidge.  By  order  from  head 
Quarters  I left  Oamp  McKisick  Tuesday,  March  4,  with  two  howitzers,! 
on  an  expedition.  Thursday  night,  the  6th  instant,  I returned  witl 
one  piece  to  Camp  Sugar  Creek,  leaving  the  other  in  charge  ot  Lieu 
tenant  Waizenegger. 

On  Friday  morning,  March  7,  I received  marching  orders,  and  left 
with  the  command,  under  General  Osterhaus,  with  three  howitzers 
leaving  the  two  12-pounder  guns  in  command  of  Lieutenant  Jacoby,  oi 
the  ridge,  looking  south.  Being  ordered  to  advance,  I went  forwarc 
about  half  a mile,  where,  as  I was  advancing  on  a small  road  sur 
rounded  by  a timber,  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  rushed  down  upon  men 
a regular  stampede,  running  several  of  my  men  down.  I ordered  mj 
pieces  left  about,  which  movement  was  made  in  good  order,  but  jusi 
as  I was  leaving  the  timber  one  of  the  horses  was  shot  and  broke  thd 
tongue,  and  it  was  impossible  to  take  the  piece  along.  As  soon  as  w< 
had  formed  in  line,  myself  and  Lieutenant  Bencke  went  forward  witl 
two  companies  of  infantry  of  the  Twelfth  Missouri  Volunteers,  and 
after  considerable  labor,  were  able  to  bring  the  piece  from  the  brust 
and  into  action.  We  kept  up  a steady  fire  on  the  enemy  for  about  foui 
hours,  after  which  the  firing  ceased.  About  dark  we  followed  the  maid 
column,  and  got  to  camp  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.  At  4 o’clock  p.  m.  the  twc 
12-pounder  guns  came  out  to  the  field  of  action,  and  returned  to  camij 
with  General  Davis’  division.  A] 

On  Saturday  the  8th  instant,  at  6 o’clock  a.  m.,  the  battery  being, 
ready,  was  ordered  to  the  left  wing,  where  I occupied  with  all  fin 
pieces  the  center  of  our  division.  Here  my  battery  suffered  most 
being  exposed  to  a terrific  fire  from  the  enemy.  After  two  hours  con 
tinuous  firing  I ordered  the  three  howitzers  to  advance,  and  sent  the 
12-pounder  guns  to  the  left,  where  they  occupied  a slightly  elevated 
ground,  and  opened  a very  successful  fire  on  the  then  retreating  force* 
of  the  enemy.  The  three  howitzers  then  went  forward  and  struck  tut 
Cassville  road  near  the  Elkhorn  Tavern.  After  arriving  here  I hao 
the  honor  to  pursue  the  enemy,  which  I did  till  4 o’clock  p:  m.,  wliet 
the  advance  guard  camped  about  2 miles  south  of  Keetsville.  bun 


HAP.  XVIII  ] pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  237 

ay  morning  we  kept  up  our  advance  about  2 miles  north  of  Keetsville, 
dien  I was  ordered  to  return  to  camp,  arriving  at  2 o’clock  p.  m. 
Enough  praise  cannot  be  given  to  my  officers  and  men,  all  of  whom 
ehaved  with  the  utmost  coolness  and  bravery.  To  the  Twelfth  Begi- 
ient  Missouri  Volunteers  I am  indebted  for  a fine  6-pounder  brass 
annon,  which  they  captured  in  their  advance,  and  also  for  rendering 
le  such  valuable  assistance  in  recapturing  my  disabled  piece  the  day 
efore.  My  loss  during  the  two  days’  engagement  is  comparatively 
nail,  considering  the  heavy  fire  my  battery  was  mostly  exposed  to  ; 
le  third  section,  in  command  of  Lieutenant  Bencke,  suffered  most. 
Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  WELFLEY, 
Captain , Commanding  Artillery . 

General  Franz  Sigel. 


No.  14. 

eport  of  Capt.  Louis  Hoffmann , Fourth  Independent  Battery  Ohio  Light 

Artillery. 

Camp,  March  14,  1862. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant  the  battery,  with  other  troops  of 
e First  Division,  left  Cooper’s  farm  for  the  march  to  Sugar  Creek  via 
entonville.  When  at  a place  about  4 miles  northeast  from  Benton- 
lle  the  First  Division  received  information  of  an  attack  of  the  enemy 
)on  the  rear  guards  of  our  army.  The  battery,  with  the  Thirty-sixth 
linois  Infantry  and  other  parts  of  the  Second  Brigade,  First  Division, 
t order  of  Acting  General  Osterhaus,  immediately  returned  for  the 
pport  of  said  rear  guards.  After  a march  of  about  2 miles  Lieut. 
3orge  Froehlich  was  posted  with  two  howitzers  of  the  battery  in  the 
>nt  of  the  division,  and  having  thrown  21  shells,  spherical  case;  and 
nister,  at  the  enemy,  compelled  him  to  cease  his  firing.  Lieutenant 
oehlich  then  returned  with  his  section,  on  order  of  General  Osterhaus, 
d joined  the  other  two  sections  of  the  battery,  which,  with  the  Thirty - 
cth  Illinois,  were  posted  on  the  road  about  1 mile  east  from  the  place 
action.  The  whole  battery  then  marched  to  the  camp  occupied  by 
e rest  of  our  troops,  and  was  posted  on  a hill  in  the  neighborhood  of 
igar  Creek,  north  of  the  Bentonville  road. 

March  7,  at  7 o’clock  a.  m.,  the  battery,  on  order,  left  the  said  hill, 
d was  posted  near  the  headquarters  of  General  Osterhaus,  at  the 
legraph  road,  and  then  marched  with  the  other  troops  of  the  First 
vision  about  14  miles  northwest,  when  they  met  the  enemy.  Before 
ving  been  placed  in  position  for  the  battle  the  enemy  made  a severe 
;ack  upon  the  battery,  which,  however,  by  the  skillful  and  fast  oper- 
ons  of  the  division  and  brigade  commanders,  General  Osterhaus  and 
lonel  Greusel,  was  saved,  and  being  promptly  placed  in  position,  met 
3 attack  of  the  enemy  with  good  result.  The  battery  remained  at  the 
ttle  ground  from  10  o’clock  a.  m.  to  3 o’clock  p.  m.,  and  although  the 
lit  was  a very  hot  one,  compelled  the  enemy’s  batteries  to  cease  their 
ng,  and  did  not  change  its  position  until  the  enemy  left  his  position 
the  woods  and  retired.  During  the  battle  Private  Anthony  Meyer, 
nioneer,  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  left  leg,  and  2 horses  of  the 
ttery  were  wounded.  The  four  6-pounder  rifled  guns  threw  on  that 
3asion  221  shots  and  the  two  howitzers  72  shells  and  spherical  case. 
Vfter  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  the  battery,  on  order,  left  the  battle- 


238  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  xvnl 

field  and  posted  itself  at  a settlement  called  Leetown,  about  a quart*! 
of  a mile  south  of  the  battle  ground.  At  4.30  o clock  p.  m.,  on  order  t.i 
General  Sigel,  one  section  of  the  battery,  commanded  by  Lieut.  LouJ 
Piderit,  returned  to  the  battle  ground,  and  remained  there  with  othj 
troops  on  picket  guard,  and  another  section,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Mai 
Frank,  was  detailed  to  the  staff  of  General  Sigel  for  reconnoitermi 
The  section  of  two  howitzers,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Froehlich,  w<| 
ordered  to  the  Fayetteville  road,  on  the  battle  ground  of  the  right  win! 

On  order  of  General  Sigel,  Corporal  Conrad  Ebner  was  sent  at  1 
o’clock  p.  m.  by  Lieutenant  Frank  to  the  camp  for  the  purpose  of  fuj 
nishing  the  section  of  Lieutenant  Frank  with  a caisson  filled  with  ai  l 
munition:  said  corporal,  in  company  with  3 privates,  Lorenz  ^™ien 

John  Meyer,  and  Rudolph  Frese,  left  the  camp  at  1 o clock  a.  m.,  Mar<| 
8 taking^  along  the  caisson  for  the  said  purpose;  but  as  neither  the  md 
nor  the  caisson,  drawn  by  6 horses,  arrived  at  the  place  designated,  ar  , 
they  are  missed  since  the  time  they  left  the  camp,  it  is  suppos^ 


that^theT^bSnff  misled  by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  took  a wroi 
road,  and, ’together  with  the  horses  and  the  caisson,  fell  in  the  hands 

^March's, before  daybreak,  the  different  sections  of  the  battery  returig 
from  their  detachments  into  the  camp,  and,  by  order  of  General  Si* 
the  whole  battery  left  the  camp  at  7 o’clock  a.  m.,  and  was  station! 
near  the  general’s  headquarters.  Left  said  place  with  other  troops 
the  First  Division  shortly  after  its  arrival,  and,  commanded  by  Gener 
Osterhaus,  marched  to  the  battle-field,  about  1 mile  north  of  said  liea 
quarters,  on  the  Telegraph  road,  where  the  enemy  during  the  mg 
previous  had  concentrated  all  his  forces. 


The  battery  was  placed  on  the  left  wing  of  the  First  Division. 

” , i 4--.' dwrur  UTlthAllt  111T 


on 


Tne  oarrery  was  piaceu.  uu  laa^  . 

high  plateau,  and  has  not  changed  its  position,  firing  without  intern* 
tion  during  nearly  four  hours.  After  having  compelled  the  enemy  < 
stop  the  firing  of  his  batteries,  Hoffmann’s  battery  turned  its  whole  atte 
tion  to  a high  rocky  hill  opposite  our  plateau,  occupied  by  the  strong* 
force  of  the  enemy,  for  the  support  of  our  infantry,  which  at  that  ti 
commenced  its  marching  up  the  said  rocky  hill.  At  IX  of0**  a.  j 
when  the  enemy  left  his  position  and  commenced  to  retreat,  the  batter, 
on  order,  left  the  battle  ground,  and  pursuing  the  enemy  in  northe. 
direction  on  the  Telegraph  road  and  firing  upon  his  rear  guards,  arnv: 
at  a place  about  3 miles  south  of  Keetsville,  Mo.,  at  5 o clock  p.  m.,  an 
remained  there  for  encampment. 


‘IllclXliC'.X  LAAOAO  A KJL 

During  the  engagement  of  Saturday,  the  8th  instant, 

- _ & . • , 1 rvnAlWTT  OnGllAT 


the  batte’ 


seized  1 caisson,  with  ammunition,  of  the  enemy.  One  horse  of  the Gw 
tery  was  killed  and  2 horses  wounded.  The  four  6-pounder  rifled  gu; 
of  the  battery  have  thrown  460  shots  and  the  two  howitzers  106  she' 

On  Sunday  morning,  March  9,  the  battery,  with  the  other  parts  o 
First  Division,  left  for  Keetsville,  and  after  a short  rest  at  that  pia 
returned  for  encampment  to  the  battle  grounds  near  the  Sugar  Oret, 

^FoTa  more  distinct  explanation  of  the  position  of  the  battery  dim 
the  engagement  I inclose  two  sketches,  marked  A and  B,  the  lorn 
of  the  battle  ground  of  Friday,  March  7,  and  the  latter  of  the  bat 
ground  of  Saturday,  March  8,  1862.* 

Respectfully,  L HOFFMANN, 

Captain,  Comdg.  Light  Battery,  2d  Brig.,  1st  Div.,  Ohio  VM- 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XVI1L]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  239 

No.  15. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  Asboth , U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division* 

Headquarters  Second  Division, 

Camp  near  Sugar  Creek , Ark.,  March  8,  1862 — 2 a.  m. 

General  : As  General  Sigel,  under  whose  command  you  have  placed 
me,  with  my  division,  has  not  yet  returned  to  our  camp,  I beg  to  address 
you,  general,  directly,  reporting  that  all  the  troops  of  the  Second  Divis- 
ion were  yesterday,  as  well  as  now,  in  the  night,  entirely  without  for- 
age ; and  as  we  are  cut  off  from  all  supplies  by  the  enemy,  outnumbering 
our  forces  several  times,  and  as  one  more  day  without  forage  will  make 
our  horses  unserviceable,  consequently  the  cavalry  and  artillery  as  well 
as  the  teams  of  no  use  at  all,  I would  respectfully  solicit  a decided 
concentrated  movement,  with  the  view  of  cutting  our  way  through  the 
enemy  where  you  may  deem  it  more  advisable,  and  save  by  this  if  not 
the  w hole  at  least  the  larger  part  of  our  surrounded  army. 

I take  the  opportunity  of  mentioning  the  high  valor  of  the  Second 
Missouri  Volunteers  and  Second  Ohio  Battery,  which,  supported  by  the 
First  Iowa  Battery,  did  save  this  afternoon,  at  a very  critical  time,  our 
camp  from  the  advancing  enemy.  Officers  and  men  all  did  their  duty 
gallantly,  pressing  the  enemy  until  evening,  when  the  last  cartridge 
and  artillery  ammunition  was  exhausted. 

I have  especially  to  mention  the  gallant  conduct  of  Colonel  Schae- 
fer, Lieutenant-Colonel  Laibold,  and  Lieutenant  Chapman,  who  was 
mounded  in  a manner  which  will  deprive  the  army  of  his  services  for 
some  time. 

Finally,  I have  to  communicate  the  gratifying  news  that  the  three 
pieces  of  the  First  Flying  Battery,  detailed  this  morning  from  my  di- 
vision to  General  Osterhaus,  and  supposed  to  have  been  taken  by  the 
memy,  have  been  brought  in  by  Colonel  Pattison,  and  that  the  two 
latteries  will  be  able  to  resume  the  fight  at  daybreak. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ASBOTH, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Second  Division * 

General  Samuel  E.  Curtis, 

Commanding  Southwest  Army. 


Headquarters  Second  Division, 

Camp  at  Elkhorn  Tavern , Bea  Ridge , Ark.,  March  16,  1862. 

General  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  63,  I have  the 
Lonor  to  submit  my  report  of  the  participation  of  the  Second  Division 
n the  battles  of  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  days  of  the  present  month  at  Ben- 
on  ville,  Sugar  Creek,  and  Pea  Eidge. 

By  way  of  preliminary  I may  allude  to  the  happy  union  of  the  First 
«nd  Second  Divisions  under  your  command.  I say  happy  union,  be- 
ause  I have  never  witnessed  more  perfect  harmony  either  in  camp  or 
Lpon  the  battle-field.  Native  Americans  and  foreigners  of  varied  na- 
lonalities  have  been  aptly  blended,  and  the  fraternity  of  the  troops 
mds  its  counterpart  in  that  prevailing  between  the  officers  and  com- 
aanders.  No  wonder  the  privations  of  our  arduous  winter  campaign, 
a the  midst  of  a hostile  populace,  were  so  cheerfully  borne,  or  that  the 
nendliness  thus  engendered  should  result  in  so  irresistible  a co-opera- 


240 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvial 


tion  upon  the  battle-field.  Officers  and  men  were  all  imbued  with  th(| 
earnest  feeling  that  yon  would  lead  them  only  to  victory,  and  you  dicl 
so  at  a moment  when  experienced  and  brave  soldiers  admitted  the  eritij 
eal  character  of  our  position.  Allow  me  to  thank  you,  general,  in  th<| 
name  of  my  division,  for  your  skillful  leadership  and  the  results  achieved.* 
As  owing  to  the  harmony  alluded  to  the  two  divisions  were  consolidate! 
for  the  engagement,  and  their  respective  commands  exchanged  bet  weei 
their  commanders  as  the  occasion  demanded,  it  is  impossible  to  give  a, J 
exact  report  confined  exclusively  to  either  division.  You  alone  can  givl 
the  whole  history.  The  commanders  of  divisions  only  can  furnish  yoi 

the  materials,  to  be  combined  by  yourself.  , J 

Thursday,  March  6.— On  the  5th  of  March,  being  encamped  at  Mel 
Kisick’s  farm  with  my  division,  in  close  proximity  to  the  First  Division 
31  mues  southwest  of  Bentonville,  I received  orders  from  you  at  1 
o’clock  p?  m.  to  march  at  2 o’clock  on  the  following  morning  111  cod 
junction  with  the  First  Division,  to  Bentonville  and  there  to  awa| 
further  orders.  We  started  accordingly  in  the  following  order  . 1,  corn 
pany  of  Fremont’s  Hussars;  2,  Fifteenth  Missouri  Volunteers;  3,  Seconj 

Ohio  P>atterv  4 the  train,  in  the  order  of  respective  commands,  5,  Firbl 

Flytog  Battery;  7,  Benton  Hussars,  and  reached  Bet 
tonville  at  about  4 o’clock  in  the  morning.  Overtaken  by  you,  and  a i 
information  arrived  that  the  Second  Missouri  Regiment,  oi  my  div  . 
expected  from  Smith’s  Mill,  was  already  near  the  town,  you  ordered  mjj 
to  continue  the  march  in  the  same  order  to  our  old  camp  at  Sugar  Oreell 
yourself  awaiting  the  Second  Missouri  Regiment,  which  with  the  Benjol 
Hussars  and  the  flying  battery,  was  to  form  the  rear  guard  ot  the  columj 
X had  arrived  at  your  old  headquarters  on  Sugar  Creek,  with  all  tn 
troops  of  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  except  the  rear  guard  mert 
Honed,  after  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  but  while  arranging  the  encampments  th 
verbal  intelligence  came  that  you  were  attacked  and  surrounded  byl 
vastly  superior  force  of  the  enemy  at  Bentonville.  General  Osterliai 
and  myself  hastened  with  all  our  troops  to  your  relief,  and  found  yc* 
still  engaged  5 miles  off  on  the  Sugar  Creek-Bentonville  road  with  tM 
rebel  troops,  who  were  speedily  routed. 

By  your  order  our  forces  were  drawn  up  on  the  Bentonville  S gj 
Creek  road  with  all  precautions  against  a fresh  attack,  but  nothi 
more  was  heard  of  the  rebel  forces,  and  you  effected  a H 

main  body  on  the  Telegraph  road  at  its  crossing  of  Sugar  Creek  ValleJ 
The  Benton  Hussars,  the  Flying  Battery,  the  Tweffth  Missouri,  ad 

Second  Missouri  Volunteers  took  a prominent  part  in  fighti  g 

though  the  Sugar  Creek  Valley,  the  last-named  regiment  losing  Cap 
Francis  Kohr,  of  Company  E,  a most  efficient  officer,  wlio  was  killed  j 
the  first  attack,  when  deploying  his  company  as  skirmishers.  Lieutel 
ant-Colonel  Laibold,  commanding  the  Second  Missouri  Tlegimeiifc,  speah 
in  his  official  report*  of  the  bravery  of  Frederick  Jaensch, 
ant  adjutant- general  of  Colonel  Schaefer’s  brigade,  and  also  ot  Cap 
Walter  Hoppe^  of  Company  K,  and  also  of  Capt.  Christian  Burkhart 
of  Company  B,  who  gave  a noble  example  to  the  rest  of  the  troops,  ai 
I cheerfully  make  mention  of  them  here.  . . 

Friday,  March  7.— Intelligence  having  been  received  that  the  enea 
was  advancing  in  force  with  the  view  of  cutting  oil  our  commumeat 
with  Missouri  and  by  approaches  in  other  directions  to  surround! 
General  Curtis,  commanding,  ordered  a force,  coun’osed  o pa  ts  tj 
the  different  divisions,  under  command  of  General  Osterhaus,  to  att 
him  at  Leesville,  in  concert  with  the  Third  Division,  under  command 


'Not  found. 


iap.  XVI1T.J 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


241 

eneral  Jefferson  C.  Davis.  The  Benton  and  Fremont  Hussars  and 
.e  Flying  Battery  were  directed  to  join  him  from  my  division.  The 
irst  Brigade,  under  command  of  Colonel  Schaefer,  and  comprising  the 
icond  and  Fifteenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  with  the  Second  Ohio  Bat- 
ry,  was  directed  to  take  position  upon  the  heights  this  side  of  the 
igar  Creek -Bentonville  road,  commanding  it.  The  battle  speedily 
>ened  both  in  the  direction  of  Leesville  and  Keetsville,  at  Pea  Bids® 
ndin  fhl  furl.ously>  1 without  involving  the  First  Brigade  of  my  divls- 
!'"/Se  action.  A few  skirmishers  from  the  heights  on  the  opposite 

lers^were  IluKe  saV?  W°UUded  b°rSeS  °f  the  rebels 
In  the  afternoon,  between  3 and  4 o’clock,  however,  General  Curtis 
mmandmg  came  personally  with  the  information  that  the  Fourth 
vision,  under  Acting  Lrigadier-General  Carr,  on  our  right,  was  hard 
essed.  All  the  troops  were  immediately  ordered  forward  with  the 
ception  oftwo  howitzers  of  the  Ohio  battery  and  six  companies  of 

Which  were  left  in  their  opposition 
the  Sugar  Creek-Bentonville  road.  I myself  was  directed  by  you 
companies  of  the  Second  Missouri  Volunteers  and  four 
,ces  of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery  forward  as  quick  as  possible  on  the 

£s°ad?  Ttv  VieW  °f  meetin&  tlie  remaining  part  of  the 
^ a*d  TeC°nd  DlIlsl0“s  on  contested  battle  ground  this  side 
Elkhorn  Tavern.  Arriving  there  in  advance  of  your  troops,  I found 
ourth  Division  already  exhausted,  the  enemy  pressing  forward 

E11fh0rn  Tavern  to  the  opeii  space  ?n  e7ther 

e of  the  Telegraph  road  with  great  force,  and  seeing  that  in  that 
tical  moment  no  time  was  to  be  lost,  I ordered  the  Second  Ohio  Bat- 
L ° Posltlcn  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  replacing  the  three 
the  IoYa,batter^1under  command  of  Capt.  M.  M.  Hayden,  to 
?P©ned  at  once  a brisk  and  concentrated  fire  upon  the^enemy, 
eking  instantly  his  advance,  and  at  the  same  time  rallying  the  partly 
;enng  pieces  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Fourth  Division  8 P Y 
bavin£  kePt  ^p  a steady  fire  for  half  an  hour,  and  per^ 
ang  that  the  enemy  was  forced  by  it  to  abandon  the  woods  this  side 
he  tavern,  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry  to  the  right  and  left  of  the 
llery  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  under  Colonel  Schaefer  and  ad 

be  ES1kWny7°  ^ th™Ugh  the  woods  t0  the  fence,  within  200  yards 
be  Llkhorn  Tavern.  Thus  securing  the  advance  of  mv  artillery  1 

etodtheteft  Ttf  °llio1Battery  forward  to  follow  us  to  a position  on 
to  the  left  of  the  road  commanding  the  enemy’s  stronghold.  Sharp 

enemy’s  w?  COntest  were  again  maintained  from  this  point  until 

oB^l:beery  WaSi  Slle“ced’  and  tlie  ammunition  of  the  Second 
o Battery  being  nearly  exhausted,  we  retired  in  good  order  to  our 
' Pos|tion,  to  hold  it  at  all  hazards.  Night,  however,  settin g in  fi  o-ht- 

wuri  Volunteers  w68’  and  tbe  four  companies  of  the  gallaSt  Second 

of  ou7cen?er  for  The  night " 38  ^ °“  tbe  extreme 

Chapman,  commanding  the  Second  Ohio  Battery,  was 
' onnded  during  the  action  and  was  carried  away  by  the  sur- 

■tom  cStoSJ  to  fflSSST"'11  l*»t<Ud„otdis»ble 

co  operation  of  the  Third  Iowa  Battery,  under  Captain  Havdpn 
ers  andmen  all  did  their  duty  well  ami ’gallantfy  untd  tee  last 
idge  was  expended.  I have  especially  to  mention  the  gallant  con- 

1G  R R — VOL  VIII 


242 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS. 


AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XVmi 

coolness  to  energy  and  daring.  or(iered  in  the  morning  t 

The  First  Flying  Battery, 

join  the  Lees ville  expedition,  p an(j  Schneider,  followed  by  th 

ragaged  when  t^^rstatteck^as  made  upon  the  enemy’s^cavalry^^Th 

were  lost,  but  afterwards  found  b , . 3 woun(ied,and  8 missing 

Flying  Batter J * under  command  of  Captain  Elbert,  with  a part  | 
The  rest  of  the^a“®r^Xenth  Missouri  Volunteers  and  two  companil 
the  Seventeenth  and  inlteentn  missuui  Heinrichs,  were  guar  i 

of  the  Benton  Hussars,  under  com  countered  the  enemy  about 

ing  the  rear  of  the  engaged  tonville  road.  They  opened  ai  i 

miles  from  Sugar  Creek,  ®J?  andspherical  case  shot  until  dar 

exchanged  fire  with  them  Hussars,  who  we 

when  they  retired  towards  th  P • „ , j gussey  report  that  < 

also,  as  stated,  with  t e com  o’clock  a.  m.,  they  participated  I 

arriving  atfbc  AeW  of but.that,  for 

fng  agabi In  the  first  open  field,  they  held  it  during  the  remainder  of  tj 
day,  guarding  Welfley’s  battery.  cavalry  were  withdraw 

companies  of  Benton  Hussar  , Clowes  and  4 men  were  kilh, 

in  the  affair  just  mentioned  ^eutenant  Clowes^  under  oo- 

8 wounded,  and  3 missing.  The f“fha orts near  the  town  of  Le  ■ 
mand  of  Major  Meszaros,  charg  , s h , After  the  enemy  hi 

ville,  upon  a ^“^^L  M^or  Meszaros  was  ordered  by  Gene, 
retreated  on  the  left  wing  i J of  General  Carr,  but  i< 

Curtis  to  take  his  command  t ^ ] 1 officer  to  return  to  caw 

finding  him,  was  ordered  by  the g was  resumed  at  7 o’cl< 
Saturday,  March  8.  On  t y ed  fire  /j  may  gay  too  soo) 

Oil  i 


had  taken  position  on  the  lew.  | moved  from  position 

artillery  fire  was  opened,  and  the  ’ able  in  its  progrc 

position  like  an  iunnense  machine,  perfectly  irresis^^  V 


position  like  an  immense > J 1 TeveVeV  preTsed  upon  every  <4 

under  your  command.  The  We  numbers  of  his  dead  \ 

finally  fled  in  wild  disorder,  leaving  1 g unmole8ted  J 

ond  Divisions  were  united  upon  the  open  neiu  00mpanle 

tt  sis 

SS£,S«*-  “» B“,o»  u~™  “a  l"'F“ 


;hap.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  243 

Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers,  were  designated  as  the  reserve  in  the 
>eginning,  hut  were  soon  drawn  into  the  line  of  battle  and  ordered 
nto  action.  Six  companies  of  the  Second  Missouri  Volunteers,  with 
wo  howitzers  of  the  Ohio  battery,  were  sent  towards  the  enemy’s 
xtreme  right  flank,  southwest  of  Elkliorn  Tavern,  and  forming  our 
xtreme  left.  The  infantry,  deployed  as  skirmishers,  drove  the  enemy 
rom  a thicket  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  there  formed  the  general 
dvance,  the  two  howitzers  of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery  in  the  mean 
diile  dismounting  the  enemy’s  battery  and  driving  their  infantry  from 
he  top  of  a hill  upon  which  it  had  formed. 

I have  to  regret  that  the  efficient  Swiss  regiment,  Fifteenth  Missouri 
TflunteerSj  whose  beautiful  flag  floated  so  picturesquely  throughout 
he  battle-field,  had  not  the  opportunity  they  so  ardently  longed  for  of 
illowing  their  energetic  commander,  Colonel  Joliat,  to  the  heart  of 
he  conflict,  and  of  attesting  by  their  blood  their  devotion  to  the  cause. 
I feel  bound  to  make  honorable  mention  of  the  officers  of  my  staff, 
hey  were  always  at  hand,  regardless  of  danger,  where  duty  called 
aem,  especially  during  our  desperate  attack  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
fch.  Lieutenants  Gillen  and  Haskell,  although  for  the  first  time  in  a 
3vere  engagement,  stood  coolly  at  my  side  under  the  hottest  artillery 
nd  musketry  fire,  while  Lieutenant  Von  Enrich,  a soldier  of  European 
sperience,  carried  my  orders,  dashing  bravely  and  promptly  through 
^ery  danger.  Mr.  Ullfers,  the  accomplished  topographical  engineer 
t my  division  during  the  arduous  campaigns  of  the  .last  six  months, 
though  not  called  by  his  especial  duties  to  the  battle-field,  was 
ferywhere,  regardless  of  danger,  and  while  exhibiting  an  example 
cool  courage,  gathered  from  the  events  of  the  moment  many  iin- 
irtant  features  towards  his  topographical  delineation  of  the  battle 
round. 

Major  Wiegand,  recently  of  the  Garibaldi  Guard,  who  joined  me  the 
ly  before  as  a volunteer  aide,  deserves  my  hearty  commendation, 
ou  ^ ourself,  general,  having  been  everywhere  and  having  seen  every- 
mg,  know  how  well  our  men  and  officers  generally  behaved.  For- 
ard  they  always  moved.  Honor  to  them  all. 

My  report  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  is  herewith  submitted, 
shows  comimssioned  officers  killed,  3;  wounded,  3;  enlisted  men 
lied,  17  j wounded,  60;  missing,  36.  One  hundred  and  twenty-six 
isoners  were  delivered  by  Captain  Hesse,  provost-marshal  of  the 
?cond  Division,  to  the  grand  provost-marshal,  Major  Heinrichs. 
ver  ooO  stand  of  arms,  with  a large  amount  of  ammunition  and 
mous  implements  of  war,  were  also  taken  and  delivered  to  Chief 
aartermaster  Carr.  An  artillery  caisson  taken  is  now  with  the  Sec- 
id  Ohio  Battery. 

I submit  topographical  sketches  of  the  extended  Pea  Bidge  battle- 
Rl,  with  our  and  the  enemy’s  position  on  the  7th  and  8th  of  March, 
epared  by  the  topographical  engineer  of  my  division  just  so  honor- 
'll mentioned,  Mr.  Ullfers.  The  sketch  appertaining  to  your  action 
Bentonville  will  follow  in  a few  days. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

_ . . ASBOTH, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Second  Division. 
General  Franz  Sigel, 

Commanding  First  and  Second  Divisions. 


* To  appear  in  Atlas. 


244 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL  fl 
No.  16. 


Report  of  Col.  Joseph  Nemett,  Fifth  Missouri  Cavalry  {Benton  Hussars), 


Sir  : Agreeably  to  your  orders  I hereby  submit  the  following  report 
of  the  part  which  the  Benton  Hussars  took  in  the  battle  of  Sugary 

Creek. 

We  formed  the  rear  guard  of  the  army  on  the  march  from  the  camp 
3 miles  west  of  Bentonville  to  Sugar  Creek,  and  started  about  G a.  m. 
We  arrived  at  Bentonville  about  10.  First  perceived  the  enemy  at  itl 
He  had  then  surrounded  us  on  three  sides,  and  we  were  soon  closely  is 
pressed.  Mv  rear  guard  did  not  exceed  100  men  (Companies  A,  B,  and  F. 
and  9 men  of  Company  D).  Observing  a large  cavalry  force,  about  500 
men,  bearing  a secession  standard,  advancing  rapidly  upon  our  rear,  L 
with  Companies  A and  B,  of  the  Benton  Hussars,  charged  them  and 
put  them  to  flight,  and  by  these  means  kept  them  at  a respectful  dis-| 
tance  for  half  an  hour,  thus  giving  time  to  the  whole  column  to  retreat 
from  the  town  without  molestation.  Following,  we  formed  again  outlie 
hill  east  of  town  in  line  of  battle,  fronting  the  enemy,  who  formed  ii 
town.  On  the  whole  retreat  we  sent  out  flankers  and  skirmishers  tc 
the  rear,  fronting  to  the  enemy  about  every  ten  minutes,  thus  keeping 
them  in  check  and  preventing  their  advance  upon  us.  Although 
delayed  on  the  road  by  the  breaking  down  of  a piece  of  artillery  tor  f 
half  an  hour,  and  separated  by  this  means  over  a mile  from  the  man 
body,  we  kept  the  enemy  from  encroaching  upon  us,  and  succeeded  n 
carrying  off  the  gun.  We  were  continually  fired  upon,  and  only  savet 
ourselves  from  being  cut  off  and  surrounded  by  repeated  charges  to  tin 
rear  and  flanks,  thus  letting  the  enemy  believe  that  our  torce  was 
superior  to  what  it  really  was. 

After  marching  about  3 miles  the  whole  column  halted,  and  we  wer< 
happily  re-enforced  and  supported  by  a battalion  of  the  Second  anc 
Twelfth  Missouri  Infantry  and  two  pieces  of  light  artillery,  our  situa 
tion  haying  then  become  so  critical  that  unless  thus  supported  we  mus 
have  succumbed  to  the  infinitely  superior  numbers.  The  enemy  sooi 
ceased  his  fire,  and  we  marched  5 or  G miles  without  molestation,  lhei 
we  were  again  attacked,  but  ordered  by  General  Sigel  to  proceed  to  oui 

qUMyeforce  was  as  follows : Company  A,  Captain  Pfaff  and  Lieuten 
ant  Apprederis,  28  men ; Company  B,  Captain  Langen  and  30  men 
Company  I),  Lieutenant  Borcherdt  and  9 men ; Company  F,  Lieuten 
ant  Luther  and  26  men ; in  all,  93  men.  Company  E,  45  men,  unde 
command  of  Lieutenant  Galeskowsky,  remained  as  guard  to  the  flymj 
battery,  and  did  its  duty  well.  Company  G.  under  command  oi  Cap 
tain  Lehmann,  had  the  advance  guard,  and,  as  I understand,  at  on* 
time  made  a spirited  charge  and  cleared  the  road  in  front  near  Benton 
ville.  Lieutenant  Kluefer,  of  Company  D,  with  30  men,  had  been  or 
dered  off  two  days  previous,  to  form  part  of  an  expedition  under  Majo 
Conrad : Lieutenant  Hansen,  of  Company  B,  with  30  men,  to  form  par 
of  an  expedition  under  Major  Meszaros ; and  Lieutenant  Schipper,  ot  Coin 
pany  A,  with  20  men,  the  night  before  the  retreat,  as  a scouting  partffl 
Fifteen  men  of  Company  F were  detailed  as  provost  guard  to  Captai 

Hesse,  division  provost-marshal.  _ , _ 

I must  here  observe  that  the  bravery  and  bearing  of  my  men  wer 
exemplary,  but  notwithstanding  this,  had  the  enemy  shown  the  leas 
military  spirit,  we  should  unavoidably  have  been  sacrificed. 

On  tiie  7th,  Companies  A,  B,  E,  and  G,  with  the  First  Missouri  Cav 


*at.  XVIII.]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  245 

Iry,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  and  three  pieces  of  flying  artillery,  besides 
vo  or  three  regiments  of  infantry  and  Welfley’s  battery,  under  com- 
mand of  General  Osterhaus,  proceeded  to  attack  the  left  flank.  Colo- 
el  Bussey,  of  the  Third  Iowa,  commanded  the  cavalry.  The  order  of 
iarch  was : 1,  First  Missouri ; 2,  Flying  Battery $ 3,  Third  Iowa ; 4,  two 
>mpanies  of  Fremont  Hussars ; 5,  Benton  Hussars.  The  forces  ahead 
? us  had  already  engaged  the  enemy  in  the  timber  (9.30  a.  m.)  Avhen 
e came  upon  the  battle  field.  We  were  about  forming  right  into  line 
hen  suddenly  the  First  Missouri  and  Third  Iowa  rushed  in  mad  flight 
?on  us  and  carried  us  along.  We,  however,  immediately  formed  as 
>on  as  we  reached  the  open  field,  and  were  the  only  cavalry  that  kept 
ie  open  field  the  whole  day.  One  gun  of  Welfley’s  battery,  the  horses 
‘ which  had  been  shot,  was  left  behind  in  the  timber,  but  I imme- 
ately  returned  with  Company  A,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Schip- 
ir,  rescued  it,  and  brought  it  back  in  safety.  We  after  this  were  all 
ty  posted  on  the  extreme  left  flank  and  as  guard  to  the  battery.  We 
mained  in  the  open  field  exposed  to  the  fire,  which  lasted  until  5.30 
m.  The  rest  of  the  forces  were  then  ordered  off  the  field,  and  the 
snton  Hussars  and  two  companies  Fremont  Hussars  were  alone  left 
maintain  the  battle-field  during  the  night. 

March  8, 1862,  early  in  the  morning,  I was  ordered  back  to  the  Second 
ivision,  posted  on  the  extreme  left  flank  as  guard  to  that  flank,  and 
vanced  until  we  reached  Elkhorn  Tavern.  There  we  were  ordered 
halt,  and  in  the  afternoon  sent  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  taking 
prisoners.  In  the  evening  we  reached  the  encampment  and  there 
mained. 

JOSEPH  NEMETT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fifth  Missouri  Cavalry . 
Brigadier- General  Sigel, 

Commanding. 


No.  17. 

port  of  Col.  Jefferson  C.  Davis , Twenty-second  Indiana  Infantry , com- 
manding Third  Division. 

Headquarters  Third  Division, 

Pea  Ridge,  ArJc.,  March  16,  1862. 

j apt  Ain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
rt  taken  by  the  Third  Division,  under  my  command,  in  the  recent  en- 
gement  with  the  rebel  forces  at  this  place. 

In  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant,  in  obedience  to  instructions  from 
^ general,  I broke  up  my  camp  near  Cross  Hollow  and  took  position 
the  heights  of  Pea  Bidge,  on  the  north  side  of  Sugar  Creek,  com- 
ndmg  the  main  road.  On  the  night  of  the  5th  I received  intelli- 
lce  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy  from  the  general  and  of  intention 
concentrate  his  forces  on  my  right  and  left  and  give  battle  at  this 
! . °n  the  morning  of  the  6th  I deployed  the  First  Brigade  of  my 
lsion,  consisting  of  the  Eighth,  Eighteenth,  and  Twenty-second  In- 
na, with  Klauss’  Indiana  battery,  commanded  by  Col.  Thomas  Patti- 
>,  on  the  right  of  the  Fayetteville  road,  so  as  to  command  the  ap- 
•ach  completely.  The  Second  Brigade,  consisting  of  the  Thirty-sev- 
n and  Fifty-ninth  Illinois  (formerly  the  Ninth  Missouri),  with  David- 


* 


246  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


son’s  Illinois  battery,  commanded  by  Col.  Julius  White,  I ordered  to  take 
position  on  the  left  of  this  road.  This  battery  commanded  the  valley 
of  Sugar  Creek  east  and  west  and  strongly  supporting  Klauss  batterjd 
on  the  right.  This  battery  was  well  posted,  and  protected  by  a smal 
earthwork,  which  I had  ordered  to  be  thrown  up  during  the  night.  The 
Eighth  and  Eighteenth  Indiana,  under  Colonels  Benton  and  Washburn 
strengthened  their  position  by  felling  timber  and  throwing  up  some 
small  intrenchments.  During  the  night  the  general  himself  arrived* 
followed  by  a part  of  Colonel  Carr’s  division  from  Cross  Hollow,  whicl 
took  position  on  the  left.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  6th  General  SigeL’tf 
column  arrived  from  Bentonville  and  took  position  on  the  right.  Dur 
ing  the  night  my  troops  bivouacked  on  the  ground,  anxiously  awaiting  i 

the  enemy’s  approach.  , 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  it  was  ascertained  that  the  enemy  wa; 
making  an  effort  to  turn  our  right  flank  and  to  attack  us  m rear,  h 
order  to  prevent  this,  Colonel  Osterhaus  was  ordered  with  some  cavairj 
and  artillery  to  make  a demonstration  in  the  direction  of  Leetown 
The  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Ellis,  and  the  Twenty-sec 
ond  Indiana,  under  Colonel  Hendricks,  were  ordered  to  support  thr 
movement.  Colonel  Osterhaus  advanced  about  a mile  beyond  Leetowi 
and  found  the  enemy  in  force,  moving  rapidly  along  the  road  leading 
from  Bentonville  to  Elkhorn  Tavern,  where  Colonel  Carr’s  division  ha( 
already  sharply  engaged  him.  At  this  time  the  unexpected  appear 
ance  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  from  the  field  gave  proof  of  the  neces 
istv  of  re-enforcements  being  sent  at  once  in  the  direction  of  Leetowr 
and  an  order  to  that  effect  was  timely  received.  Passing  through  Lee 
town  a few  hundred  yards,  I found  Colonel  Osterhaus,  with  the  I ortj 
fourth  Illinois,  Twenty-second  Indiana,  arid  some  artillery,  had  takei 
position  on  the  left  of  the  road  and  was  contesting  the  approach  ol  tli 
enemy  over  a large  open  field  in  his  front. 

In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  was  rapidly  approaching  and  advancmi 
his  forces  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and  had  already  lodged  himsell  u 
large  numbers  in  a thick  oak  scrub  extending  to  our  camp.  I mime 
diately  ordered  the  Second  Brigade  to  deploy  to  the  right  and  engag 
him.  This  was  done  in  a vigorous  manner  by  the  Thirty-seventh  an< 
Eifty-ninth  Illinois,  assisted  by  Davidson’s  battery,  which  I had  pa 
into  position  for  that  purpose.  I soon  became  satisfied,  Irom  tn 
increasing  and  excessive  fire  of  the  enemy,  that  he  was  being  rapidly 
re-enforced,  and  ordered  the  Eighteenth  and  Twenty-second  Indian 
to  make  a flank  movement  to  the  right  and  perpendicular  to  tn 
enemy’s  lines,  and  then  move  forward  and  attack  him.  This  wa 
accomplished  with  alacrity,  but  not,  however,  until  the  Second  ±>i 
gade  had  begun  to  recede  before  the  excessive  fire  of  the  enemy,  wn 
had  now  concentrated  his  forces  to  the  number  of  several  thousand 
under  McCulloch  and  McIntosh,  with  a large  body  of  Indians,  uncle 
Pike  and  Boss.  The  Second  Brigade  being  thus  overwhelmed,  I ordere- 
it  to  fall  back  in  changed  front  to  rear  on  its  right,  and  the  First  hr 
gade  to  change  front  forward  on  its  left,  so  as  to  attack  the  enem>  1 
his  rear,  who  was  now  exultingly  following  up  bis  temporary  success 
The  Eighteenth  Indiana  soon  executed  the  movement  as  directed 
and  opened  a well-directed  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  rear,  which  had  tn 
effect  of  drawing  his  fire  and  disconcerting  his  pursuit,  so  as  to  enaoi 
the  Second  Brigade  to  reform  their  lines  as  directed,  but  not  until  tn 
enemy  had  succeeded  in  capturing  two  guns  of  Davidson  s batter} 
which,  owing  to  the  precipitate  advance  of  the  enemy  and  disaap 
horses,  could  not  be  withdrawn. 


FIAP.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


247 


The  Eighteenth  Indiana  pushed  rapidly  forward  and  drove  the  enemy 
*om  this  part  of  the  field,  and,  advancing  to  the  open  ground,  found 
iree  pieces  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy;  charged  and  routed  him  with 
heavy  loss  from  them.  The  Twenty-second  Indiana  during  this  time 
agaged  a large  portion  of  the  Arkansas  troops  and  Indians,  and  after 
sharp  engagement  put  them  to  flight.  In  the  mean  time  the  Second 
rigade  renewed  the  engagement,  when  the  enemy  fled  from  the  field, 
saving  behind  him  many  of  his  killed  and  wounded.  Among  the 
>rmer  were  Generals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh.  At  this  moment  I 
:dered  the  cavalry  to  charge  the  flying  foe,  but  for  some  unexplained 
iason  it  was  not  done. 

The  enemy  made  an  attempt  to  reform  on  his  former  position  near 
le  Bentonville  road,  but  was  easily  driven  from  it  by  the  action  of 
ir  batteries.  Two  regiments  of  re- enforcements,  with  two  pieces  of 
3avy  artillery  (12-pounders),  arrived  at  this  time  from  General  Sigel’s 
>mmand.  These  I ordered  to  take  position  on  the  right,  so  as  to  be 
lie  to  move  the  more  readily  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Carr’s  division, 
hich  had  been  hotly  engaged  m the  vicinity  of  Elkhorn  Tavern  for 
iveral  hours.  General  Sigel  soon  arrived  himself,  and,  accompanied 
Y Osterhaus’  command,  moved  in  the  direction  of  Carr’s  left.  I at 
te  same  time  threw  forward  the  Second  Brigade  to  the  Bentonville 
id  Elkhorn  Tavern  road.  Finding  the  enemy  gone  and  night  upon 
$, 1 ordered  the  troops  to  bivouac  on  the  field  they  had  so  gloriously 
on. 

After  reporting  to  the  general  the  entire  rout  of  the  enemy  at  Lee- 
>wn,  he  directed  me  to  move  my  division  during  the  night  to  the 
Lpport  of  our  position  of  the  previous  day  at  Elkhorn  Tavern.  The 
repart  of  the  night  was  occupied  by  the  troops  in  collecting  the 
ounded  and  dead.  Daylight,  however,  found  us  in  position  in  front 
‘ the  enemy  at  Elkhorn  Tavern,  where  the  troops  under  Colonel  Carr 
id  so  nobly  fought  the  day  before.  That  gallant  officer,  though  suf- 
ring  much  from  a wound,  was  still  upon  the  ground  to  assist  in  dis- 
cing of  my  troops. 

The  First  Brigade  was  deployed  a few  hundred  yards  to  the  right  of 
e Fayetteville  road  to  support  Klauss’  battery,  which  was  placed  at 
e edge  of  an  open  field  intervening  between  the  range  of  hills  at 
Ikhorn  Tavern  and  the  timber  protecting  our  camp.  Here  the  five 
•mpanies  of  the  Eighth  Indiana,  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Shunk, 
ined  their  brigade.  These  companies  had  the  previous  day  partici- 
ited  in  the  engagement  with  Colonel  Carr’s  forces  and  had  bivouacked 
i the  field  during  the  night.  Davidson’s  battery  was  placed  in  a simi- 
r position  on  the  left  of  the  road,  supported  by  the  Second  Brigade, 
t sunrise  the  enemy’s  position  was  discovered  by  a few  shots  being 
rown  by  Davidson’s  battery,  which  was  at  once  answered  by  the  rebel 
itteries.  Klauss’  battery  soon  responded,  but  after  a sharp  contest  of 
few  rounds  was  forced  to  retire  by  a sudden  attack  from  one  of  the 
lemy’s  heretofore-undiscovered  batteries,  which  opened  closely  upon 
8 flank  with  grape  and  canister.  This  battery,  however,  soon  with- 
*ew  upon  discovering  dispositions  being  made  by  the  First  Brigade  to 
targe  it. 

The  Second  Brigade  at  this  time  was  much  exposed  to  an  enfilading 
*e  from  the  enemy’s  guns,  and  I ordered  it  to  fall  back  and  take  posi- 
m under  shelter  of  the  timber.  By  this  time  the  position  of  the  en- 
vy’s batteries  was  well  developed,  and  Davidson’s  now  took  a more 
mmanding  position  in  the  open  field.  He  was  soon  joined  by  Klauss, 
iiom  I had  ordered  to  support  him,  and  in  a few  moments  the  contest 


248 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVUir 

was  opened  and  maintained  with  great  spirit  on  both  sides  until  tin  > 
arrival  of  General  Sigel’s  forces,  about  7.30  o’clock.  Sigel’s  artiller;i» 
soon  took  position  on  the  enemy’s  right  and  engaged  with  great  spiri  i 
in  the  contest.  The  approach  of  Sigel’s  infantry  on  the  left  of  my  dil 
vision  rendered  the  position  of  my  battery  secure,  and  enabled  me  h® 
withdraw  the  Second  Brigade  from  their  support  and  prepare  my  wholl 
division  for  a general  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  left.  The  gradual  de 
crease  of  the  enemy’s  fire  and  the  withdrawal  of  some  of  his  gunl 
offered  a favorable  opportunity,  and  I immediately  ordered  an  advance 
across  the  field.  Previous  to  this  movement  Colonel  Dodge  had  takeil 
position  with  his  brigade  on  my  right,  so  as  to  prevent  any  attempt  thi , 
enemy  might  make  to  attack  me  on  this  flank. 

The  Second  Brigade,  together  with  the  Twenty-second  Indiana  an( 
five  companies  of  the  Eighth  Indiana,  soon  warmly  engaged  thi 
enemy’s  infantry,  occupying  a strong  position  in  the  thick  scrub-oal 
skirting  fthe  base  of  the  hill  upon  which  his  artillery  was  posted.  Tin 
enemy  soon  began  to  yield  to  the  steady  fire  and  determined  advanc. 
of  our  troops,  and  finally  broke  and  fled  in  much  confusion,  leaving 
behind  his  dead  and  wounded.  The  heights  were  soon  carried,  and  oi 
reaching  the  summit  of  the  hill  I ordered  a halt,  in  order  to  bring  nr 
artillery  in  position  on  the  road  leading  to  Huntsville,  my  left  resting 
on  Elkhorn  Tavern.  Here  Colonel  Benton,  with  five  companies  of  th< 
Eighth  Indiana  and  a section  of  artillery,  who  had  been  kept  bad 
guarding  the  road  leading  from  Cross  Hollow,  joined  their  command 
Much  to  their  chagrin  and  that  of  their  gallant  commander,  the  enenr 
did  not  give  them  an  opportunity  to  add  new  laurels  to  those  already 
won  at  Bich  Mountain.  , ^ . 

The  division  lost  during  the  engagement  60  killed,  270  wounded 
and  8 missing.  Total  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  338.  It  afford, 
me  pleasure  to  be  able  to  bear  testimony  to  the  prompt  and  efficien 
manner  in  which  the  brigade  commanders,  Colonels  Pattison  and  M bite 
conducted  their  brigades  throughout  the  entire  engagement.  The  regi 
mental  commanders,  Colonels  Benton,  Eighth  Indiana,  Hendricks 
Twenty rsecond  Indiana,  and  Lieutenant- Colonel  Washburn,  Eighteentl 
Indiana,  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  Lieutenant-Colonels  Barnes,  Thirty 
seventh,  and  Frederick,  Fifty-ninth  Illinois,  of  the  Second  Brigade 
acquitted  themselves  with  distinction.  Colonel  Hendricks  fell  early  u 
the  engagement,  after  which  Major  Daily  commanded  the  regiment 
with  great  credit  to  himself,  during  the  remainder  of  the  battle.  Thu 
part  taken  by  the  Peoria  Light  Artillery  (Illinois),  under  Captan 
Davidson,  and  the  First  Indiana  Battery,  under  Captain  IOauss,  ha 
been  so  conspicuously  described  in  the  above  report,  that  it  would  Di 
useless  to  call  further  attention  to  their  efficiency  and  gallant  conduct 
The  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Ellis,  reported  during  thj 
night  of  the  Gtli  from  a four  days’  scout  on  White  Biver,  during  whicl 
they  captured  50  rebels,  with  their  arms  and  horses.  The  bearing  am 
efficiency  of  my  staff  officers,  Lieutenant  Holstein,  assistant  adjutant 
general,  and  Lieutenants  Pease  and  Morrison,  aides-de-camp,  wen 
conspicuous  everywhere,  fearlessly  executing  every  order ; every  par 
of  the  field  witnessed  their  gallantry.  My  division  surgeon,  Benjamn 
J.  Newland,  deserves  the  highest  commendation  for  his  promptness  am 
skill  in  establishing  his  hospitals  and  taking  care  of  the  wounded. 
division  quartermaster  and  commissary,  Captains  Branson  and  Bradley 
performed  their  duties  equally  promptly  and  efficiently. 

The  superior  numbers  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  engaged  as  lie  was  n 
his  favorite  “scrub,”  his  utter  rout,  when  led  on  to  desperation  at  tm 


.r.  XVIII.] 


249 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 

uifice  of  two  of  liis  famous  generals  on  the  field,  is  sufficient  proof  of 
i valor  and  patriotism  of  the  troops  displayed  in  every  conflict  with 
) enemy.  Both  officers  and  men  fought  with  a courage  and  determi- 
don  seldom  excelled,  and  will  ever  entitle  them  to  the  gratitude  of  a 
iteful  country. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JEFF.  0.  DAVIS, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

3 apt.  T.  I.  McKenny, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Southivest. 


No.  18. 

oort  of  Col.  Thomas  Pattison , Eighteenth  Indiana  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Third  Division, 

March  10,  1862. 

}ir  : In  accordance  with  your  order,  and  as  is  customary  in  such 
es,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
the  brigade  under  my  command  in  achieving  the  complete  victory 
t the  enemy  in  the  late  battles  fought  on  the  7th  and  8th  instant,  at 
3town  and  Elkhorn  Tavern,  in  Benton  County,  Arkansas. 

)n  the  morning  of  the  6th,  in  obedience  to  your  command,  I moved 
brigade — consisting  of  the  Eighteenth  Indiana  Regiment,  under 
utenant-Colonel  Washburn ; the  Eighth  Indiana,  under  Colonel  Ben- 
the  Twenty-second  Indiana,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hendricks, 
1 the  First  Indiana  Battery,  of  six  field  pieces,  under  Captain  Klauss — 
1 took  possession  of  the  hills  on  the  north  side  of  Sugar  Creek  and 
nediately  west  of  the  principal  Telegraph  road  from  Springfield  to 
ft  Smith,  the  Twenty-second  occupying  the  left  on  the  ridge  next 
road,  the  Eighth,  with  Klauss’  battery,  in  the  center,  on  another 
•minent  point,  and  the  Eighteenth  on  the  next  ridge  to  the  right, 
h point  being  separated  by  deep  ravines,  extending  back  a consid- 
ble  distance  in  the  direction  of  the  Cassville  road.  Colonel  Benton 
1 Lieutenant-Colonel  Washburn,  in  compliance  with  orders,  set  their 
pective  commands  to  work,  throwing  up  in  the  course  of  five  hours 
te  a respectable  breastwork,  which,  in  case  of  an  attack  from  the 
action  of  Cross  Hollow,  would  have  been  an  excellent  defense. 

)n  the  night  of  the  6th  the  brigade  bivouacked  in  this  position, 
[hing  of  moment  transpired  until  about  10  o’clock  of  the  7th,  when 
illery  firing  was  heard  a mile  or  two  to  our  right  rear ; also  heavy 
ng  in  the  direction  of  Cassville,  immediately  in  our  rear.  The  Twenty  - 
ond  having  in  the  mean  time  been  ordered  by  you  to  re-enforce  Colo- 
Vandever,  near  the  village  of  Leetown,  the  left  wing  of  the  Eighth, 
ler  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shunk,  and  Captain  Klauss,  with  one  section 
l a half  of  his  battery,  were  ordered  to  support  Colonel  Carr,  whose 
ision,  in  conjunction  with  General  Asboth’s,  was  then  engaged  with 
ce’s  force  near  Elkhorn  Tavern. 

^bout  2 p.  m.  I received  your  order  to  proceed  with  the  Eighteenth 
lie  scene  of  action,  which  order  was  executed  with  dispatch  by  Lieu- 
ant-Colonel  Washburn.  On  arriving  I found  the  Twenty-second  in 
‘ of  battle  on  the  left  and  rear  of  Davidson’s  Peoria  battery,  which 
* in  position  in  the  southeast  corner  of  a large  open  field.  We  im- 


250  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV]| 

mediately  formed  on  their  right.  Here  I took  command  of  both  re 
ments.  Colonel  White’s  brigade  being  warmly  engaged  with  the  eneiri 
in  the  woods  on  the  right  of  the  clear  land,  I was  ordered  to  his  si| 
port.  Moving  in  double-quick  time  by  the  right  flank  and  passi^ 
through  the  timber  to  a small  hill  I found  the  Fifty-ninth  Illinois  $ 
tirin"  in  disorder,  having  been  overwhelmed  by  vastly  superior  nui 
bers  and  a murderous  fire  from  the  Louisiana,  Arkansas,  and  Cherolj 
troops.  I closed  up  my  lines  as  soon  as  the  Fifty-ninth  passed  throng 
and,  advancing  through  the  field,  changed  my  line  of  battle  by  wheeli^j 
to  the  left  until  I got  about  parallel  with  the  right  side  of  the  large  fid 
first  mentioned.  Then  pressing  forward  I found  the  enemy  rushing  up! 
Davidson’s  battery  (Colonel  White,  with  the  Thirty-seventh  Xllino^ 
having  retired  to  change  his  line),  having  taken  two  guns,  which  thjjj 
turned  on  my  command  with  some  effect.  Here  they  received  a f| 
volley  from  us,  which  threw  them  into  the  utmost  confusion,  when  tfirt 
abandoned  the  guns  taken  and  retreated  from  the  field,  a part  of  th<i 
passing  to  our  right  rear,  and  a large  force  taking  immediately  through  t s 
line  of  the  Twenty-second,  which  gave  way,  by  order  of  Colonel  H<- 
dricks,  and  retired  from  the  field,  leaving  the  Eighteenth  alone.  Abcb 
this  time  Colonel  Hendricks  fell,  having  received  two  mortal  wounl 

About  the  time  the  enemy  found  I had  them  flanked  Colonel  Whl 
rallied  the  Thirtv-seventh  and  nobly  seconded  my  efforts  to  retake  t» 
battery.  That  portion  of  the  enemy  which  passed  my  left  flank  pour 
in  a desperate  volley  on  the  rear  of  the  Eighteenth,  which  was  render 
comparatively  harmless  by  having  the  men  fall  flat  down.  The  left  wi 
was  promptly  faced  by  the  rear  rank  and  returned  the  fire  with  terril 
effect  on  the  enemy,  while  the  right  wing  fired  to  the  right  front 
those  who  were  rapidly  retreating  in  that  directioir.  W e then  pass 
through  to  the  open  ground  in  front,  having  secured  a complete  victc 
over  a force  three  times  our  number  of  the  best  Louisiana  and  Arkam 
troops,  assisted  by  a large  body  of  Cherokee  Indians,  many  of  wh< 
paid  the  penalty  of  their  base  ingratitude  to  the  Government  that  1 
so  bountifully  provided  for  their  welfare.  After  some  little  time  t 
Twenty-second  returned  and  took  their  position  on  the  right  of  t 
Eighteenth,  where  we  bivouacked  on  the  same  ground  where  we  fi 
formed.  Thus  ended  the  battle  near  Leetown,  in  which  the  enemy  1< 
Generals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh,  with  many  other  officers  of  distil 
tion. 

About  10  p.  m.  your  orders  were  received  directing  me  to  move  v 
command  to  the  support  of  Carr’s  division,  which  had  been  warmly  < 
gaged  all  day  with  Price’s  forces.  At  12  o’clock  we  moved,  returnii 
to  the  main  road,  thence  north  to  the  cleared  land  south  of  Elkhd 
Tavern,  where  we  took  position  on  the  right  side  of  the  road,  the  I 
of  tha  Eighteenth  resting  on  the  road,  and  the  right  of  the  Twen 
second  resting  on  the  left  wing  of  the  Eighth,  which  had  rendered  g 
lant  service  during  the  day  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Shunk,  in  c( 
junction  with  the  right  wing  of  Klauss’  battery,  which  I found  in  po 
tion  opposite  the  center  of  my  command.  Here  we  bivouacked  on  t 
edge  of  the  brush- wood  until  morning. 

At  7.30  a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  the  fire  was  opened  by  Dav 
son’s  and  Klauss’  batteries,  which  in  a short  time  was  answered  Ip 
tremendous  fire  of  grape  and  canister  from  a masked  battery  in  a po 
of  scrubby  timber  not  over  150  yards  from  my  line.  Klauss’  batte 
after  firing  a few  rounds,  was  forced  to  retire,  the  Twenty-second  a 
Eighth  likewise  falling  back  in  haste.  The  Eighteenth  remained 
ambush  unobserved  as  yet  by  the  enemy,  their  fire  passing  over,  un 


kv.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


251 


leemed  it  advisable  to  bring  them  to  the  rear,  which  order  was  exe- 
ted  without  loss  and  in  good  order.  I now  reformed  the  Twenty- 
sond  and  Eighth,  and  directed  my  line  of  battle  parallel  with  and 
out  300  yards  from  my  first  position  in  the  woods,  but  on  receiving 
iers  from  you  I changed  my  line  by  throwing  the  right  back  a little, 
which  position  we  cautiously  advanced  until  my  right  rested  on  the 
jar  land  adjoining  our  first  position.  Here  I received  a message  that 
e masked  battery  had  retired ; that  I had  to  change  position  to  get 
t of  the  line  of  fire  of  our  batteries,  which  were  then  moving  for- 
trd,  the  enemy  having  given  way.  Here  we  passed  to  the  front  by  file 
>m  the  right  until  we  were  on  the  ground  pointed  out  for  us  near  the 
ash  concealing  the  enemy’s  batteries,  when  to  my  surprise  I found 
at  there  had  been  a mistake  in  supposing  them  withdrawn,  as  a per- 
>t  shower  of  canister  belched  forth  from  the  thick  brush  in  front, 
tich,  fortunately,  was  aimed  too  high.  Lieutenant-Colonel  W ashburn, 
ing  forward,  promptly  gave  orders  to  change  front  forward  and  form 
e along  the  fence,  which  was  rapidly  executed,  our  own  batteries  and 
at  of  the  enemy  in  the  mean  time  playing  over  us.  An  order  to  charge 
d take  the  battery  was  now  given,  which  was  received  with  cheers, 
3 fine  advancing  steadily  with  fixed  bayonets,  increasing  the  speed 
a double-quick.  Our  men  cheered  with  undaunted  spirit,  which 
used  the  rebels  to  hastily  withdraw  their  battery,  and  a general  stam- 
de  ensued.  We  now  deployed  to  the  right,  the  Eighteenth  being  in 
vance,  the  Eighth  and  Twenty-second  being  separated  by  Colonel 
hite’s  brigade,  which,  in  the  excitement  consequent  on  the  unex- 
cted  attack  from  and  subsequent  charge  on  the  battery,  had  formed 
its  left.  In  this  position  the  two  brigades  pushed  on  the  enemy,  in 
1 retreat,  frequently  giving  them  a heavy  fire  from  muskets  and 
les,  the  chase  being  kept  up  through  heavy  fallen  timber,  passing 
lich  we  got  into  open  timber  and  moved  rapidly  forward.  The  enemy 
w having  passed  out  of  sight  and  the  men  being  exhausted  I gave 
the  chase,  but  advanced  steadily  up  to  the  Huntsville  road,  when  I 
Lted  the  Eighteenth  and  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  rest  of  the  brigade, 
ich  came  up  in  a short  time.  Colonel  Benton  now  arrived  with  the 
ht  wing  of  the  Eighth  and  the  balance  of  Klauss’  battery,  which  had 
3n  left  to  hold  the  crossing  at  Sugar  Creek,  no  doubt  thinking  their 
a hard  one  at  not  being  permitted  to  take  a more  active  part  in  the 
lievement  of  so  glorious  a victory.  This  was  the  first  time  my  com- 
aid got  all  together  since  the  engagement  first  commenced. 

During  the  engagement  of  the  7th  and  8th  Captain  Klauss  rendered 
3 most  efficient  service,  being  several  times  the  first  day  unsupported 
infantry,  consequently  in  great  danger  of  being  cut  off  by  the  enemy. 
[ cannot  close  this  report  without  noticing  the  promptitude  with 
dch  nearly  all  the  officers  executed  the  commands  given,  but  more 
rticularly  would  I return  thanks  for  the  efficient  aid  rendered  by 
iutenant-Colonel  Washburn,  Major  Thomas,  and  Captain  Short, 
Ing  major  of  the  Eighteenth ; to  Colonel  Benton  and  Lieutenant- 
lonel  Shunk,  of  the  Eighth;  also  to  my  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
aeral,  Lieut.  George  S.  Marshall,  and  Lieut.  William  F.  Davis,  aide- 
camp,  who  both  rendered  prompt  and  efficient  service  in  delivering, 
lers  on  the  field.  The  officers  of  the  line  tried  to  emulate  each  other 
forwarding  the  good  cause  in  which  we  are  engaged,  and  the  men 
serve  the  praise  and  congratulations  of  the  whole  country  for  their 
irage  and  efficiency  exhibited  on  all  occasions  in  the  face  of  a des- 
rate  and  unscrupulous  foe. 

In  consideration  of  the  galling  fire  to  which  my  command  was  fre- 


252 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND-  T.  [Chap.  XV]',' 

quently  exposed  I am  liappy  to  say  but  little  loss,  comparatively,  wjj 
sustained,  every  advantage  being  taken  to  save  the  men  from  exposu 
by  lying  down  and  otherwise,  to  which  the  accompanying  list  of  kilh, 
wounded,  and  missing  will  bear  testimony.* 

The  following  officers  have  been  favorably  noticed  by  their  respectil 
commanders  in  regimental  reports,  namely : Capts.  Jonathan  H.  W • 
iams,  John  C.  Jenks,  and  Dr.  G.  W.  Gordon,  of  the  Eighteenth,  a l 
Lieut.  Col.  D.  Shunk,  of  the  Eighth.  Many  others  no  doubt  desei^ 
particular  mention  who  have  escaped  the  observation  of  myself  a l 
their  immediate  commanders. 

Respectfully  submitted.  

THOMAS  PATTISON. 

Col.,  Comdg.  First  Brig.,  Third  I)iv.,  Southwest  Army 

Col.  Jefferson  C.  Davis, 

Commanding  Third  Division. 


No.  19. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  David  Shunk , Eighth  Indiana  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Eighth  Regt.  Indiana  Vols., 

March  13,  1862 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  note  of  the  12th  instant  would  say  that  abri 
3 o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  first  day’s  fighting  an  order  came  from  Gene:l 
Curtis  to  Colonel  Benton,  commanding  the  Eighth  Indiana  Regime , 
to  send  five  companies  to  your  support.  He  immediately  ordered  }j 
to  take  the  left  wing  of  the  regiment  and  proceed  at  double-quick.  I 
was  joined  by  three  pieces  rifled  cannon  from  Captain  Klauss’  \ 
diana  battery,  which  I reported  to  you  at  the  same  time.  You 
tached  my  command  temporarily  to  Colonel  Yandever’s.  Afterwaii 
I received  an  order  to  go  over  on  the  right  of  the  main  road,  in  tj 
brush,  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Dodge,  to  whom  I did  not  report,  fr< 
the  fact  that  my  guide’s  horse  was  killed  under  him,  and  I was  so: 
engaged  by  about  1,200  of  the  enemy,  with  whom  I continued  to  fig 
along  with  the  Fourth  Iowa,  until  dark.  We  then  fell  back  about  £ 
yards  across  the  field  in  the  edge  of  the  timber,  and  laid  on  our  ar: 
all  night.  In  the  morning  I was  ordered  by  Colonel  Patti  son,  co 
manding  our  brigade,  to  join  my  brigade,  which  I did.  My  loss  in  t 
engagement  of  Friday  afternoon  was  5 killed  and  27  wounded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  vour  very  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  SHUNK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Eighth  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers 

Col.  E.  A.  Carr, 

Commanding  Fourth  Division. 

* Nominal  list  aggregated  17  killed,  80  wounded,  and  7 missing. 


p.  XVIII,  J 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 
No.  20. 


253 


oort  of  Col.  Julius  White , Thirty -seventh  Illinois  Infantry , command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Third  Division, 

Camp  on  Sugar  Creek , Arkansas,  March  11,  1862. 
rENERAE : In  obedience  to  your  order,  received  at  about  1 p.  m of 
7th  instant,  this  command,  consisting  of  the  Thirty- seventh  Illinois 
lunteers,  the  Fifty-ninth  Illinois  Volunteers  (late  Ninth  Missouri), 
l the  Peoria  Light  Artillery,  in  all  about  950  men,  took  position  in 
at  of  the  enemy  near  Leetown.  The  force  we  encountered  consisted 
:he  Third  Louisiana,  Colonel  Hebert,  a regiment  formerly  commanded 
General  McIntosh,  Colonel  Mitchell’s  and  Colonel  McKae’s  two  regi- 
ats  of  Arkansans,  and  a large  body  of  Indians,  under  command  of 
[.  Albert  Pike,  with  a reserve  of  several  other  regiments,  all  being 
ler  the  chief  command  of  General  Benjamin  McCulloch. 

"he  enemy  taking  position  in  a dense  thicket  on  our  right,  this  com- 
nd  was  moved  in  and  formed  in  line  of  battle  in  perfect  order  within 
i yards  of  the  enemy’s  front.  Both  lines  then  advanced  slowly,  not 
un  being  fired  until  the  distance  between  them  was  reduced  60  or 
yards,  when  the  fire  opened  almost  simultaneously  from  both  sides, 
1 was  maintained  for  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  with  very  little 
Brmission  at  very  short  range.  At  this  time,  finding  that  the  enemy 
s outflanking  our  right,  notwithstanding  I had  deployed  this  com- 
nd  to  an  extent  which  was  of  itself  hazardous  in  the  effort  to  pre- 
it  such  a result,  and  desiring  to  execute  a change  of  front  corre- 
mding  to  the  requirements  of  the  emergency,  I threw  back  the 
Tty-seventh  Illinois  in  good  order  to  the  corner  of  the  field  on  our 
, where  it  was  again  formed.  While  in  the  execution  of  this  move- 
nt a fresh  regiment  of  the  enemy  made  a sudden  charge  from  the 
ish-wood,  and  after  disabling  a number  of  horses  by  a volley  suc- 
ded  in  capturing  two  guns  of  the  light  artillery.  "Their  triumph 
3 short-lived,  however,  for  the  Thirty-seventh  Illinois  immediately 
d upon  them  and  charged,  routing  their  right  wing  at  the  same  time 
t the  First  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Pattisoi),  came  into  action  on  our 
lit,  driving  the  left  wing  of  the  enemy  in  confusion  from  the  field 
l retaking  our  guns.  After  following  the  enemy  into  the  woods 
>ut  a mile  beyond  the  battle-field  this  command  rested  for  about 
> hours,  when  we  marched,  by  your  direction,  to  a position  on  the 
in  road  in  the  direction  of  Cassville,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the 
ht. 

tmong  the  officers,  who  all  exhibited  the  utmost  gallantry  and  effi- 
gy, it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  individuals. 

)f  Lieut.  Col.  M.  S.  Barnes,  of  the  Thirty-seventh,  and  Lieut.  Col. 
EL  Frederick,  of  the  Fifty-ninth,  it  is  but  just  to  say  that  they  were 
1,  determined,  and  discharged  their  duty  as  commanding  officers  of 
ir  respective  regiments  in  a manner  that  entitles  them  to  the  thanks 
heir  countrymen. 

loth  Maj.  John  Charles  Black,  of  the  Thirty-seventh,  and  Maj.  P. 
ney  Post,  of  the  Fifty -ninth,  were  wounded  early  in  the  engagement, 
h severely  in  the  sword  arm.  The  former  continued  on  the  field  until 
emptorily  ordered  by  myself  to  leave  it  for  the  purpose  of  having 
wound  dressed.  Major  Post  also  refused  to  leave  the  field  until  it 
J insisted  on  by  Surgeon  Maynard. 

’apt.  C.  V.  Dickinson,  of  the  Thirty-seventh,  and  Capt.  Clayton 


254  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVl| 

Hale,  of  the  Fifty-ninth,  who  by  virtue  of  seniority  filled  the  plac# 
of  Majors  Black  and  Post  respectively,  discharged  the  duties  devo: 
ing  upon  them  with  great  gallantry  and  efficiency.  I 

Adjts.  Anton  Mem  an,  of  the  Thirty-seventh,  and  Samuel  West,  I 
the  Fifty-ninth,  and  all  the  officers  of  the  line,  without  exception 
deserve  the  highest  praise.  FTot  one  flinched  or  shrank  from  his  dut 
in  fact,  the  same  may  be  said  of  all  the  non-commissioned  officers  a 
privates. 

The  Peoria  Light  Artillery  company,  under  the  command  ot  La]i) 
Peter  Davidson,  deserves  honorable  mention.  Although  not  brougi 
into  action  until  late  in  the  day,  their  fire  was  delivered  with  precisil 
and  great  effect,  all  the  officers  and  men  of  that  command  display^ 
the  utmost  firmness  and  efficiency. 

Our  loss  was  as  follows*: 


Command. 


THIRTY-SEVENTH  ILLINOIS,  LIEUT.  COL.  MYRON  S.  BARNES. 


Officers ; 

Non-commissioned  officers  and  privates . 


Total 


FIFTY-NINTH  ILLINOIS,  LIEUT.  COL.  C.  H.  FREDERICK. 


Officers : 

Non-commissioned  officers  and  privates. 


Total 


PEORIA  LIGHT  ARTILLERY,  CAPT.  PETER  DAVIDSON. 


Officers : 

Non-commissioned  officers  and  privates. 


21 


Total 


All  our  wounded  have  been  attended  to  by  Asst.  Surg.  E.  A.  Clar 
of  the  Thirty-seventh,  and  Maynard,  of  the  Fifty-ninth,  in  the  me 
assiduous  manner.  Their  skill  and  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  their  respo 
sible  position  is  highly  commendable. 

Report  of  the  engagement  of  the  8th  instant . # 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th  instant  I took  position  in  front  of  tl 
enemy,  our  right  resting  on  the  Springfield  road,  three  companies  su 
porting  the  battery  of  the  Peoria  Light  Artillery  on  the  extreme  rigl 
and  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  to  the  left  in  an  open  field,  with  i 
shelter  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  but  a rail  fence.  Our  battery,  1 
direction,  opened  fire  the  first  of  the  day  upon  the  woods  in  fror 
where  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  were  discovered  in  the  act 
forming  their  line  of  battle.  Our  fire  was  responded  to  by  the  guns 
the  enemy  to  our  right,  where  they  were  masked  by  a dense  growth 
underbrush  and  within  grape  and  canister  distance.  For  about  ha 
an  hour  I sustained  this  position  alone  with  but  four  guns,  our  infant; 
being  entirely  out  of  range  and  therefore  useless,  while  at  the  saD 
time  they  were  greatly  exposed  to  an  enfilading  fire,  which  began 


Nominal  list  omitted. 


aj\  xyih.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  9R  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


255 


11  upon  them.  At  this  time  I directed  a movement  to  the  rear  and 
>out  250  yards  distant,  placing  the  infantry  out  of  exposure  from  the 
emy’s  artillery  and  establishing  Davidson’s  battery  on  an  eminence 
thin  easy  range  of  the  enemy.  From  this  position  our  fire  was 
newed  and  fold  with  manifest  effect.  The  artillery  of  General  Sigel’s 
d Colonel  Carr’s  divisions  soon  formed  on  our  left  and  right,  and  the 
tion  became  general.  The  artillery  gradually  advanced  on  the  enemy, 
file  my  command,  under  the  same  order,  moved  to  the  right,  in  con- 
ction  with  the  First  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Pattison,  forming  a con- 
rnous  line  and  connecting  with  General  Sigel’s  infantry.  We  now 
vanced  in  perfect  order  upon  the  enemy’s  left,  delivering  volley  after 
tley  with  great  rapidity,  precision,  and  effect.  The  rout  of  the  enemy 
is  complete,  and  we  halted  at  Elkhorn  Tavern,  about  a mile  and  a 
If  in  advance  of  our  first  position,  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  being 
ntinued  by  General  Sigel’s  column. 

The  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  was  but  a repetition  of  the  pre- 
ous  day.  None  faltered;  all  performed  their  duty  nobly.  The 
ioria  Light  Artillery,  however,  on  this  day  had  the  opportunity,  which 
ey  had  not  so  fully  before,  to  exhibit  the  great  skill  and  bravery  of 
eir  officers  and  the  discipline  and  bravery  of  their  men.  The  guns 
ire  served  with  the  regularity  and  rapidity  of  a parade  day,  and  un- 
r that  terrific  fire  of  shell,  grape,  and  canister  from  more  than  double 
e number  of  their  own  guns  for  some  time  before  any  other  artillery, 
cept  that  of  the  First  Brigade  of  this  division,  was  brought  into 
tion.  This  battery  was  subsequently  moved  to  the  front  and  right, 
lere,  after  taking  position  near  the  main  road,  it  opened  a very 
ective  fire  of  canister  upon  the  enemy,  who  was  concealed  in  the 
usb,  but  was  immediately  routed  from  his  position  by  this  fire.  The 
ticers  of  this  battery — Capt.  Peter  Davidson  and  Lieutenants  Borris, 
ansel,  and  Fenton — have  exhibited  all  the  qualities  requisite  to  the 
ghest  proficiency  as  officers  and  are  entitled  to  the  respect  and  thanks 
their  countrymen. 

To  Brigade  Adjt.  Isaac  C.  Dodge  I am  indebted  for  prompt  aid  at 
e commencement  of  the  action  of  the  7th,  but  having  been  sent  to 
•urself  with  a message,  he  was  prevented  from  joining  the  command 
;ain  until  near  the  close  of  the  action. 

Chaplains  Anderson,  of  the  Thirty-seventh,  and  Shumate,  of  the  Fifty- 
nth,  were  present  in  the  field,  rendering  all  the  aid  in  their  power  in 
moving  the  wounded  and  relieving  their  sufferings. 

I should  do  injustice  if  I omitted  to  mention  the  very  valuable  aid 
ceived  at  various  times  from  your  aides,  Cols.  Henry  Pease  and  Mor- 
son ; also  from  Adjutant  Holstein.  The  person  and  voice  of  Colonel 
iase  were  often  seen  and  heard  along  the  line,  cheering  and  encour- 
,'ing  the  men  on  to  victory,  regardless  of  personal  danger,  which  he 
is  under  no  obligation  to  encounter  except  on  official  business. 

The  quartermasters  of  both  regiments — Captain  Peck  of  the  Thirty- 
venth,  and  Brasher,  of  the  Fifty-ninth,  and  Brigade  Quartermaster 
M.  Jones  and  Brigade  Commissary  A.  D.  Baker — have  during  the 
ree  days  of  the  enemy’s  presence  discharged  their  duties  promptly 
id  efficiently ; their  several  departments,  so  essential  to  the  welfare  of 
aops,  having  always  been  in  order. 


256  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvutf 

Our  loss  during  the  action  of  the  8th  was  as  follows : 


Command. 


cfl 

w 


37th  ' j 

Davidson’s  battery 


Total 


RECAPITULATION . 


37th  Illinois  (March  7) 
37th  Illinois  (March  8) 

Total 

59th  Illinois  (March  7) 
59th  Illinois  (March  8) 

Total 


21  j 



21  i 1 

U ~ 


14 


Peoria  Light  Artillery  (March  7) 
Peoria  Light  Artillery  (March  8) 

Total 

Grand  total 


I close  this  report  with  my  warmest  thanks  to  you,  general;  for  tl : 
wisdom,  firmness,  and  ability  with  which  the  movements  of  my  coi  l 
mand  have  been  directed  by  yourself  and  for  your  kindness  to  iu 
wounded. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JULIUS  WHITE, 

Col.  Thirty  seventh  111.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Third  Div. 

Actg.  Brig.  Gen.  Jeeferson  0.  Davis, 

Commanding  Third  Division. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Col.  Eugene  A.  Carr , Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  commandh 

Fourth  Division. 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Div.,  Camp  near  Elkhorn  Tavern, 

Benton  County , Arkansas,  March  10,  1862. 

Sir:  Pursuant  to  Paragraph  I of  General  Orders, No.  5,  dated  Hea< 
quarters  Army  of  the  Southwest,  Pea  Eidge,  Ark.,  March  9, 1862,  direc 
ing  commanders  of  divisions  to  report  as  soon  as  practicable  the  mov 
ments  and  casualties  in  their  respective  divisions  during  the  campaign 
I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows : I 

On  the  9th  of  February,  at  Lebanon,  Mo.,  the  general  organized  tL 
Fourth  Division  and  placed  it  under  my  command.  I had  previous! 
conducted  the  operations  of  the  cavalry  expedition  and  the  force  uudt 
Colonel  Osterhaus  up  to  the  time  when  the  general  commanding  the  dr 
trict  arrived  in  person  at  Lebanon.  The  troops  ordered  to  constitul 
the  Fourth  Division  were : 

First  Brigade,  Colonel  Dodge  commanding:  Fourth  Iowa\  olunteei 
Colonel  Dodge  5 Thirty-fifth  Illinois  Volunteers,  Colonel  Smith  ; Fin 
Iowa  Battery,  Lieutenant  David. 

Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Vandever  commanding:  Ninth  Iowa  v olui 


XVIIIi]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark. 


257 


>ers,  Colonel  Vandever;  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Volunteers,  Colonel 
oyd;  Dubuque  battery,  Captain  Hayden;  third  battalion  of  the  Third 
hnois  Cavalry,  under  Majors  Euggles,  McConnell,  and  Captain  Maus. 
With  this  command  I started  from  Lebanon,  Mo.,  on  the  10th  of  Feb- 
Lary,  and  arrived  at  Marshfield  on  the  12th,  where  the  whole  army  had 
isembled.  On  the  13th  we  marched  within  8 miles  of  Springfield  I 
ading  the  advance  on  the  direct  road,  and  my  advance  of  cavalry,  under 
ajor  McConnell,  together  with  Major  Bowen  and  Colonel  Wright’s  cav- 
ry,  and  the  mountain  howitzers,  under  Captain  Stephens,  skirmished 
e enemy  during  the  latter  part  of  the  day’s  march.  I placed  a picket 
four  companies,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  a mile  and  a half  in  advance 
the  fork  of  the  road,  immediately  after  arriving  in  camp.  This  picket 
is  attacked  by  the  enemy,  but  gallantly  held  its  ground  and  drove 
e enemy  away.  The  next  morning  at  4 o’clock  my  division  took  the 
vance  in  the  direction  of  Springfield.  Upon  arriving  5 miles  from 
>nngfield,  before  daylight  in  the  morning,  I halted  to  wait  for  the  other 
visions  to  come  up  and  deploy,  but  a company  of  the  Fourth  Iowa, 
lich  had  been  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers,  did  not  receive  the 
lers  to  halt,  but  marched  into  Springfield  and  took  it,  with  some  pris- 
ers  and  stores,  the  enemy  having  evacuated  in  the  night. 

Ilie  next  day  the  Third  and  Fourth  Divisions  moved' on  to  McCulla’s 
ore,  29  miles.  The  next  day  my  division  led.  The  cavalry  advance 
nposed  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  the  cavalry  of  the  Third  Divis- 
i,  and  the  mountain  howitzers,  overtook  the  rear  guard  of  the  enemy’s 
iHery  and  infantry  on  Flat  Creek,  and  brought  them  to  bay.  The 
unique  battery  was  brought  up,  and  under  the  personal  supervision 
the  general  fired  upon  the  enemy,  doing  him  considerable  damage 

tker  mfantry  COuld  not  come  np  nntil  was  to°  late  to  pursue  any 

rhe  next  day  the  Third  Division  led,  preceded  by  all  the  cavalry, 
hiding  the  Third  Illinois.  They  had  a skirmish  after  passing  Keets- 
le,  and  m Cross  Timber  Hollow  a party  with  Colonel  Davis,  com- 
ndmg  Third  Division,  who  went  forward  to  reconnoiter,  consisting 
Free  compames  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  and  about  a company 
the  First  Missouri,  charged  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  ran  them  to 

11  my  men  having  several  men  and  horses  wounded  and  1 

se  killed. 

he  next  day,  my  division  leading,  with  Ellis’,  Wright’s,  and  Mc- 
mell  s cavalry,  came  upon  the  enemy  at  Sugar  Creek.  The  general 
ered  a charge  of  cavalry,  which  was  gallantly  executed,  supported 
the  mountain  howitzers  under  Major  Bowen,  who  was  wounded  in 
wrist.  My  cavalry,  though  in  rear  of  the  column,  advanced  well 
by  flanking  to  the  left,  and  did  considerable  execution.  I came  on 
rapidly  as  possible  with  the  Second  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Van- 
er,  and  opened  with  the  Dubuque  battery,  Captain  Hayden,  the 
my  having  made  a stand  about  a mile  and  a half  from  the  creek, 
was  quite  obstinate,  and  showed  some  good  artillery  practice  at  our 
tery,  disabling  two  horses,  but  Captain  Hayden  finally  drove  him 
ty,  and  we  camped  where  we  were.  I have  since  learned  that  the 
:ny  had  come  to  that  point  from  Cross  Hollow  to  assist  Price  and 
mled  to  fight  us  there,  but  that  his  heart  failed  him  and  he  retreated 
onsiderable  confusion  before  my  Second  Brigade,  and  that  if  we  had 
sued  at  that  tune  we  might  have  routed  him  and  done  him  consul-* 
ue  damage;  but  the  positive  order  of  the  general,  based  upon  the 
on  tha^  it  was  too  late  m the  day  to  go  as  far  as  Cross  Hollow  and 

17  R R — VOL  VIII 


'•)  h 


58 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ojiap,  XVII 


i. 


tight  a battle— ami  that  point  bad  long  been  spoken  of  as  one  whel 
the  enemy  intended  to  make  a determined  stand— forbade  my  gon.l 

toThfnert  dav  we  waited  for  General  Sigel’s  division  to  come  u 
The  next  we  marched  to  Osage  Springs,  when  we  found  that  the  enenl 

bad  decamped  from  On*  Hollow.  My  ^iriTobmteerThil 


that,  place,  Colonel  Phelps’  regiment  of  Missouri  Volunteers  havn 
been  asSted  to  the  Second  Brigade  and  Ooloiiel  Boyd’s  regment  i 


been  cusoig 
lieved. 


lievea  While  at  Cross  Hollow  Lieutenant  Jones,  of  the  First  Iov 
Battery  received  his  commission  as  captain  and  took  command,  relit; 
in  g ^Lieutenant  David.  The  ammunition  of  that  battery  and  a so 
Dubuque  battery  was  defective,  the  powder  being  pool,  the  ohargi 
too  light,  and  the  fuses  uncertain.  I was  told  that  the  aminunitM 
was  put  up  by  contractors,  and  on  the  day  of  battle  the  blood  of  ol 
soldiers  paid  over  again  the  unjust  debt  which  had  once  been  paid  frig 

' 1 ' < > 1 1 1 1\ i e ''2 4 1 h of  February  an  expedition  of  cavalry  and  artillery,  uudl 
General  Asboth,  was  sent  to  Fayetteville.  My  cavalry  led  the  chars 
into  the  town,  capturing  several  prisoners.  During  my  occupation 
Cross  Hollow,  up  to  the  5th  of  March,  several  parties  went  out  1 
different  directions,  Colonel  Dodge  making  two  expeditions  and  Colo  I 
Vandever  one,  taking  a good  many  prisoners  and  killing  some  ot  tj 


OiAlie  5th  of  March  his  cavalry  appeared  111  strong  force  on  ti 
Fayetteville  road  and  captured  some  of  our  wagons  and  men  wbu 
were  out  foraging.  We  at  the  same  time  received  intelligence  that 
was  advancing  in  force.  The  general  directed  me  to  move  back  to  Sjd 
Creek,  to  which  place  he  had  ordered  the  other  f ™ns  and  where 


intended  to  fight'  ‘ I moved  that  night,  but  on  account  of  the  loss  of  1) 


intended  to  mini,  j-  jbgvcu  muo  nibuu,  - — — . 

wagons  was  obliged  to  destroy  a few  stores  and  some  camp  equipii 

an/Ll«eUoftAeP7tft.^HavhigS heard  that  the  enemy  had  made  his  appe 
aime  on  toe  west  of  us,  General  Curtis  had  called  us  in  consultat.on 
the  morning  of  the  7th  about  changing  front  in  that  direction,  w 
news  came  from  the  rear  (north)  that  parties  of  the  enemy  were  U 
vicinity  to  the  Elkhorn  Tavern,  where  our  depot  of  supplies  had  l« 
placed,  together  with  the  provost-marshal’s  guard  and  prisoners.  Ja 
general  immediately  directed  me,  to  send  a brigade  to  that  point,  an; 
gave  the  order  to  Colonel  Dodge,  who  was  present.  Elkhorn  1. ' 
was  about  a mile  and  a half  north  of  our  camp,  the  ground  being  smo 
and  gradually  ascending,  with  open  fields  on  each  side  of  the > road  ft 
about  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  camp  to  with m about  a hum! 
yards  of  the' house.  The  house  is  situated  on  the  west  side  ot  | 


Spring  field  auu  rayeitcvinc  xv,«v»,  — ;; — : 7-  ,7  ® w.  v 

Cross  Timber  Hollow  (the  head  of  Sugar  Creek),  through  which 
road  runs  about  7 miles  north  towards  Keetsville.  Behind  the  lio 
to  the  west  is  a rocky  hill  abput  150  feet  high,  running  oft  m a n 
towards  the  northwest.  In  front  of  the  house  is  a level  ridge,  on  u 
a road  runs  towards  the  east,  having  on  the  south  side  the  S'liooth  sio 
mostly  timbered,  and  on  its  north  side  the  heads  ot  rugged  gor». 
ning  down  into  Cross  Timber  Hollow.  About  a halt  a niile  tioi 
tavern  on  the  north  side  of  this  road  is  Clemens’  house,  with  a fi 
mostly  on  the  south  side  of  the  road  of  about  20  acres._  Abouttlic  I 
horn  Tavern  is  an  open  space  ot  about  10  acres.  W itli  these  tw 
ceptions  the  ground  is  mostly  covered  with  trees  and  iiiiderbrush,  wB 


and  Fayetteville  road,  at  the  head  of  a gorge  known 


comes  up  close  to  the  tavern  on  the  north  side.  As  I left  the  gem 


■ur.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  259 

> go  witli  my  leading  brigade  be  remarked  to  me  that  1 would  clean 
ut  that  hollow  in  a very  short  time. 

On  arriving  at  the  tavern  I found  that  the  enemy  were  trying  to  flank 
round  to  the  east  beyond  Clemens’  house.  I sent  out  the  cavalry, 
nder  Major  McConnell,  to  skirmish  them,  followed  by  Colonel  Dodge, 
ith  his  regiment  and  two  pieces ; ordered  Captain  Jones  to  remain 
ith  two  pieces  as  a reserve  at  the  tavern,  and  took  two  other  pieces 
lyself  down  the  road,  which  led  down  the  hollow  300  or  400  yards  to 
here  the  bushes  w6re  open  enough  to  see  a little  to  the  front  and  to 
le  right,  bringing  Colonel  Smith,  with  the  Thirty -fifth  Illinois,  to  sup- 
ort  the  battery,  and  opened  fire  on  a battery  on  a bluff  on  our  right 
ont.  They  immediately  replied,  and  as  long  as  my  guns  staid  there 
lere  was  a perfect  storm  of  shot,  shell,  and  grape.  * 

In  the  mean  time  Dodge  had  driven  back  the  enemy  on  the  right  flank 
iid  frustrated  his  first  attempt  to  outflank  us.  I then  sent  back  to  the 
eneral  a request  to  send  forward  Yandever’s  brigade ; brought  Jones’ 
vo  pieces  down  the  road,  which  took  some  time,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
ley  had  gone  with  Dodge  instead  of  remaining  as  reserve.  About 
lat  time  one  of  the  pieces  which  I had  became  disabled  by  a cartridge 
icking  half  way  down  and  was  sent  off. 

The  enemy  seemed  to  have  the  range  exactly.  Colonel  Smith,  Thirty - 
fth  Illinois,  was  wounded  in  the  head  by  a shell,  which  took  off  a part 
* his  scalp.  He  received  a bullet  in  his  shoulder  and  his  horse  was 
illed  all  about  the  same  time.  Colonel  Smith  and  his  regiment  showed 
le  utmost  gallantry,  and  deserve  great  credit  for  their  steadiness  in 
ipporting  the  battery  as  well  as  for  their  conduct.  Subsequently, 
hen  fighting  the  enemy’s  infantry  near  the  same  point,  just  before 
olonel  Smith  was  wounded,  five  or  six  ammunition  chests  burst,  one 
ter  the  other,  Captain  Jones  and  Lieutenant  Gambell  were  wounded 
vr  my  side,  and  all  but  one  of  the  pieces  were  disabled.  This  one  piece 
as  commanded  by  Corporal  Leebert,  First  Iowa  Battery,  and  was  the 
fly  gun  which  was  in  the  action  from  beginning  to  end,  and  both  Cor- 
)ral  Leebert  and  his  cannoneers  deserve  great  credit  for  coolness,  gal- 
ntry,  and  activity  through  the  entire  action. 

About  this  time  General  Curtis  came  up  to  see  how  we  were  getting 
ong.  At  this  juncture  two  pieces  of  the  Dubuque  battery  arrived, 
uler  Lieutenant  Wright,  and  were  served  with  admirable  zeal  and 
itivity.  Lieutenant  Wright  showed  great  coolness  and  skill  during 
ie  entire  action  and  was  slightly  wounded.  The  remainder  of  the 
oblique  battery  then  came,  and  continued  firing  until  I became  satis- 
h!  that  it  was  disadvantageous  to  remain  there  any  longer,  and  re 
t ed  to  the  top  of  the  hill.  I had  then  been  struck  three  times.  I then 
nt  word  to  the  general  that  I had  need  of  re-enforcements,  having 
‘(tome  satisfied  that  it  was  no  small  party  merely  to  annoy  the  road 
itli  whom  I was  contending,  but  a very  considerable  force — perhaps 
s ma9i  body.  From  subsequent  information  I learn  that  it  consisted 
between  10,000  and  15,000  men,  comprising  all  the  Missourians,  some 
whom  were  called  Confederate  troops,  and  were  under  Colonel  Little; 

1 the  Missouri  State  Guards,  under  General  Price.  There  were  other 
bel  forces,  including  Indians,  the  whole  commanded  by  General  Van 
oni  in  person,  with  about  twenty  guns,  some  of  which  were  rifled, 
mle  1 had  not  quite  2,500  men  now  on  the  field,  with  twelve  guns, 
nidi  came  up  successively,  were  disabled,  and  ran  out  of  ammunition 
such  a manner  that  I could  never  have  more  than  five  playing  at  the 
me  time. 

1 know  ot  the  following  divisions  being  engaged  there,  viz:  Frost’s, 


260 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [^hap.  xvn 


Slack’s,  Parsons’,  Pains’,  and  Little  s $ also  the  following  batteries 
Guibor’s,  Clark’s,  MacDonald’s,  and  Wade’s.  Against  this  force  in 
division,  with  the  slight  assistance  mentioned  farther  on,  held  it 
around  for  upwards  of  seven  hours.  After  retiring  from  my  first  at 
vanced  position  down  the  road  there  was  a lull  m the  action,  and 
went  over  to  see  Colonel  Dodge,  who  was  about  three-quarters  of 
mile  distant,  near  the  road  running  to  the  east,  along  the  ridge  an 
beyond  Clemens’  house.  During  this  time  the  enemy  advanced  u 
the  hollow  in  the  brush  along  the  main  road,  and  Colonel  Vandevt 
ordered  forward  the  infantry,  when  there  ensued  a desperate  conflit 
with  small-arms,  our  men  driving  them  back  to  the  foot  of  the  liil 
where  the  enemy  opened  his  batteries.  As  our  wounded  men  wei 
beino-  brought  back  by  their  comrades  from  this  desperate  eneountt 
many  of  them  would  hurrah  for  the  Union  and  utter  expressions  of  jo 
that  they  had  had  an  opportunity  to  suffer  for  the  cause.  Colonel  V ai 
dever  Ninth  Iowa,  commanding  the  brigade,  exhibited  the  utmoi 
coolness  and  bravery.  He  was  everywhere  where  his  presence  m 
most  needed,  cheering  and  encouraging  his  men,  who,  however,  neede 
but  little  encouragement,  and  directing  their  efforts  to  the  best  advai 


His  horse  was  hit  twice.  Colonel  Phelps,  commanding  Phelp 


tage.  Jtiis  nurse  vvcis  jjau  - — r— 7 - o * 

regiment  of  six-months’  Missourians,  had  three  horses  shot  under  hr 
and  received  a contusion  from  a shell.  Both  he  and  his  regiment  b 
haved  nobly.  Major  Geiger,  of  the  same  regiment,  had  his  horse  sh< 
under  him.  Major  Weston,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Volunteers,  ha 


three  or  four  companies  on  provost- guard  duty,  a part  of  which 


xnree  or  iuui  . ^ \ ,,  , 

stationed  on  the  hill,  and  did  good  service  m protecting  the  flank 
Captain  Hayden,  commanding  the  Dubuque  battery,  acted  with  n 


uapxain  na,yucu,  Luiimiaucuia&  ~ n 

usual  coolness  in  superintending  the  operation  of  his  guns.  He  ha 
two  horses  killed  under  him.  Maj.  William  H.  Coyl,  Ninth  Iowa,  w; 
here  wounded  in  the  shoulder.  His  gallantry  had  been  very  conspic 


ous. 


I gent  word  to  Colonel  Dodge  to  draw  his  forces  near.  After  mi 
men  retired  from  the  range  of  the  battery  there  was  another  short  hr 
when  the  enemy  advanced,  and  there  was  another  desperate  encounte 
in  which  the  enemy  failed  to  drive  us  out  of  the  edge  of  the  timbe 
but  was  driven  back  himself,  we  being  materially  assisted  by  tH 
mountain  howitzers,  under  Major  Bowen,  and  his  lieutenant,  Madiso 
which  had  been  sent  up  by  the  general.  It  was  at  this  time  that  01 
of  the  guns  of  Hayden’s  battery  was  lost  in  the  attempt  to  place  it  i 
the  top  of  the  hill,  by  going  into  a large  body  of  the  enemy  who  we 
concealed  in  the  brush.  There  was  now  a lull  for  a considerable  timl 
the  enemy  being  engaged  in  arranging  his  forces  lor  a final  attacj 
From  the  tavern  I could  not  see  him  on  account  of  the  thick  brusiiej 
but  on  the  right,  the  timber  being  more  open,  Colonel  Dodge  saw  In 
plainly  advancing  and  placing  his  batteries  and  outflanking. 

At  this  time  I was  satisfied  that  the  enemy  was  too  strong  for  in 
although  my  troops  had  fought  with  the  most  heroic  gallantry,  ana 
would  have  retired  but  for  the  following  reasons  : The  position  whit 
I now  held  would,  if  occupied  by  the  enemy,  have  commanded  o 
1 camp.  We  had  some  stores  in  a barn  near  the  tavern,  and  1 was  jco 
stantly  expecting  re-enforcements,  which  I knew  the  general  was  usiij 
every  effort  to  get  up  to  me,  and  if  they  arrived  m time  we  could  M 
the  ridge,  which  would  be  as  valuable  to  us  as  to  the  enenyy , and  j 
general  sent  me  word  repeatedly  to  u persevere.”  I therefore  de  e 
mined  to  hang  on  to  the  last  extremity.  Knowing  that  every  mome 
saved  brought  my  re-enforcements  nearer,  I sent  what  was  lett  ot  jH 


vr.  XVIII J pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  261 

irty- fifth  Illinois  to  Dodge,  as  it  belonged  to  his  brigade.  I received 
out  this  time  a battalion  of  the  Eighth  Indiana  and  three  field  pieces, 
of  which  I placed  in  position  at  the  tavern,  but  soon  after  the  enemy 
ened  on  Dodge  with  artillery  and  infantry,  and  I sent  the  last-arrived 
*ops  to  him. 

Enclosed  find  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shunk,  Eighth  Indiana,  of 
s part  of  the  engagement. 

irVhile  Colonel  Yandever  was  closing  in  the  gap  thus  occasioned  the 
*m y commenced  swarming  up  the  road  and  hollow  and  through  the 
ish  in  front  of  us.  My  troops  fought  with  most  heroic  courage  and 
otion,  officers  exposing  themselves  freely,  cheering  and  encourag- 
; their  men,  but  it  was  impossible  to  withstand  such  overpowering 
ubers,  and  the  men  retreated  across  the  field,  but  rallied  very  hand- 
aely  along  the  fence  not  far  back. 

Jeut.  Col.  F.  J.  Herron,  Hintk  Iowa,  had  his  horse  shot  under  him 
s wounded,  and  taken  prisoner.  He  had  commanded  his  regiment 
ing  the  entire  engagement,  and  his  courage  and  conduct  won  the 
niration  of  all,  and  will  add  to  the  laurels  he  gained  at  the  battle 
Wilson’s  Creek.  Here  my  horse  was  hit  three  times.  The  artillery 
d until  the  last  moment,  and  in  consequence  thereof  lost  two  pieces 
era!  of  the  men  being  shot  down  while  trying  to  attach  them  to  the 
ber.  The  three  pieces  of  artillery  lost  that  day  by  Captain  Hay- 
i’s  battery  were  recovered  by  our  troops  on  the  next  day. 

JPon  retiring  to  the  fence  above  mentioned  we  fortunately  met 
leral  Curtis,  with  re-enforcements  under  General  Asboth,  advancing.. 
} commanding  general  conducted  the  remainder  of  the  operation  in 
son. 

hiring-  all  this  time  Colonel  Dodge  had  sustained  a constant  engage- 
lt  with  the  enemy.  He  bad  placed  himself  on  the  hither  side  of 
field  near  Clemens’  house,  and  though  immediately  outnumbered 
in  point-blank  range  of  grape,  held  his  position  until  his  ammuni- 
i gave  out,  when  he  retired  a short  distance,  waited  for  the  enemy’s 
roacb,  gave  him  a last  volley,  which  checked  and  turned  him,  and 
:i  marched  off  the  field  with  colors  flying,  and  bringing  his  wounded 
i along.  Colonel  Dodge  had  three  horses  shot  under  him,  one  of 
n being  struck  with  20  balls,  and  received  a slight  wound  in  the 
d.  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Galligan,  Fourth  Iowa,  was  wounded  in  the  hand, 
it.  Col.  William  P.  Chandler,  Thirty-fifth  Illinois,  was  taken  pris- 
i while  rallying  a squad  of  men  to  check  the  enemy,  who  were  very 
l‘  the  left  flank.  Maj.  John  McConnell,  with  two  battalions  of  the 
fd  Illinois  Cavalry,  supported  the  right  during  the  entire  engage- 
it,  and  Colonel  Dodge  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  their  conduct, 
y were  much  under  fire  of  artillery.  They  skirmished  constantly, 
frequently  dismounted  to  fight  on  foot.  Some  of  the  men  whose 
ies i were  disabled  joined  the  infantry  and  fought  out  the  battles 
i them.  Captain  Sparks  was  wounded.  Captain  Davis  had  a horse 
under  him. 

lie  Second  Battalion  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  supported  the 
and  was  a part  of  the  time  iflaced  on  top  of  the  hill  to  the  west  of 
tavern,  skirmishing  with  the  troops  there,  some  of  whom  were 
aus.^  Lieut.  S.  F.  Dolloff  received  a dangerous  wound  in  the  thigh, 
it.  W . S.  Lee  had  a horse  shot  under  him. 

ie  total  ’ loss  of  the  division  was  97  killed,  488  wounded,  and  78 
png;  total,  663.  ’ 

j e brought  onto  the  ground  1,790  infantry  and  469  cavalry  : twelve 
oth-bore  guns,  with  204  men. 


262 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [C«Ar.  XVII 


In  giving  the  above  narrative  1 have  spoken  of  those  officers  an  ,t 
troops  whom  I personally  noticed  or  whose  conduct  lias  been  special 
reported  to  me.  There  are  many  others  deserving  of  whom  I have  m 
vet  heard  All  the  troops  beliaved  with  such  gallantry  and  devotuj 
that  it  is  the  proudest  boast  of  my  life  to  have  commanded  them.  I 
Mv  staff  were  of  the  greatest  service  to  me.  First  Lieut.  1.  W.  bt| 
li  van,  adjutant  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  acting  assistant  aujutant-generJ 
of  the  Fourth  Division,  rode  the  same  horse  on  which  he  made  the  gal 
lant  charge  at  Dug  Springs,  where  both  he  and  Ins  horse  were  del 
perately  wounded.  He  carried  a great  many  orders  and  went  forwa* 
many  times  to  reconnoiter,  exposing  liimselt  freely.  His  horse  w| 
wounded.  Lieut.  L.  Shields,  Fourth  Iowa,  acting  aide,  was  ot  giej 
assistance.  He  had  a horse  shot  under  him  while  conducting  a ba 
talion  of  the  Eighth  Indiana  to  Colonel  Dodge.  Lieut  O.  A Bowel 
Ninth  Iowa,  acting  aide,  was  of  great  service,  transmitting,  <xc*.  it 
John  E.  Phelps,  who  has  been  acting  aide  since  I ebruary  17,  was  wil 
me  in  all  the  hottest  parts  of  the  engagement,  and  was  wounded  I 
the  leff.  Sergt.  Mai.  James  William  Wooster,  of  my  regiment,  wl 
killed  while  trying  to  disengage  an  artillery  team  in  front  of  the  troopl 
After  the  engagement  we  lay  en  bivouac  m front  of  the  enemy  mil 
morning,  when  the  action  was  again  renewed.  My  divisu on,  being  (I 
the  right,  did  not  come  in  contact  with  the  enemy  Captain  Hay  dal 
battery,  however,  did  excellent  service,  having  bee^  posted  by  t 
general  in  person  so  as  to  cross-fire  on  the  enemy.  The  Fust  lo 
Battery  also,  under  Lieutenant  David,  did  good  execution  with  vh 
little  ammunition  he  had  been  able  to  obtain  during  the  night,  and  t! 
Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  as  on  the  previous  day,  was  of  great  benefit  I 

us  by  skirmishing  on  the  flanks.  ]T.  , • 

Before  closing  I wish  to  remark  on  the  facts  that  Colonel  Dodge,  wi 
a large  part  of  his  brigade,  by  special  direction  of  the  t 

been  out  the  night  before  the  battle  until  1-  o clock,  blockading  t 
road  by  which  the  enemy  traveled  an  hour  or  two  afterwards  to  get  <1 
our  rear.  This  blockading  delayed  the  enemy  and  was  of  great  a 
vantage  to  us.  Also  Colonel  Y andever,  with  a large  part  o is  i J 
ment,  Phelps’,  and  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  composing  more  thanh 
bis  brigade,  being  on  detached  service,  made  a march  of  40  miles  t 
day  before  the  battle  to  join  us.  The  horses  had  absolutely  notkij 
to  eat  from  the  morning  of  the  6tli  till  the  evening  ot  the  8th.  1 a 
facts  show  that  my  division  was  tired  when  it  went  into  action,  accou 
for  the  absence  of  some  of  the  men,  who  were  absolutely  worn-out,  ai. 
demonstrate  what  our  soldiers  cheerfully  endure  lor  the  cause. 

I inclose  herewith  reports  of  Col.  G.  M.  Dodge,  Fourth  Iowa,  and 
Col.  William  Yandever,  Ninth  Iowa,  with  the  accompanying  paper 
likewise  the  report  of  Col.  David  Shnnk,  commanding  battalion 
Eighth  Indiana. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ (3 ABB 

Colonel , Commanding  Division . 

Capt,  T.  I.  McKenny,  . 7 0 _ 

Actg.  Asst,  Adjt.  Gen.,  Army  of  the  Southicest. 


SAP.  XVIII.]  PEA  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  263 

No.  22. 

leport  of  Col.  Grenville  M.  Dodge , Fourth  Iowa  Infantry , commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Fourth  Division, 

Pea  Ridge  Battle-field , Ark.,  March  10,  1862. 
Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
art  taken  by  the  First  Brigade  of  the  Fourth  Division  in  the  battle  on 
ie  7th  and  8th  instant ; also  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing: 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  I was  ordered  to  take  position  with  my 
rigade  near  Elkhorn  Tavern,  on  the  Springfield  road.  On  my  arrival 
discovered  the  enemy  in  the  timber  about  half  a mile  to  the  right, 
ad  brought  up  one  section  of  the  First  Iowa  Battery,  which  opened 
ie  battle,  doing  considerable  execution.  The  enemy  fled  to  the  hollow, 
hen  I deployed  my  line,  covering  as  much  ground  as  possible,  placing 
ajor  McConnell,  commanding  one  battalion  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cav- 
ry,  on  the  right,  the  Thirty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry  on  the  left,  and  the 
ourth  Iowa  Infantry  and  one  section  of  the  First  Iowa  Battery  in  the 
alter,  on  the  center  sending  forward  a company  of  skirmishers  from 
ie  Fourth  Iowa,  who  soon  became  sharply  engaged,  causing  the  enemy 
► open  on  us  with  shell,  solid  and  grape  shot.  Four  pieces  of  the  First 
>wa  Battery  were  planted  on  the  Springfield  road  near  the  tavern, 
hich  opened  on  the  enemy’s  batteries  to  the  right.  Capt.  J.  A.  Jones 
id  Lieutenant  Gambell  were  wounded  here.  Soon  after  this  the  Thirty- 
?th  Illinois  Infantry  became  engaged  in  the  attack  made  in  the  morn- 
g on  the  left,  and  fought  with  great  bravery.  Colonel  Smith  fell 
ounded  and  the  regiment  lost  severely. 

As  soon  as  the  engagement  had  fairly  begun  I closed  up  my  line  to 
e left  and  awaited  the  attack,  keeping  the  section  of  the  battery  at 
ork  with  my  skirmishers  until  near  2 o’clock,  when  the  enemy  ceased 
ing  and  drew  back.  I soon  discovered  that  the  enemy  were  prepar- 
g for  a general  attack,  and  changed  front  to  the  right,  covering  my 
en  with  a rail  fence,  forcing  the  enemy  to  cross  an  open  field  to  reach 
e.  I formed  my  line  and  opened  fire  with  one  section  of  my  battery, 
e other  four  pieces  having  left  the  field  for  want  of  ammunition, 
le  enemy  answered  with  eight  pieces  of  artillery,  and  advanced  on 
y right,  left,  and  front.  I brought  up  the  skirmishers  and  placed 
em  on  the  left,  and  held  the  position  for  more  than  two  hours  with  at 
ist  6,000  infantry  and  eight  pieces  of  artillery  agtiinst  me,  the  artil- 
L-y  playing  upon  us  at  short  range  with  canister."  My  section  of  the 
Ttery  left  the  field  early,  having  exhausted  all  their  ammunition. 

Near  the  last  of  the  engagement  three  rifled  pieces  of  a German 
dtery  were  sent  to  me  and  took  position  on  my  left,  which,  after 
ing  three  or  four  rounds,  was  compelled  to  retire  from  the  field, 
Ing  flanked  by  a regiment  of  the  enemy.  I then  ceased  firing,  to 
scover  the  position  of  the  enemy’s  forces  on  my  right,  when  they 
i mediately  advanced  to  within  100  feet  of  my  lines,  when  I ordered 
Y men  to  fire,  which  they  did  so  effectually  that  the  enemy  fled  along 
e whole  line  in  confusion.  Fresh  regiments  immediately  filled  their 
aces.  Finding  that  the  enemy  were  outflanking  me  on  the  right  and 
at  my  forces  were  insufficient  to  extend  my  lines,  I sent  for  re-enforce- 
mts,  and  obtained  five  companies  of  the  Eighth  Indiana  Infantry, 
lich  I placed  on  my  right.  The  firing  becoming  more  terrific,  the 
einy  having  placed  a battery  on  my  left  that  enfiladed  my  line,  the 
imunition  of  the  Fourth  Iowa  beginning  to  fail,  the  Thirty-fifth  Illi- 


2(34 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIlli 


nois  being  forced  to  give  way,  I ordered  Colonel  Chandler  to  rally  hi 
men,  which  he  did  with  great  gallantry,  driving  the  enemy  back  a shori 
distance  on  the  left,  but  he  was  soon  surrounded  and  taken  prisoner 

W I^noticed^t  this  time  that  the  Second  Brigade,  which  was  on  mylefl 
ceased  firing.  I sent  my  adjutant  to  ascertain  the  cause.  He  informer 
me  that  they  had  retired.  At  this  time  the  ammunition  of  the  Fourt 
Iowa  had  almost  entirely  given  out,  and  I ordered  them  to  fall  bach 
which  they  did  in  splendid  order  in  line  of  battle,  the  enemy  runmn 
forward  with  their  batteries  and  whole  force.  I halted  and  turned  o 
them,  and  with  my  last  ammunition  poured  so  hot  a fire  into  thei 
ranks  that  they  fled  in  confusion.  I then  fell  back  and  took  a positio 
on  the  open  field  in  my  rear,  the  division  at  thus  time  ha vmg  bee 
strongly  re-enforced.  General  Curtis  ordered  the  Fourth  Iowa  to  fi 
bayonets  and  advance,  though  they  were  out  of  ammunition.  They  di 
so,  and  moved  briskly  over  the  field,  but  found  no  enemy.  Generj 
Curtis  then  ordered  us  to  halt,  it  being  dark.  I then  took  the  bngad 
back  to  camp  to  replenish  their  ammunition  and  clean  then’  gun^j 
which  they  did,  and  at  12  o’clock  took  another  position  on  the  lett  cl 

thAt°sunrise  the  First  Iowa  Battery  was  put  in  position  and  opene 
fire  on  the  enemy’s  batteries,  which  were  planted  on  the  point  near  tnl 
hotel  The  fire  was  effective  and  very  hot.  The  battery  had  to  retnl 
in  about  an  hour,  having  spent  all  the  ammunition.  I was  then  ordere 
to  the  right,  and  took  that  position,  advancing  with  the  entire  lm 
steadily  until  the  enemy  fled  in  all  directions  m confusion.  We  too 
many  prisoners,  also  one  gun  (spiked)  and  one  caisson. 

The  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  in  the  brigade  shows  that  it  tough 
against  fearful  odds  and  disputed  the  field  with  great  stubbornnes  s 
Every  field  officer  in  the  brigade  was  disabled  and  had  to  leave  the  fiek 
and  only  two  lieutenants  were  left  in  the  battery.  When  so  man. 
fought  so  gallantly  it  is  hard  to  distinguish,  but  I noticed  the  darm 
bravery  of  Major  McConnell,  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  who  sup 
ported  me  on  the  right,  and  of  Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Thirty-fifth 
nois  Infantry,  who  in  the  early  part  of  the  day  fought  gallantly unt 
he  was  wounded.  I make  mention  especially  of  Lieutenant-Colom 
Chandler,  who  displayed  coolness  and  bravery  in  rallying  his  mei 


LieuteBant-Oolonel  Galligan  rendered  efficient  service  in  holding  tt 


Jjieutenclll l-UUIUHtl  VJ  n-uv.iui.vvi  ..  , -i  J 

Fourth  Iowa  firm,  no  part  of  which  gave  an  inch  until  the  v hole  w< 
Compelled  to  fall  back.  I wish  to  mention  especially  the  braveiy  ari 
valor  of  Oapt.  H.  H.  Griffiths,  acting  major,  and  of  Lieut.  J.  A.  WU 
iamson,  brigade  adjutant;  also  of  Lieut.  Y.  J.  David,  command] ng 
section  of  the  battery  on  the  right;  also  of  Private  J.  W.  Bell,  ad]ut, 
clerk,  who  fell  mortally  wounded  while  nobly  doing  his  duty,  and  LoM 
Sergt.  T.  Teil,  who,  after  being  severely  wounded,  staid  upon  tr 
held.  The  conduct  of  the,  above-named  officers  came  under  ui\  pe; 
sonal  observation.  All  did  well  and  fought  nobly,  and  did  their  pan 
in  winning  a great  battle. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' G.  M.  HUUbrRi, 

Col.  Fourth  Iowa,  Comdg.  First  Brigade,  Fourth  Division. 

Lieut.  T.  W.  Sullivan,  . . 

Actg.  Asst,  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Brig.,  Fourth  Ihvision. 


hap.  xviii]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  265 

No.  23. 

i eport  of  Capt.  Junius  A.  Jones , First  Independent  Battery  Iowa  Light 

Artillery. 

Camp  near  Elkhorn  Tavern, 

March  9,  1862. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  my  duty  I beg  leave  to  report  that  on  the 
lorning  of  the  7th  instant  I proceeded  to  your  camp  with  my  battery, 
nd  by  your  order  sent  Lieutenant  David,  with  the  first  section,  to  the 
ead  of  the  column.  Upon  arriving  at  the  Elkhorn  Tavern,  by  order 
f Colonel  Carr,  commanding  division,  I sent  Lieutenant  Gambell,  with 
te  left  section,  some  200  yards  farther  north,  on  the  Springfield  road, 
) take  position  against  the  rebels,  and  proceeded  on  the  road  to  the 
S'ht  and  easterly  from  the  tavern  some  800  yards  to  take  position 
gainst  the  same  force.  Just  as  I was  ready  to  go  into  action  the  fir- 
lg  of  the  right  section  having  ceased,  and  a messenger  arriving  telling 
le  Lieutenant  David  had  advanced,  I limbered  up  and  moved  to  join 
le  left  section,  which  commenced  action  as  I reached  the  Elkhorn 
avern.  I immediately  joined  Lieutenant  Gambell  and  took  position 
a his  right  and  commenced  on  the  rebel  batteries  forthwith.  I found 
ieutenant  Gambell  actively  engaged,  the  rebel  guns  having  him  in 
erfect  range  of  grape,  shell,  and  shrapnel.  The  fire  of  the  rebels  was 
ailing  in  the  extreme.  Just  as  I delivered  my  second  round  Reese 
arkhurst,  acting  as  No.  3,  was  killed,  a cannon-ball  taking  off  his  left 
g and  a piece  of  rock  striking  him  in  his  head.  I then  had  the  pro- 
ves fixed  to  fire  retiring  when  necessary.  Shortly  after  this  event 
le  of  my  caissons  was  exploded  by  a shot  from  the  rebels,  and  another 
as  lost  to  me  by  a runaway  team  running  into  the  caisson  team,  which 
’°k  fright,  and  they  in  running  away  capsized  it  down  a slope,  break  - 
g the  pole  and  otherwise  disabling  it.  The  team  escaped.  Two  of 
te  horses  were  subsequently  recovered  by  Lieutenant  David,  as  was 
7 him  two  of  my  ammunition-chests  and  contents.  By  this  time  the 
bels’  fire  began  to  tell  on  my  men.  Kirk  W.  Henry  was  disabled  by 
piece  of  shell  striking  him  in  the  mouth ; Sergt.  H.  R.  Horr  was  severely 
irt  by  a spent  round  shot  striking  him  in  the  groin ; W.  F.  Conner 
as  slightly  wounded  in  the  hand;  D.  J.  Duvall  was  struck  over  the 
e with  a piece  of  shell,  disabling  him  for  a time ; Thomas  Brown  was 
jured  by  a piece  of  shell,  wounding  him  in  the  right  side;  I.  B.  Nel- 
n was  wounded  in  the  right  hand  and  back;  Clark  Woodmansee  was 
oundedin  the  right  shoulder  by  a grazingball;  Samuel  Black  was 
ounded  slightly  in  the  ankle  by  a grazing  solid  shot ; James  Moles- 
arth  was  disabled  by  a spent  round  shot  striking  him  in  the  hip,  and 
)hn  Easton,  detailed  from  Company  — , Fourth  Iowa,  was  wounded  in 
e right  arm  slightly  by  a grape  shot.  After  these  casualties  the 
nber  of  a second  caisson  was  exploded  by  the  rebels,  burning  severely 
Skivinki,  the  driver  of  the  wheel  team. 

About  this  time  Lieutenant  Gambell  was  disabled  by  a grape  shot 
issmg  through  his  left  leg  above  the  knee  and  between  the  bone  and 
ndons.  My  ammunition  becoming  exhausted,  I began  to  fire  retiring. 
ie  second  piece  had  nearly  reached  the  road  when  I was  hit  by  a 
>cnt  round  shot  below  the  groin  on  the  left  leg,  which  compelled  me 
retire  from  the  field,  being  unable  to  sit  on  my  horse.  When  I left 
c scene  of  action  the  last  piece  was  in  the  act  of  retiring.  We  were 
cping  up  the  fire,  waiting  to  be  relieved  by  the  Dubuque  battery, 
eutenant  Williams  kept  the  field  with  the  last  piece,  and  afterwards 


266 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  ICuap.  XVIII. 


collected  the  left  and  center  sections  and  drew  them  up  in  battery  m a| 
held  eastward  and  southward  of  the  tavern,  where  they  were  afterwards 
joined  by  Lieutenant  David  with  the  right  section,  who,  being  the  senior 


joined  by 

officer,  took  command.  j I 

After  I retired  Gustavis  Gustavison,  No.  6 of  the  piece  remaining 
action,  had  his  right  leg  shot  off  by  a solid  shot,  and  William  Seidenl 
No.  6 of  the  same  piece,  was  wounded  severely  in  the  ankles  by  a irag 
ment  of  a shell.  Gustavison  has  since  died  from  the  shock  and  ampu  1 

tation.  I 

For  the  labors  of  the  right  section  and  the  subsequent  service  ot  the 
battery  I refer  you  to  the  report  of  Lieutenant  David.  I should  liavii 
noted  that  to  keep  the  ammunition  of  the  capsized  caisson  from  tin! 

rebels  we  exploded  it.  • . 

In  conclusion  I am  pleased  to  state  that  with  the  exception  ot  Lieu  I 
tenant  Gambell  and  William  Seldentlie  wounded  will  be  ready  for  duty 
in  a short  time. 

JUNIUS  A.  JONES, 
Captain  First  Iowa  Battery . I 


Colonel  Dodge, 

Commanding  B rigade. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Col.  William  Vandever , Ninth  Iowa  Infantry , command'* n<\ 

Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Fourth  Division, 

Camp  Stevens , Art:.,  March  13,  1802.  . 

Colonel  : On  the  morning  of  the  4th  instant  I left  Camp  Halleck  aj 
Cross  Hollow  in  command  of  an  expedition  in  the  direction  of  Hunts  j 
ville.  The  forces  consisted  of  350  of  the  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry,  b>< 
from  Colonel  Phelps’  Missouri  regiment,  one  battalion  of  the  Third 
Illinois  Cavalry,  one  section  of  the  Dubuque  Light  Artillery,  and  omj 
section  of  Bowen’s  mountain  howitzers.  We  prosecuted  the  march  am 
arrived  at  Huntsville  at  noon  on  the  5th  without  incident.  A portion 
of  the  enemy’s  stores  were  captured  at  their  camp,  3 miles  beyom 
Huntsville,  and  several  prisoners  taken.  From  the  prisoners  I obtains 
information  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  in  the  direction  of  our  lines 
for  the  purpose  of  attack,  which  information  I immediately  transmittet 
to  headquarters,  and  then  prepared  to  retrace  my  steps.  On  the  same 
evening  I moved  out  of  Huntsville  and  camped  3 miles  distant.  At  : 
o’clock  in  the  morning  1 received  your  order  to  return  and  rejoin  tin 
main  body  at  Sugar  Creek,  and  at  3.30  o’clock  resumed  my  line  of  march 
and  at  dusk  the  same  evening  arrived  in  camp,  having  accomplish^ 
a forced  march  of  40  miles  in  a single  day.  Too  much  praise  cannot  m 
bestowed  upon  officers  and  men  for  energy  and  perseverance  in  siu 
mounting  the  difficulties  of  this  long  and  painful  march. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  being  aroused  by  the  sound  ot  firing  in  tin 
direction  of  Elkhorn  Tavern,  in  obedience  to  your  order  I moved  up  my 
brigade,  consisting  of  the  Ninth  Regiment  of  Iowa  Volunteers,  ( olone 
Phelps’  regiment  of  Missouri  Volunteers,  and  the  Dubuque  Light  Ar 
tillery,  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  having  already  been  ordered  to  oh 
serve  the  enemy.  Upon  arriving  at  the  Elkhorn  Tavern  the  artilleiy 


JlIAl'.  XVIII.J 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


207 


immediately  took  position  near  the  main  road  and  opened  a brisk  tire, 
infantry  forming  mainly  on  the  left,  Colonel  Dodge’s  brigade  being 
to  the  right.  Soon  after  my  whole  line  of  infantry  was  briskly  en- 
gaged with  the  enemy,  who  fell  back,  we  pushing  forward  and  driving 
!iim  until  met  by  an  overpowering  force.  The  infantry  then  resumed 
the  position  in  advance  of  the  Elkhorn  Tavern  where  the  enemy  was 
first  encountered,  and  retained  it  during  most  of  the  day  against  greatly 
superior  odds,  a part  of  the  time  being  supported  by  a battalion  of  the 
Eighth  Indiana,  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Shunk,  which,  however,  was 
soon  withdrawn  and  sent  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Dodge.  Towards 
evening,  the  enemy  having  concentrated  a heavy  fire  of  artillery  and 
nfantry  upon  our  position,  and  to  avoid  the  chance  of  being  flanked 
luring  the  night,  I fell  back  to  a line  of  timber  and  formed  on  the  right 
>f  the  main  road.  Here  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shunk  again  joined  me, 
md  we  remained  in  line,  resting  upon  our  arms,  until  near  morning, 
vhen  I again  moved  to  the  left  of  the  road  and  formed  on  the  left  of 
Colonel  Dodge’s  brigade. 

Soon  after  sunrise  the  fire  of  our  artillery  again  opened  upon  the 
meiny  and  he  replied  with  vigor.  At  this  point,  finding  ourselves 
exposed  to  a raking  fire  from  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  our 
•ight,  we  changed  direction  to  the  east.  About  this  time,  the  First 
Division  coming  into  position  on  our  left,  we  joined  in  the  general  ad- 
vance upon  the  enemy,  the  whole  cavalry  force  participating  and  the 
irtillery  co-operating.  The  enemy  here  broke  into  disorder,  and  the 
fortune  of  the  day  was  decided  in  our  favor. 

I cannot  close  this  account  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  coolness, 
bravery,  and  steadiness  of  all  the  troops  under  my  command.  Colonel 
Phelps  was  especially  active  in  leading  his  command,  and  inspired 
hem  by  his  own  example  to  deeds  of  bravery.  Of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Eerron,  commanding  the  Ninth  Iowa,  too  much  cannot  be  said.  He 
vas  foremost  in  leading  his  men,  and  with  coolness  and  bravery  never 
excelled  rallied  them  to  repeated  acts  of  daring  and  bravery.  Unfor- 
unately  at  the  close  of  the  day  on  the  7th  his  horse  was  killed  under 
dm,  and  he,  being  disabled  by  the  fall,  was  captured  by  the  enemy. 
Major  Coyl,  also  of  the  Ninth  Iowa,  acted  with  distinguished  bravery 
mtil  disabled  by  a painful  wound,  when  he  was  compelled  reluctantly 
o leave  the  field. 

I deem  it  but  just  to  add  that  every  officer  of  my  command  was 
uompt  and  ready  in  the  discharge  of  duty  throughout  the  action, 
nspiring  their  men  by  example  to  acts  of  determined  bravery.  Lieut. 
Vsher  Riley,  my  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  deserves  particular 
nentiori.  Upon  the  fall  of  Captain  Drips  and  Lieutenant  Kelsey,  of 

ompany  A,  Ninth  Regiment,  both  distinguished  for  their  bravery, 
Lieutenant  Riley  gallantly  took  command  of  the  company  and  remained 
vitli  it  to  the  end  of  the  action.  Captain  Carpenter  and  Lieutenant 
lones,  of  Company  B,  distinguished  themselves  by  leading  their  com- 
>any  into  the  face  of  an  overpowering  force  of  the  enemy  and  recap- 
uring  one  of  our  guns  and  a caisson.  Lieutenant  Tisdale,  of  Company 
P,  deserves  especial  mention  for  his  gallantry  while  in  command  of  the 
ompany  after  the  fall  of  Captain  Towner  and  Lieutenant  Neff,  both 
>f  whom  acted  with  distinguished  bravery  until  disabled  by  painful 
sounds.  Captain  Bull,  of  Company  C,  was  particularly  distinguished 
or  his  coolness  and  bravery;  also  Lieutenant  Baker,  of  Company  E, 
md  Captain  Washburn  and  Lieutenant  Beebe,  of  Company  G;  Lieu 
enants  Crane  and  Magee,  of  Company  D ; Captain  Moore  and  Lieu- 
enant  Mackenzie,  of  Company  H.  Captain  Carskaddon  and  Lieutenant 


268 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chav.  xviii:.I 


Claflin.  of  Company  K,  were  conspicuous  for  bravery.  Captain  Drips,  of 
Company  A,  and  Captain  Bevins,  of  Company  E,  fell  mortally  wounded 
while  gallantly  leading  and  cheering  their  men.  Company  I was  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant  Fellows,  whose  conduct  was  deserving  of  great 
„ raise.  Many  instances  of  special  gallantry  occurred  among  non-com- 
missioned  officers  and  men.  Where  all  did  their  duty  so  nobly  and  so 

well  distinction  would  be  invidious.  x T>  , , . , . 

1 desire  also  to  call  your  especial  attention  to  the  Dubuque  .Light 
Battery,  under  command  of  Capt.  M.  M.  Hayden,  whose  report  is  ap- 
pended. Captain  Hayden  and  every  officer  of  this  battery  acquitted 
themselves  with  the  highest  credit.  They  bore  the  hottest  fire  of  the 
enemy  with  coolness  and  intrepidity,  the  men  under  the  skillful  lead 
of  Captain  Hayden  performing  duty  with  cheerfulness  and  alacntj, 
and  never  faltering.  He  mentions  special  instances  of  bravery  in  his 
report  hereto  appended,  to  which  I would  call  especial  attention. 

Numerous  instances  of  individual  bravery  occurred  during  the  trying 
events  of  the  battle  which  I cannot  enumerate.  I can  only  say  that  J 
feel  deeply  indebted  to  every  officer  and  man  of  my  command  for  the 
heroic  manner  in  which  they  have  acquitted  themselves.  They  did  their 
dutv  nobly.  I herewith  append  a list  of  casualties.* 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yol,r^jdly^|re^Y^1. 

Colonel  Ninth  Iowa  Vols.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Fourth  Div. 


Col.  E.  A.  Care, 

Commanding  Fourth  Division. 


No.  25. 


Report  of  Capt.  Mortimer  M.  Hayden , Third  Independent  Battery  Iowa 

Light  Artillery. 


Headquarters  Hayden’s  Battery, 

(Attached  to  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry), 

Sugar  Creeh , March  9,  1862. 

Colonel  : Herewith  please  find  statement  of  the  part  taken  by  this 
command  in  the  action  of  the  7th  and  8th  instant : . 

Pursuant  to  your  order  I sent  forward  one  section  of  the  battery , in 


x ursuanu  iu  yuui  uiuci  j.  ecu  u ^ — - . . , ',-1 

charge  of  Lieut.  M.  C.  Wright,  who  took  position  in  the  road  directly 
A-..  oTvri  v.nrW  n,  liP.aw  fire  from  the  enemy’s  battery.  Lieuts. 


in  front  of  and  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  battery. 

W.  II.  McClure  and  J.  Bradley,  with  their  respectivc  scctionSj  Were 
ordered  forward  to  engage  the  enemy  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  first, 
section.  Supported  by  the  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry,  we  held  tins  position 
until  the  rebel  guns  had  disabled  ten  pieces  and  killed  and  wounded 
many  of  both  men  and  horses.  The  engagement  now  became  general 
along  the  whole  line  with  both  artillery  and  infantry.  The  enemy  s fire 
becoming  too  severe,  we  withdrew,  leaving  behind  our  disabled 
and  several  killed  and  wounded  horses.  We  then  took  position  about 
300  yards  in  rear  of  the  point  where  our  fire  was  first  opened,  remaining 
there  until  near  evening  (having  held  the  enemy  m check  during  t 
entire  day),  at  which  time  the  whole  division  fell  back  to  a large  open 
field,  where  it  halted  during  the  night.  Here  the  enemy  pursued,  but 


* Embodied  in  return  on  p.  205. 


HAP.  XVIII. J PEA  RIDGE,  OR  I^LKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  269 

>ein g vigorously  engaged  by  our  artillery  and  infantry,  were  driven 
>ack  with  severe  loss.  During  the  engagement  we  attempted  to  plant 
he  pieces  of  the  battery  upon  a commanding  eminence,  btft  failed  in 
he  endeavor,  an  immense  force  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  charging  upon 
is,  carrying  away  one  of  my  guns,  and  killing  and  wounding  2 of  mv 
wn  and  several  of  the  battery  horses. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th  we  took  position  on  the  enemy’s  left,  uu- 
upported  by  either  infa’ntry  or  cavalry,  opening  fire  on  the  slope  where 
ur  guns  were  captured  the  day  previous.  Shortly  afterwards  the  enemy 
pened  upon  us  from  a battery  in  our  front,  to  which  we  then  turned 
ur  fire,  silencing  his  guns  and  driving  him  from  the  field.  Our  loss 
3 2 men  killed  and  17  wounded.  We  lost  23  horses  killed  and  3 dis- 
bled.  Three  of  our  guns  and  one  limber  were  captured  by  the  enemy. 

I desire  to  make  mention  of  the  coolness  and  bravery  of  the  whole 
ommand  during  the  entire  engagement,  especially  of  Lieutenants 
Vright  and  Bradley,  who,  fearless  of  all  personal  danger,  met  the 
nemy  with  a spirit  worthy  the  highest  commendation,  and  cannot 
verlook  the  efficient  services  rendered  by  Sergeants  House,  Harkins, 
nd  Weaver,  alike  of  Corporals  Martin,  Guilford,  Goldthorp,  and  Bowles, 
he  latter,  while  spiking  the  last  gun  left  upon  the  field,  was  severely 
rounded  in  both  legs. 

I am,  colonel,  respectfully, 

M.  M.  HAYDEN, 

^ _ Commandinq. 

Col.  William  Yandever, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Fourth  Division. 


No.  26. 

eport  of  Maj.  William  D.  Bowen , Bowen’s  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry , 
and  including  operations  since  February  10,  1862. 

Headquarters  Bowen’s  Battalion  of  Cavalry, 

Fea  Bidge,  Arh .,  March  10,  1862. 

General:  In  pursuance  of  general  orders,  dated  Headquarters, 
olla,  Mo.,  January  25,  1862,  this  command,  with  four  mountain 
Switzers  attached,  under  charge  of  Captain  Stephens,  Company  A, 
ding  as  body-guard  to  Brigadier-General  Curtis,  took  up  the  line  of 
arch  tor  Lebanon,  Mo.,  which  point  was  reached  without  any  incident 
orthy  of  comment  on  the  29th  January,  when  the  command  encamped. 
On  the  10th  of  February,  1862,  in  pursuance  of  general  orders,  dated 
eadquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest,  Lebanon,  Mo.,  this  command 
oved  towards  Springfield.  On  the  12th  instant  our  advance  saw  and 
jed  on  the  enemy’s  pickets.  My  command  was  ordered  to  the  front, 
hich  was  rapidly  gained,  when  I immediately  opened  with  the  howit- 
rs  on^i  heavy  picket  of  the  enemy,  concealed  partially  from  view  by 
e thick  brush.  After  two  rounds  the  rebels  disappeared.  At  8 p.  m. 
e camp  was  alarmed  by  heavy  firing  in  the  front.  My  command  was 
pidly  pushed  forward  to  the  scene  of  action,  but  the  rebels  were 
ready  repulsed. 

On  the  14th,  whilst  in  advance,  came  suddenly  upon  the  rebel  camp, 
jrew  10  shells  in  the  camp,  killing  15  and  wounding  9.  Finding  the 
iemy  were  trying  to  outflank  us  and  being  so  far  from  the  main  army, 

3 fell  back  to  camp  to-day.  We  took  30  prisoners,  amongst  them  the 
aorious  Colonel  Freeman. 

On  the  16th,  about  3 a.  m.,  sent  out  10  men,  under  command  of  Lieu- 


i 


270  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.}  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  wni| 


tenant  Ballon,  Company  C,  and  Sergeant-Major  Evans,  to  reconnoiter 
the  position  of  the  rebels.  They  found  that  the  whole  force  had  re| 
treated  some  time  before.  About  12  m.  came  up  with  the  enemy  tj 
rear  guard,  concealed  by  the  brush  in  the  Cross  Timber;  commence^ 
throwing  shell  amongst  them,  then  advanced  our  battery  to  within  201 
yards  of  their  position,  and  threw  canister  into  their  ranks,  when  theji 
tied.  The  prisoners  taken  at  this  place  state  their  loss  was  heavy  fron  ; 

our  shell  and  canister.  ' , , „ ■ 

On  the  17th  came  up  to  the  enemy’s  re-enforcements,  opened  fire 
with  the  howitzers  from  the  valley,  when  the  cavalry  was  ordered  . t( 
advance.  We  formed  the  center  of  the  column,  moved  up  with  th< 
o-uns  to  within  200  yards  of  the  enemy’s  battery.  After  firing  a fev 
rounds  we  retired,  together  with  the  cavalry;  advanced  again,  ant. 
maintained  the  position  till  our  place  was  filled  by  one  of  the  heavj 
batteries.  Two  guns  only  were  used,  the  other  two  being  in  the  reai  « 
On  the  22d  detached  two  mountain  howitzers,  under  command  o I 
Lieutenant  Madison,  and  Company  B,  cavalry,  Captain  Ing,  to  join  ai 
expedition,  under  Colonel  Vandever,  to  Huntsville,  Ark.  Detach « 
ment  returned  to  camp  on  the  evening  of  the  6th.  . I 

On  the  7th  formed  my  command  for  battle.  At  12  m.,  according  t< 
orders,  took  two  guns,  under  Lieutenant  Madison,  and  Company  < 
Captain  Benteen,  and  reported  to  Acting  Brigadier-General  Carr,  wh 
instructed  me  to  take  position  on  the  road  between  the  Ninth  low! 
and  the  Twenty-fourth  Missouri.  After  firing  24  rounds  my  paclj 
caissons  were  exhausted,  and  I fell  back.  Having  resupplied  mysel 
with  ammunition,  took  post  about  300  yards  to  the  left  of  m)  I 

position,  and  threw  spherical-case  shot  into  the  ranks  of  the  enein 
until,  finding  their  heavy  guns  had  our  range,  we  fell  back. 

The  ensuing  dav  Captain  Williams,  with  Company  D,  pursued  thj 
enemy  some  4 miles,  taking  10  prisoners  and  capturing  a wagon  an< 

* Oii'  tlie  9th,  according  to  orders  from  General  Curtis,  this  command 
reported  to  Colonel  Bussey,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  proceeded  to  Benton 
ville,  and  attacked  the  rear  of  the  enemy;  threw  two  shells  into  thei 
force,  captured  several  horses,  and  took  a number  of  prisoners.  1 
command  returned  to  the  camp  about  8 p.  m.  ! 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a list  of  the  killed,  wounded 
and  missing  of  this  command  since  the  26th  January,  186— 

Respectfully,  WM.  D.  BOWEN, 

Commanding  Battalion  Cavalry.  \ 

Brigadier-General  Curtis,  __  . 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest , TJ . S.  Army. 


No.  27. 


Report  of  Mai.  Eli  W.  Weston,  Twenty-fowth  Missouri  Infantry , pr< 
vost-marshal  Southwestern  District. 


Hdqrs.  Lyon  Legion,  Twenty-fourth  Mo.  yoLS., 

^ March  10,  1862. 


I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  b 


mv  command  in  the  late  action  of  the  7th  and  8th  instant : 

We  were  encamped  at  what  is  known  as  the  Elkhorn  Tavern. 


Nominal  list  omitted  slum  s 1 m^n  killed,  1 officer  and  2 men  wounded,  and  2 me 
missing. 


HAl\  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


271 


lie  evening  previous  to  tlie  con  diet  I had  jdaced  cavalry  pickets  on 
he  Huntsville  and  on  a cross-road  leading  into  the  Springfield  and 
len  tonville  road,  supported  by  infantry.  I should  here  remark  that  1 
ad  two  companies  of  cavalry  attached  to  my  command,  to  wit  : Com 
•any  Gr,  commanded  by  Capt.  Barbour  Lewis,  of  the  First  Missouri 
Rivalry,  and  Company  M,  commanded  by  Capt.  James  H.  O’Coniivir, 
f the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry.  About  3 o’clock  the  morning  of  the 
ngagement  Private  Welch,  of  Company  M,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry, 
hile  on  duty  near  the  Bentonville  road,  was  captured  by  a party  of 
ebel  cavalry.  While  on  the  road  to  the  rebels’  cam])  he  suddenly 
urued  into  a by-road  and  fortunately  escaped,  minus  his  arms.  In 
be  mean  time  my  pickets  reported  a force  moving  around  on  our  left 
auk.  I immediately  ordered  Company  F,  of  my  battalion,  commanded 
y Capt.  S.  P.  Barris,  together  with  my  two  companies  of  cavalry,  to 

0 out  into  the  cross-roads  and  reconnoiter  the  enemy,  and  ascertain, 

' possible,  their  strength.  They  proceeded  to  do  as  ordered,  and  on 
rriving  near  our  picket  ground  they  discovered  a small  force  of  rebel 
avalry,  who  upon  their  approach  fell  back  through  a field  and  copse 
f timber.  Captain  Barris,  dividing  his  company,  sent  Lieutenant 
[art  to  the  right  and  went  to  the  left  himself,  the  cavalry  keeping  up 
tie  center.  They  followed  them  a short  distance  and  gave  them  one  or 
vo  volleys,  which  caused  them  to  disperse  and  disappear.  The  whole 
ben  returned  to  camp. 

I soon  learned  of  a force  approaching  on  the  Cassville  road.  I iinme- 
iately  sent  Company  B,  commanded  by  Capt.  It.  W.  Fyan,  down  the 
lad,  with  instructions  to  take  them,  supposing  them  to  be  the  same 
routing  party  before  alluded  to  at  the  cross-roads.  On  arriving  near  the 
mnery  Captain  Fyan,  discovering  the  force  to  be  larger  than  before 
nticipated,  sent  back  to  be  rc-enforced.  I immediately  sent  him  Com- 
anies  I and  LI,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Lyon,  of  Company  II, 

> his  assistance,  at  the  same  time  ordering  out  the  two  remaining 
ompanies,  A and  F,  to  be  in  readiness,  and  sent  Company  K,  Capt. 

. B.  Vanzant,  with  my  train  and  40  prisoners  then  in  charge,  to  the 
xtreme  rear.  At  this  time,  receiving  information  that  the  enemy 
ere  on  our  left  and  steadily  moving  around  to  our  right,  I deployed 
le  second  platoon  of  Company  A on  the  high  hill  to  the  left,  and  the 
rst  platoon,  together  with  Company  F,  to  the  right,  as  skirmishers, 
[y  entire  command  being  now  engaged,  I ‘waited  patiently  for  the 
isult  of  what  was  yet  to  be.  After  waiting  anxiously  for  an  hour  or 
lore,  I was  somewhat  relieved  by  the  appearance  of  Acting  Brigadier- 
eneral  Carr  and  his  division.  I then  drew  in  my  companies  of 
ifantry  that  were  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  the  right,  and  took  a 
osition  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  division,  bordering  on  the  base  of 
le  hill,  deploying  Company  A to  the  cone  of  the  hill  and  Company  F 
nyn  the  ravine  making  down  from  the  house,  holding  this  position 
>i  two  hours  or  more.  My  men  being  in  range  of  the  enemy’s  battery, 
leir  ranks  gradually  being  thinned,  and  the  infantry  of  the  enemy 
owly  closing  in  upon  them  with  greatly  superior  numbers,  I ordered 
lem  to  retire  to  my  main  line.  I then  took  a position  in  line  of  battle* 

1 the  brow  of  the  hill ; deployed  Lieutenant  Hart  and  20  men  to  the 
>ne  of  the  hill.  This  position  I held  till  forced  to  retire  with  the 
inth  Iowa,  under  a raking  fire  of  a vastly  superior  number  of  the. 
lemy’s  fresh  troops. 

After  falling  back  some  distance  I again  formed  my  battalion,  and 
ie  field  officers  of  the  Ninth  Iowa  Volunteers  all  being  absent  or 
minded  (Colonel  Vandever  commanding  a brigade),  I assisted  in 


272 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIIL  | 

forming  them.  Colonel  Yandever,  then  coming  up,  took  command  of| 
the  brigade,  and  moved  it  by  the  right  flank  to  the  right  of  the  road.  I 
I here  halted  my  battalion  in  support  of  a battery  there  stationed  ml 
the  open  field.  This  position  I held  until  the  close  of  the  day,  when  I 
then  retired  with  my  command  to  camp,  where  were  the  remainder  off 
my  provost  guard.  My  two  cavalry  companies,  Captains  O’Connor  I 
and  Lewis,  were  doing  very  efficient  service  during  the  day,  scouting  i 
and  skirmishing,  ascertaining  movements  of  the  enemy,  &c.  They] 
executed  all  my  orders  promptly  and  with  a zeal  and  gallantry  highly  r 
praiseworthy,  and  I would  be  glad  had  I time  and  space  to  give  par- 1 
ticular  note  of  some  of  their  daring  exploits. 

I must  not  omit  to  mention  that  quite  early  in  the  morning  I sent  out  | 
my  quartermaster,  Lieut.  S.  L.  Fritz,  with  one  of  my  own  and  one  each 
of  the  cavalry  companies’  wagons,  foraging,  with  a guard,  under  Lieu-  j 
tenant  Moore,  of  Company  G,  First  Missouri  Cavalry.  I regret  to  say  j 
that,  although  Lieutenants  Fritz  and  Moore  and  one  or  two  of  the  guardl 
escaped,  the  wagons  loaded  with  forage,  also  the  teams  with  several  of 
the  guard,  were  captured  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  However,  they  did  . 
not  succeed  in  getting  all  the  wagons  away,  as  on  the  evening  of  the! 
8th  I found  one  of  my  wagons,  minus  the  team  (four  good  mules),  in  a I 
ravine  to  the  right  of  the  road,  below  the  blacksmith  shop. 

On  the  evening  of  the  8th  instant,  receiving  no  special  orders  to  I 
repair  to  the  battle-field  and  having  a large  number  of  prisoners  in 
charge,  I remained  with  my  command  in  camp  in  charge  of  the  pris-1 
oners.  There  are  several  officers  and  men  whom  I desire  to  mention  i 
particularly  for  their  gallant  deeds  ot  skill  and  bravery.  Capt.  1.  A. I 
Reed,  of  Company  A,  exhibited  great  bravery  and  coolness,  maintain- j 
ing  the  position  assigned  him  in  the  morning  two  or  three  hours,  with 
but  few  men,  against  great  odds.  Capt.  B.  W.  Fyan  also  displayed  the! 
‘greatest  courage  and  skill  as  an  officer,  executing  all  orders  with  calm-] 
ness  and  precision.  Captain  Barris  and  Lieutenant  Hart,  of  Company  | 
G,  were  of  great  service  to  me  indeed  as  skirmishers,  and  their  pait  could] 
not  have  been  acted  better  by  the  most  veteran  soldiers.  Lieutenant 
Lyon,  commanding  Companies  I and  H,  held  his  companies  to  their  post 
under  a raking  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  was  among  the  very  last  to  retire  j 
from  his  position.  Lieutenant  Lyon  is  a gallant  young  officer,  and 
acted  his  part  nobly.  Lieutenant  Bobberson,  of  Company  A,  conducted  I 
himself  bravely,  and  displayed  great  coolness  and  ardor  tor  a contest 
with  the  enemy.  I am  also  highly  pleased  with  Captain  "V  anzant  loi 
his  services  in  taking  charge  of  the  prisoners  and  my  train.  I desire 
to  mention  Sergt.  Maj.  A.  A.  Harrison  as  showing  much  bravery,  and 
Private  Collins,  of  Company  F,  and  would  be  glad  if  I had  time  and, 
space  to  mention  others.  a n n I 

I desire  to  take  this  opportunity  of  speaking  ot  Adjt.  J.  C.  b.  LoiD}, 
and  to  tender  him  my  thanks  for  his  efficient  services  in  carrying  orders 
from  point  to  point,  which  he  did  with  alacrity  and  with  the  least  pos- 
sible concern  for  his  personal  safety.  In  short,  my  whole  command 
behaved  with  remarkable  coolness,  and  obeyed  my  orders  Promptly  I 
and  to  the  letter.  Our  loss  sustained  is  as  follows,  viz  : 4 killed,  1«> 
badly  wounded,  3 slightly,  10  missing;  for  particulars  of  which  I refer 
you  to  company  commanders’  reports,  which  I herewith  transmit. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 ELI  W.  WESTON, 

Major.  Commanding  Twenty-fourth  Mo.  Vols ., 

Provost-Marslial  8.  IF.  7).,  U.  S.  Army j 
Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B,  Curtis, 

Commanding  Army  in  the  Field. 


bap.  xyiil]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  273 

No.  28. 

Report  of  Capt.  Thomas  A.  Reed , Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 

March  10,  1862. 

Sir  : 1 hereby  transmit  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  Company  A in 
le  memorable  battle  which  came  off  on  the  Fayetteville  road  and 
hat  is  called  the  Elkhorn  Tavern. 

After  the  rebels  were  discovered  to  be  lurking  in  the  vicinity  in 
outing  parties,  companies  having  been  ordered  out  by  you  previous 
id  sent  in  different  directions  to  discover,  if  possible,  whether  the 
bels  were  approaching  in  any  considerable  number  or  not,  I received 
i order  from  you  to  turn  out  Company  A and  report  immediately  in 
e road  opposite  the  tavern,  which  1 did,  when  we  were  ordered  to 
ack  arms,  which  we  did;  after  which  Lieutenant  Eobberson  was 
dered  with  the  second  platoon  to  the  top  of  a high  hill  to  the  left  and 
•rthwest  of  the  tavern,  with  orders  to  report  back  to  headquarters  if 
e enemy  was  discovered  in  any  strong  force.  At  the  same  time  one 
ction  of  the  first  platoon  was  out  on  the  Huntsville  road  in  a north- 
st  direction,  under  J.  T.  Walker,  fourth  sergeant,  while  I took  the 
reminder  of  company,  went  down  to  the  right  of  the  road  some  400 
rds  from  the  tavern,  and  discovered  the  enemy  moving  in  column  in 
southeast  direction  toward  the  Huntsville  road.  My  boys  were  anx- 
is  for  a shot,  upon  which  I granted  three  of  them  the  exquisite  pleas- 
e of  taking  a pop  at  a few  scouts  we  saw  on  the  side  of  the  hill  be- 
een  us  and  the  main  body.  The  rebels  instantly  began  to  form  line 
battle,  when  I returned  and  reported. 

By  this  time  Lieutenant  Eobberson  had  reported  a considerable  force 
ssmg  around  the  hill  which  he  occupied.  About  the  same  time  Ser- 
ant  Walker  returned,  reporting  the  head  of  their  column  crossing  the 
intsville  road.  We  had  some  foraging  wagons  out  that  were  return- 
>•  Our  boys  saw  them  captured  by  the  enemy.  Two  men  of  Com- 
ay  A were  out  with  the  wagons ; one  of  them  made  his  escape  and 
l,  mto  camp  in  the  evening.  The  other  two,  I suppose,  have  been 
itured  by  the  enemy,  to  wit,  Daniel  C.  Putnam  and  William  D.  Pope- 

n the  mean  time  Lieutenant  Eobberson  Avas  ordered  to  regain  the 
apany,  and  the  whole  company,  consisting  in  number  (able  for  duty) 
me*b  together  with  the  gallant  Sergt.  Maj.  A.  A.  Harrison,  was 
jered  back  to  the  top  of  the  hill  previously  occupied  by  Lieutenant 
bberson  and  party,  to  deploy  as  skirmishers  and  report  as  circurn- 
nces  required.  W e proceeded  immediately  to  comply  with  the  order, 
l while  advancing  around  the  brow  of  the  hill  on  the  right  we  dis- 
ered  to  our  right  in  a ravine  numbers  of  the  enemy  in  ambush,  when 
i dered  the  company  to  deploy  as  skirmishers,  taking  trees,  rocks, 
mps,  &c.,  for  covering,  and  pour  it  into  them.  Our  boys,  eager  for 
encounter,  hardly  waited  for  orders.  Each  fellow  betook  himself 
t tree,  and  poured  several  volleys  into  their  ranks,  causing  consid- 
ble  stir  among*  them,  and  no  doubt  they  had  very  good  reason,  for 
m examination  of  the  ground  after  the  retreat  of  the  rebels  their 
d lay  in  numbers  along  the  ravine.  They  gave  way.  We  then  ad- 
iced  to  the  top  of  the  hill  and  again  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and 
n discovered  the  rebels  thick  in  ambush  there  also.  The  boys 
ned  themselves  of  the  advantage  of  the  covering  of  trees,  and  woe 
he  white  blanket  and  butternut  pants  that  came  in  their  sight.  Being 
| 18  r r — vol  VIII 


274  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chat.  XVIIT. 

convinced,  however,  they  had  a heavy  force  and  were  only  trying  to 
draw  us  out,  and  satisfied  nothing  short  of  a regiment  would  justify  us 
in  advancing  and  bringing  on  an  engagement,  I reported  to  you  accord- 
ingly, when  Company  F,  commanded  by  Captain  Barns ; Companies  H 
and  I commanded  by  Lieutenant  Lyon,  also  one  company  from  the  Iowa 
Fourth  were  ordered  up  to  re-enforce  us,  our  force  now  consisting  of 
about  150  men.  The  Iowa  Fourth  formed  on  the  right;  H and  I on 
the  left  Our  line  extended  across  the  hill.  W e hehl  our  position  nearly 
two  hours,  firing  only  when  we  could  see  a rebel,  and,  taking  deliberate 
aim  we  brought  several  to  the  ground. 

I ’left  Captain  Barris  in  command  and  went  to  report  to  you  again, 
upon  which  we  were  called  off  by  your  order,  and  the  remaining  part  of  the 
engagement  in  which  we  participated  needs  no  recapitulation  by  me,  as 
you  were  an  eye-witness  of  what  followed.  I must  not  close,  however, 
without  awarding  great  applause  to  the  boys  under  my  command, 
refrain  from  mentioning  names,  as  all  merit  praise  for  their  valiant  con- 
duct, Such  cool  courage  and  bravery  have  rarely  been  exhibited  on 
the  battle-field.  The  officers  also  merit  great  praise— the  gallant  bei  gt . 
Mai.  A.  A.  Harrison,  who  by  his  conduct  in  rallying  and  cheeiing  t t 
boys  on  and  setting  them  an  example  of  bravery  worthy  of  imitation, 
will  ever  endear  him  to  Company  A.  Lieutenant  Kobberson  performed 
his  duty  coolly  and  deliberately  5 in  fact,  all  of  the  officers  present,  as 

'^respectfully  submit  the  above  as  the  part  taken  by  Company  A in 
the  battle  which  came  off  near  Blkhorn  Tavern  on  the  ith  instant. 

Yours,  &c.,  THOMAS  A.  KEED, 

Captain,  Comdg.  Co.  A,  Twenty-fourth  Mo.  Voh. 

Mai.  Eli  W.  Weston,  . _ , ^ 

Commanding  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Volunteers. 


No.  29. 


Report 


of  Capt.  Robert  W.  Fyan,  Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 


In  Camp  in  the  Field,  March  9,  1862. 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  herewith  to  submit  the  following  report : 

At  about  7 o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  7th  instant  I received  your  order  to 
take  my  company  and  proceed  north  on  the  Cassville  road  as  far  as  1 
was  able,  and  ascertain,  if  possible,  whether  the  enemy  were  advancing 
on  that  road  and  in  what  force.  The  company  were  under  arms  speedy 
ily,  all  of  the  company,  even  the  sick,  turning  out  with  the  utmost 
promptness  and  alacrity.  We  had  not  advanced  inore  than  three^ 
quarters  of  a mile  on  the  road  before  we  came  in  °f  the  enemy s 
cavalry.  In  consequence  of  the  garb  in  which  many  of  them  were 
clothed  I was  in  doubt  whether  they  were  Union  or  rebel  forces.  1 
therefore  threw  out  a squad  of  8 men,  and  deployed  them  in  the  ravines 
on  both  sides  of  the  road  we  were  advancing.  I then  cautiously  pro- 
ceeded some  200  yards  farther,  when  the  enemy  opeiieU  a cross-fiie  oil 
us  from  both  sides  of  the  road,  wounding  Private  John  Franklin.  Ilie 
fire  was  promptly  returned,  when,  finding  the  enemy  in  force  and  about 
to  flank  us,  I ordered  the  company  to  fall  back  some  200  yards,  w ei 
we  remained,  having  sent  back  to  camp  for  re-enforcements. 

Being  joined  by  Companies  I and  H,  we  ascertained  the  enemy 


.VIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


275 


inoiing  around  on  our  right  towards  the  Huntsville  road.  I 
liately  ordered  my  company  across  the  woods  to  the  Huntsville 
Deploying  as  skirmishers  on  both  sides  of  the  road  we  advanced 
,ve  reached  the  field  where  we  took  position  along  the  fence 
ng  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  whom  we  could  now  distinctly 
,e  m heavy  force  on  the  edge  of  the  woods  immediately  in  our 


'^i)0'!iti0TU  "’6  TCinaiued  uutil  the  First  Iowa  Battery,  supported 
Fourth  Iowa  Infantry,  reached  us.  Having  been"  ordered  by 

; fell  back  to  camp,  and  in  executing  your  further  order  to  move 

a i dhVhf  m!'  °U  ith®  leftr  f tb?  camp  we  lost  Private  Francis 
ipany 1 d bj  th  explosion  of  a shell  that  burst  in  the  midst  of 

Position  designated  until  ordered  to  join  the  rest 
egiment,  where  we  were  under  your  own  immediate  observation 
nmand  the  remainder  of  the  day.  ation 

nanv  “f*0*  tbe  killed’  funded,  and  missing  of 

pan* . Of  the  latter,  two  were  detailed  to  accompany  Quarter  - 
Fritz  on  a foraging  expedition  on  the  morning  of  the  7tli  and 
camp  t0  be  captured  by  the  enemy-  Tke  third  one  we  left’very 
tespectfully,  yours,  &c., 

BOBEET  W.  FYAbl, 

Captain  Company  B,  Twenty-fourth  Beat.  Mo.  Vols 
Eli  W.  Weston, 

Commanding  Twenty -fourth  Missouri  Volunteers. 


Ho.  30. 


of  Capt.  Sampson  P.  Barns , Twenty-fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 


In  Camp  in  the  Field,  March  9,  1862. 

darttSnf ' S* % °f  ^,porti"g  t0  y°u  that  upon  receiving  your 
W 0t  F?ld-ay’  7*b  “Stant,  I formed  my  company  of  those 

accor^rrStl,ng  °w?  men’.  and  marched  °ut  west  as  skir- 
1 camn  fg  r ,?rder-  .„wben  within  about  three-quarters  of  a 
of  t o ,!rn5nll “ CaPtams  O’Connor  and  Lewis,  of  the 
the  brulh  wL  glVafd’,  who  were  fin“g  occasionally  on  the 

> Mon^d  «,rh  i r°°k  my  “ out  in  tlie  brusb  on  the 
loll  tbe  w°°d  for  some  distance,  when  we  came  to  a farm. 
l' i . company , Lieutenant  Hart  taking  command  of  one 

e leflg  ^ 0f  tbe  road’  myself>  with  th<;  other  Platoon! 
e lett.  In  that  position,  with  cavalry  in  the  center,  under 

•inrhTsLhf nf  ?L  Vel,y ’ Tu  PlFsued  the  enemy  some  distance, 
“ ^'gbt  of  them  in  the  distance  and  opened  a fire  on  them 

on  their  ^ft  flo(ThlChathey  ailswered),  while  Lieutenant  Hart 
ised  them  l daub  and  opened  fire  on  them  from  the  brush, 
nnl.net  break  m retreat.  Becoming  satisfied  that  they 
nmaml  & Strong  ,f,,rce.  we  withdrew,  together  with  the 
,.  U ’ “to  camp.  The  whole  command,  according  to  my 
’ actecl  with  coolness  and  bravery. 

'isIwv^6611  In  cam»  some  twenty  minutes  we  were  called 
t^order  and  marched  out,  when,  according  to  your 
took  position  on  the  side  of  the  hill  rL.x 


276  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KARS.,  AND  IRD.  T.  «J 

- mm  >»  “> 

wait  wlien  the  enemy  appr  feU  back  a sfi0rt  distance  an. 

a fire  on  them.  Alter  a tew  rmi  continued,  the  fire  for  some  time 

took  cover  behind  trees>1?f  ’ ’ taia  Eeed,  Company  A,  who  forme 

We  were  so. on  re-enforced  by  Captain  Eeeo^  £ 3 Coolness  an 

on  our  left  and  entered  into  tbe  ^Yeteran  Th(,  actio 

bravery  that  would  have  do  n^  ^ euemy  retired,  moving  to  or 
lasted  some  hour  and  a ha - 1 ed  our  position  to  the  left  o!l 

left,  after  which  by  your  ord®r.  . d Lieutenant  Lyon,  in  comman 
top’of  the  infantry’ and  cavalr] 

of  Companies  I and  H,  togetn  p.mtain  Beed,  which  position  11 
the  whole  under  the  «ma^CfaP™0SS  to  take position  | 
held  till  late  in  the  evcmngi  Whcn  immediate,  commai 

the  foot  of : the  hill, nwhere  we  were f jder  you  ^ ^ ^ 

from  that  time  forward.  J ® firing,  coolness,  and  courag 

“ H 

ffv?  be, — »*v»r  BAEEIS, 

Captain  Comdg.  Co.  F,  Twenty-fourth  Mo.  Vole.,  Lyon  Legion. 
Maj.  Eli  W.  Weston. 


So.  31. 


Report  of  Lieut.  James  J.  Lyon,  Twenty  fourth  Missouri  Infantry. 


Camp  in  the  Field, 

Monday,  March  10,  lsoA 


Sin:  I would  most  fo.ni^ck  a, m. untU  da 


There  being  no  commissioned  “ skirmish] 

mand.  In  the  Tbout  latm.I  took  my  c« 

with  the  enemy  on the  Hu ntsvi lie  ™cl  Tavern  where  I for* 

mand  to  the  mound  in  the  rear  of  the  ru  assumed  then  the  co 

Captain  KeedwithCompaniesAand  p.  Heagumea^  ^ hm  I 

mand  of  the  battalion  About^p.  in-je^r^^^  ^ fleld  , 
formed  in  line  of  battle  1 command  occupied  the  extra 

right  and  the  mound  on  the  ^^““nd,  came  to  a halt,  1 
left.  We  advanced  in  line  Column  from  the  left  to 

the  enemy  through  the  brush  advanmn^  * hearing  considj 

riuht.  I was  about  ordering  me  meuw  ’ . fu[1  retr„ 

ble  of  a noise  to  the  rear,  I gave  it.^The  men  started 

I Lad  lieard  no  order  of  that  tana,  b i g ' ®d^ere  C0Tning  off  in  g> 

some  confusion,  but  were  re  were  sending  a shower  of  hi 

order,  though  the  enemy  in  from  the  hill  to  our  ri 

around  us.  They  opened  a fir ^ upon ‘ »s  »om  *nd  fled  in  dis0r 

which  was  terrific.  Under $eth“  modnd  we  reformed  and  up 
After  crossing  the  field  so  ' p:no,  our  forces  advance.  El 


hap.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


277 


he  action  with  12  privates  and  3 non-commissioned  officers.  Eesult,  1 
private  killed  and  1 wounded  mortally.  It  is  hard  to  discriminate 
mong  so  many  meritorious  ones,  but  I desire  to  make  special  mention 
f Sergeant  Ferrell,  Corporal  Eay,  Privates  Connor  and  Bishop,  of 
Company  H,  and  Privates  Edwards  and  Hurse,  of  Company  I.  Their 
on  rage  and  coolness  are  commendable. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  truly, 

JAMES  J.  LYON, 

First  Lieutenant  Company  II,  Twenty -fourth  Mo.  Vols. 

Maj.  Eli  W.  Weston, 

Provost-Marshal , Commanding  Twenty-fourth  Regt.  Mo.  Vols. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Capt.  Barbour  Lewis , First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

In  Camp  in  the  Field, 

Sunday , March  9,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  having  received  your 
?der  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  Friday,  the  7th  instant,  to  fur- 
ish  15  men  immediately  for  scouting  purposes,  I caused  that  number 
► be  mounted  promptly  and  went  with  them  myself.  Five  or  6 
hers  of  my  men  also  asked  leave  to  go,  making  my  force  about  20. 
fe  were  joined  by  about  the  same  number  from  Company  M,  of  the 
hird  Illinois  Cavalry,  but  now  acting  as  provost  guard,  under  your 
ders.  Captain  O’Connor  had  charge  of  his  own  detachment,  and  I 
aced  myself  and  mine  also  under  his  command.  He  discharged  his 
ities  throughout,  I thought,  with  coolness,  ability,  and  judgment. 
e marched  to  the  west  of  your  camp,  near  the  Elkhorn  Tavern,  and 
a half  or  three-quarters  of  a mile  found  some  of  the  scouts  of  the 
icmy  skulking  with  their  horses  in  the  brush.  . Here  we  also  found 
e brave  infantry  boys  of  Company  F,  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Missouri 
olunteers,  under  the  lead  of  their  gallant  captain,  Barris.  The  in- 
ntry  soon  routed  the  enemy  from  the  brush  and  we  all  chased  the 
e some  distance. 

At  about  a mile  from  where  we  first  found  them  they  rallied  to  the 
imber  of  some  150,  but  one  or  two  volleys  fired  by  a portion  of  the  in- 
utry  under  Lieutenant  Hart  soon  scattered  them  in  the  utmost  confu- 
m.  The  lieutenant  gallantly  flanked  them  amid  great  difficulties  and 
Light  them  with  rare  ardor  and  courage.  The  whole  force,  infantry  and 
valry,  pursued  the  enemy  in  a northwestern  direction  nearly  3 miles, 
itil  becoming  certain  that  we  were  near  a camp  where  the  enemy  lay 
heavy  force,  and  having  obtained  valuable  knowledge  of  their  plans 
d purposes,  it  was  deemed  best  to  suspend  the  pursuit  and  to  return 
camp.  I repaired  immediately  to  General  Curtis’  headquarters, 
iere  I found  you,  and  reported  what  I knew.  I then  returned  to 
tnp,  and  sent  out  some  of  my  men  as  scouts  north  and  east.  They 
m_returned’  reporting  the  enemy  to  be  very  near  and  advancing 
!>idly  in  great  force  in  both  directions,  they  having  during  the  night 
me  around  the  whole  camp  on  the  west  side  and  north  with  many 
ousands  of  men  and  several  batteries  of  artillery.  Unfortunately,  a 
age  party  sent  off  from  my  camp  while  I was  absent  in  the  morning 
is  cut  off,  and  Sergeant  Siggins  and  Teamster  Abram  Gallaton,  with 
ine  wagon  and  team,  were  captured  by  the  enemy.  Had  it  not  been 
■ the  bravery,  coolness,  aud  good  conduct  of  Lieut.  George  W. 


278  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap. 


Moore  and  Corporal  Hiltabidle,  they,  with  some  8 or  10  of  our  8D 
would  also  have  been  cut  off. 


OU1CI  also  nave  ueexi  uuu  u±x. 

Under  your  orders  we  moved  our  camp  into  the  general  camp* 

1 . i ___£> r*,  nrwililo  mATTfl  AYrATYT^n, 


UliUW  VULU  UUltiO  uv  x r . ° 

owing  to  the  loss  of  one  of  our  teams  were  unable  to  move  everyth 

T -tUj.  V-IP . — ^*4?  A11T.  rtnnrncmv  pnmmkfiflTV  StOTCS  UTld  15  jj 


owing  iu  me  iuos  ui  v/iiv-  v/i  «#- 

and  lost  half  or  more  of  our  company  commissary  stores  and  15 
extra  sabers  and  4 or  5 Colt’s  carbines  in  a damaged  condition,  ar 
most  of  the  commissioned  officers’  private  baggage;  Lieutenant 
losing  nearly  everything  he  had.  During  the  rest  of  the  day,  am 
during  the  8th,  my  company  performed  almost  constant  duty  i 
your  orders,  scouring  the  timber  in  every  direction,  keeping  bac 
scouts  of  the  enemy,  breaking  up  their  attempts  at  flanking,  ant 
■ - numbers  of  prisoners.  Sergts.  W.  A.  Kirby,  W.  T.  Hamilton 


ing  manuals  ill  * . — ■ — --.17  - — - . , ■ 

Samuel  H.  McCartney  acted  in  a manner  to  deserve  the  highest  ;* 
ration.  Private  Skeels  alone  took  a first  lieutenant  prisoner.  I 
During  a part  of  the  7th  I was  scouting  under  the  direct  orcl;< 
General  Sigel.  My  men  did  hard  service,  and.  my  only  regiet  fta 
it  was  not  in  our  power  to  participate  more  directly  and  efficient 
the  principal  engagement.  Believing  that  we  were  useful,  and* 
scious  that  we  were  truly  anxious  to  be  more  so,  I have  the  hoi*1 

be,  your  obedient  servant,  BARBOUR  LEWIS,  ; 

Captain  Co.  U,  First  Missouri  Cavalry , Provost  Guard , ?. 


Maj.  Eli  W.  Weston. 


NTo.  33. 


Report  of  Maj.  Joseph  Conrad , Third  Missouri  Infantry. 


Hdqrs.  First  Batt’n,  Third  Begt.,  Mo.  Vols.,  ] 
Camp  Welfley , Arlc.,  March  13,  lcl 

General  : Pursuant  to  your  orders,  dated  Camp  McKisick,  ?l 
3 1862,  I left  camp  on  the  morning  of  the  4th,  my  command  cons  t 
of  two  companies  of  the  Seventeenth,  one  of  the  Twelfth,  one  c 
Third,  one  of  the  Fifteenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  and  one  comp?; 
the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers,  one  section  of  Captain  VVe 
howitzers,  and  30  Fremont  and  30  Benton  Hussars.  Proceediii|i 
southwestern  direction,  I marched  along  Flint  Creek  until  within  6\ 
of  Lindsey’s  Prairie,  where  I camped  the  night  of  the  4th.  Start!. 
7 o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  5th  I still  continued  in  the  same  direction  i 
striking  the  State  line  road,  whence  I turned  north  towards  Mays, 
sending  my  adjutant,  Lademann,  ahead  with  8 Fremont  Hussars 
rest  Mr.  Gunter,  a notorious  secessionist.  He  met  with  i discn  l 
soldiers  of  General  Price’s  army,  and  charging  upon  them,  he  cap 
5 after  a long  chase.  My  guides  not  being  well  acquainted  witfi 
section  of  country,  I marched  some  10  miles  out  of  my  way,  arrivi 
Camp  Walker  towards  evening,  where  I met  Captain  Kielmanseg 
your  staff,  who  had  the  order  that  my  command  should  either  pr 

to  Pineville  or  return  to  camp.  _ A w 

The  infantry  being  very  tired,  we  camped  that  night  m the  Din 
of  the  Vegetarian  Society,  1 mile  east  of  Camp  Walker.  In  the  i 
at  10  o’clock,  Captain  von  Kielmansegge  proceeded  to  Pmeviii 
command  consisting  of  my  cavalry,  one  piece  of  artillery,  and 
of  infantry  hauled  in  a wagon.  At  7 o’clock  in  the  morning  ol 
I received  the  order  to  immediately  return  to  camp,  as  the  qti&b) 
approaching.  I instantly  moved  forward  on  the  Maysville  and  w 


Chap.  XVIII.l 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  279 


ville  road,  and  at  11  o’clock  a.  m.,  about  12  miles  from  Benton ville  I 
received  your  orders,  dated  Bentonville,  March  6,  10  o’clock  a.  m.  in- 
forming me  to  march  to  Miser’s  farm  and  Waters’  Mill,  and  from  there 
proceed  to  Potson’s  Hill.  I marched  on  about  6 miles  and  turned  to 
the  lett,  the  guide  knowing  a nearer  road  to  Miser’s  farm. 

I had  proceeded  only  about  4 miles  when  I heard  the  report  of  can- 
non m the  direction  ot  Bentonville,  and  afterwards  was  rejoined  by  the 
b Benton  Hussars  who  had  brought  me  your  latest  orders.  It  was  then 
3 o clock  p.  m.  They  had  passed  Waters’  Mill  and  got  to  Sugar  Creek 
Hollow,  when  they  met  2 of  the  enemy  and  disarmed  them.  They  had 
only  proceeded  a short  distance  when  suddenly  they  beheld  2,000  of  the 
enemy’s  cavalry.  They  immediately  turned  round  and  reported  the  cir- 
cumstances to  me,  being  obliged  to  leave  the  prisoners  behind.  I went 
across  the  hills  and  struck  Pineville  road,  endeavoring  to  go  around  the 
enemy  and  join  you  at  Potson’s  Hill,  if  possible.  I followed  that  road 
up  to  McCullough’s  Hollow,  where  I turned  to  the  right  and  marched 
along  the  State  line.  I could  only  proceed  2 miles  in  that  direction 
because  there  was  the  only  water,  and  the  men  were  too  fatigued  to  «o 
any  farther,  haying  marched  some  30  miles  that  day. 

I started  again  at  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  7th,  gaining  Pea 
Ridge,  and  turning  off  to  the  left  I arrived  at  Shell’s  Mill  at  9 o’clock 
a,  m.  At  12  o’clock  I got  to  a little  creek  4 miles  from  Keetsville,  on 
the  Keetsville  and  Pineville  road,  where  I had  to  halt,  the  exhaustion 
ot  the  men  not  permitting  any  farther  marching.  From  there  I pro- 
ceeded, in  company  with  Lieutenant  Clever,  Dr.  Krumsick,  and  some 
8 cavalry,  to  the  Fayetteville  road  to  reconnoiter.  We  had  proceeded 
as  far  as  the  tan-yard,  where  the  road  to  Bentonville  turns  off  to  the 
right.  There  we  suddenly  came  upon  the  enemy’s  pickets,  taking  them 
prisoners,  when  presently  I beheld  large  numbers  of  the  enemy  comino* 
down  the  Bentonville  road.  I at  once  turned  round  to  retrace  my  way 
to  the  camp,  being  eagerly  pursued  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  I now 
knew  that  I was  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  and  knowing  also  the  dis- 
tance between  the  tan-yard  and  Potson’s  Hill,  I saw  that  it  was  impos- 
sible for  my  worn-out  men  to  force  a passage.  I therefore  concluded 
to  retreaf  upon  the  nearest  post,  to  give  my  men  rest  and  re-enforce 
the  garrison,  and  at  5 o’clock  p.  m.  I again  moved  forward  to  Keets- 
ville and  from  there  to  Cassville.  In  Keetsville  I halted  an  hour 
waiting  to  escort  a train  of  9 wagons  that  had  endeavored  to  join  Colo- 
nel Davis’  command  and  was  greatly  harassed  by  the  enemy. 

I arrived  in  Cassville  at  11  o’clock  p.  m.  Remaining  there  on  the 
8th,  I received  three  days’  provisions,  only  having  three  days’  rations 
along  when  I started. 

Sunday  the  9th,  I again  moved  forward,  under  command  of  Col. 
C.  Wright,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  the  whole  force  consisting  of  my 
command,  150  of  Colonel  Wright’s  cavalry,  and  some  300  infantry  that 
got  in  from  Springfield  the  night  previous  with  a train.  That  morning 
I rejoined  your  command  at  Keetsville. 

In  four  days  my  command  marched  a distance  of  125  miles.  The  fol- 
lowing is  my  loss : One  private  of  Twelfth  Missouri,  8 of  Company  A, 
Seventeenth  Missouri,  and  13  of  Company  B,  Fifteenth  Missouri  Vol- 
unteers. These  men,  not  being  able  or  willing  to  stay  with  the  com- 
mand, were  picked  up  by  the  pursuing  enemy. 

I remain,  yours,  respectfully, 


JOSEPH  CONRAD, 

^ _ Major , Commanding  Expedition . 

Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel, 

Commanding  First  and  Second  Divisions . 


280  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chap.  XVHL 

No.  34. 


Report  of  Maj.  August  E.  Poten , Seventeenth  Missouri  Infantry. 


Hdors.  Seventeenth  Begtment  Mo.  Vols., 

^ Camp  Welfley , Arh, .,  March  18,  1862. 

March  6,  in  camp  on  McKisick’s  farm.  Received  marching  order 
the  night  previous.  Started  with  the  division  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.  on  the 
Bentonville  road;  passed  through  Bentonville;  halted  about  5 miles  , 
on  the  other  side  of  Bentonville,  when  we  received  the  intelligence 
that  the  enemy  had  attacked  our  rear  guard  at  Bentonville.  Major] 
Poten  received  the  order  to  proceed  at  once  to  General  Curtis,  to 
report  the  state  of  affairs.  In  the  mean  time  the  regiment  marched, 
under  command  of  Captain  Niegemann,  back  on  the  road  to  Benton- 
ville  about  2 miles,  when  we  met  our  rear  guard  retiring.  Majoi 
Poten  having  returned,  was  ordered  by  General  Sigel  to  cover  the  I 
retreat  with  our  regiment,  together  with  two  companies  of  the  Fifteenth 
Missouri  Volunteers  and  one  company  Fremont  Hussars,  under  com- 
mand of  Major  Landry;  the  whole  under  the  command  of  Major  Poten. 
This  operation  was.  carried  out  in  perfect  order  without  any  loss  on  our 
side.  The  command  reached  camp  on  Sugar  Creek  Hill,  Ark.,  about 

d<Marck  7,  remained  in  camp  until  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  when  General  Sigel 
ordered  Major  Poten  to  advance  with  our  regiment  on  the  road  to 
Bentonville.  The  command  consisted  of  the  Seventeenth  Regiment 
Missouri  Volunteers;  two  companies  of  the  Fifteenth  Regiment  Mis- 
souri Volunteers,  under  Major  Landry;  two  companies i ot  the  Third 
Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers;  two  companies  of  Benton  Hussars, 
under  Major  Heinrichs,  and  two  pieces  of  the  flying  battery,  undei 
Gantain  Elbert  After  having  advanced  as  far  as  4 miles  the  enemy 
wafdiscovered  on  the  hills  tothe  right  of  the  Bentonville  road,  Sev- 
eral  shells  were  thrown  at  him,  and  the  cavalry  under  Major  Heinrichs 
advanced,  drawing  the  enemy’s  fire  from  three  pieces  of  artillery  upon 
them,  severely  wounding  1 man.  The  regiment,  as  the  other  part  ot 
the  command,  then  returned,  according  to  orders  received  from  Ge  - 
eral  Sigel,  to  the  camp,  making  some  8 or  9 prisoners  on  their  way 

baMarch  8,  at  3 o’clock  a,  m.,  Adjutant  Leser  was  sent  by  M^or  Poten 
to  General  Sigel’s  headquarters  for  orders.  At  the  same  time  the  six 

companies  of  the  Second  Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers,  who  ha,ve  b^» 

with  our  command,  received  marching  orders,  to  jom  General  Sig 
division.  General  Sigel  ordered  Major  Poten  to  proceed  with  Ins  e tui 
command  to  the  Telegraph  road  and  from  there  to  the  battle-field  a- 
soon  as  four  companies  of  the  Second  Regiment  Missouri  Volunt^rs. 
detailed  to  relieve,  would  arrive.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baibold  havrrt 
arrived  at  our  camp  at  9.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  our  command  at  once  ni  ched 
to  the  battle-field.  After  having  taken  possession  on  the  left 
received  orders  to  advance  up  a steep  hill,  to  disiocate  the  enemy 
right  wing,  or,  if  he  should  give  way,  it  possible  to  cut  oft  his retraM 
The  regiment  deployed  as  skirmishers  in  line,  took  the  hill  pre'iou  . 
cleared  with  our  batteries,  they  throwing  shells  over  our  heads.  V lnl 
the  regiment  was  climbing  up  the  lull  we  met  a few  strag ,glei «». 
succeeded  in  wounding  one  of  our  men  and  killing  ActinB  iL  ) - 

mann’s  liorse  before  they  retired.  After  a platoon  fire  of  _the_wiij|( 
battalion  t' 
hill  to  the 


orse  before  they  retired.  After  a platoon  fire  ot  the  wnoi 
the  regiment  moved  again  down  to  the  hollow  aPp.  1 1 n 
e Telegraph  road,  joined  by  the  Second  Regiment  Missour 


!hap.  XVIII.]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  281 

Volunteers,  Forty-fourth  Begiment  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  the  flying 
>attery  having  come  at  the  same  time.  After  a halt  of  a few  minutes 
General  Sigel  and  staff  came  and  ordered  to  pursue  the  enemy.  We 
olio  wed  the  enemy  within  2 miles  from  Beets  vi  lie,  Mo.,  making  many 
irisoners.  Encamped  there.  Beceived  intelligence  that  a body  of  the 
nemy  camped  1 mile  from  our  halting  place. 

March  9,  started  at  2 o’clock  a.  m.  Followed  the  enemy  through 
leetsville,  Mo.  Seeing  the  impossibility  of  coming  up  with  him 
eturned  to  Keetsville,  and  after  a rest  of  a few  hours  returned  in  a 
eavy  rain  to  our  old  camp,  back  near  the  battle-ground. 

Very  respectfully, 

„ A.  H.  POTEB, 

Major,  Commanding  Seventeenth  Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel, 

Commanding  First  and  Second  Divisions. 


Bo.  35. 


eports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Farl  Van  Dorn , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Trans- 
Mississippi  District. 

Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

March  9,  via  Hog  Eye , March  10,  [1862]. 

F ought  the  enemy,  about  20,000  strong,  7th  and  8th,  at  Elkhorn,  Ark. 
attle  first  day  from  10  a.  m.  until  after  dark ; loss  heavy  on  both  sides, 
enerals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh  and  Colonel  Hebert  were  killed- 
enerals  Price  and  Slack  were  wounded — General  Price,  flesh  wound  in 
ie  arm  5 the  others  badly  wounded,  if  not  mortally  • many  officers  killed 
id  wounded ; but  as  there  is  some  doubts  in  regard  to" several,  I can- 
)t  yet  report  their  names.  Slept  on  the  battle-field  first  night,  having 
wen  the  enemy  from  their  position.  The  death  of  Generals  McCul- 
ch  and  McIntosh  and  Colonel  Hebert,  early  in  the  action  threw  the 
oops  on  the  right  under  their  commands  "in  confusion.  The  enemy 
ok  a second  and  strong  position.  Being  without  provisions  and  the 
?ht  wing  somewhat  disorganized,  determined  to  give  battle  on  the 
?ht  on  their  front  for  the  purpose  only  of  getting  off  the  field  without 
e danger  of  a panic,  which  I did  with  success,  but  with  some  losses. 
I am  now  encamped  with  my  whole  army  14  miles  west  [of]  Fayette- 
lle,  having  gone  entirely  around  the  enemy.  I am  separated  from  my 
am,  but  think  it  safe  on  the  Elm  Springs  road  to  Boston  Mountains, 
ie  reason  why  I determined  to  give  battle  at  once  upon  my  arrival 
assume  command  of  the  army  I will  give  in  report  at  an  early  day. 

EABL  VAN  DOBB, 

ffi  , . „ General , Commanding. 

General  A.  Sidney  Johnston,  Decatur. 

[Copy  to  the  Secretary  of  War.] 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , ArTc.,  March  18,  1862. 
SiE:  I avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  offered  me  by  the  departure 
L>r.  u.  B.  Knobe  for  Bichmond  to  inform  you  that  the  entire  army  I 


282 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  X’t 


marched  against  the  enemy  some  days  since  is  now  in  camp  a w 
miles  from  this  place,  and  that  I shall  march  in  a few  days  for  Pocah 
tas  to  make  a junction  with  whatever  force  may  be  assembled  at  lit 


point. 


It  is  my  intention  to  fall  upon  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  the  vici  t 
of  New  Madrid  or  Cape  Girardeau  and  attempt  to  relieve  Gem! 
Beauregard,  and,  if  practicable,  X shall  march  on  Saint  Louis,  d 
thus  withdraw  the  forces  now  threatening  this  part  of  the  Statif 
rkcins<is 

The  army  cannot  be  subsisted  here  any  longer;  neither  do  I think  it 
the  enemy  can  make  any  serious  demonstrations  from  here  until  lahn 

the  spring.  . 

I send  several  thousand  cavalry  off  in  a few  days  via  h orsytnj 
White  Biver,  to  burn  up  the  depots  of  the  enemy  at  Springfield  <! 
to  destroy  his  immense  trains,  which  go  to  and  fro  nearly  un  guard 
They  will  then  join  me  at  Pocahontas.  I shall  order  Pike  to  ope» 
in  the  Indian  country  west  of  this  to  cut  off  trains,  annoy  the  encmi 
his  marches,  and  to  prevent  him,  as  far  as  possible,  from  supplymgis 
troops  from  Missouri  and  Kansas.  He  cannot  supply  them  here  I 
have  debated  this  movement  in  my  own  mind  and  think  that  it  isl 


best  I can  make.  . 

I attempted  first  to  beat  the  enemy  at  Elkhorn,  but  a series  ol  a 
dents  entirely  unforeseen  and  not  under  my  control  and  a badly « 
ciplined  army  defeated  my  intentions.  The  death  of  McCulloch « 
McIntosh  and  the  capture  of  Hebert  left  me  without  an  officer  to  o 
mand  the  right  wing,  which  was  thrown  into  utter  confusion,  and  t 
strong  position  of  the  enemy  the  second  day  left  me  no  alternative i 
to  retire  from  the  contest.  A heavy  blow  was  struck  them,  howei 
and  they  are  somewhat  paralyzed.  I shall  march  to  another  ;< 
before  they  recover,  and  before  their  re-enforcements  arrive,  which  tj 
are  daily  expecting. 

If  I give  battle  to  the  troops  near  New  Madrid  I relieve  Beauregl 
If  I find  this  not  advisable  or  practicable,  I shall  march  boldly  and  t 
idly  towards  Saint  Louis  between  Ironton  and  the  enemy’s  grand  d< 
at  Bolla.  I think  I shall  accomplish  something  in  that  direction 
shall  at  all  events  task  my  humble  abilities  to  their  utmost  to  ach' 
some  success  for  our  cause,  and  I earnestly  hope  that  I may  he  < 


eessful. 

I shall  not  be  able  to  make  my  report  of  the  battle  of  Elk  horn 
some  time  on  account  of  the  difficulty  I have  of  getting  subordi  ' 
reports.  Our  loss  was  not  as  heavy,  however,  as  I had  thought  an> 
was  reported  to  me,  not  being  more  than  800  or  1,000  killed 
wounded  and  between  200  and  300  prisoners. 

The  enemy’s  loss  was  about  800  killed  and  1,000  or  1,200  vnoui 
and  about  300  prisoners.  We  also  took  two  batteries  of  artillery, 
of  which  was  destroyed  by  fire— burnt  up. 

The  enemy’s  position  was  a strong  one,  but  we  drove  him  Iromit 
slept  on  our  arms  on  the  field  of  battle,  night  closing  the  first  o 

battle.  _ 

The  second  day  we  found  him  at  daylight  in  a new  and  stroi 
position  to  the  rear  of  his  first,  about  2 miles  off.  From  all  the  cir( 
stances  which  surrounded  me  I determined  to  withdraw.  I there 
made  a demonstration  in  front  to  cover  the  movement  and  put  the  a 
on  the  road  towards  Huntsville,  towards  the  east,  and  retired  wi« 
heavy  heart,  but  with  a determination  to  recover  as  soon  as  pos? 
and  fight  again.  I was  not  defeated,  but  only  foiled  in  my  intent! 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


283 


I am  yet  sanguine  of  success,  and  will  not  cease  to  repeat  my  blows 
whenever  the  opportunity  is  offered.  y 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Major-General. 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Jachsonport,  Ark.,  March  27,  1862. 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  while  at  Pocahontas  I 
received  dispatches  on  February  22,  informing  me  that  General  Price 
had  rapidly  fallen  back  from  Springfield  before  a superior  force  of  the 
enemy,  and  was  endeavoring  to  form  a junction  with  the  division  of 
eneral  McCulloch  m Boston  Mountains.  For  reasons  which  seemed 
to  me  imperative  I resolved  to  go  in  person  and  take  command  of  the 
combined  forces  of  Price  and  McCulloch. 

I reached  their  headquarters- March  3,  and  being  satisfied  that  the 
enemy,  who  had  halted  at  Sugar  Creek,  55  miles  distant,  was  only 
waiting  large  re-enforcements  before  he  would  advance,  I resolved  to 
at.0,lce-  Accordingly  I sent  for  General  Pike  to  join  me 
fn^rjvr1  S?rl,ngS  Wltb  th® forces  under  his  command,  and  on  the  morn- 
ing  of  March  4 moved  with  the  divisions  of  Price  and  McCulloch  bv 

r^?LFryettrillme,and,B?nti,nville  t0  ^tack  the  enemy’smaincamp 
on  Sugar  Creek.  The  whole  force  under  my  command  was  about  16,000 

On  the  6th  we  left  Elm  Springs  for  Bentonville,  and  from  prisoners 
™Pwwb?  °Ur  scoutl“?  Parties  011  the  5th  I became  convinced  that 
f,  4 tlfme  uo,suspicion  was  entertained  of  our  advance,  and  that 
there  were  strong  hopes  of  our  effecting  a complete  surprise  and  attack- 
ing}^6 enemy  before  the  large  detachments  encamped  at  various  points 
m the  surrounding  country  could  rejoin  the  main  body.  I therefore 

tboetZnr(f  to  r6T  BentonYllIe>  11  miles  distant,  by  rapid  march,  but 
rf  tw  iTj-  r -so  v%v  slowly  that  it  was  11  a.  m.  before  the  head 
of  the  leading  division  (Price’s)  reached  the  village,  and  we  had  the 
mortification  to  see  Sigel’s  division,  7,000  strong,  leaving  it  as  we  en- 
?Ved;  ,ad  we  been  0116  bour  sooner  we  should  have  cut  him  off  with 
h w?r  n f0re,ei  -md  certain,y  have  beaten  the  enemy  the  next  day. 

We  followed  him,  our  advance  skirmishing  with  his  rear  guard,  which 

Thmu?1111  jabln  lan<1'e<l,  until  we  had  gained  a point  on  Sugar  Creek 
about 7 miles  beyond  Bentonville  and  within  1 or  2 miles  of  the  strongly- 
intrenched  camp  of  the  enemy.  ° 

In  conference  with  Generals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh,  who  had  an 
of  this  locality,  I had  ascertained  that  by  making 

field* tn  Fif™+tl  eSi f C0U  <i1  Yeach  the  Telegraph  road  leading  from  Spring- 
field  to  Fayetteville,  and  be  immediately  in  rear  of  the  enemy  and  his 

haltedCtheehP»d  f had  r,esolved  t0  ad°Pt  this  route,  and  therefore 
halted  the  head  of  my  column  near  the  point  where  the  road  bv  which 

iTfor^niffht10'^  f|1VergeS’ihr6r  °,Ut  'ey  pickets,  and  bivouacked  as 
But  soon  after  dark  I marched  again,  moving  with 
Price  s division  m advance,  and  taking  the  road  by  which  I hoped  be- 

hehad' halt'd  t0rtICaCh  tbe  rear  of  the  enemy.  Some  obstructions^  which 
imt  ^ ir  fl^T  *hrown,  m the  way,  so  impeded  our  march  that  we  did 
not  gam  the  Telegraph  road  until  near  10  a.  m.  of  the  7th. 


284 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII.  ! 

By  prisoners,  with  forage  wagons,  whom  our  cavalry  pickets  brought  : 
in  we  were  assured  that  we  were  not  expected  in  that  quarter,  and 
that  the  promise  was  fair  for  a complete  surprise. 

♦ I at  once  made  dispositions  for  attack,  and  directing  General  Brice 
to  move  forward  cautiously,  soon  drew  the  fire  of  a tew  skirmishers,  | 
who  were  rapidly  re-enforced,  so  that  before  11  o’clock  we  were  fairly 
engaged,  the  enemy  holding  very  good  positions  and  maintaining  a 
heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  small-arms  upon  the  constantly-advancing 
columns  which  were  being  pressed  upon  him.  t I 

1 had  directed  General  McCulloch  to  attack  with  his  forces  the  enemy’s  I 
left  and  before  2 o’clock  it  was  evident  that  if  his  division  could  ad- 
vance or  even  maintain  its  ground,  I could  at  once  throw  forward 
Price’s  left,  advance  his  whole  line,  and  end  the  battle.  I sent  him  a 
dispatch  to  this  effect,  but  it  was  never  received  by  him.  Before  it  was 
penned  his  brave  spirit  had  winged  its  flight,  and  one  of  the  most  gal- 
lant leaders  of  the  Confederacy  had  fought  his  last  battle. 

About  3 p.  m.  I received,  by  aides-de-camp,  the  information  that 
Generals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh  and  Colonel  Hebert  were  killed, 
and  that  the  division  was  without  any  head.  I nevertheless  pressed  I 
forward  with  the  attack,  and  at  sunset  the  enemy  was  fleeing  before  our 
victorious  troops  at  every  point  in  our  front,  and  when  night  fell  we 
had  driven  him  entirely  from  the  field  of  battle. 

Our  troops  slept  upon  their  arms  nearly  a mile  beyond  the  point  at 
which  he  made  his  last  stand,  and  my  headquarters  for  the  night  were 
at  the  Elkhorn  Tavern.  We  had  taken  during  the  day  sevdn  cannon 

and  about  200  prisoners.  , x.  I 

In  the  course  of  the  night  1 ascertained  that  the  ammunition  was 
almost  exhausted,  and  that  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  ordnance  sup- 
plies could  not  find  his  wagons,  which,  with  the  subsistence  tram,  had 
been  sent  to  Bentonville.  Most  of  the  troops  had  been  without  any 
food  since  the  morning  of  the  6th  and  the  artillery  horses  were  beaten 
out.  It  was  therefore  with  no  little  anxiety  that  I awaited  the  dawn 
of  day.  When  it  came  it  revealed  to  me  the  enemy  in  a new  and  strong 
position,  offering  battle.  I made  my  dispositions  at  once  to  accept  the 
gage,  and  by  7 o’clock  the  cannonading  was  as  heavy  as  that  ot  the 

P1On°the<side  of  the  enemy  the  fire  was  much  better  sustained,  for,  be- 
ing freed  from  the  attack  of  my  right  wing,  he  could  now  concentrate 
his  whole  artillery  force.  Finding  that  my  right  wing  was  much Mis 
organized,  and  that  the  batteries  were  one  after  the  other  retiring  Irom 
the  field  with  every  shot  expended,  I resolved  to  withdraw  the  army, 
and  at  once  placed  the  ambulances,  with  all  the  wounded  they  could 
bear,  upon  the  Huntsville  road,  and  a portion  of  McCulloch’s  division, 
which  had  joined  me  during  the  night,  in  position  to  follow,  while  1 so 
•disposed  of  my  remaining  forces  as  best  to  deceive  the  enemy  as  to  mv 
intention,  and  to  hold  him  in  check  while  executing  it. 

About  10  o’clock  I gave  the  order  for  the  column  to  march  and  soon 
afterwards  for  the  troops  engaged  to  fall  back  and  cover  the  roar  o ' ® 

army.  This  was  done  very  steadily;  no  attempt  was  made  by  tne 
enemy  to  follow  us,  and  we  encamped  about  3 p.  m.  about  10  miles 
from  the  field  of  battle.  Some  demonstrations  were  made  by  his  cav- 
alry upon  my  baggage  train  and  the  batteries  of  artillery , wine  i ie 
turned  by  different  routes  from  that  taken  by  the  army,  but  they  were 
instantly  checked,  and  thanks  to  the  skill  and  courage  of  Colonel  Stone 
and  Major  Wade,  all  of  the  baggage  and  artillery  joined  the  army  in 
safety. 


/HAF.  XVIII.] 


PEA  KIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


285 


So  far  as  I can  ascertain  our  loss  amounts  to  about  600  killed  and 
wounded  and  200  prisoners,  and  one  cannon,  which,  having  become 
lisabled,  I ordered  to  be  thrown  into  a ravine. 

The  best  information  I can  procure  of  the  enemy’s  loss  places  hi# 
ailed  at  more  than  700,  with  at  least  an  equal  number  of  wounded. 
;iVe  captured  about  300  prisoners,  making  his  total  loss  about  2,000. 
v\re  brought  away  four  cannon  and  ten  baggage  wagons,  and  we 
)urned  upon  the  field  three  cannon  taken  by  McIntosh  in  his  brilliant 
■harge.  The  horses  having  been  killed,  these  guns  could  not  be  brought 
iway. 

The  force  with  which  I went  into  action  was  less  than  14,000  men. 
Chat  of  the  enemy  is  variously  estimated  at  from  17,000  to  24,000. 

During  the  whole  of  this  engagement  I was  with  the  Missouri  di vis- 
on,  under  Price,  and  I have  never  seen  better  fighters  than  these  Mis- 
iouri  troops  and  more  gallant  leaders  than  General  Price  and  his 
>fficers.  From  the  first  to  the  last  shot  they  continually  pushed  on 
md  never  yielded  an  inch  they  had  won,  and  when  at  last  they  re- 
ceived the  order  to  fall  back  they  retired  steadily  and  with  cheers.  Gen- 
Tal  Price  received  a severe  wound  early  in  the  action,  but  would 
leither  retire  from  the  field  nor  cease  to  expose  himself  to  danger. 

No  successes  can  repair  the  loss  of  the  gallant  dead  who  fell  on  this 
rell-fought  field.  McCulloch  was  the  first  to  fall.  I had  found  him,  in 
he  frequent  conferences  I had  with  him,  a sagacious,  prudent  coun- 
selor, and  a bolder  soldier  never  died  for  his  country. 

McIntosh  had  been  very  much  distinguished  all  through  the  opera- 
ions  which  have  taken  place  in  this  region  ; and  during  my  advance 
“rom  Boston  Mountains  I placed  him  in  command  of  the  cavalry  bri- 
gade and  in  charge  of  the  pickets.  ITe  was  alert,  daring,  and  devoted 
o his  duty.  His  kindness  of  disposition,  with  his  reckless  bravery, 
lad  attached  the  troops  strongly  to  him,  so  that  after  McCulloch  fell, 
lad  he  remained  to  lead  them,  all  would  have  been  well  with  my  right 
ving.  But  after  leading  a brilliant  charge  of  cavalry  and  carrying 
he  enemy’s  battery  he  rushed  into  the  thickest  of  the  fight  again  at 
lie  head  of  his  old  regiment  and  was  shot  through  the  heart.  The 
ralue  of  these  two  officers  was  best  proven  by  the  effect  of  their  fall 
ipon  the  troops.  So  long  as  brave  deeds  are  admired  by  our  people 
he  names  of  McCulloch  and  McIntosh  will  be  remembered  and  loved. 

General  Slack,  after  gallantly  maintaining  a long-continued  and  suc- 
cessful attack,  was  shot  through  the  body ; but  I hope  his  distinguished 
cervices  will  be  restored  to  his  country. 

A noble  boy,  [S.]  Churchill  Clark,  commanded  a battery  of  artillery, 
tnd  during  the  fierce  artillery  actions  of  the  7th  and  8th  was  conspic- 
uous for  the  daring  and  skill  which  he  exhibited.  He  fell  at  the  very 
close  of  the  action.  Colonel  Bives  fell  mortally  wounded  about  the 
came  time  and  was  a great  loss  to  us.  On  a field  where  many  gallanl# 
gentlemen  were  I remember  him  as  one  of  the  most  energetic  and 
levoted  of  them  all. 

To  Col.  Henry  Little  my  especial  thanks  are  due  for  the  coolness, 
skill,  and  devotion  with  which  for  two  days  he  and  his  gallant  brigade 
)ore  the  brunt  of  the  battle.  Colonel  Burbridge,  Colonel  Bosser,  Col- 
mel  Gates,  Major  Lawther,  Major  Wade,  Captain  MacDonald,  and  Cap- 
ain  Schaumberg  are  some  gf  those  who  attracted  my  special  attention 
)y  their  distinguished  conduct. 

In  McCulloch’s  division,  the  Louisiana  regiment,  under  Col.  Louis 
debert,  and  the  Arkansas  regiment,  under  Colonel  McBae,  are  espec- 
ally  mentioned  for  their  good  conduct.  Major  Montgomery,  Captain 


286 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVIII. 


Bradfute,  Lieutenants  Loinax,  Kimmel,  Dillon,  and  Frank  Armstrong, 
assistant  adjutant- general,  were  ever  active  and  soldierly.  After  their 
services  were  no  longer  required  with  their  own  division  they  joined 
my  staff,  and  I am  much  indebted  to  them  for  the  efficient  aid  they  gave 
me  during  the  engagement  of  the  8th.  They  are  meritorious  officers, 
whose  value  is  lost  to  the  service  by  their  not  receiving  rank  more 
accordant  with  their  merit  and  experience  than  that  they  now  hold. 

Being  without  my  proper  staff,  I was  much  gratified  by  the  offer  of 
Colonel  Shands  and  Captain  Barrett,  of  the  Missouri  Army,  of  their 
services  as  aides.  They  were  of  great  assistance  to  me  by  the  courage 
and  intelligence  with  which  they  bore  my  orders ; also  Colonel  Lewis, 
of  Missouri. 

None  of  the  gentlemen  of  my  personal  staff,  with  the  exception  of 
Colonel  Maury,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieut.  C.  Sulivane,  my 
aide-de-camp,  accompanied  me  from  Jacksonport,  the  others  having  left 
on  special  duty.  Colonel  Maury  was  of  invaluable  service  to  me  both 
in  preparing  for  and  during  the  battle.  Here,  as  on  other  battle-fields 
where  I have  served  with  him,  he  proved  to  be  a zealous  patriot  and 
true  soldier;  cool  and  calm  under  all  circumstances,  he  was  always 
ready,  either  with  his  sword  or  his  pen.  His  services  and  Lieutenant 
Sulivane’s  were  distinguished.  The  latter  had  his  horse  killed  under 
him  while  leading  a charge,  the  order  for  which  he  had  delivered. 

You  will  perceive  from  this  report,  general,  that,  although  I did  not, 
as  I hoped,  capture  or  destroy  the  enemy’s  army  in  Western  Arkansas, 
I have  inflicted  upon  it  a heavy  blow  and  compelled  him  to  fall  back 
into  Missouri.  This  he  did  on  the  16th  instant. 

For  further  details  concerning  the  action  and  for  more  particular 
notices  of  the  troops  engaged  I respectfully  refer  you  to  the  reports  of 
the  subordinate  officers,  which  accompany  this  report. 

Yery  respectfully,  sir.  your  obedient  servant, 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-  General. 

General  Braxton  Bragg,  Commanding , &c. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  West, 

Memphis , Tenn .,  April  20,  1862. 

General  : I regret  to  find  that  in  my  report  of  the  battle  of  Elk- 
horn  no  mention  was  made  of  the  excellent  conduct  of  Lieut.  L.  C. 
Leftwich,  of  General  McCulloch’s  staff.  After  exhibiting  great  cour- 
age and  energy  during  the  engagement  of  that  division  he  joined  my 
staff  and  rendered  me  very  great  assistance  during  the  action  of  the 
8th.  I desire  to  bring  him"  to  your  notice  as  a gallant  and  meritorious 
youngbofficer. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EARL  YAN  DORN, 

Major- General. 


No.  36. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Bike , C.  8.  Army , commanding  Department 

of  Indian  Territory. 

Dwight  Mission,  Cherokee  Nation,  Ind.  T., 

March  14,  1862. 

Sir  : On  February  25  I reached  Cantonment  Davis,  near  Fort  Gib- 
son, with  Colonel  Cooper’s  Choctaw  and  Chickasaw  battalion,  which  had 


EVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


287 


encamped  near  the  mouth  of  the  Canadian.  The  same  evening 
0.  E.  McIntosh’s  regiment  of  Creeks  arrived  at  the  same  point 
in  charge  a large  amount  of  coin  and  other  moneys  for  the  differ - 
idian  tribes,  and  found  delegations  of  the  Osages,  Comanches,  and 
ve  Indians  awaiting  me,  and  the  disposition  of  the  moneys  left 
>ectedly  in  my  hands,  together  with  the  dealings  with  the  Indian 
, detained  me  there  three  days. 

Choctaws,  Chickasaws,  and  Creeks  refused  to  march  until  they 
laid  off,  and  as  by  their  treaties  with  us  they  could  not  be  taken 
the  Indian  country  without  their  consent,  I had  no  alternative 
> submit.  The  payment  of  the  Choctaws  and  Chickasaws  occu- 
hree  days. 

the  morning  of  the  third  day  I left  them  behind  at  Fort  Gibson, 

: 0.  G.  Welch’s  squadron  of  Texans,  part  of  the  First  Choctaw 
hickasaw  Eegiment,  with  which,  and  the  Creek  regiment,  whom  I 
ided  to  move  by  the  promise  that  they  should  be  paid  at  the  Illi- 
hver,  I marched  to  Park  Hill,  near  that  river,  remained  there 
y,  and  not  being  overtaken,  as  I expected  to  be,  by  the  Choctaw 
hickasaw  troops,  moved  the  next  day,  Monday,  March  3,  towards 
ville,  and  the  next  day  to  Cincinnati,  on  the  Cherokee  line,  where 
took  Col.  Stand  Watie’s  regiment  of  Cherokees. 
next  day,  Wednesdaj7,  with  Colonel  Watie’s  regiment  and  Cap- 
belch’s  squadron,  I reached  Freschlag’s  Mill,  and  on  Thursday 
ok  Colonel  Drew’s  regiment  of  Cherokees  at  Smith’s  Mill,  anil 
ip  with  the  rear  of  General  McCulloch’s  division  late  in  the  after- 
That  night  I encamped  within  2 miles  of  Camp  Stephens,  and 
o’clock  received  General  Van  Dorn’s  order,  to  the  effect  that  the 
vould  move  at  8 o’clock  and  that  I would  follow  General  McCul 
livision.  I sent  to  General  McCulloch  to  ascertain  at  what  hour 
id  would  be  clear  for  me  to  move,  and  received  his  reply  that  it 
be  clear  at  12  o’clock  and  that  his  train  would  not  move  until 
it.  At  12  o’clock  I marched  with  my  command,  overtook  and 
General  McCulloch’s  train,  which  was  in  motion,  and  had  to 
ltil  sunrise  a little  south  of  Sugar  Creek  until  his  infantry  had 
it  on  a little  bridge  of  rails.  We  followed  closely  in  his  rear 
ie  head  of  my  command  had  passed  the  houses  on  what  is  called 
ne  Ridge,  where  we  were  halted,  and  Colonel  Sims’  Texas  regi- 
ountermarching,  passed  us  to  the  rear,  an  officer  informing  me 
was  to  countermarch  and  follow  the  other  troops.  I did  so,  and 
e then  marched  off  the  Bentonville  road  to  the  south  through 
m.  Soon  after  Captain  Lomax,  of  General  McCulloch’s  staff, 
|f  m.®  that  the  enemy  had  fortified  a little  place  called  Leetown, 

I " m i Tk/r^.  S0U^b  which  we  were  marching  to  attack,  and 
feral  McCulloch’s  orders  were  that  my  command,  on  reaching 
>t,  should  form  in  line  in  rear  of  General  McIntosh’s  brigade, 
would  itself  be  in  rear  of  a line  of  infantry,  and  that  when  the 
' 10lhci  begin  all  were  to  dismount  and  charge  together. 

■ad  marched  from  the  road  in  a southeasterly  direction  about  a 
>in  the  point  where  we  left  it,  and  were  passing  along  a narrow 
nween  a piece  of  woods  on  our  left  and  a fenced  field  on  our 
• hen  we  discovered  in  front  of  us,  at  the  distance  of  about  300 
1 Dattery  of  three  guns,  protected  by  five  companies  of  regular 
- A fence  ran  from  east  to  west  through  the  woods,  and  behind 
i orhied  in  line,  with  Colonel  Sims’  regiment  on  the  right,  the 
n ot  Captain  Welch  next  to  him,  and  the  regiments  of  Colonels 
lna  Drew  m continuation  of  the  line  on  the  left.  The  enemy 


288  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVld 

were  in  a small  prairie,  about  250  yards  across,  on  the  right  of  whicli 
was  the  fenced  field,  and  on  our  left  it  extended  to  a large  prairie  field 
bounded  on  the  east  by  a ridge.  In  rear  of  the  battery  was  a thickei 
of  underbrush,  and  on  its  right,  a little  to  the  rear,  a body  of  timber.  E 

General  McIntosh’s  cavalry  had  passed  on  into  the  large  prairie  fiell 
to  our  left  and  the  infantry  were  quite  across  it,  close  to  the  ridga 
about  600  yards  from  us.  My  whole  command  consisted  of  about  1,00 
men,  all  Indians,  except  one  squadron.  The  enemy  opened  fire  inti 
the  woods  where  we  were,  the  fence  in  front  of  us  was  thrown  down 
and  the  Indians  (Watie’s  regiment  on  foot  and  Drew’s  on  horseback  j 
with  part  of  Sims’  regiment,  gallantly  led  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Quay  Id 
charged  full  in  front  through  the  woods  and  into  the  open  ground  witj 
loud  yells,  routed  the  cavalry,  took  the  battery,  fired  upon  and  pursued 
the  enemy,  retreating  through  the  fenced  field  on  our  right,  and  held 
the  battery,  which  I afterwards  had  drawn  by  the  Cherokees  into  th 
woods.  Four  of  the  horses  of  the  battery  alone  remained  on  th 
ground,  the  others  running  otf  with  the  caissons,  and  for  want  of  horsel 
and  harness  we  were  unable  to  send  the  guns  to  the  rear. 

The  officers  of  my  staff,  Captains  Schwarzman  and  Hewitt  and  Lieu 
tenant  Pike,  with  Captain  Lee,  of  Acting  Brigadier-General  Cooper] 
staff,  rode  with  us  in  the  charge.  Our  loss  was  2 of  Colonel  Drew] 
men  killed  and  1 wounded.  Colonel  Sims  had  1 man  killed  and  9 
wounded.  Of  the  enemy,  between  30  and  40  were  killed  in  the  fief 
and  around  the  guns.  The  charge  was  made  just  at  noon. 

We  remained  at  the  battery  for  some  twenty  minutes,  when  Colonel j 
Watie  informed  me  that  another  battery  was  in  our  front,  beyond  th 
skirt  of  underbrush,  protected  by  a heavy  force  of  infantry.  Genera 
McIntosh’s  force  was  not  near  us,  nor  do  I know  where  it  then  was 
The  infantry  were  still  in  their  position  near  the  ridge,  across  the  larg| 
field  on  the  left,  and  did  not  approach  us;  indeed,  at  one  time  move! 
farther  off  along  the  ridge.  Colonel  Drew’s  regiment  was  in  the  fiell 
on  oar  right,  and  around  the  taken  battery  was  a mass  of  Indians  an  ! 
others  in  the  utmost  confusion,  all  talking,  riding  this  way  and  thafl 
and  listening  to  no  orders  from  any  one.  I directed  Capt.  Boswell  M \ 
Lee,  of  Acting  Brigadier-General  Cooper’s  staff,  always  conspicuou 
for  gallantry  and  coolness,  to  have  the  guns  which  had  been  take 
faced  to  our  front,  that  they  might  be  used  against  the  battery  jual 
discovered ; but  he  could  not  induce  a single  man  to  assist  in  doing  sol 

At  this  moment  the  enemy  sent  two  shells  into  the  field,  and  th 
Indians  retreated  hurriedly  into  the  woods  out  of  which  they  had  mad; 
the  charge.  Well  aware  that  they  would  not  face  shells  in  the  ope 
ground,  I directed  them  to  dismount,  take  their  horses  to  the  rear,  an  . 
each  take  to  a tree,  and  this  was  done  by  both  regiments,  the  men  thul 
awaiting  patiently  and  coolly  the  expected  advance  of  the  enemy,  whl 
now  and  for  two  hours  and  a half  afterwards,  until  perhaps  twentjj 
minutes  before  the  action  ended,  continued  to  fire  shot  and  shell  int;| 
the  woods  where  the  Indians  were  from  their  battery  in  front,  but  neve 
advanced.  This  battery  also  was  thus,  with  its  supporting  force,  b 
the  presence  of  the  Indians,  rendered  useless  to  the  enemy  during  till 
action. 

In  the  mean  time  our  artillery  had  come  into  action  some  distance  fij 
our  left  and  front,  beyond  a large  field,  extending  from  the  woods  ijj 
which  we  were  to  a line  of  woods  beyond  it,  which  hid  the  conflict  froi 
our  view.  Leaving  the  Indians  in  the  woods,  I passed  beyond  ther, 
to  the  left  into  the  open  ground  nearer  the  conflict,  and  remained  somjl 
time. 


p.  XVIII.  ] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  289 

^bout  1.30  o’clock  there  was  a very  heavy  fire  of  musketry  for  about 
miuutes,  and  soon  after  about  two  regiments  of  our  cavalry  came 

0 the  field  on  our  left  front  and  formed  in  line  facing  the  woods  on 
,t  side.  Colonel  Drew  then  came  to  me  with  his  regiment,  about 

strong,  and  I sent  him  across  the  field,  directing  him  to  form  in 
r of  the  line  of  cavalry,  and  if  they  advanced  through  the  woods  to 
ow  them,  dismount  his  men  near  the  other  edge,  and  let  them  join 
he  fight  m their  own  fashion.  They  crossed  the  field  and  took  the 
ition  indicated. 

t was  just  after  this  that  I directed  Sergeant-Major  West,  of  Colonel 
tie’s  regiment,  to  take  some  of  the  Cherokees  and  drag  the  captured 
is  into  the  woods,  which  was  done,  the  enemy  still  firing  over  them 
) the  woods,  where  he  placed  a guard  of  Cherokees  over  the  cannon, 
oon  after  the  cavalry  force  crossed  to  our  side  of  the  field  and  formed 
me  m front  of  the  woods  in  which  the  Indians  were  and  remained 
re  until  the  enemy  threw  a shot  in  that  direction,  when  they  also 

1 shelter  in  the  woods.  During  all  this  time  I received  no  orders 
itever  nor  any  message  from  any  one. 

bout  3 o’clock  I rode  towards  the  fenced  field.  I saw  nothing  of 
cavalry,  but  found  a body  of  our  infantry  halted  on  the  road  run- 
? along  the  fence  by  which  we  had  originally  come.  It  consisted  of 
regiments  of  Colonels  Churchill,  Hill,  and  Rector,  and  Major  Whit- 
S b,a^alion-  Major  Whitfield  informed  me  that  Generals  McCul- 
and  McIntosh  were  both  killed,  and  that  7,000  of  the  enemy’s  in- 
ry  were  marching  to  gain  our  left,  one  body  of  which,  at  least 

0 strong,  he  had  himself  seen.  Totally  ignorant  of  the  country  and 
roads,  not  knowing  the  number  of  the  enemy,  nor  whether  the 
le  or  what  portion  of  General  McCulloch’s  command  had  been  de- 
ied  from  the  main  body  for  this  action,  I assumed  command  and 
)ared  to  repel  the  supposed  movement  of  the  enemy. 

) our  left,  beyond  the  field  where  our  infantry  had  first  been  seen 
ne  in  the  forenoon,  was  a wooded  ridge  of  no  great  height,  with  a 
e running  along  the  foot  of  it  on  the  west  and  northwest:  be- 
m it  and  the  Bentonville  road  was  open  and  level  ground.  I 
ihed  the  infantry,  Welch’s  squadron  ami  Watie’s  regiment,  across 
teld,  dismounted  the  horsemen,  directed  all  to  be  posted  behind  the 
es,  and  sent  Major  Boudinot,  of  Watie’s  regiment,  to  inform  Gen- 
Van  Dorn  that  I would  try  to  hold  the  position ; but  upon  riding 
ud  along  the  ridge  to  the  rear  I found  the  position  not  tenable,  as 
niemy  could  cross  it  and  descend  upon  our  rear  by  an  open  road 
ran  over  it. 

' tllis  time  the  firing  on  the  field  had  ceased,  and  I saw  coming 
the  road  at  the  farm  house  a large  body  of  cavalry  and  Good’s 
pry.  It  was  evident  enough  that  the  field  was  left  to  the  enemy, 
is  we  were  not  in  sufficient  numbers  to  resist  them  and  the  ground 
(led  no  defensive  position  I determined  to  withdraw  the  troops  and 
j them  to  General  Van  Dorn.  Indeed,  the  officers  assured  me  that 
nen  were  in  such  condition  that  it  would  be  worse  than  useless  to 
? them  into  action  again  that  day. 

. accordingly  sent  orders  to  the  artillery  and  cavalry  to  join  me. 
t had  become  of  the  other  troops  engaged  no  one  could  inform 

1 concluded  they  had  retreated  towards  Camp  Stephens,  gaining 
oadby  which  we  had  come  in  the  morning.  Colonel  Stone  and 
am  Good  came  to  me,  and  I informed  them  of  my  purpose.  Plac- 
:he  squadron  of  Captain  Welch  in  front,  the  infantry  marching 

followed  by  Good’s  battery,  with  the  Cherokees  on  the  flanks, 

19  r r— yol  yni 


290 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARR,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChaf.  XVh| 


inThe  SfantefhadTn  three  day^marched  60  miles,  had  beer i on to 
all  the  preceding  night,  and  fought  that  day  without  water,  and  ColoJ 

srrJtffiWssKsjd 


road  .bout  S j;  lalffrom  the  poiut  where 

^fSSS®  Sr.hTe^  Sf  ] 
sftssSKi  ‘<rr 

S i”S< w ‘"t“  r‘,¥»«Srh.  eTh«iT! 

S1ob,i8S5“  £«r,™i.ea  with  ,.  „.il  the  - 

^After  remaining  for  some  two  hours  near  the  foot  of  the  ridge) 

th^south  sMe,  observing  the  W’s  infantry,  *3 

were  in  the  fields  beyond  and  the  fire  of  then  batteries m nuiv«i 

EHSS&^r^SSi 

batWeenow  heard  long-continued  cheering  in  front.  Bodies  off 

troops  had  come  across  the  rid«f«^VluppoTe  thejwe^  m^ 
Hollow,  in  good  order  apparently,  and  Is  PI  * ?ffc  flank  a), 


ssssss«as 


the  Telegraph  road  we  supposed  the  peering  to  pw^ed  from 
troops  and  that  the  day  was  ouis,  yken  a f s . an(i 

informed  me  that  the  field  was  occupied  by  Federal  troops, 


ap.  XVIII.]  PEA.  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  291 

ter  another  came  and  told  me  that  no  one  had  seen  either  General 
in  Dorn  or  General  Price  for  some  time  and  it  was  supposed  they 
;re  captured,  as  the  field  where  they  were  last  seen  was  full  of  Ped- 
als; and  he  remarked  to  me,  “You  are  not  safe  here,  for  the  enemy’s 
Fairy  are  within  150  yards  of  you.” 

The  troops  that  had  come  across  the  ridge  and  down  the  Hospital 
allow  were  now  below  us  on  the  Telegraph  road.  Colonel  Watie  had 
it  to  me  for  orders.  I had  sent  to  him  to  bring  his  men  from  the 
ge  down  into  the  valley  and  there  halt  for  orders,  and  I supposed 
had  done  so ; but  he  did  not  receive  the  order  and  remained  on  the 
*untain,  from  which  he  went  direct  to  Camp  Stephens, 
lust  at  this  moment  the  two  batteries  close  to  me  commenced  to 
eel  and  hurried  down  the  hill  into  the  road.  I do  not  know  that 
f one  gave  them  any  order  to  fall  back.  The  captain  of  one  battery 
d that  some  one  ordered  it,  but  I think  that  the  information  of  the 
)ture  of  our  generals  was  overheard  and  that  no  order  was  given, 
one  was  there  to  give  an  order.  The  batteries  rattled  down  the 
ep  hill  and  along  the  Telegraph  road,  and  as  I rode  by  the  side  of 
m I heard  an  officer  cry  out,  “Close  up,  close  up,  or  you  will  all  be 
; to  pieces.” 

)n  reaching  the  road  I rode  past  the  batteries  to  reach  a point  at 
ich  to  make  a stand,  for,  having  passed  the  road  but  once,  and  then 
he  night,  it  was  all  an  unknown  land  to  me.  When  we  reached  the 
t open  level  ground  I halted  the  leading  gun,  directed  the  captain 
he  company  in  front  to  come  into  battery,  facing  to  the  rear,  on  the 
lit  of  the  plain  going  northward.  The  battery  in  the  rear  I knew 
L no  ammunition.  Saw  the  first  gun  so  placed  in  position,  rode  back 
he  second  battery  and  directed  the  only  officer  I could  find  to  do 
same  on  the  left  of  the  plain,  and  when  I turned  around  to  go  to 
front  found  that  the  gun  faced  to  the  rear  had  been  again  turned 
) the  road,  and  that  the  whole  concern  was  again  going  up  the  road 
thward.  I rode  again  to  the  front  and  halted  the  leading  battery  at 
foot  of  the  next  level,  ordered  it  into  line,  facing  to  the  rear,  gave 
necessary  commands  myself,  and  had  three  guns  brought  into  posi- 
>•  Two  regiments  of  infantry  were  standing  there  in  lines  ranging 
ind  down  the  valley,  the  flank  of  each  to  the  enemy.  I directed 
n to  form  in  the  rear  of  the  batteries ; but  at  this  moment  a shell 
sent  by  the  enemy  up  the  road  from  the  point  of  the  hill  around 
tii  we  had  just  passed.  The  cry  of  “The  cavalry  are  coming”  was 
ed,  and  everything  became  confusion. 

was  impossible  to  bring  the  other  guns  into  battery.  Those 
ady  faced  turned  again  into  the  road;  and  supposing  that  of  course 
' would  take  the  Bentonville  road,  which,  at  leaving  the  other, 
aids  a steep  hill,  and  thinking  I could  certainly  halt  them,  after  a 
| r ascent,  on  its  summit,  I galloped  through  the  bottom  and  up  the 
lie  on  the  left  of  the  hill,  dismounted,  and  climbed  the  hill  on  foot, 

I minted  at  the  summit,  rode  to  the  brow  of  the  hill,  looked  down 
I ^ie  r°ad,  and  found  that  our  retreating  troops,  batteries  and  all, 

| passed  by  on  the  Telegraph  road,  the  enemy’s  cavalry  pursuing, 
hute  for  Springfield,  Mo. 

liptain  Hewitt  and  my  aide-de-camp,  Lieut.  W.  L.  Pike,  had  foi- 
l'd me,  and,  except  half  a dozen  stragglers,  we  were  alone.  We 
ed  a few  moments  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  uncertain  what  course 
arsue,  when,  on  our  right,  as  we  faced  the  valley,  and  at  a distance 
bout  100  yards,  a gun  of  the  enemy  sent  a shot  into  the  valley,  and 
1 her  on  the  other  side,  farther  ofi*,  replied  with  another. 


292 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Ph«.  XVI, 


We  then  ^ 

in  the  reax  ^ - turneOiJ 


full  speed,  leaving  mem  in  rue^^  — the  Pea  ^ 

the  woods  on  the  right,  p ,,  Pjueville  and  Beutouville  roa<. 

W^HaS1  Sens  aLnt^oSocCS'our  whole  tauTh# 
treating  horsemen  fired  p >d  QUr  retreat  and  made  every  arranj, 

‘^SHS«isa 

march  northward  and  give  them  battle  in  positions  selected  by  thl 
selves.  pursuit  of  our  retreating  train  they  follov 

ssssisstfa 

2w?^sssa 

MMm 

KIM! 

cSSliSd  cilo«d  McIntosh,  ”*■> *»  M 

5sSaS£|i^ 

ordered  to  march  with  their  own  tram  to  Cincinnati. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  youis,  ALBEKT  pIKB; 

Brigadier-General,  Comdg.  Department  of  Indian  Terntoi 
Capt.  D.  H.  Maury,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


293 


P.  xvm.l  PEA  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark. 

No.  37. 


)ort  of  Col . E.  Greer,  Third  Texas  Cavalry , commanding  division • 


Headquarters  First  Cavalry  Brigade, 

March  19,  1862. 

have  the  honor  of  submitting  to  you  the  following  report  of  the 
on  of  the  forces  under  my  command  in  the  battle  of  the  7th  and  8th 
ant: 


larly  in  the  engagement  my  command  had  been  assigned  a position 
General  McCulloch  on  the  field  to  be  held  at  all  hazards.  Repeat- 
j during  the  day  I sent  messengers  for  orders  to  Generals  McCulloch 
McIntosh.  Not  being  able  to  find  them,  and  growing  impatient 
li  long  delay,  I ordered  my  regiment  to  horse  and  moved  them  in 
center  of  the  field,  and  then  wrent  in  search  of  the  generals  myself, 
'ting  with  the  staff  of  the  two  generals,  I was  then  for  the  first 
3 informed  that  they  were  dead,  and  that  I was  senior  officer  on  the 


y first  inquiry  was  for  Brigadier-General  Pike.  I was  informed 
he  had  left  the  field,  and,  as  I afterward  learned,  with  a great  por- 
of  the  division.  I at  once  assumed  command  of  all  the  forces  re 
□ing  on  the  field,  sending  Captain  Dotson  to  the  rear  to  halt  and 
g back  the  different  commands  that  were  moving,  with  the  determi- 
on,  as  I understood,  of  going  around  and  joining  General  Pricers 
sion.  About  this  time  I received  a note  from  the  commanding  gen- 
> addressed  to  General  McCulloch,  containing  information  that  the 
ny  had  been  driven  back  on  the  left. 

iter  some  one  came  from  the  commanding  general  and  stated  that 
esired  we  should  hold  our  position.  Being  unexpectedly  placed  in 
mand  and  having  had  no  intimation  of  the  general  plan  of  attack, 
ig  but  few  troops  on  the  field,  and  not  knowing  the  whereabouts  of 
remainder,  I took  a view  of  the  field  and  its  surroundings, 
liscovered  Captain  Hart’s  battery  of  four  pieces  on  a hill  in  close 
imity  to  the  enemy,  unsupported  by  any  of  our  troops.  Soon  after 
liscovery  Captain  Hart  opened  a heavy  fire  on  the  advancing  forces 
the  other  side  of  the  hill.  I moved  my  regiment  rapidly  up  to  that 

t,  and  ordered  Captain  Hart  to  move  his  battery  some  400  or  500 
s,  while  my  cavalry  would  cover  his  rear. 

bout  this  time  I was  informed  that  Colonel  Stone’s  regiment  had  left 
he  train,  and  feeling  apprehensive  that  the  enemy  would  send  a 
iderable  force  and  destroy  it,  I ordered  Major  Brooks,  with  his  bat- 

u,  to  form  a junction  with  Colonel  Stone’s  forces  for  its  protection, 
r remaining  here  for  some  time  I carefully  examined  our  position 
available  forces  present,  who  had  free  access  to  all  the  command- 
ants south  of  us. 

>rdered  the  troops  under  my  command  to  bivouac  for  the  night, 
after  this  order  was  given  Captain  Bradfute  suggested,  as  we  were 
prepared  to  remove  the  battery  which  had  been  captured  from  the 
iy  in  the  early  part  of  the  engagement,  that  a detail  be  at  once  sent 
to  disable  or  destroy  it.  I dispatched  two  companies  for  this  pur- 
Large  heaps  of  rails  were  piled  around  and  upon  the  guns,  fire 
o them,  and  in  this  manner  these  cannon  were  effectually  disabled. 

-T  force  at  this  time,  as  reported  to  me,  consisted  of  the  Third  Louis- 
| Regiment  of  Infantry,  Colonels  McNair’s,  McRae’s,  and  Mitchell’s 
'Oents  of  Arkansas  infantry,  Colonel  Young’s  regiment  of  cavalry, 
[landed  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dimondj  Colonel  Sims’  regiment, 


294 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV! 


on/inri  cif  that  time  bv  Lieutenant -Colonel  Quayle,  Colonel  Sii 
commanded  at  that  time  o;y  ^ , v,mhrv?s  regiment,  a 


s^s^«3^<asa.,ss3?aesi 

aUltlO  o'clock^  after  consultation  with  all  the  leading  officers  aroil 
mP  I determined  to  issue  the  order  to  take  up  the  hne  of  march  a l 
T mIdand  loin  General  Price’s  division.  Dispatching  a messenp 

with  a statement i °of° theTdwof  marchT“^  g°en“al  command™ 

CSKSS  » rapidly  a,  P— *«d  .1 

*CiSw°S5tT5pS“““»i'”»re'‘  and  before  day  reacted  I 

•flSPSSrt  ‘S."SSl“  ”»  £ commander dincW 
stating'  that  the  enemy  was  advancing.  A guide  was  sent  me  to  <1 

dWhmen  ^rLSfaVffint^ottxLXga^nle  f-m  the  right  win  j 

VCTy^on^I^esmhecTnr^position  on  rheleft^hn'miug  the°infantry^ 
meSsIn  two  parallel  lines  and  the  cavalry  in  the  same  way  wdhS 

head  of  these  columns  resting  on  the  °f orders  I 

strneted  then  to  hold  this  position  and  await  further  orders. 

After  remaining  in  this  position  about  two  hours  an  orde  ' 

2-ss;  '-sa  snB««JS»3a 

SSliTSy  on  ft.  riglrt  ind  1. 
thIUs  with  ^reat1  pSure  1 wouldVring  to  your  fa^orab}e^t^ 

names  of  Captains  Bradfute,  Dotson,  Frank  A^  and  Harde^ 

Major  Montgomery,  Lieutenants  Heimes  id  Ldwards 
aided  and  assisted  me  on  the  evening  of  ^‘thand  ; 

tain  Dotson,  aide-de-camp,  and  Captain  Bradfute, “ 1 f tu- dMs& 
were  prompt  and  efficient  in  assisting  me  “ *>^“8  ^divimo 
line  of  battle,  and  they  both  deserve  great  credit  tor  the  es  | 

energy.  ^ 1lTT 

Yours,  very  respectfully,  E GEEERj 

Colonel , Commanding  Divisu 
Col.  D.  H.  Maury,  A.  £.,  Trans- Mississippi  District. 


No.  38. 

Report  of  Col.  Evander  McNair , Fourth  Arkansas  Infantry . 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  29,  18 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  action  of  my 


ip.  xvm.]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  295 

yat  (Fourth  Arkansas)  and  other  troops  under  my  command  in  the 
ttle  of  Sugar  Creek,  or  Elkhorn,  on  March  7 : 

At  about  10.30  a.  m.  my  regiment,  constituting  the  extreme  right  of 
ilonel  Hebert’s  brigade,  composed  of  McIntosh’s,  Hebert’s  (Third 
•uisiana),  Fourth  and  Fourteenth  Arkansas  Regiments,  and  McRae’s 
ttalion,  was  ordered,  with  the  rest  of  the  brigade,  to  take  a battery 
lich  was  directly  in  front,  but  at  some  distance,  and  in  the  rear  of  an 
en  field  and  a strip  of  woods  of  dense  undergrowth  and  filled  with 
len  timber,  intervening  between  us  and  the  field  and  extending 
rand  on  the  left  of  the  field.  Ordering  a charge,  my  men  obeyed 
th  alacrity  and  cheerfulness ; but  after  advancing  some  200  yards 
3y  were,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground  and  obstacles  in  the  way, 
[•own  into  disorder  and  were  halted,  and  reformed  as  well  as  the 
Hind  would  permit.  The  enemy  discovering  us,  immediately  opened 
on  us  a heavy  fire  of  shell  and  grape.  In  a few  moments  the  order 
& given  to  renew  the  charge.  I accordingly  moved  my  regiment  for- 
rd,  obliquing,  however,  to  the  left,  keeping  in  the  skirt  of  woods 
at  extended  around  the  field,  in  order  to  protect  my  men  from  the 
emy’s  fire.  This  I succeeded  in  doing  in  a great  degree. 

While  making  this  movement,  however,  another  portion  of  the  bri- 
de, moving  by  the  flank,  cut  off  two  companies  and  a half  on  the  left 
im  the  main  body  of  my  regiment,  which  did  not  rejoin  it  during  the 
y,  but,  connecting  themselves  with  other  troops  of  the  brigade,  as  I 
credibly  informed,  fought  most  gallantly  through  the  day.  Con- 
uing  to  move  forward,  we  came  upon  a body  of  the  enemy’s  infantry 
ambuscade $ attacked  and  drove  them  back  until  they  were  reformed 
a second  body  in  the  rear.  We  attacked  the  whole  body  and  re- 
Ised  them  again $ but,  rallying  upon  their  reserves,  they  made  a 
nd,  but  were  soon  driven  back  again  by  our  brave  troops.  In  this 
t charge  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  at  a distance  of  200  yards, 
med  upon  us,  but  we  charged  and  took  it  in  a very  short  time.  In 
s charge  the  loss  of  the  enemy  was  very  great. 

Che  enemy,  receiving  heavy  re-enforcements,  made  a simultaneous 
ack  with  cavalry  on  the  left  and  infantry  on  the  right  of  our  brigade 
numbers  far  superior  to  our  own.  After  a fierce  conflict  the  enemy 
re  for  the  fourth  time  repulsed  and  with  heavy  loss.  Generals 
Culloch  and  McIntosh  having  fallen  and  Colonel  Hubert  being  taken 
soner  and  there  being  no  other  field  officers  present,  I assumed  com- 
nd  of  the  brigade,  which  did  not  at  that  time  number  more  than  1,000 
n,  our  ranks  having  been  much  broken  and  thinned  by  casualties  and 
in  being  much  fatigued  and  disordered. 

3erceiving  the  enemy  advancing  heavily  re-enforced,  preparatory  to 
king  an  attack  upon  my  right  wing,  I ordered  Captain  Harris,  who 
s then  in  command  of  the  right  of  the  Third  Louisiana,  to  resist 
m.  He  did  so  with  great  gallantry  and  success,  again  repulsing 
; enemy.  The  enemy’s  cavalry,  at  the  same  time  attacking  my  right, 
s re  defeated  with  actual  slaughter. 

shortly  afterwards  the  enemy  were  seen  advancing  in  several  coi- 
ns towards  us,  numbering  at  least  5,000.  My  command  being  then 
atly  exhausted  and  seeing  no  advantage  likely  to  accrue  from  re- 
iiing  the  position  then  occupied,  after  consulting  with  the  officers 
jler  my  command,  all  agreeing,  I determined  to  fall  back  on  our 
erve,  which  I did  in  good  order  and  without  haste,  the  enemy  not 
oring  to  pursue  us. 

laving  occupied  the  new  position  selected  by  me,  I was  ordered  by 
y general  commanding  to  hold  the  same  until  further  orders.  I did 


296 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVnl 


SO,  and  about  2 a.  m.  on  March  8,  by  his  order,  I united  my  common 
With  the  forces  which  had  been  under  his  immediate  command  on  tt 

Telegraph  road.  A , _ „ . . 0 

The  loss  in  my  own  regiment  was  16  killed  and  38  wounded,  ooir 
40  were  found  missing  after  the  battle,  but  all  except  5 or  6 have  sin<|| 
then  rejoined  the  regiment. 

The  officers  and  men  who  came  under  my  observation  behaved  in 
manner  not  only  worthy  of  themselves,  but  of  the  sacred  cause  in  whic 
they  were  engaged;  and  though  doubtless  many  others  whom  I (lid  nc 
observe  acted  in  an  equally  noble  manner,  and  I cannot,  therefore,  or 
them  justice  in  this  report,  yet  I must  particularize  the  following  pe  l 

sons,  whose  actions  I noted : , ,,  . I 

In  my  own  regiment  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Samuel]  Ogden  and  Majtl 
[James  H.]  May  nobly  performed  their  duty,  cool  and  intrepid,  e . 
couraging  and  rallying  the  men.  They  placed  me  under  many  obligl 

tl0Capt.  Kufus  K.  Garland,  during  the  whole  battle,  constantly  engage; 
in  rallying  and  encouraging  his  men  and  leading  them  onto  the  attac.|| 

was  of  invaluable  assistance  to  me.  I 

Capt.  John  M.  Simpson  charged  the  enemy’s  battery  to  the  cannon" 
mouth:  and  springing  upon  one  of  the  guns,  while  waving  his  swor 
and  cheering  his  men,  fell  mortally  wounded  by  a volley  from  tJi 
enemy,  thus  nobly  offering  up  his  life  for  his  country. 

Capt.  Josephus  C.  Tison,  who  led  the  van  in  the  same  charge,  win- 
leading  on  his  men,  fell  severely  wounded  in  both  legs  a few  pace 

from  the  cannon.  ' , , . , , , , J 

Capt.  F.  J.  Erwin,  early  in  the  action,  had  been  shot  through  tJ 
body,  and  I thus  had  been  deprived  of  the  services  of  one  of  my  mo 

efficient  officers.  , J 

Capts.  Jos.  B.  McCulloch  and  Augustus  Kile,  by  their  personal  cod 
ness  and  intrepidity  during  the  entire  engagement,  did  much  to  e 

courage  and  sustain  the  men.  _ . , , . 

Lieut.  Henry  G.  Bunn,  my  adjutant,  rendered  efficient  service  durn 
the  whole  engagement,  and  was  wounded  by  the  explosion  ot  a sin 
on  the  head  as  we  were  retiring  from  the  field.  . , 

Mr.  William  Garland,  who  voluntarily  participated  m the  who 
engagement,  proved  himself  a good  and  valiant  soldier,  and  render* 
me  great  assistance. 

Capt,  W.  J.  Ferguson,  my  quartermaster,  who  acted  as  my  ai 
during  the  whole  engagement,  conducted  himself  with  marked  abilij 

I must  also  be  permitted  to  make  most  honorable  mention  of  Captai 
Harris,  Gunnels,  and  Gilmore,  of  the  Third  Louisiana  Eegiment,  wJ 
during  the  whole  engagement  showed  themselves  thorough  soidie 
and  gallant  gentlemen,  untiring  in  their  exertions  in  rallying  ai 
leading  on  their  men,  ardent,  yet  acting  with  the  steadiness  ot  v< 
erans.  They  by  their  conduct  that  day  proved  themselves  worthy 
their  gallant  State  and  the  regiment  which  has  so  nobly  iought  durn 
this  entire  war. 

With  respect,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  MCJNAiivj 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Arkansas  Regiment. 

General  D.  H.  Maury,  ...  . . , 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tr ans- Mississippi  District. 


297 


jap.  xvm.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 

No.  39. 

Report  of  Col.  E.  Greer , Third  Texas  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Third  Texas  Cavalry, 

Cantonment  Wigfall , Arh .,  March  — , 1862. 

I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  my  command  : 
On  the  3d  instant  we  were  ordered  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  early 
e next  morning  towards  the  enemy,  General  McIntosh’s  brigade  to 
ke  the  advance. 

At  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  we  left  our  encampment  on 
[>ston  Mountains,  my  regiment  going  in  advance. 

That  night  we  encamped  near  Fayetteville.  The  day  had  been  very 
Id,  with  quite  a snow-storm  during  the  morning.  After  leaving  Fay- 
teville  General  McIntosh’s  brigade,  which  was  composed  exclusively 
cavalry,  marched  up  the  Telegraph  or  Springfield  road  for  4 miles, 
lile  General  Price’s  division,  with  the  rest  of  our  army,  was  ordered 
> the  Elm  Springs  road.  Four  miles  from  Fayetteville  Colonel  Stone 
is  ordered  with  his  regiment  to  proceed  a few  miles  farther  up  the 
ilegraph  road,  where  he  would  remain  during  the  night  and  rejoin  our 
rces  the  next  day.  The  rest  of  General  McIntosh’s  brigade  turned  to 
e left,  and  after  carefully  reconnoitering  the  country  and  getting  all 
e information  we  could  of  the  enemy,  joined  the  main  body  of  our 
tny  at  Elm  Springs.  Considerable  snow  fell  again  that  night. 

At  3 a.  m.  on  the  6th  instant  we  left  Elm  Springs,  this  regiment  still 
advance.  When  we  had  gone  2 miles  that  morning  we  were  in- 
med  that  our  pickets  during  the  night  had  fired  upon  the  pickets  of 
3 enemy. 

We  arrived  at  Smith’s  Mill  about  sunrise,  and  here  learned  that  1,000 
deral  infantry  had  left  that  place  at  1 a.  m.,  and  had  gone  in  the 
•ection  of  Bentonville.  On  approaching  Bentonville,  from  the  smoke 
was  evident  that  the  enemy  had  fired  a portion  of  the  town  and 
re  destroying  some  of  their  supplies,  &c.  The  cavalry  were  halted 
the  prairie,  miles  south  of  Bentonville,  in  view  of  the  town,  a 
>rt  time,  for  consultation,  thus  affording  the  rest  of  our  army  time  to 
se  up.  It  was  agreed  that  Colonel  Gates,  with  his  command,  should 
ve  around  to  the  east  of  the  town,  and  that  General  McIntosh,  with 
command,  should  go  to  the  left.  Our  advance  guard  in  the  mean 
ie  had  approached  near  the  town.  When  we  had  got  immediately 
st  of  the  town  several  men  were  sent  up  to  reconnoiter  the  enemy, 
ey  soon  returned,  and  reported  a considerable  force  of  the  enemy 
raed  on  the  public  square.  General  McIntosh,  feeling  confident  that 
enemy  would  take  what  is  known  as  the  Camp  Stephens  road,  de- 
mined to  get  in  rear  ot  them.  Owing  to  the  broken,  rocky,  and 
untamous  character  of  the  country  north  of  the  town  and  the  ab- 
ce  of  a road  leading  from  where  we  were  across  to  the  Camp  Ste- 
als road,  we  found  it  impossible  to  reach  that  road  nearer  than  4 miles 

II  Bentonville,  and  then  only  by  traveling  a very  circuitous  route, 
ten  we  did  reach  it,  it  was  in  a rough,  mountainous  country.  On 
right  there  was  a mountain  the  entire  length  of  the  brigade.  The 
np  Stephens  road  passed  to  the  east  of  this  mountain.  Lieut  J.  S. 
,'gess,  with  20  men,  was  ahead  as  an  advance  picket.  Near  the 
np  Stephens  road  they  came  suddenly  on  a small  picket  of  the 
my,  and  at  once  gave  General  McIntosh  notice  of  it.  About  this 
e tlie  pickets  fired  at  each  other.  General  McIntosh  rode  forward 

ordered  the  advance  to  charge.  This  was  done  as  effectually  as 


298 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS. 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYOl 


nossible  under  the  circumstances.  The  enemy  proved  to  be  in  stronl 

css*. 

the' Xante1*8 Coimideriug  the  ambuscade  they  hatl  prepared  for  us  ail 
the  number  of  shots  fired  by  them,  it  seems  almost  like  a miracle  the 

maud  to  oblique  to  the  left,  form,  and  charge  the  enemy,  which  w. 


Pritmwa!f  evident  that  the  enemy  were .in  a strong  Portion  in  the  rouj 


and  rocky  gorges  nSir  the  road,  and  about  this  time  considerable  bodi, 
ridge  At  this  time  General  McIntosh  rode  up  and  ordered  us  to  f< 

^L^o'fUrt SSu.  m*  have  MOM.  «k 

A mg  i si 


mountain  'anVbevond  this  mountain  was  the  Telegraph 

from  us.  This  battery  was  supported  by  the  liea\j  bodies  oi 
““GaifewfMcIntbsh  at  once  ordered  the  different  ^gene 

s^ts-MWia^sfSSSrar 

sji*w«Mr4«ae 

made  by  the  rest  of  the  cavalry,  the 

LleutenanhColouef  Lauc^of'iny  command,  j^tSl 


'***■  XVHL]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  299 

some  one  to  throw  liis  pieces  in  battery,  ready  to  open  fire  upon  the 
merny  in  that  direction,  at  the  same  time  ordering  me  to  form  my 
■egiment  on  the  left  of  it.  This  was  done.  Soon  afterwards  I was 
>rdered  to  dismount  my  command  and  hold  at  all  hazards  a hill, 
diieh  was  the  most  prominent  position  on  the  battle-field.  This  hill 
commanded  our  portion  of  the  field.  Leaving  our  horses  in  the  rear, 
re  took  position  on  the  hill.  I soon  found  the  enemy  had  the  range  of 
he  same  from  their  batteries  beyond  it.  Here  we  remained  during 
he  engagement  on  our  side  of  the  field,  anxiously  awaiting  orders.  I 
lispatched  several  messengers  for  orders,  but  could  not  learn  the 
thereabouts  of  either  of  the  generals.  Soon  after  these  messengers 
tere  dispatched  by  me  the  adjutant-general  rode  up.  I asked  him 
there  General  McCulloch  was.  He  replied  that  if  the  troops  down 
n the  right  did  not  do  better  than  they  had  done  for  the  last  few 
loments  I had  best  move  my  command.  Soon  afterwards  Colonel 
leEae  passed  us  on  our  left.  He  stated  that  the  enemy  were  advanc- 
Qg  in  overwhelming  force.  About  this  time  heavy  bodies  of  our  in- 
antry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  were  seen  moving  to  our  rear.  After  a 
onsultation  with  my  officers,  and  finding  it  impossible  to  receive  any 
rders  from  either  Generals  McCulloch  or  McIntosh,  I moved  my  regi- 
lent  back  to  their  horses,  and  took  position  in  the  field  near  where  we 
rere  in  the  morning  when  the  masked  battery  of  the  enemy  opened 
re  upon  us.  I then  went  in  person  in  search  of  Generals  McCulloch 
nd  McIntosh.  I soon  met  with  the  staff  of  the  two  generals,  who 
iformed  me  that  each  one  of  them  was  dead,  and  that  I was  senior 
fficer  on  the  field.  I made  inquiry  for  Brigadier-General  Pike,  and  was 
iformed  that  he  was  not  present.  The  firing  had  ceased  on  both  sides 
efore  this.  I at  once  assumed  command  of  our  remaining-  forces  on 
tie  field. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  of  my  command  in 
be  two  engagements,  embracing  also  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded 
orses  :* 

In  conclusion,  I deem  it  my  duty  to  notice  the  gallant  bearing  and 
onduct  throughout  the  entire  engagement  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Lane, 
![,?*£.  W*  °5ilton’  AdJt-  M*  Ector,  Capts.  E.  H.  Cum  by,  Thomas 
. Winston,  J.  J.  A.  Barker,  Lieuts.  J.  S.  Boggess,  J.  P.  McKay,  and 
thers.  As  a general  thing  both  the  officers  and  privates  of  my  com- 
tand  acquitted  themselves  with  great  gallantry  and  coolness  through- 
lit  the  engagement. 

E.  GEEEE, 

n i -r^  , Colonel , Commanding  Third  Texas  Cavalry . 

Col.  D.  H.  Maury, 

Adjutant- General,  Trans-Mississippi  District . 


Ko.  40. 

Report  of  Lieut . Col.  Walter  P.  Lane , Third  Texas  Cavalry. 

Eegimental  Hdqrs.  South  Kansas-Texas  Kegt., 

Camp  Wigfall , March  18,  1862. 

Colonel  : Amid  the  confusion  and  active  operation  in  the  reorgani- 
ition  of  the  army  I have  been  so  much  occupied  as  to  preclude  an 

•Nominal  list  shows  loss  is  2 killed,  12  wounded.  No  report  found  of  horses  lost. 


300 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


earlier  report  of  the  action  of  the  South  Kansas-Texas  Regiment  after  - 
von  were  called  from  its  command  by  the  much-lamented  death  of  our 
gallant  Generals  McCulloch  and  McIntosh.  The  only  object  I oow  have 
in  view  is  to  furnish  a necessary  page  to  the  history  of  the  battles  of 

the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  instant.  . 

After  the  command  had  devolved  upon  you,  on  Friday  evening,  and 
when  it  was  supposed  that  the  enemy  would  attempt  to  force  its  way 
through  our  lines  to  the  Telegraph  road,  which  would  have  thrown  them 
in  the  rear  of  General  Price’s  division  of  the  army,  I drew  my  regi- 
ment up  immediately  north  of  the  center  of  the  enemy  s column,  and 
anxiously  held  that  position  until  near  sunset,  when  the  order  was  given 
to  move  northward  to  a suitable  point  for  camping.  . 

Although  my  men  were  almost  exhausted  by  the  fatigue,  loss  of 
sleep,  and  hunger,  consequent  upon  the  three  days  and  nights  forced 
march  and  the  wearing  and  action  of  the  day,  they  retired  from  the 
field  with  reluctance.  Having  encamped  upon  the  side  of  a mountain 
near  the  enemy’s  line— indeed,  in  plain  view  of  their  camp-fires— we  were 
constantly  in'  hearing  of  the  rumbling  of  the  enemy  s artillery  as  it 
passed  from  the  battle-field  of  the  7th- where  the  brave  Texan  ranger, 
McCulloch,  gave  himself  up  as  a sacrifice  to  his  country  s good  to  join 
the  forces  opposed  to  General  Price,  and  remained  in  sleepless  vigi 
lance  until  1 a,  m.,  at  which  time,  by  your  order,  we  took  up  the  line 
of  march  for  General  Price’s  encampment. 

About  an  hour  before  daylight  Saturday  morning  we  reached  the 
right  of  Price’s  column  on  Sugar  Creek,  and  there,  for  the  first  time  in 
forty-eight  hours,  my  soldiers  were  permitted  to  snatch  a few  moments 
of  troubled  sleep,  only  to  be  aroused  by  the  deep-toned  thunder  of  forty 
cannons  soon  after  sunrise.  . , . \ 

The  soldiers  of  my  command  impatiently  awaited  orders  to  mou 
forward,  and  the  alacrity  with  which  they  obeyed  the  first  summons 
indicated  the  patriotic  purpose  of  each  one  to  discharge  fully  his | dutrf 
in  driving  back  the  deluded  bigots  who  had  invaded  our  soil,  bilentlj 
and  with  stern  resolve  did  they  form  for  battle,  and  many  a brave  hearl 
chafed  with  anxious  zeal  during  the  heavy  firing  which  occurred  neai 

the  Elkhorn  Tavern.  _ ,,  . J 

When  the  order  was  given  to  fall  back  not  one  of  those  composing 
my  command  supposed  for  a moment  that  a retreat  was  contemplated 
nor  were  they  undeceived  until  the  order  came  from  General  Van  Dorr 
for  the  South  Kansas-Texas  Regiment  to  cover  the  retreat  of  the  army 
It  was  the  impression  of  the  general  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  woulc 
attempt  an  attack  upon  our  rear,  on  the  broad  mountain-flat  over  whict 
we  were  then  passing.  So  soon  as  I received  the  orders  I formed  mj 
command  in  battle  line  upon  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  m hearing 
of  the  enemy’s  shouts,  and  thus  held  the  position  taken  until  the  real 
of  the  armv  passed.  As  regiment  after  regiment  passed  slowly  by  n< 
indication  of  alarm  or  knowledge  of  defeat  could  be  discerned. 

It  is  due  to  the  gallant  soldiers  composing  that  squadron  tiiat  - 
should  state  that  two  companies  of  Colonel  Cooper’s  regiment,  com 
manded  by  Captain  Welch  and  aided  by  Adjutant  Lee,  prompts 
formed  with  my  command  and  remained  with  me  during  the  day. 
must  also  mention  the  conduct  of  Captain  MacDonald,  of  the  Misso 
Army,  and  his  gallant  artillery  corps,  who  remained  with  me  durmf 
the  entire  day.  The  defeat  of  our  army  was  barren  ot  results  to  m 
enemy,  as  they  were  too  badly  crippled  to  pursue  us  a mile. 

Upon  the  evening  of  the  third  day  I was  ordered  across  to  Hum* 
ville,  to  protect  a portion  of  our  artillery  and  a large  tram  ot  wagon 


hap.  xym.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


301 


aptured  from  the  enemy.  This  duty,  in  conjunction  with  Colonel 
rates’  regiment,  Missouri  troops,  was  performed  safely,  although  my 
len  and  horses  were  nearly  exhausted.  To  the  officers  and  men  of  my 
am  maud  I feel  profoundly  grateful  for  the  gallant  discharge  of  every 
uty  devolved  upon  them,  and  commend  them  individually  and  col- 
ictively  to  the  Government. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  yours,  most  respectfully, 

W.  P.  LANE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Regiment. 

Col.  E.  Greer, 

Commanding  South  Kansas- Texas  Regiment. 


No.  41. 

Reports  of  Col.  B.  W.  Stone , Sixth  Texas  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Texas  Cavalry, 

Oliver’s  Store , Ark.,  March  12,  1862. 
General  : I have  the  honor  of  reporting  to  you  the  action  of  the 
ixth  Eegiment  Texas  cavalry,  under  my  command,  in  the  late  battle 
: Sugar  Creek : 

The  five  mounted  regiments  under  the  command  of  the  late  General 
clntosh  were  formed  in  column  in  the  timber  west  of  the  field  occupied 
y the  enemy,  and  were  thus  marched  into  the  field,  our  gallant  Mcln- 
>sh  at  the  head  and  intrepidly  marching  on  the  foe.  When  about  300 
irds  from  the  enemy’s  lines  a large  force  of  cavalry  was  discovered 
•utheast  of  our  then  marching  position,  bearing  the  colors  of  the  Stars 
id  Stripes.  At  this  moment  from  that  point  three  heavy  guns  opened 
ion  our  columns  a most  destructive  and  galling  fire,  which  mainly 
fected  our  second  battalions.  The  regiment  of  Colonel  Greer  was  on 
ir  extreme  right,  and  next  was  the  regiment  under  my  command.  At 
is  moment  the  order  was  given  to  charge,  and  in  an  instant  our  gal- 
nt  columns  were  pouring  a destructive  fire  in  the  face  of  the  enemy, 
id  at  once  they  abandoned  their  guns,  and  they  were  taken  by  our 
oops  and  secured. 

The  column  under  my  command,  after  the  guns  were  taken,  bore  to 
e left  and  formed  line  immediately  in  front  of  the  infantry  of  the 
lemy,  under  a galling  fire  of  infantry  and  a shower  of  grape  and  shell 
am  their  artillery.  My  regiment  was  then  ordered  to  the  rear,  and 
ecuted  the  command  in  the  most  perfect  order.  I then  reformed 
cm  in  the  open  field,  and  my  regiment  then  stood  in  ranks  unmoved, 
th  the  batteries  playing  full  upon  us.  Having  been  reserved  as  the 
ily  mounted  regiment  in  the  field  I kept  my  position,  receiving  no 
ders  on  account  of  the  fall — the  fated  fall — of  our  illustrious  Generals 
cOulloch  and  McIntosh,  until  late  in  the  evening,  at  which  time  some 
our  columns  were  retreating  and  the  enemy  attempting  to  flank  our 
ft.  I wheeled  my  command  in  position  to  defend  against  the  flanking 
ovement.  After  being  under  march  for  this  purpose  I was  ordered 
f General  Pike  to  protect  the  retreat  and  preserve  our  trains,  which 
mmand  I obeyed  through  many  difficulties,  and  brought  off  the  entire 
vision  train  and  all  of  the  public  property.  I had  no  further  connec- 
m with  the  fight;  a fact  much  regretted  by  the  brave  officers  and 
en  under  my  command. 


302 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [C„«. 


I am  especially  grateful  to  Maj.  L.  S.  Boss  for  his  coolness  and  mj 
trepidity;1  to  Lieut.  D.  R.  Gurley,  adjutant;  Lieutenant  Portei,  ser 
geant-major,  and  every  captain  and  lieutenant  in  the  regiment.  A1 
the  officers  and  men  are  worthy  of  the  highest  praise. 

Nothing  could  so  completely  have  cast  a gloom  over  my  command  a. 
the  untimely  fall  of  our  generals,  and  to  their  fall  may  be  attribute! 
whatever  of  disaster  befel  us.  There  are  but  19  killed,  wounded,  anc 

m I will  here^state^n “behalf  of  the  soldier-like  bearing  of  my  men,  tha 
they  were  at  all  times  in  ranks,  and  as  cheerful  and  ready  to  form  4 
the  shower  of  lead  around  them  as  they  ever  were  in  camps  when  calle< 
to  the  drill  or  dress  parade,  and  did  so  with  the  same  dispatch. 

I am,  general,  with  consideration  of  the  highest  regard,  your  obedien 

servant,  B WABKEN  STONE, 

Colonel  Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry. 


Des  Arc,  Ark.,  April  14,  1862.  j 

General  : In  this  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  troops  under  m; 
command  in  the  late  action  at  Elkhorn,  to  do  them  justice  for  thei 
services,  I must  detail  the  events  of  a few  days  preceding  the  engage. 

1U  On  February  17,  while  in  winter  quarters,  I received  orders  to  marci 
with  dispatch  through  Fayetteville  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy,  h 
six  hours  my  men  were  in  the  saddle,  train  en  route , ammunition  du 
Stated,  and  the  march  begun.  I made  20  miles  the  same  day  an 
encamped  on  the  north  side  of  Boston  Mountains.  rnnVf 

At  daylight  the  following  morning  the  troops  were  on  the  mov 
Receiving  orders  during  the  day  urging  me  forward,  I hastened,  fe 
my  stock  by  the  road  side,  and  made  a march  of  o4  miles  to  Gross  Ho 
low,  where  we  arrived  at  10  p.  m.,  through  continuous  ram  and  slee 

and  Egvptian  darkness.  . , . 

Next  morning  I was  detailed  to  destroy  the  winter  quarters  m th 
vicinity  of  Cross  Hollow  and  to  bring  up  and  protect  the  real  ot  tb 

army,  which  was  then  falling  back  on  Boston  Mountains.  s 

curling  volumes  of  smoke  and  lurid  glare  of  flame  arose  from  Gam 
Beniamin  my  troops  doggedly  turned  to  the  duty  of  rear  guard  for  t 
army,  and  maintained  this  position  until  we  were  encamped  upon  th 

m Main's.  Ross,  of  my  command,  was  then  called  for  to  take  a scou 
iuff  party  in  rear  of  the  enemy  and  cut  off  his  tram  and  annoy  his  ■ 
This  duty  was  most  gallantly  performed  by  attacking  a portion  of  t 
enemy’s  army  at  Keetsville,  killing  25  ot  Ins  number,  capturing  9,  an 
destroying  much  of  his  train  and  commissary  supplies.  Themajorr 
turned  with  wearied,  conquering  heroes  from  the  field  without  the 
of  a man,  although  he  met  the  very  blaze  of  their  guns  on  3 
distant,  I cannot  too  highly  estimate  the  chivalry  and  gallant  y 
this  intrepid,  daring  knight,  nor  too  high  y appreciate  the  piudtn 
and  administrative  ability  of  this  officer,  who,  although  bu  c . » 
won  imperishable  honors  as  an  officer  in  the  border  warfare  otieg 
on  repeated  occasions,  meeting,  as  he  has  now  done,  the  full  4P' 
tion  and  admiration  of  our  executive,  and  securing  his  fullest  conhdenc 
It  is  with  pride  that  I thus  bear  testimony  to  the  distinguished  men 
of  my  brave  major,  L.  S.  Boss. 


;haf.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  303 

After  your  advance  movement  was  taken  against  the  enemy  at  Sugar 
>eek  my  immediate  brigadier-general  (McIntosh)  detailed  my  regiment 
o make  a demonstration  against  the  enemy  at  Mud  Town  and  Cross  Hol- 
ow,  while  the  entire  army  moved  by  Elm  Springs  towards  Bentonville. 
This  order  was  delivered  to  me  on  the  5th,  and  was  executed  as  I will 
iow  detail : I moved  my  troops,  unsupported  either  by  artillery  or  in- 
antry,  to  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  at  Mud  Town,  but  their  guns  having 
he  best  range  possible  at  my  column  and  being  heavily  supported  by 
ofantry,  with  overwhelming  odds  against  us,  I determined  to  seek  a 
setter  field.  By  meeting  Colonel  Phelps,  with  his  regiment,  who  was 
q our  rear  on  the  Huntsville  road,  I turned  my  column  in  that  direction 
nd  succeeded  in  capturing  40  prisoners,  10  wagons  with  six-mule  teams, 
ome  loose  mules,  and  a lot  of  horses.  Captain  Jack  Wharton  late  in 
he  evening  had  a spirited  picket  skirmish  and  drove  in  the  enemy’s 
tickets. 

I bivouacked  at  night  in  a strong  natural  position,  looking  for  the 
olumnsof  the  enemy  until  next  morning,  when  we  marched  and  joined 
he  troops  in  the  skirmish  at  Bentonville  on  the  6th. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  General  McIntosh  led  our  cavalry  columns 
gainst  the  enemy  at  11.30  o’clock,  and  we  unexpectedly  met  him. 
le  at  once  opened  a galling  and  destructive  fire  upon  our  ranks  from 
is  left.  The  order  to  charge  was  immediately  given,  and  the  heavens 
ssounded  with  the  tramp  of  warriors’  steeds  as  they  swept  the  field 
nd  rushed  impetuously  on  the  enemy’s  battery.  My  regiment  gal- 
mtly  led  in  this  most  brilliant  charge,  which  was  but  momentarily 
ithstood  by  the  enemy,  who  left  his  guns  in  the  most  precipitous 
ight.  The  first  three  companies,  under  Captains  Wharton,  Throck- 
lorton,  and  Bridges,  poured  a most  destructive  fire  upon  the  enemy 
ear  his  guns,  killing  near  80  of  his  number.  Thanks  to  these  gallant 
ffieers  for  their  promptness,  valor,  and  success. 

Passing  the  batteries  with  my  troops,  I drew  up  in  line  of  battle  80 
irds  distant  from  the  enemy’s  line  of  infantry,  supporting  heavy  guns 
q mediately  in  our  front,  which  at  once  began  a destructive  fire  upon 
3.  I waited  for  orders  for  a general  charge,  but  was  directed  to  with- 
i‘aw  to  a greater  distance,  which  I did  in  the  most  perfect  order.  My 
oops  were  the  only  ones  to  be  left  mounted  during  the  day  on  our 
ght,  and  forming  again  in  the  rear  of  our  former  line,  we  stood,  dur- 
g the  balance  of  the  day,  the  continued  fire  of  ball,  shell,  and  shot 
om  the  enemy’s  guns  without  wavering  or  complaint  and  with  the 
ernness  of  veterans  of  a hundred  battles.  All  credit  to  my  brave 
oops. 

About  the  time  of  our  second  formation  of  line  our  distinguished 
ader,  the  gallant,  chivalrous  McCulloch,  fell,  embalming  his  country’s 
use  with  his  own  blood,  and  depriving  his  admiring  soldiery  of  their 
|ilitary  chieftain  and  idol.  But  a short  time  after  this  and  near  the 
me  portion  of  the  field  fell  Brig.  Gen.  James  McIntosh,  in  whose 
airage  the  troops  had  the  most  implicit  confidence.  May  history  do 
eir  characters  justice  and  later  years  appreciate  their  loss  as  we  felt 
on  that  day.  Several  hours  elapsed  before  I knew  certainly  of  their 
d fate,  during  which  time  I dispatched  officers  and  aides  to  every 
:rt  of  the  field  for  orders,  but  who  invariably  returned  without  them, 
wing  me  in  the  most  perplexed  condition  and  mental  anguish. 
Learning  certainly  of  the  death  of  our  generals,  I dispatched  Major 
oss,  of  my  regiment,  to  you  for  orders  and  to  give  you  the  true  con- 
tion  of  our  end  of  the  field.  During  his  absence  I was  ordered  by 
meral  Pike  to  cover  the  retreat  of  the  infantry  (who  were  then  with- 


304 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIlll 


u 


drawing  from  the  field)  and  our  train,  at  that  moment  threatened  by 
large  force  of  infantry  from  the  enemy.  This  I did  at  once,  with  thi 
determination  of  obeying  the  order  and  returning  to  the  ^’otectol 
afterwards  ordered  to  the  arduous  and  dangerous  duty  of  protectmj 
the  train  to  the  mountains.  This  I accomplished  with  the  prompt  aJ 
sistance  of  Majors  Brooks  and  Crump,  with  their  battalions ; Captail 
?h.  GTHarmans,  of  Colonel  Young’s  regiment,  and  Provence’s  batterjjj 
nf  four  o-uns  under  Lieutenant  McDonald.  . . , 1 « 

I am  under  special  obligations  to  these  officers  for  their  aid  and  oft 
cer-lTe  bearing,  as  also  to  Colonel  King,  who  was  m command  of  I 
regiment  of  Arkansas  militia.  I brought  off  in  safety  the  entire  tnfl 
Af  Price’s  and  McCulloch’s  divisions  ot  the  army.  : 

During  the  days  immediately  preceding  the  battle  [my]  men  toob 
all  told  70  prisoners,  for  which  I am  indebted  to  Major  Boss  and  0 ipl 
li!  M.  ( White— than  whom  there  are  no  better  scouting  officers  in  tt 

C<On  the  btattferSd  my  first  battalion  was  immediately  under  the  conj 
mand  of  Major  Boss;  the  second,  nnder  the  command  of  Lieut.  D.  1 
Gurley.  Both  these  officers  discharged  their  whole  duty  to  my  ful 

Saifmnnder  obligations  to  my  sergeant-major  (Porter)  andmyaidj 

(J  A Echols  and  G.  Graves)  for  their  efficiency  and  promptness  in  e.f 
ecuting  my  orders;  indeed,  officers  and  men  bj-theirconductliaiei 
spiredSme'  with  the  fullest  confidence,  and  now  I think  they  will  folio 
me  to  danger  or  death  or  wherever  duty  calls.  ,1 

1 re  "retted  much  the  temporary  absence  of  my  lieutenant-colon 
(J.  S.  Griffith),  which  deprived  him  of  the  privilege  of  mingling  iu  1 

^Having  thus  reported  to  you  the  part  taken  by  my  men,lhaveom 
to  report  19  men  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  from  my  lanks,  and  tJ 
heavv  loss  of  30  liorses  lost  in  action.  _ . , . i .dJ 

^ You  will  please  receive,  general,  assurances  of  my  high  consideratioj 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  gTONB) 

Colonel  Sixth  Texas  Cavalry .) 


General  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  . . 

Commanding  Trans- Mississippi  District. 


So.  42. 


Deport  of  Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  commanding  Missouri  State  Gua 

( Confederate ). 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  Ben.  McCulloch,  Mo.,  March  22,  1862. 

Colonel  : 1 have  the  honor  to  submit  to  Major-General  Yan  Bo 
the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Missouri  troops  in  t 
•iption  of  the  6th.  7th,  and  8th  instant:  _ , 

That  officer  having  arrived  at  Cove  Greek  and  ^^nlac^dmvt 
the  Confederate  forces  in  Western  Arkansas,  I 1 t 

and  my  army  under  his  orders,  and  in  obedience  to  these  took  up 
line  of  march  in  the  direction  of  Bentonville  ,th® 

4 provided  with  three  days’  cooked  rations,  and  leaving  my  ba^ga 
and  supply  trains  to  follow  slowly  in  the  rear. 


iap.  xvin.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


305 


My  forces  consisted  of  the  First  Brigade  Missouri  Volunteers,  Ool. 
enry  Little  commanding;  the  Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
lack  commanding;  a battalion  of  cavalry,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
nan  t- Colonel  Cearnal,  and  the  State  troops,  under  the  command  of 
rigadier-Generals  Eains,  Green,  and  Frost,  Cols.  John  B.  Clark,  jr., 
id  James  P.  Saunders,  and  Major  Lindsay,  numbering  in  all  6,818 
en,  with  eight  batteries  of  light  artillery. 

With  these  I reached  Elm  Springs  on  the  evening  of  the  5th,  and  on 
e morning  of  the  6th  advanced  to  Bentonville,  where  burning  houses 
dicated  the  presence  ot  the  enemy.  Colonel  Gates7  regiment  of  cav- 
ry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cearnal’s  battalion,  and  the  mounted  men  of 
eneral  Rains7  command  were  rapidly  pushed  forward  to  the  east  of 
e town  and  soon  became  briskly  engaged  with  what  proved  to  be 
e rear  guard  of  General  Sigel’s  forces,  the  main  body  of  which  had 
«sed  through  Bentonville  that  morning  in  the  direction  of  Elkhorn 
ivern,  near  which  the  enemy  were  encamped  in  force  and  stronalv 
trenched.  J 

Skirmishing  between  our  advance  and  this  rear  guard  was  kept  up 
roughout  the  day,  and  resulted  in  the  capture  by  us  of  quite  a num- 
r of  prisoners,  from  whom  we  gained  much  useful  information. 
Towards  evening  we  bivoucked  as  if  for  the  night  within  5 or  6 miles 
the  enemy,  but  resumed  the  line  of  march  at  8 p.  m.,  and,  in  spite 
the  impediments  with  which  the  enemy  had  sought  to  obstruct  our 
ly,  reached  a point  on  the  Telegraph  road  to  the  north  and  in  the 
ir  of  the  enemy’s  position.  A march  of  about  2 miles  along  the  deep 
lley  through  which  the  road  leads  brought  us  within  view  of  the 
iteau  upon  which  the  enemy  were  posted,  and  which  lay  to  the  north 
the  Elkhorn  Tavern. 

Our  advance  had  already  begun  to  skirmish  with  the  vedettes  of  the 
emy,  when  I discovered  that  they  were  about  to  place  a battery  in 
sition  to  command  the  road.  I at  once  deployed  the  brigades  of 
neral  Slack  and  Colonel  Little  to  the  right  and  the  rest  of  my  forces 
the  left  and  took  possession  of  the  heights  on  either  hand.  This 
vement  gave  my  artillery  on  the  left  a very  commanding  position, 
m which  they  were  enabled  not  only  to  check  the  enemy’s  advance 
on  our  left,  but  also  to  support  our  right  in  its  advance  upon  the 
'my. 

Che  brunt  of  the  action  fell  during  the  early  part  of  the  day  upon 
right  wing,  consisting  of  General  Slack’s  and  Colonel  Little’s  bri- 
les.  They  pushed  forward  gallantly  against  heavy  odds  and  the 
st  stubborn  resistance,  and  were  victorious  everywhere. 

M this  time  and  here  fell  two  of  my  best  and  bravest  officers,  Brig, 
n.  William  Y.  Slack  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cearnal,  the  former 
irtally  and  the  latter  severely  wounded. 

now  advanced  my  whole  iine,  which  gradually  closed  upon  the 
‘my  and  drove  them  from  one  position  to  another,  until  we  found 
m towards  evening  in  great  force  on  the  south  and  west  of  an  open 
d,  supported  by  masked  batteries. 

Jie  artillery  and  infantry  of  my  left  wing  were  brought  up  to  attack 
m,  and  they  did  so  with  a spirit  and  determination  worthy  of  all 
ise.  The  fiercest  struggle  of  the  day  now  ensued;  but  the  im-  ' 
uosity  of  my  troops  was  irresistible,  and  the  enemy  was  driven  back 
1 completely  routed.  My  right  had  engaged  the  enemy’s  center  at 
same  time  with  equal  daring  and  equal  success,  and  had  already 
ven  them  from  their  position  at  Elkhorn  Tavern.  Right  alone 
20  r r — VOL  viii 


306 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiai*.  xyii 


prevented  us  from  achieving  a complete  victory,  of  which  we  ha 
already  gathered  some  of  the  fruits,  having  taken  two  pieces  of  arti  < 

^My'troops'1  bivouacked* upon  the  ground  which  they  had  so  nohl: 
won  almost  exhausted  and  without  food,  but  fearlessly  and  anxious! 
awaiting  the  renewal  of  the  battle  in  the  morning.  I 

The  morning  disclosed  the  enemy  strengthened  m position  and  nuJ 
bers  and  encouraged  by  the  reverses  which  had  unhappily  befalls! 
the  other  wing  of  the  army,  when  the  brave  Texan  chieftain.  Bel 
McCulloch,  and  his  gallant  comrade,  General  McIntosh,  had  fallei! 
fearlessly  and  triumphantly  leading  their  devoted  so  diers  against  J 
invaders  of  their  native  land.  They  knew,  too,  that  Hebert  tu 
accomplished  leader  of  that  veteran  regiment  the  Louisiana  Thiitl 
whichwon  so  many  laurels  on  the  bloody  field  of  the  Oak  Hills,  ar 
which  then  as  well  as  now  sustained  the  proud  reputation  ot  Lorn 
iana— was  a prisoner  in  their  hands.  They  were  not  slow  to  renew  tl 
attack-  they  opened  upon  us  vigorously,  but  my  trusty  men  falter* 
not  They  held  their  position  unmoved  until  (after  several  of  the  ba 
Series  nKder  my  command  had  left  the  field)  they  were  ordered  - 
retire.  My  troops'  obeyed  it  unwillingly,  with  faces  turned  defiant* 

^It'was'ttien6  that  I lost  two  officers  of  whom  any  nation  might  1 
proud  The  one,  Col.  Benjamin  A.  Rives,  fell  m the  prune  of  his  ma 
hood  at  the  zenith  of  his  usefulness.  No  braver  or  more  gallant  office 
no  more  accomplished  gentleman,  no  more  unselfish  patriot  ever  led. 
regiment  or  died  for  his  country’s  honor.  The  other,  [S.]  Church. 
Clark  was  as  Colonel  Little  justly  observes  m his  report,  a child  , 
simplicity  and  piety  of  character,  a boy  in  years,  but  a soldier  in  spy 
and  a herohi  action.”  They  fell  at  the  very  close  of  the  hard-foug 
battle,  well  deserving  the  glowing  praises  which  their  immediate  coi 

-Tgaswsaas. » ,«<■«  »*,  .*«.«.  .<s 

For  the  details  of  all  this  I beg  leave  to  make  reference  to  the  acco. 
-nan  vine*  reports  of  my  subordinate  officeis.  J 

P Sffonduct  of  nearly  every  officer  and  soldier  under  my  comuj. 
was  such  as  to  win  my  admiration  $ it  is  the  less  necessary  that  I s 
commend  any  one  particularly  to  the  notice  of  the 
manding,  as  the  operations  of  my  arms  were  conducted  under  h s 4 
while  his  presence  and  gallant  bearing,  as  well  as  his  skill,  contnbut 
immeasurably  to  the  success  ot  our  cause. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient^rvant,^  pBI0E) 

Major-General , Commanding  Missouri  State  Guard . 

Col.  D.  H.  Maury,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  43. 


Report  of  Col.  Henry  Little , commanding  First  Brigade  Missouri  Vol i 

teers  ( Confederate ). 


Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Mo.  Vols.,  < C.i 3., 


Camp  Ben.  McCulloch , Ark.,  March  18, 


1862 


Captain  • I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  J 
operations  of  the  First  Brigade  on  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  of  the  pie 
month : 


Chap, 


XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


307 


The  brigade,  composed  of  the  [First]  Eegiment  of  Cavalry,  Col.  E 
Gates  commanding $ the  First  [Second]  Eegiment  of  Infantry,  Col  J 
Q.  Burbridge ; the  Second  [Third]  Eegiment  of  Infantry,  Col.  B.  A 
Rives,  and  Captains  Wade's  and  Clark’s  batteries  marched  from  the 
bivouac  at  Elm  Springs  early  on  the  morning  of  March  6,  and  pro- 
ceeded on  the  road  to  Bentonville. 

In  compliance  with  orders  issued  from  headquarters  on  the  previous 
evening,  Colonel  Gates’  regiment  of  cavalry  led  the  advance  of  the 
whole  army.  On  reaching  Bentonville  the  smoke  of  burning  stores  and 
dwellings  indicated  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  whose  rear  guard  aban- 
doned the  town  as  Colonel  Gates’  cavalry  entered.  From  information 
subsequently  received  it  is  believed  that  this  bodv  of  troops  was  Gen- 
eral Sigel’s  division,  numbering  from  5,000  to  7,000  men.  Colonel 
3ntes,  pressing  upon  the  retreating  enemy,  engaged  their  rear  guard 
it  a short  distance  beyond  the  town,  on  the  Springfield  road.  Here 
resides  the  capture  of  several  prisoners  and  a baggage  wagon  laden 
Jith  arms  and  ammunition,  our  cavalry  killed  and  wounded  several  of 
he  enemy  and  compelled  the  main  body  of  the  enemv  to  continue  their 
•etreat,  pursuing  them  until  dark. 

The  other  regiments  of  the  brigade,  occupying  their  respective  posi- 
i°ns  iu  the  line,  came  into  camp  late  in  the  afternoon  and  proceeded 
mmediately  to  prepare  supper,  having  received  orders  to  resume  the 
me  of  march  at  8 o’clock  on  the  same  evening.  Colonel  Gates’  cav- 
ilry  having  rejoined  the  brigade,  the  First  [Second]  Eegiment,  under 
mlonel  Burbridge,  was  detailed  for  the  advance. 

At  8 o’clock  our  line  of  march  was  resumed  and  continued  all  night. 
)nce  about  midnight  and  again  towards  morning  our  progress  was 
hecked  tempore  blockade  of  the  road,  the  enemy  having  felled 

he  timber  behind  him  as  he  retreated. 

^ a*  011  the  <th  we  had  cleared  the  road  of  every  impediment, 
nd  by  8 o’clock  we  reached  and  secured  possession  of  the  Telegraph 
pad  &t  a point  about  half  a mile  to  the  north  of  the  enemy’s  position 
hereby  cutting  off  his  retreat.  ; 

The  First  [Second]  Infantry,  being  at  the  head  of  our  column,  was 
ow  ordered  to  advance  in  line  by  the  hill-side  to  the  right  of  the  road, 
tie  Second  Brigade,  under  General  Slack,  following:  Gates’ cavalry 
ext  defiled  by  the  left  up  the  face  of  the  hill  afterwards  occupied  by 
ur  artillery.  Here  the  cavalry  made  a prize  of  several  forage  wagons, 
A?rnm?  la(len  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  In  compliance  with  orders 
then  advanced  by  the  same  road  with  the  remaining  portion  of  my 
irnmand.  The  Second  [Third]  Infantry  I placed  in  position  as  reserve 
a the  hill  to  the  left,  of  the  road,  and  shortly  afterwards  summoned  up 
ie  two  batteries,  under  command  of  Captains  Wade  and  Clark,  which 
ere  immediately  placed  in  position,  with  some  other  batteries  already 
igaged  in  replying  to  the  heavy  fire  directed  from  the  enemy’s  artil- 
rv,  along  the  line  of  the  Telegraph  road.  For  more  than  an  hour  our 
tins  played  upon  the  enemy’s  batteries  with  such  spirit  and  effectiveness 
* U!  Spence  their  fire.  Colonel  Gates,  with  his  cavalry,  then  charged 
ie  heights,  supported  by  Rives’  regiment  of  infantry. 

On  reaching  the  ground  our  cavalry  received  a heavy  discharge  of 
nail-arms  from  three  regiments  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  in  position, 
eturning  the  fire,  our  cavalry  prudently  fell  back  before  superior 
imbers,  and,  dismounting,  they  formed  on  the  left  of  Colonel  Rives’ 

iS*1,  T,,e,  en®my>  in  ,turn>  advanced  against  our  lines,  but  were 
teived  by  Colonel  Rives’  regiment  with  a heavy  fire  and  repulsed 
onsiderable  loss.  A second  time  the  enemy  charged  our  lines 


308 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK., 


KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap.  XVIII. 


only  to  be  repulsed  with  greater  spirit,  Colonel  Rives  sternly  holding 
his  position,  from  which  his  men  did  not  yield  an  inch  of  ground. 

After  an  interval  of  thirty  minutes  the  enemy,  with  two  pieces  of  artil-l 
lerv  were  observed  advancing  against  our  right,  occupied by  i Colonel  j 
Burb ridge  and  General  Slack!  Major  Lindsay,  of  the  Sixth  Division,  , 
arriving  on  the  ground  with  a small  body  of  infantry,  I directed  him  l 
to  the  support  of  Colonel  Burbridge’s  position,  on  the  left.  Thus  sup-d 
ported,  Colonel  Burbridge  advanced,  driving  the  enemy  before  him., I 
This  movement  was  supported  on  the  left  by  the  simultaneous  advanced 
of  Colonel  Rives’  and  Gates’  regiments,  which  speedily  occupied  the! 
heights  lately  crowned  by  the  enemy’s  batteries.  Here  we  found  af 
broken  caisson  and  a quantity  of  ammunition  and  several  dead  and 
wounded  horses,  showing  the  destructive  effects  of  our  batteries  on  the! 

enAfter  a considerable  interval  the  batteries  of  the  enemy  renewed  the 
fight  by  a heavy  fire  directed  against  our  lines  from  the  road  m fro« 
of  the  Elkhorn  Tavern.  A brisk  reply  from  Guibor’s  battery , which  I 
had  placed  in  position  on  the  road  to  the  left  of  Rives  infantry,  very; 
speedily  checked  the  bold  assault  of  our  opponents,  who,  gradually 
slackening  their  fire,  answered  only  by  an  occasional  round  from  then; 
ffuns.  Meantime  our  ambulances  were  summoned  to  the  field.  -“"y? 
our  wounded  had  been  removed,  the  wounded  of  the  enemy,  who  thickly 
strewed  the  ground,  were  removed  to  our  hospitals  m the  rear. 

Colonel  Burbridge’s  command  having  been  much  weakened  by  then 
prominent  position  during  the  action  of  the  day,  now  called  for  re-en- 
forcements. General  Frost,  whose  brigade  had  been  ordered  up -to my 
support  in  compliance  with  my  request,  advanced  his  command  to  Col- 
onel Burbridge’s  support,  taking  position  to  the  left  of  Lindsay  s bat- 
talion, on  the  slope  of  the  ridge  to  his  rear,  with  the  ravme  mtervenmg| 
About  this  time  I received  instructions  from  General  Van  Dorn  tc 
the  effect  that  General  Price  was  about  to  make  an  assault  on  tne  ex- 
treme left  of  the  enemy’s  line.  With  this  information  was  coupled  an 
order  for  me  to  advance  my  whole  line  so  soon  as  the  heavy  firing  or 
our  left  should  give  the  signal  of  the  attack  under  General  Price.  Lot 
onel  Burbridge’s  regiment  having  been  pressed  forward  somewhat  ni 
advance  of  Colonel  Rives’  regiment,  I ordered  Colonel  Burbridge  to  fall 
back,  and  forming  my  command  into  line,  awaited  the  expected  s'gna 
It  was  very  late  in  the  day  when  the  sharp  battle  of  small-arms  u 
the  direction  of  our  extreme  left  announced  the  moment  for  action, 
ordered  the  charge.  My  men  advanced  in  one  unbroken  line.  W( 
met  the  foe.  For  a few  seconds  he  resisted,  and  then  fell  back  befow 
our  lines,  as  with  a shout  of  triumph  Rives’  and  Gates’  regimenh 
dashed  onward  past  the  Elkhorn  Tavern,  and  we  stood  on  the  grounc 
where  the  enemy  had  formed  in  the  morning.  Here,  too,  Burbridgei 
command  halted  after  forcing  the  enemy’s  position  on  the  right,  anc 
came  into  line,  having  Lindsay’s  battalion  and  a,  portion  of  Frost 
division,  under  Colonels  Colton  Greene  and  Slialer,  on  his  left  anc 
resting  on  the  Elkhorn  buildings.  Two  pieces  of  the  enemy  s cannon 
with  an  artillery  camp,  commissary  and  sutler’s  stores,  fell  into  offl 
hands,  captured  by  the  assault  of  Gates’  and  Rives  regiments. 

A renewal  of  the  enemy’s  fire  by  a battery  placed  in  position i on  th 
road  was  answered  by  Guibor’s  battery,  of  Frost’s  brigade.  For  mon 
than  thirty  minutes  we  contested  the  position  against  a brisk  me  o 
artillery,  when,  General  Price  having  forced  the  left  wing  of  the  enem. 
from  the  ground  he  had  occupied  by  General  Van  Dorn  s orders,  , 
command  again  charged  the  enemy’s  lines,  driving  them  from  the  uooa 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ARK.  309 

beyond  the  tavern,  and  compelling  them  to  seek  refuge  in  the  obscurity 
of  the  forest,  which  skirted  the  opposite  side  of  an  open  field,  over 
which  they  had  passed  in  their  retreat. 

In  this  last  charge  Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Pritchard,  who  commanded  on 
the  left  of  Colonel  Rives’  regiment,  made  prisoners  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Chandler  and  5 other  officers,  with  40  men,  of  the  enemy’s  line. 

For  some  twenty  minutes  the  enemy’s  artillery  continued  a desultory 
Ire  along  the  line  of  the  road,  which  was  answered  by  MacDonald’s 
battery,  of  Frost’s  brigade,  and  a section  of  Wade’s  battery,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Farrington. 

Our  men,  exhausted  by  the  exertions  of  the  day,  after  a fast  of  thirty- 
ax  hours,  were  now  relieved  by  the  descent  of  night,  and  under  favor 
)f  the  obscurity  rested  upon  their  arms  on  the  field  whence  they  had 
Iriven  an  obstinate  and  stubborn  foe. 

During  the  night  great  commotion  was  audible  in  the  camp  of  the 
memy.  Their  artillery  and  baggage  wagons  seemed  to  be  continually 
noving.  The  officers  of  my  command  preserved  their  lines  unbroken 
n readiness  for  any  emergency. 

About  midnight  the  sound  of  wheels  approached.  We  opened  our 
ines  and  admitted  a caisson  with  ammunition,  which,  through  mis- 
ake  of  the  driver,  came  to  seek  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  Federal 
amy  in  the  ranks  of  his  adversaries.  Until  morning  no  other  incident 
iccurred  to  disturb  the  ominous  silence  of  the  battle-field. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  our  line  was  formed  on  the  verge  of 
he  timber  according  to  the  following  order : Colonel  Burbridge’s  regi- 
ment took  position  immediately  to  the  right,  his  left  resting  on  the 
dge  of  the  road.  Immediately  on  the  left  and  next  the  road  Wade’s 
'attery  was  placed  in  mask.  Next  to  the  left  of  the  battery  Colonel 
lives’  regiment  formed  in  line,  and  farther  to  their  left  was  stationed 
portion  of  Frost’s  brigade,  under  Colonels  Greene  and  Shaler,  our 
ront  being  completed  by  Colonel  HilPs  Arkansas  regiment  deployed 
i line.  In  the  rear  of  Colonel  Rives’  regiment  was  placed  Major  Whit- 
eld’s  battalion  of  dismounted  cavalry.  To  the  right  and  about  three 
undred  yards  to  the  rear  of  Colonel  Burbridge’s  command  were  sta- 
icned  three  regiments  of  Arkansas  troops,  under  Colonel  Churchill 
The  full  light  of  morning  revealed  to  us  a caisson,  with  5 horses 
I ttached,  which  had  been  abandoned  by  the  enemy  the  previous  night, 
t lay  in  the  space  between  the  opposing  armies.  A detachment  from 
vade’s  battery  led  it  into  our  lines. 

i Until  near  7 o’clock  no  gun  had  been  fired.  Each  army  was  engaged 
eploymg  its  columns  for  a decisive  contest.  A battery  of  the  enemy 
ow  advanced  into  the  open  field  and  took  position  in  front  of  their 
[ne  and  in  full  view  of  our  men.  During  this  operation  they  received 
o molestation ; but  no  sooner  had  they  opened  fire  upon  our  line  than 
icj  were  answered  by  Teel’s  battery,  which,  having  come  up,  was  as- 
gned  a position  between  Rives’  regiment  and  General  [Martin  E.l 
reen’s  command.  Few  shots  had  been  interchanged  until  Wade’s 
attery  entered  the  list. 

enemy’  n°t  counting  on  such  odds,  limbered  up  and  hastily  left 
ie  held.  For  a short  interval  the  report  of  an  occasional  shot  from  our 
ittenes  was  the  only  sound  that  broke  the  calm  stillness  of  the  inorn- 
ig.  After  a short  time  the  appearance  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  moving 
to  position  over  against  our  right  proved  they  had  not  been  loitering, 
id  when  they  opened  fire  on  our  lines  from  their  new  stand-point  the 
cplosion  of  their  shells  above  the  ground  occupied  by  Burbridge’s 
•giment  proved  that  they  had  not  been  posted  so  far  from  our  position 


310 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


as  that  we  might  consider  ourselves  out  of  range,  as  I had  at  first  sup-  : 

P°Oaptain  Good’s  battery,  now  coming  up,  was  placed  to  the  right  of 
Burbridge’s  regiment,  and  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy  s battery  from 
its  position.  The  enemy,  having  got  the  range  ot  our  lines,  threw  in 
the  shells  with  great  precision  and  rapidity,  concentrating  their  fire  on 
one  point.  Wade’s  battery  was  ordered  up  to  Good’s  support,  but  had 
scarcely  unlimbered  when  Good’s  battery  retired  from  the  ground.,! 
Hart’s  battery  was  now  ordered  to  take  the  place  evacuated  by  Good.! 
Hart’s  battery  did  not  prove  more  steady  than  its  predecessor  under 
tbe  enemy’s  fire,  and  immediately  left  the  field.  Wade  s battery , hay 
in  s exhausted  its  ammunition  and  several  horses,  was  now  ordered  to 
retire  to  the  rear  and  replenish  the  caissons.  Wades  battery  and 
position  was  supplied  by  Captain  Clark’s  battery,  which  continued  to 
answer  the  enemy’s  fire  until,  by  slacking  his  previous  impetuosity,  it 
became  evident  that  a new  maneuver  was  contemplated  by  the  enemy. ; 

From  close  observation  I concluded  that  we  might  expect  momenta- 
rily to  be  assailed  by  a charge  of  infantry.  The  enemy’s  line  extended 
for  nearly  a mile  and  was  supported  by  heavy  reserves.  Having  or- 
dered the  left  of  my  line  to  move  close  to  the  fence  on  the  left  ot  thed 
woods  and  Whitfield’s  battalion  to  the  support  of  Burbndge  s regiment, 
on  the  right,  I reported  the  expected  advance  of  the  enemy’s  infantry 
to  General  Yan  Dorn,  who,  in  reply,  ordered  me  to  hold  my  position 

as  long  as  possible.  . . . . , 

The  enemy  advanced.  On,  on  they  came,  m overwhelming  numbers, 
line  after  line  ; but  they  were  met  with  the  same  determined  courage: 
which  this  protracted  contest  had  taught  them  to  appreciate.  For  more 
than  half  an  hour  our  greatly  diminished  and  exhausted  troops  held 
their  hosts  in  check.  Their  intention  of  turning  our  flanks  by  their 
widely-extended  line  becoming  now  clearly  evident,  we  slowly  tell  back 
from  our  advanced  position,  disputing  every  inch  of  ground  which  we; 

It  was  at  this  critical  juncture  that  the  gallant  Fives  tell  mortallyj 
wounded,  and,  as  though  fortune  sought  to  dispossess  our  resolutions 
by  multiplying  disasters,  within  a few  minutes  after  the  fall  ot  Fives 
we  suffered  an  irreparable  loss  in  the  fall  of  the  young  and  chivalrous 
Clark,  whose  battery  kept  up  a galling  fire  on  the  advancing  foe  as 
our  lines  retired  j and  as  we  had  now  fallen  back  on  a line  with  Ins 
position,  being  ordered  to  withdraw  his  guns,  he  fell,  decapitated  by  a 
round  shot  while  executing  this  maneuver;  the  last  battery  m actiom 
Captain  MacDonald,  was  now  compelled  to  retire  by  the  intervention 
of  our  retiring  line  between  him  and  the  enemy,  and  it  was  with  regre 
the  order  was  issued  for  him  to  cease  firing,  so  gallant  was  the  conduct 
of  the  commander  and  his  men,  so  terrible  was  the  effect  of  every  round 
which  he  delivered  into  the  advancing  lines  of  the  enemy  with  a cool 

ness  and  courage  unsurpassed. 

Our  latest  order  from  General  Van  Dorn  directed  our  line  to  retire 
by  the  Huntsville  road.  To  accomplish  this  movement  with  safety 
and  success  it  was  first  necessary  to  withdraw  Burbndge  s and  vv  hit- 
field’s  commands  from  our  right  wing  across  the  main  road,  on  whicn 
their  left  rested.  This  movement  was  successfully  effected  by  then 
respective  commanders  after  they  had  retained  the  enemy  in  chec 
sufficiently  longtime  for  Captain  MacDonald’s  battery  to  limber  up  an 
retire. 

During  this  movement  three  companies  of  Burbridge’s  regiment  be 
came  detached  from  their  command,  and  most  happily  effected  their  re 


(AP.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


311 


eat  under  direction  of  their  captains,  P.  S.  Senteny,  George  Butler, 
id  Thomas  M.  Carter,  following  the  artillery,  which  had  retreated  up 
le  Telegraph  road.  Being  here  threatened  by  a charge  of  the  enemy’s 
ivalry,  now  in  pursuit,  these  three  companies  formed  into  line  and  (le- 
vered so  severe  a fire  into  the  advancing  squadron  as  to  effectively 
pulse  their  charge  and  leave  the  artillery  force  to  pursue  its  march. 
For  their  gallant  conduct  on  this  occasion  too  much  praise  cannot  be 
istowed  on  Captains  Senteny,  Butler,  and  Carter. 

Our  line,  having  fallen  back  on  the  Huntsville  road,  continued  its 
treat  in  good  order. 

In  the  fall  of  Colonel  Fives  the  brigade  sustained  a severe  loss,  such 
one  as  the  Army  of  the  Missouri  could  not  many  times  encounter  and 
it  preserve  its  prestige  as  a band  of  gallant  and  devoted  patriots ; for 
ue  as  may  be  the  courage  of  the  individual  soldiers  who  fill  our  ranks, 
it  of  a truth  we  have  but  few  such  officers  as  was  our  late  brother  in 
ms.  A brave  and  gallant  soldier;  a prudent  and  accomplished  officer, 
id,  as  every  man  of  his  command  knows  from  experience,  a dear, 
nd  friend,  ever  solicitous  for  their  comfort,  ever  interested  in  their 
ill-being.  Peace  to  his  ashes,  and  may  his  name  be  held  in  venera- 
>n.  Our  exalted  respect  for  this  gallant  soldier  and  Christian  gentle - 
in  was  second  only  to  the  deep  affection  with  which  we  cherish  the 
iinory  and  virtues  of  that  youthful  martyr  to  the  cause  of  liberty  S. 
mrchill  Clark ; a child  in  simplicity  and  purity  of  character,  a boy 
years,  but  a soldier  in  spirit  and  a hero  in  action,  his  character  at 
e age  of  nineteen  years  was  obnoxious  to  no  imputation  of  enemies  or 
volities  which,  alas,  but  too  frequently  characterize  youths  who  have 
t attained  more  than  half  his  years.  His  life  was  useful  to  him  only 
far  as  it  might  be  useful  to  his  country,  and  to  her  liberation  and  the 
fense  of  her  constitutional  rights  were  all  his  energies  consecrated, 
id  he  lived,  who  can  estimate  the  height  of  rank  he  would  have  at- 
ined  and  the  elevation  of  the  niche  of  fame  in  which  a grateful  people 
>uld  have  enshrined  his  memory?  But  mayhap  it  is  better  as 
iaven  ordained.  He  has  passed  away  before  corruption  had  beguiled 
* heart  or  the  whisperings  of  malice  detracted  from  his  fair  repute, 
ere  it  not  a crime  against  God’s  Providence,  our  hearts  would  envy 
e rest  of  the  silent  but  honored  grave. 

Of  the  officers  of  the  First  Brigade,  my  companions  in  arms  and 
arers  in  the  responsible  duties  which  associate  us  in  command  of 
3m,  I fain  would  speak,  and  by  name  commend  them  for  their  cour- 
e and  fidelity,  were  jt  not  that  such  a catalogue  would  necessarily 
(brace  the  whole  roster  of  command.  To  each  and  all  I am  indebted 
’ whatever  merit  may  accrue  to  the  honor  of  the  First  Brigade  or  the 
iccess  of  its  achievements. 

To  Colonels  Gates  and  Burbridge;  Lieutenant-Colonels  Chiles,  Hull, 
d Pritchard;  Majors  Lawther,  Dwyer,  and  Hubbell;  Captain  Wade^ 
d Lieutenant  Farrington  great  praise  is  due  for  their  prudence  and 
elity  on  the  march  and  energy  and  gallantry  on  the  field.  Colonels 
1 11,  Shaler,  Colton  Greene,  and  Major  Whitfield  have  my  warmest 
inks  for  the  manner  in  which,  with  their  commands,  they  supported 
’ movements  in  the  field.  Lieutenant  Farris,  who  succeeded  to  the 
mmand  of  the  battery  after  the  fall  of  Clark,  behaved  with  much 
llantry,  succeeding  in  bringing  off  his  guns  without  loss,  under  a 
avy  fire  from  the  enemy.  Sergeant  Nelson,  of  the  same  battery,  was 
ispicuous  for  his  coolness  and  courage  in  covering  with  his  gun  the 
•vement  of  the  battery  when  ordered  to  retire,  keeping  up  a repeated 


312  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chaf.  xvinl 

fire  on  the  enemy’s  line  until  the  last  of  the  battery  had  limbered  uj 

anTommyeper^nal  staff,  Wright  C.  Schaumberg,  my  acting  assistant 
adjutant-general,  and  Oapt.  Francis  Von  Phul,  my  acting  aide,  m3 
thanks  are  particularly  due  for  their  promptness  in  carrying  my  order! 
to  different  parts  of  the  field  under  the  heaviest  fire.  Captain  bchaum 
berg  rendered  me  the  greatest  assistance  in  keeping  the  line  in  ordeirf 
white  retiring  before  the  enemy.  Maj.  Clark  Kennerly,  acting  ord 
nance  officer,  rendered  efficient  service  in  carrying  orders  and  supply 
in"  the  troops  with  ammunition  on  the  field.  Mr.  Charles  Byser,  wh< 
on  the  first  day  acted  as  volunteer  aide,  also  has  my  thanks. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

7 HENRY  LITTLE, 

Colonel,  Commanding  First  Brigade . i 

Capt.  B.  H.  Brand,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  44. 


Report  of  Col  Thomas  E.  Rosser , commanding  Second  Brigade , Confed 

erate  Cavalry. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade  Confed.  Vol.  Cay., 
Camp  Ben.  McCulloch , Arlc .,  March  21,  186-/. 

General:  In  compliance  with  the  duty  imposed  upon  me  as  th 
ranking  officer  of  my  brigade,  occasioned  by  a severe  wound  receive* 
bv  General  William  Y.  Slack  on  the  morning  of  the  Hh  instant,  I hav 
the  honor  to  report  such  of  the  particulars  of  the  battle  of  Elkhorn  a 
came  under  my  immediate  view  and  connected  particularly  with  m; 

At  an  early  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant,  simultaneous!, 
with  the  general  moving  of  the  army,  General  Slack  ordered  the  entir 
infantry  of  the  brigade,  composed  of  the  battalions  of  Col.  J.  T.  Hughes 
Mai.  R.  S.  Bevier,  and  that  under  my  command,  to  march  m the  direc 
tion  of  Trott’s  Hill,  or  Sugar  Mountain,  which  order  was  promptl, 
obeyed.  The  column  had  barely  deployed  into  line  of  battle  near  th 
summit  of  the  mountain  when  we  encountered  a sharp  volley  ot  muske 
and  rifle  balls  from  the  enemy,  producing  but  little  effect,  however,  l 
our  ranks.  The  shock  to  our  new  recruits  was  only  momentary,  andi. 
a few  moments  our  brave  general  so  disposed  the  men  as  not  only  v 
protect  them  from  injury,  but  resulted  in  the  entire  rout  of  the  enem, 

from  his  ambuscade.  , nTlM  J 

With  deep  regret  I have  to  state  that  at  the  early  part  of  this  engage 
ment  General  Slack  received  a severe  and  painful  wound  in  the  regia 
of  the  hip,  which  compelled  him  at  once  to  leave  the  field,  and  by 
order  I assumed  the  command  of  the  brigade.  My  horse  was  also  kilie< 
under  me  without  injury  to  myself. 

As  soon  as  it  was  ascertained  from  the  scouts  which  had  b®en 
to  different  portions  of  the  mountain  that  the  enemy  had  fled,  the  t 
battalions  were  so  distributed,  en  echelon,  as  effectually  to  protec 
from  surprise,  either  upon  our  flanks,  front,  or  rear.  This  distribu  . 
of  the  troops  enabled  the  commands  of  Colonels  Hughes  and  BCvi 
aided  by  a detached  company  of  my  battalion,  under  the  command  c 
Lieut.  Jeptha  Duncan,  to  repulse  a charge  of  a large  body  oi  cea 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  315 

Iry  and  of  scattering  them  in  every  direction.  The  bravery  of  these 
fficers  and  their  men  on  this  occasion  deserves  an  especial  notice* 
here  were  various  efforts  upon  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  regain  the 
ill,  but  were  in  every  instance  repulsed  by  the  bold  and  impetuous 
barges  of  our  men. 

The  charge  and  capture  of  a bronze  6-pounder  by  the  officers  and 
len  of  the  Second  Battalion  deserve  especial  notice  in  this  report* 
!apt.  Samuel  F.  Taylor  called  my  attention  to  the  appearance  of  horses 
nd  the  rumbling  ot  artillery  wheels  ascending  the  hill  on  our  extreme 
?ft.  Simultaneously  with  this  Lieut.  Eugene  Erwin,  of  the  same  com- 
any,  directed  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  a 6-pounder  was  about  to 
e planted  within  150  yards  obliquely  to  the  left  and  front  of  our  lines, 
he  gun  had  not  been  unlimbered  and  was  still  in  motion  when  a charge 
as  ordered,  and  at  once  every  member  of  the  battalion  rushed  forward 
ith  the  boldness  of  well-tried  and  disciplined  troops,  killing  the  horses 
nd  capturing  the  gun.  This  success  inspired  our  men  with  great  con- 
ience  in  themselves,  and  having  received  an  order  from  General  Van 
orn  to  close  the  interval  existing  between  Colonel  Burbridge’s  regi- 
ent,  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  my  command,  I ordered  a forward 
ovement  of  the  entire  brigade,  which  enabled  us  to  attack  the  enemy 
1 his  left  flank  and  rear.  A charge  was  made  at  the  double-quick  a 
stance  of  300  yards,  and  to  our  great  gratification  the  enemy  were 
spersed  and  shot  down  in  every  direction.  The  men  and  many  of  the 
fleers  favored  a charge  on  a battery  of  six  guns  which  was  in  the 
fid  before  us ; but  believing  that  it  was  heavily  supported  by  infantry 
ambush  immediately  in  the  woods  beyond,  and  being  separated  from 
'e  balance  of  the  army  by  some  400  yards,  I returned  with  the  com- 
and  to  the  position  formerly  occupied  by  us. 

With  this  charge  closed  the  day,  and  at  night  my  men,  having  been 
freshed  by  provisions  which  had  been  captured  from  the  enemy,  slept 
undly,  without  tents,  blankets,  or  fire,  within  sight  of  the  Federal 
mp,  which  was  immediately  over  the  hill  beyond  us.  Our  charges 
ivlng  been  successful  in  every  instance,  officers  and  men  were  san- 
une  that  victory  was  ours,  and  that  the  following  day  would  make 
ccessful  our  arms. 

Early  on  the  following  morning,  the  8th  instant,  in  obedience  to  or- 
rs  from  headquarters.  I caused  the  infantry  of  the  brigade  to  be  placed 
the  extreme  right  of  the  line  of  battle,  which  had  been  drawn  up  on 
e top  of  Sugar  Mountain.  Each  battalion  of  the  command  received 
shower  of  cannon  ball  and  grape  shot  for  at  least  an  hour  without  the 
■ssibility  of  discharging  a gun.  At  this  time  we  were  ordered  to  fall 
ck,  and  m a short  time  afterwards  I received  the  order  to  retreat,  not, 
wever,  till  most  of  the  main  army  had  left  the  field.  I brought  my 
mmand  off  in  the  best  possible  order,  and  no  member  of  the  command 
j aware  that  we  were  retreating  till  we  were  5 miles  from  the  battle- 

|The  artillery  of  this  brigade  under  the  command  of  Capt.  William 
icas  I have  learned  did  noble  work,  and  officers  and  men  displayed 
ich  valor.  The  battery  was  detached  from  the  brigade  during  the 
tire  action.  The  guns  were  all  brought  safely  from  the  field  and  are 
w m camp.  The  gun  captured  by  my  battalion  was  placed  by  your 
mission  in  this  battery,  but  has  been  subsequently  turned  over  to 
ptam  MacDonald’s  battery  by  order  of  General  Van  Dorn, 
r or  the  part  which  the  cavalry  portion  of  this  brigade  had  in  this  bat- 
1 refer  you  to  the  accompanying  report  of  Gol.  G.  W.  Riggins,  of 
lonel  McCulloch’s  battalion. 


314  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYUll 


Tn  this  renort  which  X make  in  a hurried  manner,  ■ 

in  an  especial  way  to  the  valorous  and  truly  brave  conduct  of  officerl 
fnd  men  of  thlbrigade:  but  suffice  it  to  say  that  all  did  their  dut 
tell,  withdrew  from  the  field  of  action  in  common  time,  and  not  a maj 

' oii^ioss'  was  3 killed  and  29  wounded.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectful^your^dient^^  , 

Colonel,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Confed,  Vol.  Cav.  I 

Mai.  Gen.  Sterling  Price, 

Commanding  Missouri  State  Guard. 


I would  like  to  refel 


No.  45. 


Report  of  Col.  John  T.  Hughes,  Confederate  Cavalry. 


a t • Tn  the  action  which  took  place  on  March  i and  8 betwee.1 
the  Federal  forces  and  those  of  Missouri  and  the  Confederate  States  d 
Trott’s  Hill  or  Sugar  Mountain,  near  the  State  lme,  I kave  the  hone 
of  reporting  to  you  the  part  taken  by  the  troops  placed  under  my  con 

Volunteers  bdSng  lo  ti?  Second  Brigade,  under  General  Steel 
and  also  a squadron  of  light-horse  iinder  Major  Gause.  The  Second 

gade,  under  General  Slack,  occupied  the  right  «kreme  riel, 

the  Missouri  forces  and  the  troops  of  my  command  the  extreme  ngt 

the  sumf 

on Friday1 morning,  the  7th,  early  in  the  day,  at  the  commencement 
the  action  to  the  right  of  Colonels  Bosser  and  Bener.  , 

body  of  skirmishers,  some  30  in  number,  to  prevent  the  enemy  fro 
turning  our  right  flank  and  to  guard  against  any  surpnse.  We  wej 

soon  attacked  by  a body  of  infantry,  and  a ^^“P^ferable toj 
for  perhaps  an  hour.  The  enemy  were  repulsed  w th  cc msidei lable  loa 
Oiir  loss  was  1 man  killed  and  1 wounded.  About  the  same  time  u 
other  regiments  of  the  brigade,  under  Colonels  Eosser  and  Bevier,  e 
engaged  sffiaSly  with  the  enemy’s  infantry,  capturing  one  piece  < 

from  the  field,  when  the  command  of  the  S®°®ndf  d®  p-c 

upon  Colonel  Rosser.  In  the  course  of  an  ho«r  after  this  a squa  rc 
of  horse  said  to  be  1,300  strong,  formed  to  attack  my  right,  when 
poured  such  a galling  fire  into  their  ranks  as  to  completely  d^ 
+hpm  Thov  fled  nrecipitately  down  the  steeps  ot  the  iockj  nin, 
ffirieveralofthefrmePnand  horses  dead  on  the  field  and  overcoat 
knapsacks,  caps,  hats,  guns,  and  sabers  strewn  upon  the  groui^ 

T now  ordered  an  advance,  captured  a Federal  flag,  guinea  u 
heights^  and  Cleared  the  entir’e  hill  of  the  Federate,  Colone  s Ross 
and  Bevier’s  commands  advancing  at  the  same  time.  Ou i g . t 

rested  upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  having .taken strong  po 
tion  along  the  rocky  margin  on  the  south  side,  ov erlooking  the  enem. 


But  from  a — 


pears  that  the  casualties 
wounded ; total  42. 


ip.  XVHX]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  315 

es  and  camps.  While  occupying  this  position  a most  terrific  shower 
balls,  from  small- arms  as  well  as  cannon  shot  and  shell,  was  poured 
on  us.  The  men  stood  the  fire  gallantly.  At  length  a charge 
s ordered  along  the  whole  line,  and  the  right  rapidly  advanced  down 
5 steep  sides  of  the  mountain,  leaping  from  rock  to  rock  over  the 
yged  descent  for  some  half  a mile,  driving  the  Federals  like  a tempest 
fore  them.  The  Federals  retreated  to  their  baggage  trains,  some 
stance  off,  and  renewed  the  cannonading.  The  volleys  of  musketry 
i the  booming  of  cannon  were  heard  until  night  put  an  end  to  the 
life. 

Che  right  wing,  including  my  command,  now  fell  back  to  the  summit 
the  mountain  and  laid  on  their  arms  all  night  without  refresh- 

nts. 

*ever  did  men  bear  up  with  more  true  courage  and  fortitude  under 
trying  circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed,  without  any  com- 
ts,  without  fire,  food,  or  blankets.  Weary,  hungry,  and  fatigued 
h the  march  for  several  days  previous,  and  with  one  day’s  hard 
iting,  my  men  stood  ready  early  in  the  morning,  without  breakfast- 
, to  renew  the  struggles  of  yesterday.  It  was  indeed  trying  on  the 
liers  and  officers,  but  their  courage  and  manliness  was  equal  to  the 

k. 

V ben  the  cannonading  began  and  the  roar  of  musketry  excited  their 
ids  they  flew  to  their  posts  and  with  alacrity  they  formed  the  line 
battle.  Our  right  was  now  extended  to  the  westward  and  took 
ition  on  the  west  margin  of  Trott’s  Hill.  A terrific  volley  of  bombs 
f balls  hailed  through  our  ranks;  several  were  wounded  pretty 
ierely,  but  none  killed  in  my  command.  Several  of  our  brave  Con- 
crates  in  Colonel  Churchill’s  regiment  and  Major  Whitfield’s  bat- 
on, from  Texas  and  Arkansas,  were  killed  fighting  alongside  of  us 
the  left. 

hiring  this  part  of  the  action  the  order  to  retire  from  the  hill  was 
pived  and  reluctantly  complied  with.  My  command  was  the  last  to 
e the  field,  coming  off  under  a shower  of  balls  and  bombs,  bringing 
1 us  two  fine  pieces  of  the  enemy’s  cannon  which  had  been  captured 
i previous  day,  but  which  were  now  about  to  be  abandoned  to  the 
|ny  again. 

uder  my  direction  Col.  A.  W.  Slayback,  who  had  behaved  very  gai- 
ly throughout  the  entire  action  and  who  was  acting  as  lieutenant- 
I'nel  for  me  (in  place  of  Col.  Thomas  McCarty,  who  was  unavoidably 
mt,  being  unwell),  with  a small  detachment  of  men  seized  the  two 
[pieces  with  ropes,  and  by  hand  brought  them  off  safely  in  the 
of  the  enemy  and  under  a galling  fire.  They  are  now  in  camp ; one 

l , the  other  a 6 pounder. 

take  great  pleasure  in  expressing  my  gratitude  to  all  my  officers 
I soldiers  for  their  noble  bearing  and  gallantry  during  the  entire 
igement. 

ipt.  Reuben  Kay,  recently  escaped  from  the  Saint  Joseph  prison, 
l re  he  had  been  unjustly  confined  by  the  Federals,  fell  into  the  ranks 
private  and  fought  very  gallantly  during  the  whole  time.  His 
>ns  deserve  to  be  imitated  by  the  thousands  of  supernumeraries 
) following  this  army. 

ie  squadron  of  light-horse,  under  Major  Gause,  was  attached  to 
>nel  McCulloch’s  regiment  during  the  fight,  where  they  did  good 
ice.  Two  of  them  were  (not  seriously)  wounded  (Morris  Johnson 
1 Lawson  Moore),  both  of  Clinton  County,  Missouri. 


316  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVT£ 

Recapitulation:  Killed,  one;  wounded,  three;  taken  prisoners,  foij 

Total,  eight.  , , „ 1 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully  ^ HUGHES, 

Colonel , Commanding  Confederate  Volunteer  Cavalry! 
Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  Comdg.  Mo.  State  Guard, 


No.  46. 


Report  of  Col.  G.  W.  Riggins , Confederate  Cavalry. 


Camp  on  Prog  Bayou,  March  15,  1862.* 
Sir  * I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  battalk 
with  which  I acted  at  the  battle  of  Elkhorn  Ark. : 

We  were  under  the  immediate  orders  of  Generals  A an  Dorn  al 
Price,  and  kept  scouting  until  about  3 o’clock  Friday  p.  m.,  at  whi 
time  we  were  ordered  to  take  our  extreme  left  wing  and  act  as  1 
- * ’ ' We  immediately  marched  down,  finding  the  mtantryl 

, 1 1 i .cl  ^ llvirv  Gnornu  oytATi 


thought  best,  we  lmmeumtm^  jh.uuuuu 

Generals  Price  and  Steen  on  the  left  and  the  line  of  the  enemy  exteEj 
ing  far  below  the  above-named  infantry,  evidently  attempting  to  flai 
our  left.  We  immediately  ordered  our  men  to  dismount,  and  extend, 
our  left  wing  as  far  as  we  could.  The  enemy  immediately  opened* 
very  heavy  fire  upon  us.  Our  battalion,  being  mostly  raw  recrui j 
wavered  a little,  but  were  soon  rallied,  and  received  the  enemy  s fill 

like  veteran  troops.  . . ^ , •] 

We  were  fully  in  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  but  our  men,  bei, 
armed  with  shot-guns,  could  not  reach  them.  After  receiving  a heal 
fire  for  some  time  we  ordered  our  men  to  charge  the  enemy,  which  ttt 
did  very  gallantly,  producing  great  slaughter  m the  enemy  s ran^ 
completely  routing  their  left  wing,  driving  them  from  the  held.  » 
retained  the  ground  that  night,  and  next  morning  were  ordered 
General  Yan  Dorn  to  picket  the  Yan  Winkle  road  until  the  retro 

was  commenced.  , _ , , , ,.  J 

I take  pleasure  in  saying  the  officers  and  men  of  our  battalion  act 
with  great  valor  and  courage  during  the  course  of  the  battle,  and  to  d 
brave  men  is  due  much  of  the  credit  of  the  rout  of  the  enemy  on  Prid 


evening. 

Respectfully,  yours,  G w EIGGi]sfS,  | 

Colonel , Commanding  Battalion  of  Cavalry 
Colonel  Patton,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Missouri  Brigade. 


No.  47. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green , commanding  Second  Divm 

Missouri  State  Guard. 


Hdqrs. 


Second  Division,  Missouri  State  Guard, 
Camp  Ben.  McCulloch,  Arh.,  March  21,  18bJ 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  account  of  j 
part  which  that  portion  of  the  army  under  my  command  took  m 
march  to  Elkhorn  in  the  engagement  and  return  to  this  point: 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant  I received  an  order  to  take 


xvm.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


317 


r with  my  division,  letting  the  baggage  train  all  precede  me  on  the 
*ch,  leaving  my  division  to  bring  up  the  rear.  At  the  camp  at  Elm 
ings  the  same  order  was  continued,  which  we  continued  to  do  with 
little  disturbance.  On  our  approach  near  Bentonville  our  side 
;its  discovered  an  occasional  Federal  spy,  a few  of  whom  we  cap- 
}d.  In  passing  through  Bentonville  3 of  our  men  came  upon  11 
lerals.  Our  men  immediately  ordered  them  to  surrender,  which 
7 did  without  firing  a gun,  and  were  brought  into  our  camp. 

>n  the  morning  of  the  7th  I was  ordered  to  leave  the  baggage  at 
ip,  near  Gamp  Stephens,  and  go  with  my  artillery  and  men  and  take 
isition  at  the  cross-roads,  northeast  from  Camp  Stephens.  On  my 
val  at  the  point  above  named  I found  two  regiments  of  the  Arkansas 
>ps  there  to  assist  me  in  defending  the  point,  to  wit,  Colonel  Daw- 
s regiment,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  and  Colonel 
g’s  regiment  of  infantry;  also  Major  Crump  came  up  with  his 
alion  of  cavalry  soon  after  we  got  to  this  point, 
earning  there  had  been  some  Federal  scouts  seen  east  of  us,  I sent 
or  Crump,  with  100  mounted  men,  to  scout  in  an  easterly  direction, 
i few  hours  they  returned,  having  come  upon  several  hundred  of 
enemy’s  cavalry.  Believing  it  was  unsafe  for  them  to  attack,  they 
mediately  countermarched,  and  were  pursued  by  the  enemy  some 
ance.  Our  men  came  in  in  double-quick  time,  reporting  the  enemy 
roaching.  All  hands  were  now  looking  out,  eager  for  the  approach 
he  enemy;  every  man  to  his  post,  gun  primed,  and  ready.  We 

0 not  kept  waiting  long.  Soon  the  enemy’s  cavalry  appeared  about 
or  700  yards  distant,  but  seemed  cautious  about  approaching 
[>er.  Soon  they  were  joined  by  some  infantry,  when  they  com- 
ced  maneuvering  to  flank  us.  As  soon  as  we  discovered  this  move 
let  loose  the  artillery  upon  them.  They  immediately  retreated  be- 

1 a fence  and  commenced  throwing  shell  at  us.  After  firing  a few 
ids  on  each  side  the  enemy  retreated  out  of  sight.  On  examina- 
we  found  our  firing  had  had  the  effect  of  killing  2,  mortally  wound- 
another,  and  crippling  1 horse. 

11  was  quiet  during  the  night,  every  man  laying  upon  his  arms  in 
jtion  of  battle  all  night.  About  daylight  I dispatched  a messenger 
g eneral  Price,  informing  him  of  our  strength  and  situation.  Before 
i return  of  my  messenger  I received  a message  from  Colonel  Wood, 
jeral  Price’s  aide,  to  bring  the  baggage  up  to  the  army.  I con- 
tently  put  the  train  immediately  on  the  road,  protecting  it  by 
ling  my  command  front  and  rear,  with  side  scouts  on  the  east.  We 
eeded  in  this  way,  every  man  buoyant  with  the  prospect  of  partici- 
ng in  the  fight. 

hen  within  1 mile  of  the  battle  ground  on  Saturday  morning  I met 
jnessenger,  bringing  an  order  to  return  with  the  baggage  to  Elm 
| rigs  and  there  await  further  orders,  unless  hard  pressed  by  the  en- 
, in  which  event  I was  authorized  to  continue  the  march  south. 

1 1 Sunday  at  12  o’clock  my  pickets  were  driven  in  by  the  enemy.  I 
the  train  in  motion  on  the  Walnut  Grove  road,  and,  in  order  to  pro- 
the  baggage  in  getting  out,  directed  Major  Crump,  with  the  cavalry, 
°ve  back  on  the  road  and  skirmish  with  the  enemy,  which  he  did 
jtually,  driving  them  beyond  Bentonville  in  double-quick.  After 
* mg  the  baggage  over  I received  an  order  for  the  ammunition  wagons 
3 sent  up.  They  were  accordingly  started,  with  Lieutenant-Colonel 
st  and  100  men  to  guard  it.  Alter  proceeding  some  distance  diffi- 
j es  began  to  present  themselves.  They  accordingly  turned  back. 
|r  turning  back  -they  were  run  into  by  a lot  of  Federals.  Our  men 


318 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvd 


returned  the  fire,  scattered  the  Federate,  anil  pursued  them,  captuni 
4 prisoners,  9 horses,  and  several  guns.  Before  they  got  up  to  us  ■ 
received  another  message,  saying  ammunition  mTmt  be  brought , 
if  nnssible  I accordingly  detailed  Colonel  Porter,  with  200  India! 
from  Col.  Stand  Watie’s  command,  to  join  Colonel  Priest,  and  take! 
more  circuitous  route  and  try  and  get  to  the  army.  They  succeeded 
getting  around,  but  the  army  had  gone  before  their  arrival.  They  ntafl 
their  lay  back  to  us,  which  they  did  by  going  west,  joining  us  at  W/| 

While  at  Elm  Springs  I had  the  co-operation  of  Colonel  Stone,  wi 
his  command  and  Brooks’  battalion,  who  took  position  5 miles  this  sil 
of  Elm  Springs,  at  a cross-road,  to  prevent  a surprise  by  the  enemy  I 
front.  Colonel  Cooper,  with  his  command,  staid  with  me  until  we  la 
Elm  Springs.  He  and  his  command  then  took  the  road  leading  dov.i 

thThe  heavy  rain  that  fell  Sunday  morning  caused  the  road  to  be  vej 
bad.  We  consequently  had  a very  hard,  tedious, tiresome  march.  V 
marched  all  night,  keeping  the  force  and  artillery  behind,  scouts  aM 
and  on  each  side,  traveling  in  this  way  all  night.  As  soon  as  we  got] 
feed  in  the  morning  we  fed  our  animals  and  took  the  road  again,  coj 
ing  to  Cove  Creek  Camp  that  night.  W e then  took  our  march  leisure 
to  this  point.  For  the  first  20  miles  it  was  only  through  great  exertu 

that  the  train  could  be  kept  moving.  J 

I here  avail  mvself  of  this  opportunity  to  express  my  thanks  tooflnw 
and  men  for  their  indefatigable  exertions  to  push  the _ 
and  the  prompt  manner  in  which  they  discharged  all  their  duties.  Vj 
lost  but  little  on  the  road;  some  of  the  wagons,  being  heavy  load! 
were  compelled  to  throw  overboard  some  few  things  of  little  valuel 
lighten  their  loads.  Some  old,  worthless  wagons  broke  down,  wM 
we  were  compelled  to  leave,  of  course. 

All  things  considered  our  loss  was  very  trifling,  although  some  M 
oners  inconsiderately  threw  out  some  good,  new  tents.  They  we 
picked  up  by  those  who  followed.  The  whole  tram  is  safely  he  e. 

We  found  on  the  road  two  6-pounder  guns  and  two  caissonsaboutj 
be  left  for  want  of  teams,  their  teams  having  g i ven  o nr  Wit  1 i c 
captured  horses  and  by  dismounting  a few  men  we bought  tta 

through.  We  also  found  at  Cove  Creek  a large  lot  of  guns.  N 

ing  willing  to  leave  them,  we  changed  our  loads,  got  three  empty  w 
ons  and  loaded  them  with  guns,  and  brought  them  through  with  us. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedfient  SCTVMt,^ 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding 
Maj.  Gen.  Steeling  Price,  Comdg.  Mo.  State  Guard. 


No.  48. 


Report  of  Col.  John  B.  Clark,  jr.,  commanding  Third  Division,  Misso 

State  Guard. 


Camp  near  White  River,  Ark., 

March  11,  180- 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  the  report  oi  thep 
taken  by  the  Third  Division  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard  in  the  bai 

This  division  left  camp  on  Cove  Creek  on  the  morning  of  Marti 


;ap.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


319 


itli  the  army  under  your  command,  and  arrived  on  the  morning  of 
ie  5th  near  Bentonville,  where  the  enemy  were  discovered  in  retreat 
irtliward.  The  command  was  assigned  different  positions  during  the 
ty  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  but,  not  coming  in  actual  contact  with 
m,  the  march,  with  but  short  intermission,  was  continued  through 
e night,  when,  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  we  arrived  in  presence  of 
e enemy,  in  force  near  Elkhorn  Tavern,  when  this  command  was 
dered  to  take  position  on  the  ridge  to  the  left  of  the  road.  After  re- 
aming in  this  position  a short  time  Captain  MacDonald’s  battery  made 
5 appearance,  when  we  were  ordered  to  post  the  command  on  his  left 
a support,  General  Frost’s  command  being  assigned  position  on  his 
?ht  and  Colonel  Saunders  on  the  left  of  this  command.  As  soon  as 
is  disposition  of  forces  was  completed  a brisk  cannonade  was  corn- 
iced between  MacDonald’s  battery  and  that  of  the  enemy.  The  range 
ing  too  far  for  the  musketry,  this  command  was  allowed  to  rest  in 
sition  until  Captain  MacDonald  suggested  that  effective  service  might 
done  by  a small  body  of  skirmishers.  They  were  accordingly  thrown 
t immediately  to  our  front,  and  engaged  and  drove  back  those  thrown 
it  by  the  enemy,  with  no  casualty  except  a wound  received  by  Lieut, 
hn  Calliway,  of  Colonel  Jackson’s  regiment.  As  the  enemy  fell  back 
is  command  advanced  in  position  as  first  assigned,  having  no  further 
gagement  with  small-arms  until  late  in  the  evening,  when  the  enemy 
ire  discovered  in  position  about  400  yards  to  our  front.  After  several 
ots  had  been  fired  from  the  enemy’s  guns  this  command  was  ordered 
advance  in  double-quick  time  across  an  open  field  upon  them,  which 
is  obeyed  with  great  promptness.  When  we  had  advanced  to  within 
out  100  yards  of  the  fence  behind  which  the  enemy  lay  concealed 
were  met  by  a most  terrific  and  deadly  volley  of  musketry,  when  I 
|lered  my  command  to  fire.  IsTow  the  conflict  became  earnest  and 
rible,  and  for  a moment  our  brave  men  recoiled  before  its  deadly 
n ; but,  rallying  with  a about  for  victory,  they  returned  his  fire,  and 
thirty  minutes  drove  him  in  complete  confusion  from  his  position, 
rsuing  him  through  the  wood  beyond. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  great  exposure  of  the  men  in  an  open 
Id  and  the  enemy’s  concealed  position  behind  the  fence  and  brush 
d the  large  number  of  officers  killed  and  wounded,  it  is  truly  a wonder 
ft  they  stood  this  severe  test  of  their  courage  and  devotion  to  the 
jise  of  Southern  independence  $ but  nobly  and  gallantly  did  they 
et  the  trial,  leaving  14  of  their  number  dead  upon  the  field  and  103 
unded. 

The  officers  who  were  killed  were  gallantly  leading  their  men  to  the 
irge  and  their  men  lay  close  beside  them.  They  were  gallant  spirits, 

1 deserve  the  patriotic  remembrance  of  their  countrymen. 

Jur  command  consisted  of  six  skeleton  regiments,  making  in  the 
^negate  about  500  men.  The  First  Regiment  was  commanded  by 
tjor  Rucker,  who  was  seriously  wounded  and  behaved  with  great 
Gantry.  The  Second  was  commanded  by  Col.  Congreve  Jackson, 
at.  Col.  Robert  Walker,  and  Maj.  H.  Hughes.  The  Third  was  com- 
| nded  by  Major  Hutchinson.  The  Fourth  and  Fifth  were  consoli- 
Ited,  commanded  by  Col.  J.  A.  Poindexter,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pindall, 

P Major  Perkins;  Colonel  Poindexter  being  slightly  wounded.  The 
Jh  was  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Peach er,  whose  horse  was 
fed  under  him.  All  these  officers  behaved  with  great  bravery  dur- 
the  hottest  part  of  the  engagement.  They  did  their  duty  well,  and 
ake  this  opportunity  to  return  them  my  thanks.  Major  l^rkins 
serves  especial  notice  for  his  activity  during  the  engagement  in 
hopr aging  and  rallying  the  command. 


320 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH 


That  night  we  lay  upon  our  arms  ready  to  meet  the  enemy  at  th 
dawnofday,  and  in  the  morning  were  assigned  position  on  the  extern, 
left  of  the  line  of  battle,  where  we  remained  until  ordered  off  the  fleli 
This  command  has  behaved  gallantly,  for Muring : one  of  the  mo; 
fatiguing  marches,  a severe  battle  of  two  day’s  duration  without  fooc 
and ^retreat  of  several  days,  the  soldiers  have  shown  a bravery,  ei 
durance,  and  patience  that  was  never  surpassed  by  any  troops  an 
they  only  require  discipline  to  make  them  equal  to  any  in  the  world 
Colonel  Stone,  the  adjutant  of  the  division,  was  only  present  durin 
the  first  morning  of  the  engagement.  Major  J ones,  the  provost-marsh; 
of  the  dMsion,  was  detailed  on  special  duty  away  from  the  comman. 

anftoketto"nTo^urn  my  thanks  to  the  staff  officers  of  tl 

rendered  efficient  service  to  tl 

C°Lteutenant-Colonel  Musser,  the  judge-advocate  of  the  division,  ha 
his  liorse  killed  under  him  during  the  heat  of  the  engagement,  win 
encouraging  the  troops  to  do  their  duty  like  men. 

Lieut  Col  W.  B.  Cox  sustained  the  reputation  won  upon  other  field 
and  was  prompt  and  efficient  in  his  duties  upon  the  field. 

Lieut  Col.  James  P.  Vaughn  deserves  especial  consideration,  f< 
whose  careless  indifference  to  danger,  where  duty  called  him,  was  o 
served  bv  every  one  in  the  command.  He  never  ceased  to  urge  ai 
encourage  the  men  as  long  as  the  enemy  held  their  position.  His  bea 
ing  was  that  of  a true  soldier  and  worthy  the  cause  for  which  he  figh 

S° Di\  Grin'stead,  division  surgeon,  deserves  the  thanks  of  the  commai 
for  his  kindness  and  attention  to  our  wounded.  „ . p . 

Tour  orders  were  conveyed  to  me  during  the  day  by  Celsus  Pricj 
of  the  Third  Division,  one  of  your  volunteer  aides.  He  was  alwa] 
cool  and  collected,  so  that  I never  mistook  the  order,  and  allow  me 
say  that  in  the  earnest  face  of  the  son  I could  see  the  heroism  of  tl 

fat,h 

All  of  which  I submit  to  your  consideration^  CLAEK  jR 

Colonel , Commanding 


Major-General  Price. 


[Addenda.  ] 


Return  of  casualties  in  the  Third  Division,  Missouri  State  Guard.' 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

00 

<3 

G 

S3 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

00 

N 

<© 

O 

S3 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

$ 

S 

1 

00 

'fl 

1 

5 

2 

8 

3 

8 

4 

3 

19 

17 

18 
19 

5 

15 

6 

1 

6 

i 

1 

1 

2 

2 

Total — ... 

2 

9 

25 

76 

2 

33 

* Compiled  from  nominal  lists  filed  with  Colonel  Clark’s  report. 


F*  xvm  J PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  321 

No.  49. 

Report  of  Adjt.  J.  M.  Snyde , Fourth  Regiment , Third  Division. 

? 1862. 

am  happy  to  inform  you  that  the  officers  and  soldiers  did  their 
ale  duty. 

Vent  into  the  fight  with  75  men.  Casualties:  Killed,  1:  wounded, 
and  missing,  6. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

J.  M.  SNYDE, 

. . , „ Adjutant . 

olonel  Clark. 


No.  50. 

ort  of  Col.  James  P.  Saunders , commanding  Fifth  Division , Missouri 

State  Guard. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  near  Van  Buren , Ark.,  March  17,  1862. 
ir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  on  the  morning  of  the 
instant  the  Fifth  Division,  consisting  of  about  700  infantry  and  125 
<e  and  Captain  Kelly’s  battery  of  artillery,  embracing  five  pieces, 
1 l)0St  on  the  left  wing  of  the  Missouri  forces  (except  the  horse, 
ch  was  detached  for  the  day)  under  orders.  My  force  consisted  of 
remainder  of  regiments  reduced  to  skeletons  by  expiration  of  time 
transfer  to  Confederate  service. 

bout  11  o’clock  I was  ordered  to  occupy  a verge  to  the  east  of  the 
ny’s  position,  while  Colonel  Gates’  cavalry  went  forward  to  recon- 
er  and  observe  his  movements.  My  instructions  were  to  observe 
movements  of  Colonel  Gates  and  to  retire  with  him  if  such  a 
sure  should  be  deemed  necessary,  which  a few  moments  later  I 
•rdingly  did,  and  took  a position,  which  I held,  with  but  occasional 
ting,  till  irbout  3 o’clock,  when  the  left  wing  was  ordered  to  ad- 
3e.  This  movement  contemplated  an  advance  of  at  least  a mile, 
3h  was  made  all  the  way  in  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns  and  most  of 
nder  fire  of  small-arms.  Without  faltering  and  with  but  occa- 
al  halts  my  command  advanced  with  the  utmost  gallantry  to  the 
^ charge,  routing  the  enemy  and  strewing  the  ground  with  the 

t night  fall  we  dressed  our  lines  and  lay  down  upon  our  arms,  pre- 
tory  to  the  expected  conflict  on  the  ensuing  day. 
bout  sunrise  on  the  8th  we  again  advanced  several  hundred  yards 
to  within  200  yards  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  which  position  I held  till 
red  off  the  field. 

ie  coolness  of  the  men  and  the  gallantry  of  the  officers  cannot  be 
nghly  extolled.  I will  not  be  so  invidious  as  to  name  any  of  those 

ie  lme.  J 

’ my  staff  I return  my  grateful  acknowledgments,  and  especially 
nend  to  your  favorable  consideration  George  D.  Shackelford,  my 
taut,  and  Dr.  Palmer,  division  surgeon,  and  G.  YV.  Van  Lear,  voi» 
21  r r — vol  viii 


322  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai.  XVll 


unteer  aide,  who  behaved  with  distinguished  coolness  and  gallant 

throughout  both  days. 

My  loss  was  9 killed  and  32  wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  gAUjfj)]jKS, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Fifth  Division,  Missouri  State  Guard 

Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price. 


No.  51. 


Fcvort  of  Mai.  D.  H.  Lindsay,  commanding  Sixth  Division,  Missouri  M 
F J Guard. 


STXTH  DIVISION,  MISSOURI  STATE  GUARD,  I 
Camp  Ben.  McCulloch,  Ark.,  March  19,  I861J 

Silt : I desire  to  report  to  you  the  part  the  division  I have  the  horr 
to  command  had  in  the  late  battle  on  the  7th  and  8th  instant. 

Arriving  in  the  vicinity  of  the  battle  ground  in  the  order  oi  man 
assigned  1 halted  my  command,  reported  to  yourselt,  and  awaited  I 
dfTS  The  first  position  assigned  me  was  at  the  mouth  of  the  holl 
eadino  up  to  the  tan-yard,  with  instructions  to  guard  that  and  M 
main  hollow  leading  east.  Accordingly  I placed  two  guns, , eacl 1 cd 
m inding  the  hollows,  in  such  order,  that  my  entire  battery  of  tour  fij 
n tees  could  readily  be  brought  to  bear  on  either,  and  disposed  of 
infantry  to  support  the  battery.  Captain  Roberts  company  was  ' 
ployed ^as  skirmishers  on  the  hill,  and  pickets  were  thrown  out  on  cd 

manding  points  and  up  the  hollow  east. 

After  remaining  here  some  time  we  were  ordered  up  the  road  to 
toifoT  thfhill  to  re-enforce  Colonel  Little,  Having  but  about  90  *1 
{^support  Captain  Gorham’s  battery,  I placed  it  under  the  comjj 
of  Colonel  Little,  and  formed  my  infantry  in  line 
Second  Regiments  of  Colonel  Little’s  brigade,  and  acted  with  it  dun! 

thSrreactou  o^tbebatLy  Colonel  Little  will  doubtless  give  yo 
detailed  account.  The  infantry  were  under  my  immediate 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  battle,  and  I am  proud  to  oem  cs  im 
to^the^  cooliSSand^courage  they  delayed 

of  the  enemv.  One  limber  and  five  horses  were  brought  oft  the  h 
JSS  ffie  of  So  enemy  end  under.  be.»y  «n 

fully  petition  that  that  piece  be  added.  but  Un 

oircmmstanciroC freaTSmu/ and  by  various  routes,  they  have 

' ' *1 ' lur^e'tluf honor  to  be,  very 

Maj.,  Comdg.  Sixth  Division,  Missouri  State  Guan 
Maj.  Gen.  Steeling  Price,  Commander  Mo.  State  Guard. 


-Nominal  list  oFcasualties  sliows  13  wounded  and  34  missing. 


ap.  xvni  ] pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  323 

No.  52. 

tyort  of  Brig.  Gen . I).  M.  Frost , commanding  Seventh  and  Ninth 
Divisions , Missouri  State  Guard. 

Hdqrs.  Seventh  Div.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

March  19,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  orders  from  general  headquarters  I have  the 
nor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  my  command 
the  battle  of  Elkhorn  Tavern  and  the  operations  leading  thereto  : 
The  troops  under  my  command  consisted  of  Guibor’s  battery,  of  four 
ns,  and  MacDonald’s,  of  three  guns,  and  what  is  known  as  McBride’s 
rision,  comprising  some  500  infantry  and  120  cavalry. 

In  obedience  to  General  Orders,  hTos.  58  and  59,  from  Major-General 
ice,  my  command,  provided  with  three  days’  rations  and  without 
ggage  and  camp  equipage,  proceeded  on  the  march  from  Gove 
eek  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  4th  instant,  in  the  direction  of  Benton 
le. 

On  Thursday  morning,  the  6th  instant,  when  about  6 miles  from  that 
ice,  I received  orders  to  advance  at  double-quick  time,  which  was 
scuted  by  the  command  until  they  arrived  at  the  village,  though 
) late  to  participate  in  the  skirmish  between  our  cavalry  and  Gen- 
ii Sigel’s  retreating  force,  yet  in  advance  of  other  commands  which 
I preceded  them  on  the  march. 

Che  pursuit  continued  without  halt  or  rest  during  the  whole  day, 
I night  found  us  worn  down  with  fatigue  and  our  three  days’  rations 
riausted. 

U 8 o’clock  on  the  same  evening  the  pursuit  was  continued  and 
ted  all  night. 

It  daylight  on  Tuesday  morning  an  hour’s  rest  enabled  the  command 
push  forward  with  some  degree  of  vigor,  although  unremitted  march - 
: and  fasting  had  reduced  its  effective  strength  at  least  one-third  of 
whole  number. 

U about  10  o’clock  on  Friday  morning  I was  ordered  to  form  my  in- 
try  in  line  of  battle  on  a hill  to  the  left  of  the  State  road,  on  Sugar 
>ek.  Subsequently  MacDonald’s,  Wade’s,  Clark’s,  and  Guibor’s  bat 
les  occupied  the  same  position,  which  for  some  hours  exchanged  a 
ivy  fire  with  the  enemy,  during  which  time  my  infantry  and  cavalry 
an  and  during  the  remainder  of  the  action  dismounted)  acted  as  a 
•porting  force. 

he  enemy’s  batteries  being  silenced  or  abandoned,  I received  orders 
nove  my  command  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Little’s  brigade : but 
ng  informed  by  him  that  Burbridge’s  brigade  was  being  heavily 
ssed  on  the  right  of  his  line,  I advanced  my  command  and  relieved 
t regiment,  which  formed  in  my  rear. 

laving  performed  this  duty,  I received  an  order  to  move  my  com- 
k1  to  the  left,  to  attack  the  enemy’s  position  at  Elkhorn  Tavern, 
m conjunction  with  Little’s  brigade  to  advance  upon  that  position, 
s necessitating  a change  of  front  in  line,  which  was  executed  under 

leavy  firing  being  heard  on  the  left,  which  was  understood  to  be 
signal  of  a general  advance,  my  command  moved  promptly  forward 
ue  line,  and,  sweeping  the  enemy  before  it,  halted  only  after  driving 
n back  upon  the  plain  and  under  the  protection  of  what  seemed 
r last  batteries.  Night  here  closed  upon  the  scene  and  the  men 
>t  upon  their  arms  on  the  enemy’s  field. 


324 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  XVII. 


During  this  last  advance  the  enemy  lost  his  position  at  Elkhor 
Tavern,  a battery  of  artillery,  some  standards  (one  of  which,  that  of  th 
Douglas  Dragoons,  fell  into  the  hands  of  my  command),  and  a larg 
quality  of  sutler’s  and  subsistence  stores.  These  latter  supplies  wei 
obtained  iu  good  time,  for  long  fasting  and  incessant  labor  had  nearl 
exhausted  the  powers  of  human  endurance.  , ■ 

At  about  7 o’clock  on  Saturday  morning  the  enemy,  having  concert 
trated  all  his  force,  attacked  our  lines,  directing  his  efiorts  particularly 
ou  the  Elkhoru  Tavern.  The  orders  from  headquarters  were  for  m 
command  to  keep  its  position  in  the  general  line  and  to  fall  back  wit 
the  regiment  next  on  its  right,  that  regiment  having  retired  before  th 

me  lcgiiuuiu  hcDirwr  inmoimr  cnul  rAformin 


neiit  next  ou  x 0 . ■ 

enemy.  My  command  did  the  same,  halting,  however,  and  reformnJ 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy  some  three  times  and  delivering  their  fnl 
with  coolness  and  effect,  and  finally  leaving  the  field  by  a dlank  movl 
llient  to  the  left  in  good  order,  and  among  the  \ery  last  ot  oni  tioopl 
Both  of  my  batteries  (especially  MacDonald’s)  served  under  the  iJ 


nlaced  under  my  command  did  I not  speak  ot  them  all— ^0111  x» 

t'antry,  and  cavalry— as  having  behaved  in  the  most  admirable  mangel 
The  only  deficiency  observable  among  them  was  a want  of  piacticj 
knowledge ; but  this  was  more  than  compensated  for  by  cool,  determine 
courage,  exhibited  on  all  occasions  and  to  a degree  seldom^ equalej 
While  their  conduct  on  the  field  was  thus  admirable,  it  m no  de^ 
surpassed  that  which  characterized  their  subsequent  march  to  th 
place,  straggling  having  been  unknown  to  the  column  and  prompt  ad 
ready  obedience  accorded  the  officers  in  command.  .1 

When  all  did  their  duty  so  well,  it  seems  invidious  to  select  an 3 


111K3  T l| 

divi'diiaisfor  particular  commendation;  yet  justice  ^a(f,  * 

names  of  Col.  Colton  Greene,  Lieut.  Col.  James  K.  Shaler,  and  Caf| 


Ei^etTMacDonahl  shouhrbe^imrticularly  mentioned.  The  former 
found  in  command  of  the  infantry  when  it  was  assigned  to  me  a le, 
days  before  the  battle,  and  I permitted  him  to  retain  the  chief  comma  11 
on  the  field.  Colonel  Shaler,  my _ division  inspector,  ^“^ered juj 
was  accepted  to  act  as  Greene’s  lieutenant,  and  MacDonald  s batte 
was  heard  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight  from  the  commencement  to  tl 
close  of  the  action.  All  these  officers  bore  themselves  in  the  most  a, 
mirable  manner  throughout  the  engagement  and  are  deserring| 
especial  notice.  Colonel  Greene  (whose  report  is  transmitted  hertwit 
iustlv  speaks  in  terms  of  high  commendation  of  Map  W llliam  Fiank.li 
Mai.  wlldo  P.  Johnson,  and  Capt.  L.C.  Campbell,  the  two  last  of  who 
were  wounded,  but  remained  on  the  held,  and  all  of  whom  I most  he, 
ily  commend  to  your  favorable  consideration.  +H  0. 

Captain  Champion,  whose  name  is  identified  with  the  battles  oftt 
Hill,  Drywood,  and  Lexington,  and  who  led  a party  of  20  car  ah  > < 
’ made  a dashing  effort,  at  the  head  of  his  fit 


t aclied  to -my  person,  uutue  ^ ~~  ---  . f , ttl 

band,  to  capture  the  colors  from  a regiment  drawn  up > m ime  ot  l * ■ 

and  although  he  failed  in  his  attempt  and  had  2 of  Ins  men  voumle 
yet  he  inflicted  a loss  of  some  6 or  8 upon  the  enemy 


Lltv  U UJL  O tuv  ~ , 

My  own  personal  staff  on  the  field  (consisting  nteeriJ 

~ m ^avlor  and  Mr.  Henry  Tracy,  \ olunteerii 


mented  by  that  of  McBride’s  Seventh  Division,  consisting  of  Colon* 
McBride,  Asbury,  Campbell,  and  Drs.  W ooten  and  Small.  All  ot  the 


ai>.  xviil]  pea  ridge,  or  elkhorn  tavern,  ark.  325 

mtlemen  assisted  me  with  ability  and  zeal.  Colonel  Taylor  particu- 
rly  distinguished  himself  by  his  courageous  disregard  of  the  enemy’s 
*e.  His  horse  was  killed  under  him  by  a round  shot.  Lieutenant* 
olonel  Magenis  also  had  his  horse  shot  under  him  at  my  side. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

D.  M.  FBOST, 

Brig.  Gen .,  Comdg.  Seventh  and  Ninth  Divisions , Mo.  S.  G. 
Capt.  William  H.  Brand, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Missouri  State  Guard. 

[ 


No.  53. 

eport  of  Col.  Colton  Greene , commanding  Third  Brigade  Missouri  Vol- 
unteers ( Confederate ). 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  Missouri  Volunteers,  C.  S.  A., 

Camp  near  Van  Buren , Arh.,  March  20,  1862. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  operations  of 
y command  in  the  actions  of  the  7th  and  8th  instant  near  Elkhorn 
tvern : 

In  compliance  with  your  order  all  the  cavalry,  excepting  Captain 
unpbell’s  company,  which  fought  as  infantry,  was  dismounted  before 
iving  camp  in  Boston  Mountains,  and  which  consisted  of  about  80  men, 
e remains  of  Colonel  Frazier’s  and  Colonel  Freeman’s  regiments,  Mis- 
uri  State  Guard,  and  squads  of  Confederates  numbering  105.  These 
-re  attached  to  the  Confederate  Infantry,  together  with  parts  of  two 
mpanies  of  Colonel  Schnable’s  Third  Infantry,  Missouri  State  Guard, 
narched  with  658  men  on  the  4th  instant,  leaving  a strong  camp 
lard  behind. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  we  reached  the  enemy’s  rear  near  the  junc- 
>n  of  the  Bentonville  and  Springfield  roads,  the  command  being  some- 
lat  reduced  from  the  severity  of  the  march.  I was  immediately  or- 
red  into  position  by  you  on  the  hill  to  the  left  of  the  road,  where  our 
tteries  were  first  posted.  Here  we  received  the  enemy’s  fire  for  two 
urs,  sustaining  a loss  of  10  in  wounded. 

I was  again  ordered  to  the  right,  to  support  Colonel  Burbridge,  and 
vanced  in  line  several  hundred  yards,  when  I found  myself  in  close 
oximity  to  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  Our  guide  was  missing,  and 
5 had  advanced  a considerable  distance  beyond  Colonel  Burbridge’s 
sition.  The  enemy  opened  on  us  with  canister  and  shell,  but  my  men, 
mg  well  sheltered,  sustained  no  injury.  I held  the  position  for  thirty 
mites,  when  we  were  fired  into  from  one  of  our  own  batteries  and 
re  forced  to  fall  back. 

By  your  order  I now  took  position  on  Colonel  Burbridge’s  left,  and 
vanced  on  the  enemy,  to  the  right  of  Elkhorn  Tavern.  The  timber 
ing  obstructed  by  heavy  undergrowth  at  this  point,  I was  forced  to 
hque  to  the  left,  which  movement  brought  me  to  the  rear  of  the 
rern,  and  here,  by  order,  I took  position  on  Colonel  Hives’  right,  and 
operated  with  that  gallant  and  lamented  officer  during  the  remainder 
the  action. 

b was  now  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  an  advance  was  ordered  by 
lonel  Henry  Little,  of  the  First  Missouri  Brigade.  An  open,  unshei- 
ed  field  lay  between  my  men  and  the  enemy.  He  was  in  force,  and 


326 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvnj 


supported  by  a battery  immediately  on  our  front.  Our  brave  men  i] 
once  rushed  through  the  field,  charged  the  enemy  m the  face  of  a mui 
derous  fire,  drove  him  back,  pursued  him  until  night,  and  with  Colon! 
Rives’  regiment  slept  on  the  most  advanced  position,  which  was  the  oJ 

“Aground  we  held  by  order  of  Major-General  Van  Dorn  and  stool 
to  our  arms  the  greater  part  of  the  night  expecting  an  attack.  TM 
fio-ht  at  this  point  was  renewed  in  the  morning  with  heavy  artillerl 
firing  and  continued  for  over  an  hour,  when  our  batteries  were  orderel 
off.  We  held  our  position,  and  I was  ordered  to  keep  the  enemy  ij 
check  and  fall  back  with  Colonel  Lives.  He  had  now  advanced  with! 
easy  range,  and  we  opened  a brisk  fire  upon  him,  falling  back  slowll 
Three  times  we  formed  and  fought  him,  when,  perceiving  his  mtentioi 
to  flank  us,  we  fell  back  on  the  lull  to  the  left  of  Elkhorn  Tavern,  an 
were  ordered  by  Colonel  Little  to  follow  the  mam  body  of  the  arm! 

which  had  already  been  withdrawn.  .. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  gallmfli 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shaler,  of  your  staff,  Major  Franklin,  Majo 
Johnson,  and  Captain  Campbell,  who  rendered  me  invaluable  sem< 
during  the  action.  The  two  last-named  officers  were  both  woundeffi  j 

I wish  also  to  record  my  praise  for  the  endurance  display  eff  by  md 
and  officers  on  the  march  and  for  their  courage  in  action.  They  wej 
without  food  for  twenty-four  hours  before  the  engagement  and  rec^ 
but  one  meal  of  flour  and  bacon  during  the  two  da^s following.  T e 
conduct  in  the  charge  near  Elkhorn  Tavern  is  particularly  deservn 
of  your  notice,  as  well  as  the  good  order  in  which  they  retired  Irom  tt 
field  and  which  was  preserved  on  the  whole  march. 

The  killed  and  wounded  of  my  command  during  the  action  as  to  • 
known,  was  65;  for  the  particulars  of  which  I refer  you  to  the  accM 

panving  paper,  marked  A.*  , 

• I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^ 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  D.  M.  Frost,  . . . 

Commanding  Artillery  Brigade,  Seventh  Division,  dr. 


No.  54. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  S.  Rains,  commanding  Eighth  Division,  M 

souri  State  Guard. 


Hdqrs.  Eighth  Division,  Missouri  STATP^OrARP,  ^ 

Sir:  In  reporting  the  action  of  the  Eighth  Division  in  the  rece 
engagement  at  Elkhorn  1 need  not  refer  to  the  details  of  the  inar 
from  Cove  Creek  or  while  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  save  to  thank  J 
for  placing  it  in  front  of  the  other  divisions  at  Fayetteville  and  reta 
ing  it  there  until  we  met  and  engaged  the  enemy  on  the  morning 

the  7th  instant.  , , ...  « a 

Our  numbers  were  much  reduced  by  the  expiration  of  the  term 

service  of  onr  men,  the  numbers  left  sick  in  camp,  and  still 
a detail  of  Major  [H.  W.]  King’s  battalion  to  escort  some  Federal  pi 
oners  to  the  rear.  JL 


' Nominal  list  omitted.  It  shows  6 killed  and  59  wounded. 


HAP.  XVIII.]  PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK.  327 

After  having  marched  the  greater  part  of  the  night  of  the  6th  instant 
rithout  any  other  refreshment  than  a few  hours’  rest,  we  started  at 
laylight  on  the  7th,  and  soon  reached  the  Telegraph  road,  near  which 
te  were  ordered  to  place  our  battery  in  position  while  a reconnaissance 
ras  being  made.  We  soon  advanced  and  took  position  in  the  canon 
rith  the  artillery,  while  the  infantry  crowned  the  crests  of  the  neigh- 
boring hills.  About  10  a.  m.  we  were  ordered  forward  in  double-quick 
ime,  and  ascended  a steep  hill  on  the  left,  up  which  our  artillery  was 
apidly  rolled  by  the  infantry,  who  there  displayed  the  eagerness  with 
duck  they  pushed  forward  to  meet  the  foe.  By  this  movement  we 
eached  the  same  plateau  upon  which  the  enemy  were  posted,  and  our 
attery  was  brought  into  action  under  command  of  Lieutenant  [G.  W.j 
Iiggins,  but  assisted  by  Colonel  [H.  M.]  Bledsoe,  of  the  Sixth  Infantry, 
rho  had  been  in  charge  of  it  since  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and 
ffio  had  so  signally  distinguished  himself  as  a brave  officer  and  skill- 
il  field  artillerist.  Here  our  favorite  old  piece  11  Sacramento  ” found 
erself  sustained  by  others,  commanded  by  those  who  proved  them- 
elves  during  the  day  to  be  brave  and  gallant  soldiers. 

Captains  Wa(^e?s  an(l  S.  Churchill  Clark’s  batteries  on  the  right,  with 
le  Saint  Louis  Battery,  under  Captain  Emmett  MacDonald,  on  the  left. 
>rmed  a living  wall  of  fire  which  Missouri  may  well  be  proud  of  and 
iarlessly  trust  to  for  defense.  Here  the  artillery  soon  crippled  and 
lenced  the  famous  Dubuque  Battery  of  the  enemy,  and  as  an  oppor- 
mity  occurred  sustained  the  First  Brigade  of  Missouri  Volunteers, 
nder  Colonel  Little,  as  it  gallantly  pressed  forward  the  right  wing  of 
nr  line. 

Meantime  the  infantry,  under  command  of  Colonel  [William  II.] 
jlrwin,  Lieutenant-Colonels  [John  P.]  Bowman,  [A.  J.]  Pearcy,  and 
temmons,  were  held  ready  to  support  the  batteries.  As  the  right 
ing  nobly  pushed  forward,  gaining  their  ground  inch  by  inch,  the 
ft,  of  which  we  formed  a portion,  was  gradually  advanced,  and  the 
aemy  driven  back  until  towards  evening,  when  they  concentrated 
leir  forces  on  their  right  wing,  and  took  a strong  position  on  the 
est  and  south  sides  of  an  open  field,  where  they  were  protected  by  a 
reastwork  of  fence  rails  and  logs. 

From  this  point  they  opened  a well-directed  fire  of  artillery  as  our 
Ivancing  column  deployed  along  the  east  side  of  the  same  field.  This 
as  promptly  replied  to  by  Colonel  Bledsoe,  who,  along  with  Qaptains 
acDonald  and  Clark,  dashed  forward  in  the  face  of  a murderous  fire 
‘t°  the  field  itself.  Our  infantry,  sustained  by  Brigadier-General 
'rice’s  division,  with  other  forces  on  the  left,  were  also  formed  in  the 
3ld.  Here  an  order  was  received,  through  Colonel  Clay  Taylor,  to 
ove  the  batteries  forward  by  hand,  which  was  handsomely  executed, 
lien  came  the  battle.  Fiercely  was  it  fought,  nobly  was  it  won,  under 
ie  very  eye  of  their  leaders.  For  a moment  the  infantry  wavered  and 
aggered  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy $ but  their  ranks  were  soon  closed 
id  their  hearts  nerved  by  the  rallying  cry  of  their  old  veteran  chief 
imself,  who  had  so  often  led  them  to  conquest,  as,  with  his  majestic 
’Hu,  he  rode  along  the  lines  and  bade  them  onward  to  victory.  Like  a 
hurricane  of  steel’’  swept  that  infantry  over  the  field,  drove  the  enemy 
om  his  strong  position,  routed  and  pursued  him  through  the  woods 
atil  night  closed  the  chase. 

Our  troops  bivouacked  upon  the  ground  they  had  so  nobly  won,  and 
ie  morning  of  the  8th  instant  found  them,  though  exhausted  and 
tigued,  flushed  with  the  victories  of  the  day  previous,  anxious  to 
mew  the  fight.  The  enemy  had  not  been  idle,  but  during  the  night 


3-28  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIE 


had  planted  batteries  of  heavy  artillery  in  a commanding  positioi 
which  soon  opened  upon  our  lines.  Our  battery , with  others,  prompt! 
replied  and  dealt  destruction  to  the  advancing  columns  of  the  foe.  A 
this  time  I was  ordered  to  take  position  in  the  field  which  had  bee| 
won  the  night  before,  and  consequently  drew  off  my  forces  for  tha 
purpose.  The  movement  was  reluctantly  obeyed  by  the  whole  of  m 


se.  muvciucut  lew—.,,  ~ — a'  - - . ■ 

command,  as  the  enemy  were  then  in  sight  and  almost  within  read! 
riving  at  the  old  field  and  reporting  to  Major-General  Van  Dorl 


?wasordered"  by\im  to  march  on  the  road  towards  Huntsville.  Fell 
the  first  time  I realized  the  fact— the  fight  was  over;  the  victory  withil 

our  grasp  was  lost.  , T ^ , , , , . . J 

To  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  I must  add  my  thanks  to  tb 
praise  they  are  entitled  to  from  their  country.  The  cool  bravery  (I 
Colonel  Erwin,  Lieutenant- Colonels  Bowman,  Pearcy,  and  Stemmonl 
who  had  command  of  the  infantry,  will  ever  be  gratefully  rememberel 

^Captain  Shelby  acted  with  his  well-drilled  company  during  the  dal 
with  Colonel  Gates,  on  the  extreme  left,  where  he  was  much  exposcl 
and  did  efficient  service.  In  the  evening  his  men  were  dismounted  an 
served  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bowman  in  the  gallant  charge  acroa 
the  field.  Colonel  Bledsoe  and  Lieutenant  Higgins  managed  the  ba; 
tery  with  their  usual  skill  and  daring.  , J 

To  the  members  of  my  staff  I am  particularly  indebted.  Colonel  [J 

• . ■■  • i i I T ' iirCl  a!  I \\J  Q.ITDJ1 


TO  ine  memoirs  ui  mj  oucm  g f . r„r  1+  y 

A.l  Maclean,  assistant  adjutant-general ; Lieutenant-Colonel  [Walter  a 

- - J 1 -i  J T PaI  ATinlci  I I Sn  Kflth  hfl 


O’Kane,  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant- Colonels  [George  S.]  EathbL 
and  [George  W.l  Haymakeur  were  with  me  on  the  field  all  the  tin! 
and  bore  themselves  gallantly  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight.  As  promp 
brave,  and  efficient  officers  I commend  them  to  your  favorable  notic 
To  Mr.  W.  K.  Palmer  and  Majors  Blane  and  Martin,  with  Sergean, 
Major  Orear,  I tender  my  thanks  for  their  services  on  the  field. 

Notwithstanding  the  dangers  through  which  we  passed,  lam  please 
to  have  to  record  so  small  a list  of  killed  and  wounded.  It  is  here! 
appended  and  made  part  of  this  report.* 

On  the  march  since  the  engagement  the  exposure  was  so  great  th 
I have  to  mourn  the  loss  of  some  of  our  bravest  and  best  men.  Lie 
tenant-Colonel  Bowman,  of  the  Sixth  Infantry,  and  Captain  [Jesse]  Da 
row,  of  the  Thirteenth  Cavalry,  with  G of  the  rank  and  file,  who  all  b 
haved  so  gallantly  on  the  field,  have  fallen  from  fatigue  and  exliaustio 
Such  losses  are  not  easily  repaired.  I am  pleased  to  be  able  to  sta 
that  Captain  Powers’  wound  is  not  considered  mortal. 

JAMES  S.  RAINS, 

Brig.  Gen .,  Comdg.  Eighth  Div .,  Missouri  State  Guard . 
Captain  Brand, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Missouri  State  Guard. 


No.  55. 

Report  of  Maj.  I).  Todd  Samuels,  commanding  Price's  escort. 


Camp  Ben.  McCulloch,  March  21,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  General  Orders,  No.  21,  1 beg  to  make  the  f 

lowing  report : . . 

Earlv  on  the  morning  of  the  Gtli  instant  my  command  was  order 


Nominal  list  shows  2 killed  and  26  wounded. 


HAr.  XVIII.] 


PEA  RIDGE,  OR  ELKHORN  TAVERN,  ARK. 


329 


irward  to  support  Colonel  Gates’  regiment,  then  rapidly  flanking  the 
nemy,  under  command  of  Brigadier-General  Sigel,  on  the  right.  Over- 
ling the  enemy,  I immediately  deployed  a line  of  skirmishers  to 
nnoy  and  harass  them  until  further  aid  should  arrive.  The  bravery 
nd  coolness  of  my  skirmishers  in  exposing  themselves  to  the  fire  of 
fty  times  their  number  was  to  no  purpose  with  impunity. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7 th,  having  been  thrown  forward  in  advance 
f the  whole  army,  at  10  o’clock  pursuing,  I came  upon  the  enemy  in 
ill  force  at  Elkhorn  Tavern.  I immediately  dismounted  my  command, 
nd  by  a flank  movement  on  the  right  obtained  a favorable  position, 
nd  succeeded  in  bringing  on  a general  engagement.  Attacked  by  ten 
mes  my  force,  I was  compelled  to  fall  back  some  150  yards,  at  which 
me  Colonel  Little’s  brigade  timely  came  to  our  aid — to  victory ! to 
lory ! ! 

Later  in  the  day,  the  left  wing  of  the  army  having  been  ordered  to 
(lvance,  my  command  was  transferred  to  that  part  of  the  field,  and 
gain,  with  Brigadier-General  Price’s  division  and  General  Steen’s 
ivisiou,  we  succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  a mile  from  their  position, 
ight  arriving  checked  us  in  our  bold  and  gallant  advance. 

Saturday  morning  we  were  ordered  to  support  Colonel  McCulloch’s 
?giment  and  guard  roads  parallel  to  the  enemy,  which  we  succeeded 
i doing. 

My  loss  during  the  engagement  is  1 killed,  3 wounded,  and  5 miss- 

ig- 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully, 

J.  T.  CEAKNAL, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Price’s  Escort, 
Per  D.  TODD  SAMUELS, 

Major , Commanding, 


No.  56. 

Confederate  orders. 

eneeal  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

No.  7.  j Van  Buren , Arlc.,  March  16,  1862. 

The  major-general  commanding  this  district  desires  to  express  to  the 
'oops  his  admiration  for  their  conduct  during  the  recent  expedition 
gainst  the  enemy.  Since  leaving  camp  in  Boston  Mountains  they 
ave  been  incessantly  exposed  to  the  hardships  of  a winter  campaign 
ad  have  endured  such  privations  as  troops  rarely  encounter. 

In  the  engagements  of  the  6th,  7th,  and  8tli  instant  it  was  the  for- 
me of  the  major-general  commanding  to  be  immediately  with  the 
Missouri  division,  and  he  can  therefore  bear  personal  testimony  to  their 
allant  bearing. 

From  the  noble  veteran  who  has  led  them  so  long  to  the  gallant  S. 
hurchill  Clark,  who  fell  while  meeting  the  enemy’s  last  charge,  the 
fissourians  proved  themselves  devoted  patriots  and  staunch  soldiers, 
ie  met  the  enemy  on  his  chosen  positions  and  took  them  from  him. 
hey  captured  four  of  his  cannon  and  many  prisoners.  They  drove 
im  from  his  field  of  battle  and  slept  upon  it. 

The  victorious  advance  of  McCulloch’s  division  upon  the  strong 
osition  of  the  enemy’s  front  was  inevitably  checked  by  the  misfortunes 
hich  now  sadden  the  hearts  of  our  countrymen  throughout  the  Con- 


330 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap. 


xvn 


federacy.  McCulloch  and  McIntosh  fell  in.  the  very  front  of  the  battl 
and  in  the  full  tide  of  success.  With  them  went  down  the  confidem  | 
and  hope  of  their  troops.  No  success  can  repair  the  loss  of  such  leadeil 
It  is  only  left  to  us  to  mourn  their  untimely  fall,  emulate  their  herol 
courage,  and  avenge  their  death.  I 

You  have  inflicted  upon  the  enemy  a heavy  blow,  but  we  must  pi| 
pare  at  once  to  march  against  him  again.  All  officers  and  men  mul 
be  diligent  in  perfecting  themselves  m knowledge  ot  tactics  and  i 
camp  discipline.  The  regulations  of  the  army  upon  this  subject  mu 
be  rigidly  enforced. 


By  order  of  Major-General  Earl  Van  Don^  ^ MAury, 

Assistant  A djutant-  General,  \ 


General  Orders, 
No.  15 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  West,  | 
Priceville , July  17,  1862,1 

I.  It  having  been  satisfactorily  proven  to  a court  of  inquiry,  cm 
vened  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  conduct  of  certain  men,  ft 
merly  members  of  the  artillery  company  known  as  Hart  s Battery, 
the  battle  of  Elkhorn,  that  those  men  were  guilty  of  no  misconduct  e 
the  battle-field,  it  is  hereby  ordered  that  they,  viz  Char]es  E.  hted 
M.  M.  Tice,  W.  D.  Moore,  John  Kennedy,  B.  L.  Allen,  William  Ma 
terson,  N.  B.  Milton,  and  James  Pitkins,  be,  and  they  are  hereby,  r 


• JL>.  HAUL €MiXA\A.  VUAiAVk;  . 7 7 ^ v -yr- 

lieved  from  the  censure  contained  m General  Orders,  m.  10 


data 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District,  Van  Bureu,  Ark. 


March  2! 


1862,  disbanding  Hart’s  Battery  Light  Artillery  “for  shameful  condu 

in  the  presence  of  the  enemy.”  . ^ , . 

II.  The  court  of  inquiry  of  which  Captain  Guibor  is  president  | 

hereby  dissolved. 

By  order  of  Major-General  P™:^^  l d> 

Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


MARCH  7,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Bob’s  Creek,  Mo. 

Report  of  Lieut,  Col,  Arnold  Krekel , First  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalr 

Militia. 


Headquarters, 

Saint  Charles , ilfo.,  March  10,  1862. 

Sik  : On  Thursday  morning  last  I was  advised  that  on  Tuesday* 
a number  of  strange  men  entered  houses  in  the  neighborhood  ot  fill 
Hill,  in  Saint  Charles  County,  and  forcibly  disarmed  citizens.  At 
o’clock  the  same  day  one  Jacobs  called  upon  me,  and  said  lie  knewol 
secession  camp  near  Chain  of  Rocks,  and  that  the  taking  ot  guns 
done  by  persons  from  that  camp.  After  satisfying  myself  ot  the  goi 
faith  of  the  deserter  I ordered  120  men  (cavalry),  under  Officers 
mueller  and  Heyn,  to  proceed  at  10  o’clock  p.  in.  to  the  camp,  cros 
Cuivre  River  at  5 a.  m.,  and  attacking  the  camp  at  daybreak, 
officers  and  men  proceeded  as  instructed,  crossed  the  river  at  the 


HAP.  XYIII.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  SALINE  COUNTY,  MO. 


331 


esignated,  but  on  inquiry  it  was  found  that  the  camp  was  at  Bob’s 
Teek,  in  Lincoln  County,  5 miles  distant.  The  officers  proceeded,  and 
ffien  nearing  the  camp  the  guide  fell  back  and  the  advance  guard  was 
red  upon.  In  the  rush  made  on  the  camp  a squad  of  our  men  ran 
pon  an  ambushed  squad,  and  here  3 of  our  men  were  wounded — oner 
fear,  dangerously.  The  body  of  the  men  rushed  on,  drove  the  enemy 
•om  the  camp,  killing  from  12  to  15,  and  pursuing  them  as  long  as  one 
f them  could  be  seen.  Everything  in  the  camp  was  taken  $ provisions 
nd  forage  burned.  A large  tent,  3 horses,  and  a lot  of  blankets  were 
rought  away.  Thirty  men,  with  the  woun  ded  and  property  taken  at  the 
amp,  were  detached  from  the  command  to  report  here.  The  officer  in 
3m n iand  had  failed  to  notify  me  of  his  further  movements,  and,  suppos- 
ig  that  he  would  remain  on  the  ground  or  proceed  into  Lincoln  County,  I 
3ncluded  to  strengthen  the  force.  I dispatched  40  cavalry  at  10  o’clock 
lat  night  to  Peruque  Bridge,  and  I took  the  3 o’clock  morning  train 
ith  50  infantry  for  the  bridge.  Both  commands  reached  there  at  4 
clock  a.  m.  and  at  5 o’clock  started  for  Chain  of  Rocks,  which  we 
cached  at  8 o’clock,  and  there  learned  that  Windmueller’s  command  had 
one  to  Saint  Charles  by  the  Salt  River  road.  Finding  everything  quiet 
proceeded  with  the  cavalry  to  Saint  Charles  by  the  way  of  the  Mis* 
ssippi  Bluff  road,  sending  the  infantry  back  to  the  bridge,  arriving  at 
aint  Charles  at  night.  Windmueller’s  command  had  not  come  in.  At 
2 o’clock  in  the  night  I received  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Morsey,  at 
Tarrenton,  requesting  me  to  send  three  companies  to  attack  a camp» 
ear  Troy.  Soon  after,  at  12  o’clock,  the  adjutant  of  Colonel  Morsey 
tiled  on  me  for  aid,  and,  after  inquiring  minutely  into  the  matter,  I 
pdered  100  infantry  to  proceed  with  a train  at  8 o’clock  Sunday  morn* 
tg  along  the  road,  making  inquiries  for  Windmueller’s  command,  going 
* far  as  Warren  ton,  and  getting  Colonel  Morsey  to  send  all  available 
»rce  towards  the  supposed  camp.  The  train  went  to  Warrenton,  re- 
irued  from  there  to  Wright  City,  where  Windmueller’s  command  had 
ade  its  appearance.  The  commands  there  joined,  and  I suppose  pro- 
dded to  Troy,  which  was  reported  to  have  been  overrun  by  rebels, 
y impression  is  that  a company  of  cavalry  started  from  Warren - 
>n,  and  that  the  whole  will  join  near  Troy  and  attack  that  place.  Un- 
ss  I shall  hear  something  by  9 o’clock  I shall  dispatch  the  rest  of  my 
en  except  30  men  up  the  road,  placing  them  in  the  nearest  supporting 
.stance. 

Respectfully, 

A.  KREKEL, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  First  Battalion  Mo.  8.  M .,  Cavalry . 
Brigadier-General  Schofield. 


MARCH  7-10,  1862. — Operations  in  Saline  County,  Mo. 

eport  of  Capt.  John  B.  Kaiser , Booneville  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry  f 

Militia. 

Booneville,  Mo.,  March  13,  1862. 
Colonel:  On  the  7th  of  this  month  I proceeded  by  your  order  to 
[dine  County.  On  arriving  at  Marshall  I was  informed  that  a seces- 
on  camp  was  between  that  place  and  Waverly,  which  I started  to 
sperse.  I found  near  Waverly  a troop  of  mounted  men,  who  fled  in 


332 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai*.  XVII 

all  directions  on  my  approach,  not  giving  me  a chance  to  take  any  . 
them  prisoner.  On  returning  to  Marshall  I took  4 prisoners,  who  we 
reported  to  me  to  be  jayhawkers. 

I again  started  from  Marshall  on  the  10th  m the  direction  of  Miam 
to  break  up  a company  of  recruits  for  Price’s  army,  which  was  cor 
mitting  depredations  in  that  neighborhood.  I divided  my  force  i 
small  squads,  sending  them  in  several  directions.  One  of  these  squac 
met  a party  of  some  40  men  and  had  a slight  engagement,  in  which  oi 
of  our  men  lost  his  horse  and  saddle.  The  enemy  lost  1 man  kill© 
Another  squad  brought  in  6 prisoners,  1 breech-loading  rifle,  2 doubl 
barreled  shot-guns,  and  4 contraband  horses.  We  also  succeeded  : 
finding  two  Government  wagons,  which  were  hid  by  a man  by  tl! 
name  of  R.  McNeil.  Said  wagons  were  robbed  from  the  Governmei 
some  time  last  vear  by  the  rebel  Captain  Shelby.  I had  to  leave  the* 
wagons  at  Marshall,  not  having  sufficient  horses  to  bring  them  her 

1 was  then  on  my  way  returning  to  Booneville  when  1 received  yoi 
dispatch  ordering  me  immediately  to  Lexington,  and  I resolved  1 
start  the  same  night.  We  were  marching  about  two  hours,  when  I 
was  reported  to  me  that  Sergeant  Rhein,  with  11  men,  who  were  actirl 
as  advance  guard,  were  cut  oft  and  taken  prisoners,  which  fact,  unfo 
tunately,  proved  to  be  correct.  I was  at  the  same  time  advised  thatl 
large  number  of  rebels  were  in  ambush  with  the  intention  to  attack  ill 
Under  such  circumstances,  with  worn-out  horses  and  poorly  armed, 
resolved  to  return  to  this  place  and  prepare  for  Lexington  via  Sedali 

******* 


Respectfully,  _ 

1 ’ JOHN  B.  KAISER, 

Captain  Co.  A,  Booneville  Battalion , Missouri  State  Militia. 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Eppstein, 

Commanding  Booneville  Battalion , Mo.  S.  M. 


MARCH  8-9,  1862.— Operations  about  Rolla,  Mo. 

Report  of  Col.  Sempronius  II.  Boyd , Twenty -fourth  Missouri  Infant} j 

Headquarters, 

Post  Rolla,  Mo.,  March  10,  1862. 

Captain:  Having  learned  from  a reliable  source  that  two  men 
the  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  on  a visit  home,  living  between  here  ai 
Salem,  were  murdered  a few  days  since  by  a small  band  ot  rebel 
immediately  on  information  of  the  fact  I yesterday  morning  order* 
Major  Joslyn,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  to  proceed  with  Id  men 
Wood’s  battalion  on  the  road  to  Salem,  scouting  and  breaking  up  ai 
rebel  bands  found,  &c.  In  accordance  with  the  above,  Major  Joslj 
proceeded  a distance  of  17  miles  to  the  house  ot  one  Captain  ace, 
notorious  rebel  character,  who  wTas  reported  at  that  time  to  have  oi 
of  Bowen’s  men  prisoner.  The  command  took  the  captain’s  horse  ai 
another  he  had  left  there  that  morning;  took  one  rifle  and  broke 
Learned  that  Coleman  had  a camp  of  300  or  400  men  about  100  mil 
from  here,  in  Howell  County,  near  West  Plains.  He  also  learned  tn 
bands  of  6,  15,  and  20  would  rob,  plunder,  scatter,  and  then  go 
Coleman’s  camp  with  their  ill-gotten  stores. 


AP.  XVIII.  1 SKIRMISH  ON  BIG  CREEK,  MO.  335 

I also  report  that  on  being  informed  of  a band  in  Lane’s  Prairie^ 
id  to  be  led  by  one  Captain  Spillman,  of  Wood’s  battalion,  I ordered 
eutenant  Ross,  commanding  detachment  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  to 
•oceed  to  Lane’s  Prairie,  make  inquiries,  arrest  and  bring  to  these 
jadquarters  all  persons  engaged  in  such  unlawful  proceedings.  In 
:cordance  with  said  order  Lieutenant  Ross,  with  18  men,  proceeded  at 
a.  m.  of  the  8th  instant  to  Knob  View  and  then  to  Lane’s  Prairie. 

0 accurate  information  could  be  gained  with  regard  to  the  complaint 
ade  here,  and  after  an  absence  of  two  days  returned  to  this  post. 

1 also  hear  reports  of  marauding  bands  robbing,  plundering,  and 
ealing  in  different  directions  around,  and  shall  use  my  utmost  ability 
stopping  the  same.  I am  in  great  need  of  some  cavalry  here. 

S.  H.  BOYD, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post . 

Capt.  K.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


MARCH  9,  1862. — Skirmish  on  Big  Creek,  Mo. 

port  of  Lieut.  Col.  Arnold  Krekel , First  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry 7 

Militia. 

Headquarters, 

Saint  Charles , Mo.,  March  10,  1862. 
Sir:  Captain  Windmueller  returned  with  his  command  of  cavalry 
is  evening. 

On  Sunday  morning  [9th  instant],  while  approaching  a camp  on  Big 
eek,  they  passed  a house  occupied  by  one  Hill,  from  which  a large 
mber  of  persons  sought  to  escape.  Three  of  them  were  killed,  one 
e notorious  Tid  Sharp,  who  killed  Dr.  Cleveland  at  the  Virginia 
ffel  a few  years  ago,  a notoriously  bad  character.  The  camp  was 
md  to  be  deserted.  A negro  boy  gave  valuable  information  in  con- 
cting  the  command,  and  I would  ask  for  authority  to  retain  him 
til  the  war  is  over,  as  he  cannot  safely  return. 

Captain  Windmueller’s  command  returned  to  Saint  Charles  without 
ving  heard  from  Captain  Heyn,  commanding  the  infantry  which  I 
it  up  on  Sunday  morning. 

tt  now  appears  that  the  cavalry  which  joined  my  infantry  on  Sunday 
Wright  City  was  Captain  McFaden’s  company,  of  Warrenton,  and 
?y  proceeded  to  Troy,  which  place  they  entered  at  9 o’clock  this 
>rning  without  a fight.  From  Warrenton  I learn  that  McFaden’s 
npany  has  returned,  but  I have  not  heard  further  of  my  infantry 
m stated,  but  have  no  doubt  that  all  is  well. 

The  men  who  had  assembled  at  Hill’s  were  men  who  escaped  from 
} Bob’s  Creek  fight.  There  is  a force  yet  under  Henderson  annoying 
i county  of  Lincoln  and  adjoining  neighborhood,  but  I think  I shall 
m be  able  to  dispose  of  him,  which  will  [help]  matters  in  our  vicinity* 
*0  new  losses  have  occurred  to  us  and  the  wounded  are  all  doing 

Respectfully,  &c., 

A.  KREKEL, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Commanding . 

Brigadier-General  Schofield. 


334 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai\  xvm 
MARCH  9,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Mountain  Grove,  Mo. 

Report  of  Capt.  Josephus  G.  Rich , Phelps'  Missouri  Infantry. 


Marshfield,  Mo.,  March  12,  1862. 


A t?  Sit?  • T have  iust  come  in  last  evening  from  a scout.  I learnel 


victory  was  complete.  There  was  some  35  or  40  in  number.  We  kille  j 
some  13,  wounded  7,  and  took  the  balance  prisoners.  Among  the  pm 
oners  were  Colonel  Campbell  and  Captain  Holt.  The  captain  wa 
badly  wounded.  There  was  but  one  or  two  escaped  that  we  know  oi 

Not  a man  of  us  was  hurt.  . I 

The  bearer  is  waiting  and  I cannot  give  particulars.  You  will  sooi 
learn  them.  We  returned  last  evening  late  and  heard  of  your  victor 
over  Price,  but  was  sorry  to  learn  of  so  many  of  our  men  being  los 
We  heard  that  37  of  our  men  were  lost. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  RICH, 

Captain  Co.  B.  Phelps 1 Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers , 

Commanding  Post  at  Marshfield , Mo. 

Colonel  Phelps. 


MARCH  10,  1862.— Skirmish  in  La  Fayette  County,  Mo. 


REPORTS. 


No.  1.— Col.  John  D.  Stevenson,  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry. 
No.  2. — Lieut.  James  D.  Jenks,  First  Iowa  Cavalry. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Col.  John  D.  Stevenson , Seventh  Missouri  Infantry. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Post  at  Lexington , Mo.,  March  14,  1862. 


vous  and  arrest  or  disperse  them.  He  found  them  posted  m a i 
house  known  as  the  Greer  farm,  16  miles  distant.  After  a very  new 
fight,  the  enemy  losing  9 killed,  3 wounded,  1 prisoner,  and  al 
horses,  the  remainder  escaped  iuto  the  adjoining  woods.  Our  loss 
killed  and  4 wounded.  For  the  number  engaged  this  was  as  Severn 
contest  as  marked  the  war.  I send  you  the  official  report  of  the  a 
Lieutenant  Jenks  advises  me  that  his  men  were  compelled  to  make 
a hand-to-hand  fight  from  the  nature  of  their  arms— sabers  and  pistois- 
and  labored  under  the  disadvantage  of  inferior  weapons  for  long  rang 


KAr.  XYIII.] 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  AUBREY,  KANS. 


335 


desire  to  suggest  the  necessity  of  arming  a portion  of  this  cavalry 
?rce  with  carbines.  The  country  is  filled  with  marauding  parties, 
rmed  with  double-barreled  shot-guns,  who  when  pressed  take  refuge 
1 places  inaccessible  to  cavalry,  where  to  reach  them  the  men  must 
ismount,  and  on  foot  they  necessarily  fight  at  a great  disadvantage,. 
Vith  80  carbines  and  20,000  rounds  of  suitable  ammunition  1 shall  be 
ble  to  so  operate  as  to  drive  every  band  out  of  the  country. 

Respectfully, 

JOHN  D.  STEVENSON, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post , Lexington , Mo, 
Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton,  A.  A.  G .,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  James  D.  Jenks , First  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Lexington,  Mo.,  March  12,  1862. 

' Colonel  : Pursuant  to  your  instructions  1 left  here  with  a detaeh- 
ent  of  30  meu  of  Companies  B and  D at  7 o’clock  p.  m.  March  10. 
lirowiug  forward  our  advance  guard,  after  having  moved  about  18 
iles  I learned  that  a company  of  rebels  under  Captain  Jones  were  in 
le  vicinity.  We  surrounded  and  examined  five  houses  without  finding 
ie  enemy.  Upon  proceeding  to  the  house  of  one  William  Greer,  which 
e immediately  surrounded,  we  sought  admittance  by  knocking  at  the 
)or,  and  were  immediately  fired  upon  by  the  parties  within,  and  also 
om  the  barn  adjoining,  both  being  built  of  logs  and  pierced  with 
)rt-holes.  A sharp  skirmish  ensued  for  about  ten  minutes,  when  the 
irty  at  the  barn  retired  and  those  in  the  house  called  for  quarter, 
iie  firing  then  ceased,  and  upon  moving  up  and  opening  the  door  the 
temy  discharged  a volley  full  upon  the  party,  killing  1 and  wounding 
of  our  men.  The  firing  was  incessant  for  about  thirty  minutes,  our 
en  firing  into  the  doors  and  windows  until  we  at  last  succeeded  in 
slodging  the  enemy  by  firing  the  house,  which  was  reduced  to  ashes, 
e remained  upon  the  ground  until  daylight,  removing  our  wounded 
a house  near  by,  where  they  were  cared  for  properlv.  The  enemy 
st  9 killed,  3 wounded,  and  1 prisoner.  Our  loss  is  i killed  and  4 
funded. 

We  arrived  at  this  post  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  11th  instant,  bring- 
g in  our  dead  and  wounded. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  I).  JENKS, 

Lieutenant  Co.  D,  First.  Iowa  Cav.y  Comdg.  Detachment , 
Col.  John  D.  Stevenson,  Comdg.  Post , Lexington , Mo. 


MARCH  12,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Aubrey,  Kans, 

Report  of  Col.  Robert  H.  Graham , Eighth  Kansas  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Eighth  Regiment  Kans.  Vols., 

Leavenworth , March  19,  1862. 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  10th  instant  1 received 
telhgence  that  the  rebel  Quantrill  had  with  his  band  entered  John 


336 


OPERATION’S  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  xviii 


son  County,  in  this  State,  and  murdered  several  citizens  at  Aubrey,  in 
call  I'fin nt v and  carried  away  quite  an  amount  ot  property.  1 "a* 
tnstrnc^d ^^om  headquarters  of  the  then  Department  of  Kansas  to 
take  such  steps  as  were  necessary  to  protect  the  citizens  ot  the  exposed 
region  I accordingly  sent  orders  to  Capt.  John  Greelish,  Companj  bj 
Eighth  Regiment  Kansas  Volunteers,  to  move  Ins  command  mimed 
telv  from  Olathe,  Kans.,  to  Aubrey,  and  to  take  such  measures  as  ln- 
deemed  best  to  defend  the  citizens  ot  that  locality.  Two  dajs  aftei  a 
skirmish  took  place  near  Aubrey  between  about  30  men  ot  his  compai, 
under  First  Lieutenant  Rose,  and  a portion  of  Quai  trill  s band.  I om  i 
he  official  report*  of  Captain  Greelish  I learn  that  it  resulted  m the  *ej 
ueat  of  Quan  trill,  with  a loss  of  2 killed  and  several  wounded.  Several 
horses  w ere  al  so  killed.  On  his  retreat  Quantrill  drove  a family  from, 

t h pi r home  and  burned  their  house.  ,,  I 

On  our  side  none  killed,  and  but  1 wounded— private  Charles  Cooney  J 
severely  in  the  foot,  I have  ordered  another  company  of  m^  commaml 
to  ioin  Captain  Greelish,  both  to  be  under  command  of  Map  L.  11 
Schneider,  Eighth  Regiment  Kansas  \ olunteers.  J 

I am  fully  satisfied  that  I cannot,  as  provost-marshal-general,  piotectt 
the  State  from  guerrilla  parties  from  without  and  the  depredations  o 
the  horde  of  Tjayhawkers  within  with  the  present  scattered  condition 
of  my  regiment  without  several  companies  ot  cavalry.  , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedien. 

aerva-nt,  R Ht  GRAHAM,  I 

Colonel  Eighth  Kansas  Regiment,  Provost- Marshal  General 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  . . . 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Mississippi. 


MARCH  13,  1862.— Action  at  Spring  River,  Ark. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Got.  Samuel  N.  Wood,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 


Headquarters, 
Houston , March  15,  1862. 

I arrived  here  last  Saturday,  March  8 from  Kolia,  and  was  joine* 
the  same  night  by  Major  Drake,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  and  180  me 
Srmdav  was  spent  in  making  preparations  tor  our  expedition.  - 

daydmorntag  Cwrote  yon,  taf  l t h.™  — 
fear  my  messenger  has  been  captured.  I wrote  y , soup 

Coleman’s  men  were  in  the  county  when  we  came,  but  had  g *- 
on  oiu  approach;  that  he  and  Colonel  Woodside  were  in  camp  20  m b 
south  of  Thomasville,  reported  at  000;  that  1 \Yrni -h t i 
with  the  mumps,  and  was  compelled  to  leave  them  ;u-e, 

best  to  leave  a few  men  here  to  hold  the  place,  but  dare  not  go  «e 
and  leave  mv  men  here  and  Major  Drake’s  at  Salem,  with  Gole  m 
and  Woodside  so  near  us  on  the  south,  and  had  determined  up 
exSon  south  tost  I therefore  left  this  place  Monday  morning  u 
-50  memhi  the  direction  of  Thomasville.  Tuesday  evening  wearnu 
at'tliat'place,  a distance  of  54  miles.  I found  patColeman  and  V o<x 
<;idp  and  also  MacFarlane,  were  camped  near  the  bpring  River  + 
each  with  a portion  of  a re’giment,  trying  to  consolidate  them  into  on 

regiment.  — -* 


* Not  found. 


IAP.  XVIII.] 


ACTION  AT  SPRING  RIVER,  ARK. 


337 


Wednesday  at  daylight  we  started  in  pursuit.  Ten  miles  out  we  en- 
)untered  their  pickets,  badly  wounding  one.  Pressing  on,  at  noon  we 
drived  at  their  camp,  to  find  that  during  the  previous  night  it  had  been 
sserted.  Passing  5 miles  beyond,  we  came  to  the  Spring  River  Mill, 
i the  edge  of  Arkansas.  Just  before  arriving  at  the  mill  our  advance 
aard  ran  upon  a squad  of  secesli,  supposed  to  be  Coleman’s  men; 
illed  2 and  wounded  4.  At  the  mill  I had  the  wounds  dressed,  fed 
ir  horses,  released  our  prisoners  as  an  incumbrance,  and  pushed  on 
est,  a part  of  the  time  in  Arkansas  and  part  in  Missouri.  At  9 
clock  we  camped,  having  traveled  40  miles.  At  daylight  started 
> ain  on  the  trail  of  the  rebels,  whom  I had  reason  to  suppose  were  10 
iles  west,  and  had  been  re-enforced  100  men.  Two  miles,  and  we 
?ain  encountered  their  pickets,  but  my  advance  guards  failed  to  cap- 
ire  them.  Ten  miles  brought  us  to  their  camp,  but  again  deserted, 
id  from  all  appearances  in  the  greatest  haste.  Provisions  were  left, 
id  even  breakfast  uneaten.  Being  satisfied  they  were  not  far  in  ad- 
ince,  I cautioned  my  advance  and  flankers  to  be  on  the  alert  to  pro- 
mt surprise,  and  pushed  on  about  5 miles  farther.  I heard  sharp  fir- 
g in  advance,  and  supposing  my  advance  had  encountered  the  re- 
eating rebels,  I galloped  forward  to  find  my  guard  engaged  with  the 
hole  rebel  force,  estimated  at  from  600  to  1,000.  They  had  taken  a 
rong  position  in  one  of  those  pest  holes  of  creation,  an  Arkansas 
vamp,  and  we  within  4 rods  of  them.  Just  then  a ball  struck  Ser- 
vant Rottaken  and  knocked  him  from  his  horse. 

Turning,  I found  my  whole  battalion,  including  the  howitzer,  at  my 
de,  followed  by  Major  Drake  and  the  Iowa  Third.  Our  sudden  ap- 
‘arance  seemed  to  paralyze  the  enemy  for  a moment,  and  knowing 
at  everything  depended  upon  immediate  action,  I ordered  the  how- 
ler into  position  to  shell  the  swamp.  I also  ordered  the  men  of  my 
ittalion  to  dismount,  every  fourth  man  to  take  the  horses  to  the  rear, 
also  ordered  Major  Drake  to  the  right  of  the  swamp.  This  order  was 
>eyed  in  an  instant,  and  the  men  advanced  upon  the  enemy.  Sergeant 
oody  threw  two  shells,  but  I noticed  too  high  for  those  in  our  imme- 
ate  front.  By  this  time  the  enemy  rallied  and  poured  upon  us  a 
‘adly  fire.  My  bugler,  who  was  at  my  side,  fell  from  his  horse.  Young 
att  was  killed  instantly  at  the  cannon.  Pierce,  another  one  at  the 
anon,  was  badly  wounded.  Young  Kendall  fell  mortally  wounded, 
rat  Lieut.  R.  H.  O.  Mack,  of  Company  A,  whilst  leading  his  men 
avely  forward,  fell  mortally  wounded.  Several  others  were  wounded, 
irning,  I rode  to  the  howitzer  and  directed  Sergeant  Moody  to  load 
th  grape  and  lower  his  piece.  Just  then  my  horse  was  pierced  by 
o bullets,  but  Sergeant  Moody  instantly  obeyed  the  order,  when  the 
bels  broke  in  the  greatest  confusion,  my  men  on  foot  advancing  from 
se  to  tree.  The  enemy  at  this  time  attempted  to  retreat,  but  were 
Bt  by  a charge  from  the  Iowa  boys  on  the  north,  which  drove  them 
ick  into  the  swamp  with  a loss  of  20  prisoners  and  a large  number  of 
lied  and  wounded.  Two  prisoners  belonging  to  Major  Bowen’s  bat- 
lion  were  also  released.  Among  the  prisoners  is  a nephew  of  the 
•lebrated  Jim  Lane,  of  Kansas. 

Had  we  been  able  to  pursue  the  enemy  into  the  swamp  our  triumph 
mid  have  been  complete,  but  Major  Drake’s  men  had  no  carbines 
: d I could  not  use  them  on  foot.  Sergeant  Moody  informed  me  that 
was  out  of  ammunition  for* the  howitzer,  and  I was  also  informed 
1 at  my  men  in  the  swamp  were  also  nearly  out,  some  having  fired  30 
nnds,  with  which  they  were  provided.  I sent  to  the  ammunition 
22  r n — vol  viii 


338 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH]J 

wagon,  but  was  pained  to  find  that  it  broke  down  2 miles  back  on  th 
road.  The  battle  had  lasted  over  an  hour.  I immediately  ordere,j 
a wagon  back  for  ammunition  and  another  to  collect  our  dead  an 
wounded ; which  done,  I ordered  the  men  to  fall  back  to  an  open  spact| 
with  a small  field  between  us  and  the  swamp. 

Soon  after  the  enemy  were  re-enforced  by  250  men  from  Salem,  Ark^l 
and  the  enemy  again  made  their  appearance  in  the  swamp.  Our  ammi.J 
nition  came,  but  one  box  (1,000),  marked  “Hall’s  carbine,”  proved  tl 
be  musket  cartridges,  and  entirely  useless.  I then  held  a hasty  con 
sultation  with  my  officers,  all  of  whom  agreed  that  an  effort  to  cleaii 
the  swamp  against  such  fearful  odds  and  the  consequent  loss  of  liil 
on  our  side  was  not  expedient,  especially  as  half  of  our  men  had  nc 
arms  that  could  be  used  to  advantage.  I then  formed  both  battaliod 
in  the  field  for  battle.  Every  fourth  man  of  my  battalion  was  detailel 
to  hold  the  horses.  I took  their  carbines  and  those  of  the  dead  an 
wounded  and  armed  all  of  the  Iowa  men  possible  and  ordered  thei/ 
forward,  also  the  howitzer,  supported  by  about  50  of  the  Iowa  Cavalry 
I then  ordered  the  quartermaster  to  load  the  dead  and  wounded  an 
start  our  wagons  back.  Our  boys  made  a brilliant  charge,  Iowa  an 
Missouri  vieing  with  each  other  in  bravery.  The  enemy  had  advance, 
to  and  were  sheltered  by  the  fence  and  our  men  had  to  advance  throng 
an  open  field,  but  our  men  advanced  through  a terrible  fire,  drove  thei 
from  the  fence  and  back  into  the  swamp,  Sergeant  Moody  throwra 
shell  and  canister  by  turns  with  terrible  effect.  The  enemy  havin 
again  disappeared  I ordered  the  men  to  retire,  which  they  did  in  goo 
order,  when  we  commenced  our  march  back  to  Missouri. 

Our  loss  was  3 killed  and  12  (1  mortally)  wounded,  all  of  whom  w 
brought  with  us.  The  enemy’s  loss  we  could  not  ascertain,  but  kno 
it  to  be  very  large.  Prisoners  taken  report  among  the  dead  Colon* 
Woodside.  They  also  say  that  one  shed  killed  and  wounded  over  thirty 
The  grape  told  with  terrible  effect 5 besides,  scores  dropped  before  ou 
carbines  as  our  boys  advanced  from  tree  to  tree,  whose  dead  bodies  la 
in  the  swamp.  I am  satisfied  their  loss  is  not  less  than  100.  This 
regard  as  a small  estimate.  As  to  their  numbers,  they  reported  6( 
when  below  Thomasville.  In  their  retreat  for  35  miles  everybody  ha 
joined  them.  They  certainly  had  100  men  at  the  Simmons  place,  whei 
they  camped  the  night  before  the  fight,  and  were  re-enforced  250  drain 
the  fight,  making  near  1,000  men  according  to  their  own  estimate. 

Had  it  not  been  for  the  causes  set  forth  above  I am  satisfied,  111 
swamp  as  it  was  where  no  human  being  would  go  to  fight,  it  woiu 
have  been  a complete  rout.  As  it  was  I regard  it  as  a signal  victor, 
and  feel  confident  Southern  Missouri  is  now  cleared  of  the  traitor 
The  Union  prisoners  we  released  were  taken  within  a few  miles  < 
Rolla— one  of  them  within  7.  I am  very  strongly  impressed  with  tl 
importance  of  keeping  a force  here  for  the  time  being  to  watch  tl 
south.  At  least  I shall  be  compelled  to  do  so  at  present  to  provide  h 
the  sick  and  wounded,  who  cannot  be  moved.  A squad  of  cavalry  h« 
been  to  Mountain  Grove,  25  miles  southwest,  and  the  country  is  ce 
tainly  clear  of  rebels  west.  Yet  if  I get  no  counter  orders  I will  set 
a scout  in  that  direction  Monday.  . . 

I cannot  close  this  communication  without  testifying  to  the  gallant] 
and  bravery  of  both  officers  and  men  in  our  late  fight.  Where  all  a 
so  well  to  make  distinction  is  invidious,  yet  I must  mention  Adjutai 
Cutler,  of  the  Third  Iowa  Battalion,  who  bravely  stood  by  ray  sid< 
also  Major  Drake  and  Lieutenants  McDannal  and  Horton,  of  Compai 
I,  and  Lieutenant  Cherrie,  of  Company  K,  Third  Iowa  Battalion,  w 


vp.  XVHL]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  MARSHALL,  MO.  339 

1 their  whole  duty.  That  they  were  not  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight 

* fault  of  theirs.  Horses  could  not  charge  into  the  swamp  and  I 
cdd  not  use  them  on  foot  without  carbines.  Lieutenant  Mack  entered 
3 Army  last  summer  as  a private,  and  died  nobly  leading  his  men  to 
dory.  Sergeant  Horine  deserves  especial  mention  for  his  coolness 
d daring.  Sergeant  Moody,  of  Company  A,  also  deserves  much 
lise  for  his  daring.  His  bravery  alone  saved  our  howitzer.  The  fire 
the  enemy  had  driven  almost  every  man  from  his  position,  even  the 
3 with  the  rammer ; and  a determination  being  manifested  to  take 
> piece,  Sergeant  Moody  rammed  a canister  in  with  his  saber,  touched 
)ff,  and  scattered  all  before  him.  Lieutenant  Wood,  of  Company  B, 
hough  his  first  fight,  led  his  men  into  the  thickest.  Corporal  Moore 
h J ohn  Gartland  to  load,  fired  his  carbine  sixty-odd  times,  half  of 
ich  was  after  being  severely  wounded.  Captain  Hopper,  of  Company 
and  Captain  Spillman,  of  Company  D,  bravely  led  their  men  into 
ion.  Sergeant  Bottaken,  of  Company  D,  after  being  knocked  from 
horse,  immediately  recovered,  fell  into  the  ranks,  and  was  among 

r bravest.  Young  Stein,  of  Company  C^  was  shot  through  the  leg, 

' bis  hand  to  the  wound  a moment,  but  returned  the  fire  in  time  to 
L his  assailant. 

lut  I could  fill  a page  with  such  acts  of  heroism.  I only  mention 
ise  who  came  under  my  own  notice.  We  commenced  the  fight  at 
a.  m.  Thursday ; left  the  field  at  2 p.  in.,  and  arrived  here  this  even- 
having  traveled  190  miles  in  six  days,  driving  Coleman,  Woodside, 
l MacFarlane  into  an  Arkansas  swamp,  and,  as  I hope,  completely 
d them  up.  I inclose  a list  of  killed  and  wounded.  * 

I have  the  honor,  colonel,  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

# S.  K.  WOOD, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Sixth  Mo.  Cav .,  Comdg.  Expedition . 
Colonel  Boyd,  Commanding  Post , Holla , Mo. 

• Captain  Miller,  left  in  command  here,  and  acting  provost- 
rshal,  deserves  credit  for  the  ability  with  which  he  has  performed 
duty.  I asked  the  people  last  Sunday  of  this  countv  who  were  loyal 
zens  and  wished  protection  to  come  in  and  take  the'oath.  Over  400 
ot  a voting  population  of  800,  and  the  banner  secession  county  of 
State,  have  been  in  and  taken  the  oath.  Another  week  and  seces- 
i is  squelched  in  this  part  of  Missouri. 

S.  M.  WOOD. 


MARCH  15,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Marshall,  Mo. 

Report  of  Capt.  E.  Anson  Moore. 

Georgetown,  [Mo.],  March  16,  1862. 
olonel  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  yours  of  the  11th.  The 
er  to  Colonel  Budd  I delivered  in  person  yesterday.  On  the  11th  I 
a recruiting  party  to  Marshall,  Saline  County,  under  escort  of 
utenant  Turley’s  company,  full  force  numbering  72  men,  armed  and 
Tped.  Yesterday  afternoon  received  word  by  special  messenger 
it  a large  force  was  near  Marshall  and  would  attack  our  forces.  I 
fiediately  conferred  with  Colonel  Warren,  commanding  post  at 

Nominal  list  omitted  shows  4 killed,  18  wounded,  and  1 missing ; total,  23. 


340  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  ICANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xynl 

Sedalia,  and  procured  two  companies  of  cavalry,  who  were  ordered  tl 
march  immediately  to  Marshall,  passing  this  place,  at  4 o clock  p.  o 
Saturday.  This  morning  at  5 o’clock,  by  special  messenger  fiom  lei 
tenant  Turley,  I am  informed  that  yesterday  the  enemy  encamped  aboi 
3 miles  from  Marshall,  strength  about  50 ; that  Lieutenant  Turley,  wd 

30  men,  surprised  the  camp  and  completely  routed  the  enemy,  capturm. 

11  horses  a lot  of  baggage,  a few  guns,  &c.,  wounding  2 of  the  enemy 
pickets,  and  recapturing  12  men  belonging  to  Captain  Kaiser  s cor 
pany  M.  S.  M.,  who  were  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  They  report  tlj 
enemy  300  to  400  strong,  and  expected  an  attack  last  night.  1 havei 
fears  of  the  safety  of  our  men,  as  they  were  re-enforced  by  2 or  3 o cloc 

There  are*a  great  many  wandering  bands,  consisting  of  50  to  10' 
committing  depredations  throughout  this  and  adjoining  counties, 
have  another  company  to  muster  for  Colonel  Philips  regiment  under 
lieutenant.  Rowland  will,  I understand,  be  the  lieutenant.  In  th. 
case,  and  he  is  required  to  attend  to  his  men,  will  you  detail  a clerk  f< 
me  if  I will  name  a good  man  U , T ,, 

By  consulting  Colonel  Gamble  you  can  learn  whether  I need  help.' 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  ob|,dl“^|e^an^OOEE) 

Captain  and  Mustering  Officer.* 
Col.  C.  W.  Marsh,  A.  A.  G.,  Mo.  8.  M. 


MARCH  16,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Marshall,  Mo. 


Report  o/Capt.  John  B.  Kaiser,  Booneville  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalr 
1 Militia. 


Lexington,  Mo.,  March  23, 1862. 

Colonel  : After  a laborious  march  of  four  and  a half  days  I reach* 
Georgetown  with  my  command  on  Saturday  night,  where  I learned  th 
Captain  Murphy  was  ordered  to  Marshall  to  re-enforce  Captain  Turk 
I proceeded  to  Marshall  next  morning,  and  reached  that  place  at 
I was  very  much  pleased  to  find  there  the  12  men  of  my  coi 
YV.YT  loaf  ovnArlitinn  into  Saline  Count 


ti.  III.  A W do  VClj  IIIUDU  . . o 1 " Pen'll 

mand  captured  by  secessionists  on  my  last  expedition  into  Salnie  j 
They  had  before  my  arrival  been  recaptured  by  Captain  Turley  Horn 
band  of  rebels  under  Captain  Small.  The  same  day  I made  a scoutii 
expedition  in  the  neighborhood  of  Marshall,  and  succeeded  in  rou 
a secession  camp,  killing  3 and  capturing  3 prisoners,  among  \v  c 


was  Bill  Hazle,  one  of  those  jayhawkers  who  robbed  Moore’s  stores 
I left  him  in  charge  of  Captain  Turley.  I retook  at  t 


Palestine.  I left  him  in  charge  of  Captain  Turley 
same  time  6 of  the  horses,  3 saddles,  and  4 carbines  which  had  he 

taken  from  my  men.  , w , T 

On  Tuesday  morning  I left  Marshall  for  Waverly,  where  I fount 
Government  wagons,  which  were  robbed  last  fall  by  Shelby  s bandm 
a Government  boat.  I was  compelled  to  leave  2 in  W averly,  but  press 
horses  and  brought  the  remaining  3 to  this  place.  . 

I am  now  again  ordered  to  Waverly,  and  will  start  to-night. 

Respectfully,  yours,  j0HN  B.  KAISER, 

Captain  Co.  A,  Booneville  Battalion , Missouri  State  Militia 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Eppstein,  o __  _ .7, 

Commanding  Booneville  Battalion  Mo.  S.  M.,  Booneville , Jio. 


,P.  xvm.]  JOHNSON,  ST.  CLAIR,  AND  HENRY  COUNTIES,  MO.  341 

LRCH  18-30,  1862. — Operations  in  Johnson,  Saint  Clair,  and  Henry 
Counties,  Mo.,  including  skirmish  near  Leesville,  March  19. 

REPORTS. 

1.  — Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  U.  S.  Army. 

2.  — Col.  Fitz  Henry  Warren,  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  of  skirmish  near  Leesville,  Mo. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  March  23,  1862. 
Iaptain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  the  ma- 
-general  commanding  the  following  facts,  which  I have  received  from 
l.  Fitz  Henry  Warren,  commanding  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  at  Clinton, 
nry  County,  Mo. : 

n the  night  of  the  18th  two  detachments  were  sent  out  from  Clinton — one  into 
nson  County  and  the  other  in  the  direction  of  Robinson’s  Mill.  The  latter  corn- 
'd under  Captain  Ankeny,  had  a sharp  skirmish  4 miles  southeast  of  Leesville, 
ing  2 of  the  worst  of  the  rebels,  Swykiifer  and  John  Raftre,  both  desperate 
racters,  and  wounding  1.  Four  of  our  men  were  wounded  and  1 horse  killed  and 
ounded.  They  captured  10  men,  7 guns,  10  horses,  and  7 saddles.  Captain  An- 
y behaved  with  great  spirit  and  did  himself  high  credit.  The  other  detail,  under 
tain  Caldwell,  brought  in  10  pistols,  10  horses,  1 mule,  and  48  packages  of  powder. 

Colonel  Warren  adds : 

^e  have  captured  over  75  prisoners  in  all.  Many  of  them  have  been  released  on 
d of  from  $1,000  to  $5,000. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier- General.  Commanding  Bistrict. 

Japt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis,  Mo. 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  March  31,  1862. 
Aptain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
eral  commanding  that  on  the  24th  instant  Col.  Fitz  Henry  Warren, 
unanding  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  moved  from  Clinton  across  Grand 
er  and  Deep  Water  towards  the  Osage,  encountering  several  scat- 
ng  bands  of  marauders,  capturing  52  prisoners,  a number  of  horses, 
les,  and  arms.  In  marching  down  the  hills  of  the  Osage  near  Mon- 
n Springs  they  had  some  brisk  skirmishing,  in  which  2 of  the  ene- 
were  wounded  fatally  and  3 severely.  Three  of  the  First  Iowa 
airy  were  wounded,  but  none  seriously.  One  company  was  left  to 
sue  a band  who  were  said  to  have  taken  the  bush  near  the  mouth 
Salt  Creek. 

ater  advices  report  the  return  of  the  detachment  last  mentioned, 
uging  16  prisoners,  who  were  taken  near  Musgrove  Ferry,  on  the 
'^ge.  One  rebel  was  badly  wounded  in  the  leg.  None  of  our  men 
ured.  One  company  of  cavalry  moved  to  Butler,  Bates  County,  on 


342  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVItfL 

the  morning  of  the  29th.  The  others  were  to  move,  in  accordance  wii 
Special  Orders,  No.  10,  March  26,  this  morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, TOTTEN 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District, 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 


Reports  of  Col.  Fitz  Henry  Warren , of  sHrmish  near  Leesville , Mo.,  m 

•*-  * < • rv  • i ^ a,  /J  Tf  Z rt/i/i  * /I /t /» > /m  -/zi' r% a 71//” o 


scouts  in  Saint  Clair  and  Henry  Counties,  Mo. 


Headquarters, 
Clinton,  Mo.,  March  27,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  here  on  jtl 
night  of  the  18th.  The  weather  is  awful  and  the  traveling  wretche,- 
Notwithstanding  the  condition  of  the  roads,  within  one  hour  of  my  £ 
rival  I ordered  out  two  detachments,  one  to  the  border  of  Johns; 
County  and  the  other  southwest  in  the  direction  of  Robinson’s  Mi 
Both  have  returned.  The  command  under  Gap  tain  Ankeny  had 
sharp  skirmish  4 miles  southeast  of  Leesville.  Two  of  the  worst 
the  rebels  were  killed  and  1 wounded.  Four  of  our  men  were  wounde 
1 horse  killed,  and  1 wounded.  They  captured  10  men,  7 guns, 
horses,  and  7 saddles.  The  killed  rebels  Swykiffer  and  John  Raft 
(both  desperate  men).  Captain  Ankeny  behaved  with  great  spirit  ai 
did  himself  high  credit.  The  other  detail,  under  Captain  Caldwe 
brought  in  10  prisoners,  10  horses,  1 mule,  and  48  packages  of  powd< 

I should  have  moved  across  Grand  River  in  pursuit  of  Jackman,  wj 
has  some  500  men  on  his  muster  roll  and  about  300  whom  he  can  co 
centrate  in  an  hour.  I keep  myself  advised  of  his  movements  and  sn; 
be  on  his  trail  in  person  as  soon  as  possible.  We  have  captured  ov 
75  prisoners  in  all.  Many  of  them  have  been  released  on  bonds  ot  Ire 
$1,000  to  $5,000. 

I write  in  great  haste ; the  detail  is  waiting. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 9 J F FITZ  HENRY  WARREN, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Clinton,  Mo.,  March  28,  1862. 

Captain  : I beg  to  report  that  on  Monday  last  I moved  a detac 
ment  of  my  command,  numbering  200  men,  across  Grand  River  a 
Deep  Water  towards  the  Osage,  encountering  several  scattering  bout 
ern  bands  of  marauders,  capturing  52  prisoners,  a number  ot  hors< 
mules,  and  arms.  In  marching  down  the  hills  of  the  Osage  near  Mt 
agan  Springs  we  had  some  brisk  skirmishing,  in  which  2 of  the  enei 
were  wounded  fatally  and  3 severely.  Three  of  my  men  were  wounde 
but  none  seriously.  A command  of  60  men  was  left  to  pursue  a D 
who  were  said  to  have  taken  the  bush  near  the  mouth  of  Salt  Lre( 
Under  orders  of  General  McKean  I subsisted  my  troops  and  nor 
upon  the  country,  and  also  by  the  same  authority  I am  levying  con 


^p.  XYin.]  EXPEDITION  TO  CARTHAGE,  MO.  343 

itions  of  meat  and  forage  upon  the  disloyal  people  of  this  vicinity, 
beg  your  instructions  as  to  my  future  course  in  this  particular. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FITZ  HENBY  WABBEN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

Lucien  J.  Barnes, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Jefferson  City , Mo 


Headquarters, 
Clinton , Mo.,  March  28,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  to  report  the  return  of  a detachment  of  my  com- 
md  to  which  I referred  in  my  letter  of  this  morning.  They  brought 
16  prisoners  taken  near  Musgrove  Ferry,  on  the  Osage.  One  rebel 
is  badly  wounded  in  the  leg.  None  of  our  men  injured. 

Individuals  from  Bates  County  who  arrived  this  morning  have  di- 
ced me  by  their  representations  to  hurry  forward  one  company  of 
w cavalry  in  advance  of  the  main  command.  They  march  at  7 o’clock 
morrow  morning.  I shall  follow  on  Monday  with  one  company  of 
fantry  and  three  companies  of  cavalry.  The  battery  of  Captain  Mur- 
y has  not  yet  reported. 

I am,  sir,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

FITZ  HENBY  WABBEN, 

Colonel  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  Commanding  Post. 
Oapt.  Lucien  J.  Barnes, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Clinton,  Mo.,  March  30,  1862 — 10  p.  m. 
Daptain  : Another  squad  has  just  arrived  with  4 prisoners,  3 horses, 
d 1 mule.  Two  other  detachments  are  still  out.  One  of  our  soldiers, 
lley,  a gallant  boy  of  Company  K,  is  badly  wounded  in  the  ankle  and 

gh. 

Again  hastily,  but  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FITZ  HENBY  WABBEN, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 

lapt.  Lucien  J.  Barnes, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  19-20,  1862. — Expedition  to  Carthage,  Mo. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Powell  Clayton,  Fifth  Kansas  Cavalry , 

Headquarters  Fifth  Kansas  Cavalry, 

Carthage,  Mo.,  March  22,  1862. 

have  the  honor  to  report  concerning  my  expedition  to  Carthage  as 

lows: 

broke  camp  on  Dry  Wood  about  2 o’clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
h and  marched  about  8 miles,  encamping  on  the  south  side  of  Dry 
30d  Creek.  Owing  to  the  heavy  rain  that  fell  during  the  night  and 


344  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chat.  XVII 


continued  at  intervals  during  the  following  day  (20th)  I did  not  mow 
my  whole  command,  hut  detached  Captain  Creitz,  with  a portion  of  h;j 
company,  in  the  afternoon  to  Lamar,  with  orders  to  occupy  that  placl 

during  the  night  and  to  move  to  Carthage  the  following  day. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  I marched  with  the  remainder 
my  force  on  Carthage  by  a different  route.  The  day  was  very  storm; 
and  the  roads  being  very  heavy,  I left  my  transportation  behind  undj 
a strong  escort  and  pushed  rapidly  forward,  arriving  here  at  sundowl 
Captain  Creitz  preceded  me  about  two  hours.  He  dashed  into  the  tow| 
capturing  15  or  20  of  the  most  prominent  rebels  in  the  community  anl 
took  possession  of  Johnson’s  Mill,  2 miles  below  here,  finding  m it  abo, 
225  bushels  of  wheat,  which  we  are  now  grinding.  There  is  a larq 
quantity  of  grain  in  this  country,  and  I have  two  thrashing-machim 
which  twill  set  to  work  immediately.  Johnsons  Mill  will  turn  oi 

8,000  or  10,000  pounds  of  flour  per  day.  ,. 

We  have  had  3 men  wounded  out  ot  the  advance  guard  of  a scoutiEj 
party  being  fired  at  from  the  brush,  1 of  them  seriously,  and  1 of  oi 
men  was  taken  prisoner,  being  out  with  a foraging  party. 

I inclose  a list  of  prisoners  taken  here,  with  a copy  of  the  char  J 
preferred  against  them  by  the  Union  men  of  this  community,  all 

which  can  be  substantiated.*  . ^ _ _ „ ..  , . . 

Inclosed  also  find  dispatch  from  Brig.  Gen.  8.  B.  Curtis,  wliieL  pr 
ceeded  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Jewell,  but  was  intended  no  doubt  t 


you.*  The  bearer  — x . 

forming  him  that  I have  forwarded  his  dispatch  to  you.  „ 

If  you  think  it  necessary  that  we  should  turn  out  more  flour,  we  Cc 
take  other  mills  in  this  vicinity  and  furnish  it. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  ^edient^ervanL 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Expedition . 


of  General  Curtis’  dispatch  I will  send  back. 


Brigadier-General  Deitzler, 

Commanding  at  Fort  Scott,  Fans. 


MARCH  19-23,  1862. — Operations  in  Johnson  County,  Mo. 


Beport  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  U.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  March  26,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  state  for  the  information  of  the  maj 
general  commanding  that  I have  just  received  official  intelligence 
the  effect  that  on  the  evening  of  the  19th  mstanfCapt.  Thomas 
Houts,  Missouri  State  Militia,  commanding  post  at  Warrensburg,  J oh 
son  County,  having  received  information  of  the  whereabouts  of  cc 
cealed  powder,  sent  15  men,  under  Lieut.  A.  W.  Christian,  to  bring 
the  same  to  \Varrensburg.  The  detachment  was  eotoely  e ^ jfi 
finding  125  kegs  of  powder  (a  portion  oi  it  damaged)  buried  in  difi 
ent  places  on  the  plantation  of  Mrs.  Sarah  B.  Brinker,  near  < 
burg.  On  the  evening  of  the  22d  instant  Captain  Houts,  Misso 
State  Militia,  also  sent  20  men,  under  Lieut.  J.  M.  Jewell, ^to  are 
several  armed  men  who  were  supposed  to  be  concealed  in  the  house 


Not  found. 


UP.  XVIII.]  AFFAIR  AT  M’KAY’s  FARM,  MO.  345 

rs.  Burgess,  about  10  miles  southwest  of  Warrensburg.  Lieutenant 
3well  proceeded  to  the  house  and  silently  surrounded  it.  A woman, 
curing  him  that  there  were  no  men  in  the  house,  opened  the  door, 
istantly  the  rebels,  4 in  number,  sprang  out,  firing  upon  our  men,  who 
’omptly  returned  the  hre.  It  is  thought  that  1 of  the  party  escaped 
iburt.  The  other  3 were  killed  on  the  spot.  Our  loss  was  1 killed 
id  1 badly  wounded.  The  house  was  burned  to  the  ground. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d  an  attempt  to  arrest  a desperate  character 
et  with  resistance,  when  he  was  shot  dead.  On  the  evening  of  that 
ty,  the  23d,  an  attempt  was  made  by  incendiaries  to  fire  the  town  of 
Warrensburg,  but  by  prompt  action  on  the  part  of  Captain  Houts  and 
i.s  command  the  design  was  frustrated.  Two  frame  buildings  only 
lere  destroyed.  Captain  Houts  adds  that  Johnson  County  is  infested 
f a gang  of  marauders  and  murderers  who  are  a terror  to  the  loyal 
tizens,  but  they  will  receive  prompt  attention.  All  three  of  the 
ficers  mentioned  in  this  report  merit  the  highest  commendation  for 
ie  promptness,  energy,  and  zeal  exercised  in  these  affairs,  and  Lieut. 

M.  Jewell,  Missouri  State  Militia,  and  his  party  deserve  especial 
ptice. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  District. 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


MARCH  21,  1862. — Affair  at  McKay’s  Farm,  Mo. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  W.  McClurg , Missouri  Cavalry , Militia. 

Headquarters  Missouri  State  Militia, 

Linn  Creek , Mo.,  March  26,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report,  although  accompanied 
ith  some  regrets : 

I was  informed  last  night  by  express  from  Captain  Gravely  at  Hu- 
ansville  that  he  sent  out  a scout  of  40  men  to  go  west,  consisting  of 
) men  from  his  own  company  and  20  men  from  Captain  Smithes  com- 
any ; that  they  were  attacked  by  about  100  secessionists  from  the 
rash  ; that  they  lost  2 men  and  about  20  horses  and  about  20  blankets, 
'ne  man  only  was  killed,  R.  W.  Warren,  and  1 wounded,  J.  H.  Wright, 
nd  I am  not  informed  whether  severely  or  not.  The  40  were  under 
le  command  of  Lieutenant  McCabe,  of  Gravely’s  company.  The  men 
ere  at  dinner  and  surprised,  and  Captain  Gravely  thinks  they  were 
egligent  about  keeping  out  a sufficient  guard.  Captain  Gravely  went 
at  next  day  with  100  men,  but  the  rebels  had  fled  across  Sac  River, 
aptain  Gravely  thinks  it  will  be  a useful  lesson,  and  seems  to  be  much 
lortified.  It  is  the  only  little  reverse  our  men  have  met. 

I am  informed  from  various  sources,  and  no  doubt  correctly,  that 
est  of  Humansville  and  Warsaw,  and  indeed  between  this  place  and 
Varsaw  and  between  this  place  and  Humansville,  there  are  various 
ands  of  rebels  and  marauders  constantly  committing  depredations, 
nd  scouts  are  constantly  required.  Indeed,  in  the  last  hour  a reliable 
ian,  Cotton  by  name,  living  22  miles  from  here,  on  the  Jefferson  City 


346 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVE 


road,  in  Miller  County,  came  in  to  inform  me  that  last  night  25  robbe: 
(rebels)  were  at  his  house  and  other  houses  in  the  same  neighborhoc 
taking  horses,  &c.  Their  statement  also  was  that  yesterday  afternoc 
they  went  to  Tuscumbia  and  captured  Bird  Bass,  the  provost-marshs 
and  the  United  States  flag.  Every  effort  will  be  made  by  my  commari 
to  suppress  these  outlaws  by  killing  or  otherwise. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  McCLURG,  1 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Battalion  Mo.  8 .MM 

Oapt.  Lucien  J.  Barnes, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jefferson  City. 


MARCH  22,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Little  Santa  Fe,  Mo. 

Report  of  Col.  Robert  B.  Mitchell,  Second  Kansas  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Regiment  Kansas  Volunteers, 

Camp  Blair,  March  24,  1862. 1 

Major  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  night  of  the  22d,  i 
accordance  with  a request  from  Major  Banzhaf,  commanding  First  Ba 
talion  Missouri  Cavalry,  and  also  in  pursuance  of  a plan  that  I hai 
been  maturing  for  some  time,  I left  camp  with  a detachment  detaile 
from  all  the  companies  in  this  command,  the  detachment  about  300  ii 
number,  with  Majors  Fisk  and  Pomeroy. 

Quantrill,  with  a part  of  his  gang,  had  burned  the  bridge  betwee 
Kansas  City  and  Independence,  and  it  was  contemplated  by  Maj< 
Banzhaf  to ‘march  from  Kansas  City,  and  in  conjunction  with  Colon 
Weer,  Fourth  Kansas,  to  surround  and  entrap  Quantrill. 

I left  camp  about  6.30  p.  m.  of  the  22d  instant,  reached  Little  Sant 
F4  about  10  o’clock  that  night,  and  sent  Major  Pomeroy  about  3 mik 
from  the  town,  with  instructions  to  arrest  one  David  Tate,  whom  I ha 
reason  to  believe  was  connected  with  Quantrill.  Major  Pomeroy  ha 
with  him  a detachment  of  Companies  D and  E,  under  command  < 
Captain  Moore  and  Lieutenant  Stover.  When  Major  Pomeroy  reache 
the  house  he  demanded  entrance,  and  a gun  was  immediately  fire 
through  the  door.  He  then  called  upon  them  to  surrender,  and  to  sen 
out  their  women  and  children  if  they  had  any  in  the  house.  Aft* 
waiting  some  time,  while  shots  were  fired  from  the  house,  he  ordered 
volley  to  be  fired  into  the  house.  The  cries  of  women  were  then  heart 
when  he  ordered  the  men  to  cease  firing.  The  women  and  childre 
then  came  out  and  firing  was  resumed  on  both  sides.  Two  of  the  me 
then  came  out  of  one  of  the  windows  and  surrendered.  They  stated  t 
Major  Pomeroy  that  Quantrill  was  in  the  house  with  26  men.  Majc 
Pomeroy  then  threatened  to  fire  the  house,  and  upon  their  continue 
refusal  to  surrender  he  ordered  the  house  to  be  fired,  and  an  attemi 
was  made  to  fire  it,  but  without  success.  Major  Pomeroy  and  Privat 
Wills,  of  Company  D,  were  at  this  time  shot.  Major  Pomeroy  becomin 
disabled,  Captain  Moore  took  command,  and  sent  back  to  me  requestin 
re-enforcements,  so  as  not  to  let  any  of  the  men  escape.  Captain  Mooi 
having  threatened,  in  case  of  the  enemy  not  surrendering,  to  set  fire  1 
the  house  and  they  still  refusing  so  to  do,  he  ordered  the  house  to  1 
again  set  on  fire,  and  this  time  the  flames  rapidly  enveloped  the  hous' 
The  men  in  the  house  who  were  not  wounded  then  burst  out  the  weathe 


pHAP.  XVIII.)  EXPEDITION  TO  LITTLE  RIVER,  MO.  347 

boarding  at  the  back  of  the  house  and  ran  for  the  timber  immediately 
n the  rear.  Two  were  shot  down  as  they  ran — 1 killed  instantly  and 
L mortally  wounded,  who  died  about  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  The 
>thers  escaped,  and  though  the  woods  were  carefully  scoured,  no  traces 
)f  them  were  found.  While  the  firing  was  taking  place  several  men 
vere  seen  to  fall  in  the  house,  and  the  prisoners  stated  when  they  were 
irst  taken  that  there  were  4 or  5 wounded.  Five  bodies  could  be  dis- 
inctly  seen  in  the  flames  at  the  time  I reached  the  spot  with  that  part 
>f  the  command  which  was  left  behind.  I caused  all  the  horses  and 
iorse  equipments  of  the  enemy  to  be  gathered  together  and  guarded 
tnd  remained  at  the  house  until  6.30  o’clock  in  the  morning,  when  I 
itarted  for  the  house  of  one  Wyatt..  As  we  neared  the  house  6 or  7 
aon  were  seen  to  break  from  it  into  the  brush  immediately  adjoining 
he  premises.  I immediately  dismounted  some  of  my  men  and  sent 
hem  into  the  brush,  but  succeeded  in  capturing  only  2. 

The  command  being  without  provisions,  and  being  satisfied  that 
Juantrill  and  those  of  his  gang  who  had  been  in  the  locality  had  un- 
loubtedly  fled,  I returned  to  the  Tate  House  and  started  back  to  camp, 
eaving  Captain  Moore’s  command,  with  1 wounded.  We  reached  camp 
bout  4 o’clock  yesterday  afternoon.  I had  previously  sent  Lieutenant 
Vduddell  with  15  men  to  camp  to  procure  conveyance  for  the  wounded 
tnd  to  take  the  stock  and  other  property  found  at  Tate’s.  He  passed 
ae  on  the  way  back  to  Tate’s,  and  arrived  with  Captain  Moore’s  com- 
aand  and  the  wounded  last  night  at  8 o’clock. 

Our  loss  was  as  follows:  Major  Pomeroy,  severely  wounded  with  a 
linie  ball  in  the  right  thigh  near  the  femoral  artery $ Private  William 
Wlls,  of  Company  D,  since  died,  with  a Minie  ball  in  the  right  arm 
tear  the  shoulder,  and  also  with  buck-shot  in  the  groin  and  abdomen. 
V e also  lost  2 horses  in  the  fight.  The  jayhawkers’  loss  was  5 killed  or 
rounded  and  burned  up  in  the  house,  2 killed  outside,  and  6 prisoners. 
Ve  took  25  horses,  some  of  which  have  already  been  identified  as  be- 
onging  to  parties  in  this  State,  from  whom  they  were  stolen,  and  about 
0 sets  of  horse  equipments.  The  2 men  killed  outside  of  the  house 
rere  named  Rollen  (brothers).  The  names  of  those  killed  and  burned 
lP  in  the  house  I am  unable  to  ascertain. 

I send  to  the  fort  the  following-named  prisoners.* 

I desire  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Major  Pomeroy,  who  after  he 
ras  wounded  still  cheered  on  his  men ; to  Captain  Moore,  Lieutenant 
>tover,  and  the  men  of  their  immediate  command,  for  their  gallantry  and 
;ood  behavior. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

EOBT.  B.  MITCHELL, 

Colonel  Second  Regiment  Kansas  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

Maj.  W.  E.  Blair,  Comdg.  Leavenworth , Kans . 


MARCH  23,  1862. — Expedition  to  Little  River,  Mo. 

Report  of  Maj.  Jonas  Raw  alt.  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry, 

Camp  near  Point  Pleasant , Mo.,  March  26,  1862. 
Sir:  In  pursuance  of  your  order  of  the  22d  instant  I left  camp  with 
UU  troops  at  7 a.  in.  the  23d,  to  reconnoiter  the  position  of  a body  of 

* Names  omitted;  8 in  all. 


348 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIIlI 

rebel  troops  said  to  be  located  somewhere  in  the  swamp  between  Litthl 
River  and  the  prairie  12  miles  west,  on  or  near  a plank  road  extending 
across  said  swamp.  Upon  arriving  at  Little  River,  while  examining  the 
bridge  across  the  same,  we  discovered  men  running  into  the  swamp  fron 
a house  on  the  other  side.  Our  troops  hurried  over  and  soon  captured! 
them.  At  this  point  our  guide  informed  me  that  he  had  just  received 
intelligence  that  4 miles  up  a ridge  on  the  west  side  of  said  river  therdi 
was  a camp  of  some  30  or  40  rebels.  I ordered  the  force  under  my  com 
mand  to  scour  the  ridge,  but  found  no  encampment.  We  then  pro 
needed  on  the  plank  road  to  New  River,  a distance  of  4 miles,  to  a toll 
house,  where  we  discovered  some  15  or  20  soldiers  making  their  escape 
on  the  plank  road,  having  thrown  the  plank  oft  the  bridge  before  thej 
left,  but  commenced  firing  on  our  troops  as  soon  as  we  hove  in  sight, 
which  was  briskly  returned,  though  without  much  effect  on  either  side 
Our  troops  soon  repaired  the  bridge  and  passed  on. 

Here,  to  my  great  chagrin,  I found  that  our  guide  had  remained  al 
Little  River. " Our  troops,  eager  for  the  fray,  pressed  on,  but  found  the 
bridge  torn  up  in  many  places  over  sluice-ways,  which  they  continued 
to  repair.  Being  apprehensive  that  in  the  eagerness  of  the  pursuit  we 
might  get  into  an  ambush  I ordered  a portion  of  Captain  Nelson’* 
company  to  dismount  and  proceed  on  foot  in  advance  of  the  column 
They  had  not  proceeded  far  before  they  were  fired  upon  by  person* 
concealed  in  the  swamp  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  soon  wounding  4 oj 
our  men — 2 mortally.  I ordered  forward  more  dismounted  men,  ant 
could  see  no  alternative  but  to  charge  upon  the  perfectly-concealed  foe, 
which  desperate  charge  was  led  by  Captain  Nelson  to  my  entire  satis 
faction,  and  had  the  desired  effect  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  gun  range 
At  this  point  we  captured  2 horses. 

The  important  question  was  now'  to  be  decided  whether  to  return  tc 
camp  or  proceed.  It  being  4 o’clock  p.  m.  and  about  21  miles  fron 
camp,  and  4 wounded  men  to  bring  in,  without  ambulances  or  surgeon 
two  of  them,  Matthias  Cockerel,  of  Company  K,  and  Amandus  Tweedy 
of  Company  A,  mortally  wounded,  I called  a council  of  Captains  Nelson 
Hodge,  and  Koehler,  and  Lieutenant  Hunting,  and  it  was  determined 
to  return,  on  account  of  the  lateness  of  the  day  and  the  ground  being 
entirely  impracticable  for  cavalry  to  operate  on.  Whereupon  I dis 
patched  a courier  to  camp  to  have  the  surgeon  and  an  ambulance  senl 
out  to  meet  us.  Our  attention  was  now  given  to  the  wounded  men 
who  were  carried  by  the  men,  using  blankets  and  surcingles  for  tlu 
imrpose.  About  9 p.  m.  the  ambulance  with  the  surgeon  met  us,  and 
decided  at  once  that  the  wounded  men  should  not  be  moved  farther  til 
morning.  The  troops  having  been  under  constant  fatigue  all  day,  Cap 
tains  Graham,  Nelson,  and  myself,  with  some  10  or  12  men,  remained 
The  other  troops  were  sent  to  camp  with  4 prisoners  we  had  taken  anc 
4 horses.  Matthias  Cockerel  died  of  his  wounds  at  11  p.  m.  the  23d 
and  Amandus  Tweedy  at  9 a.  m.  24th. 

The  country  after  passing  Little  River,  14  miles  from  this  point,  n 
impracticable  for  cavalry  troops  to  operate  in  at  this  season  of  tin 
year  unless  they  are  supported  by  a dismounted  force  until  the  Wesi 
or  Grand  Prairie  is  reached,  as  the  only  passage  across  the  swamp  r 
the  aforesaid  plank  road.  It  is  a single  track,  and  the  water  on  either 
side  from  one  to  many  feet  deep,  and  the  rebels  are  represented  to  hav< 
many  light  canoes  (some  of  which  we  saw),  so  that  they  can  glide  alone 
the  flanks  of  a force  on  the  road  (being  masked  by  old  vines  that  hicu 
them  from  Anew),  where  a small  force  may  from  behind  trees  pour  * 
very  destructive  fire  on  persons  traveling  on  the  plank  without  th< 


hap.  XVIII.]  EXPEDITION  IN  MONITEAU  COUNTY,  MO.  349 

ossibility  of  any  number  of  troops  on  the  road  doing  tnem  much 
amage. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  expressing  my  deep  sorrow  for  the 
>ss  of  those  brave  men.  But,  upon  mature  reflection,  I cannot  discover 
iiat  the  country  can  be  scoured  for  50  or  60  miles  back,  as  was  General 
‘ope’s  order,  in  any  other  way  than  by  passing  over  this  plank  road,  as 
understand  the  swamp  is  impassable  from  below  here  to  near  Cape 
lirardeau,  and  according  to  your  order  to  return  the  same  day,  a far- 
mer advance  was  impracticable.  The  entire  command  behaved  with 
tie  utmost,  cool,  deliberate,  bravery. 

Your  most  obedient, 

JONAS  BA  WALT, 

Major , Gommandina  Expedition. 

Col.  W.  P.  Kellogg. 


[ARCH  25-28,  1862. — Expedition  in  Moniteau  County,  Mo.,  and  skirmish 

en  route. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten , IT.  JS.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  March  29,  1862. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
eneral  commanding  the  result  of  the  expedition  under  Lieutenant-Col  - 
nel  Blood  into  the  upper  part  of  Moniteau  County. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Blood,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  these  head- 
uarters  of  March  23,  reached  Pisgah,  with  Company  A,  Sixth  Missouri 
Volunteers,  on  the  25th  ; was  joined  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  26th  by  Captain 
idams’  company,  Sixth  Missouri  Volunteers  ; Captains  Bice’s  and 
Sard’s  companies  militia,  and  a section  of  the  Third  Indiana  Battery, 
nder  Lieutenant  Thomas.  The  column  then  moved  cautiously  but 
apidly  forward.  At  2 p.  m.,  having  arrived  at  a point  5 miles  from 
lount  Vernon,  the  location  of  the  rendezvous  was  learned  and  a report 
eard  that  there  were  300  rebels  thereat.  Having  arrived  within  a few 
flies  of  the  school-house  reported  as  the  rendezvous,  and  where  the 
ommand  was  to  separate  to  surround  the  same,  they  suddenly  met  a 
quad  of  9 rebels  coming  directly  towards  them  in  twos  at  shoulder  arms. 
Colonel  Blood  being  in  the  advance,  ordered  the  advance  guard  to  charge, 
t which  the  rebels  ran  for  the  brush,  and  as  our  men  approached,  fired, 
n the  melee  which  ensued  5 were  killed,  2 mortally  wounded  (dying 
he  same  night),  and  2 taken  prisoners,  1 of  whom  was  wounded  in  the 
tip.  The  rebels  were  all  desperate  fellows,  armed  with  double-barreled 
hot-guns,  pistols,  and  knives. 

The  command  was  then  ordered  forward  at  the  double-quick  to  carry 
ut  the  plan  and  surround  the  school-house,  which  was  situated  in 
he  northeast  corner  of  the  point  of  land  at  the  junction  of  the  Little 
Saline  and  Missouri  Bivers.  There  were,  as  our  prisoners  had  protested, 
to  rebels  there.  Watson’s  gang,  they  asserted,  left  there  on  the  20th 
nstant  by  unfrequented  roads  and  by-paths  for  Arkansas.  They  also 
tated  that  Captain  Johnson’s  company  from  Shelby  County  and  Cap 
ain  Spencer’s  company  from  Boone  had  previously  gone  the  same  way, 
aaking  night  marches  and  avoiding  public  roads  and  towns.  The 
louse,  which  was  well  calculated  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  had  been 


350 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 

used,  was  burned,  as  were  also  two  other  houses  within  2 miles,  whicl 

had  been  similarly  occupied.  „ . 

On  the  following  day,  27th,  Colonel  Blood  divided  his  force,  one  part 
to  scour  the  country  north  of  the  Little  Saline,  while  the  other  should 
do  the  same  to  the  'southward,  all  to  meet  at  Pisgah  on  the  evening  O' 
the  same  day.  On  the  morning  succeeding  (28th)  the  command  sepa 
rated  to  return  to  the  respective  starting  points,  where  all  have  since 
arrived  excepting  Captain  Bice’s  company  of  militia.  The  command 
was  conducted  with  energy  and  decision,  and  though  it  did  not  prove 
as  extensive  as  had  been  anticipated,  reflects  credit  upon  all  who  par 

ticipated.  , , . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding  District . 
Capt.  N.  H.  McLean,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  26,  1862. — Action  on  the  Post  Oak,  at  the  month  of  the  Brier,  Mo 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Emory  S.  Foster,  Missouri  Cavalry,  Militia. 

No.  1. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten , TJ.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo.9  March  28,  1862.  , 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  last  evening  I received  th( 

following  telegram:  _ 1flA0 

Sedalia,  March  27,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten, 

Commanding  District  Central  Missouri , Jefferson  City : 

Just  learned  that  Major  Foster,  of  Warrensburg,  with  60  men,  attacked  on  yesterdaj 
a hand  of  200  secessionists  near  that  place,  when  approaching  to  burn  it,  and  defeatec 
the  rebels.  Loss  on  the  rebel  side  9,  on  ours  2.  Major  Foster  and  brother  were  wounded : 
Lieutenant  Jewell  mortally.  We  captured  9 horses,  &c.  A second  attack  is  imminenl 
with  much  larger  force.  Re-enforcements  badly  needed.  Can  we  have  a company  ol 

Colonel  Warren’s  regiment  ? T T.  CRITTENDEN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  of  Regiment,  M.  S.  M. 


I at  once  sent  the  following  orders  by  telegraph.  Special  Orders,  No, 
13,  mentioned  herein,  had  previously  gone  up  by  train.  A copy  is  in 
closed  in  this  mail : 


To  Maj.  W.  M.  G.  Torrence, 

First  Iowa  Cavalry,  Commanding  Post , Sedalia , Mo.  : 

Send  two  companies  of  cavalry  and  the  section  of  the  First  Missouri  Light  Artillerj 
by  a forced  march  immediately  to  Warrensburg,  Johnson  County,  to  re-enforce  Majoi 
Foster’s  Missouri  State  Militia.  The  march  must  be  made  to-night  at  all  hazards,  anf 
if  you  have  no  reliable  officer  to  send  in  command  you  must  go  yourself.  Do  not  lai 
to  carry  out  this  order  at  once.  Telegraph  me  the  time  the  command  leaves.  Kepor 
important  matters  by  telegraph. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  commanding  district : ^ 

J LUCIEN  J.  BARNES, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


at.  XYIH.] 


351 


ACTION  ON  THE  POST  OAK,  MO. 

Col.  W.  M.  Wheatley, 

Twenty-Sixth  Indiana  Volunteers,  Commanding  Post,  La  Mine  Cantonment : 

Move  your  troops  up  to  Sedalia,  as  per  Special  Orders,  No.  10,  of  March  26,  imme- 
ttely,  and  await  orders  there.  Yonr  presence  there  with  these  re-enforcements  may 
wanted  at  any  moment,  and  you  must  move  to-night  without  fail.  Report  your  de- 
rture  by  telegraph  and  your  arrival  also.  Be  in  readiness  to  march  at  a moment’s 
ming  with  your  force  to  the  relief  of  Johnson  County. 

!3y  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  commanding  district : 

LUCIEN  J.  BARNES, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

I W.  M.  G.  Torrence,  Commanding  Sedalia,  Mo. : 

j>end  the  following  at  once  to  Col.  J.  F.  Philips,  Georgetown,  by  express : 

‘Sent  you  an  order  to-day  to  re-enforce  Major  Foster  at  Warrensburg,  Johnson 
unty,  with  one  company  of  Missouri  State  Militia.  It  is  important  your  re-enforce- 
nt  should  move  immediately  to-night  without  fail.  Two  companies  and  a section 
:i artillery  move  at  once  from  Sedalia  to  Warrensburg,  and  your  company  should  ioin 
inn.  Make  haste.  J 

‘ By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  commanding  district : 

“LUCIEN  J.  BARNES, 

11  Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General.” 


j.  W.  M.  G.  Torrence,  Commanding  Sedalia: 

Send  the  following  by  express  at  once : 
laj.  Emory  S.  Foster,  Warrensburg,  Mo. : 

1 Hold  on  bravely,  gallant  Foster.  You  shall  have  immediate  re-enforcements,  and 
*ugh  to  crush  out  and  exterminate  all  robbers,  guerrillas,  and  murderers.  When 
se  come  do  not  spare  those  who  seek  to  destroy  and  lay  waste  Johnson  County. 

1 By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  commanding  district : 

“LUCIEN  J.  BARNES, 

“ Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General.” 


[ next  received  the  following  from  Sedalia: 

ieral  Totten,  Commanding  District,  Jefferson  City: 

ust  received  your  Special  Orders,  No.  13,  to  Colonel  Philips.  Have  only  one  com- 
iy  in  Georgetown,  badly  armed.  If  that  place  is  vacated,  liable  to  be  attacked  by 
' iodson’s  gang.  Have  ordered  in  men  from  Saline. 

T.  T.  CRITTENDEN, 

Lieutenant-Colonel,  Commanding. 

To  which  I replied  as  follows: 


nt.  Col.  T.  T.  Crittenden,  M.  S.  M.,  Sedalia : 

end  the  company  from  Georgetown  to  Warrensburg  as  well  armed  and  as  strong  as 
isible.  The  commanding  officer  at  Sedalia  will  take  care  of  Georgetown  in  the  ab- 
1 ce  of  the  State  militia.  There  will  be  re-enforcements  at  Sedalia  to-morrow  from 
Mine  Cantonment.  Show  this  to  the  commanding  officer  at  Sedalia. 

JAS.  TOTTEN,. 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  District. 


hater  in  the  night  I received  the  following : 

ieral  Totten,  Jefferson  City : 


Sedalia. 


Captain  Thompson,  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  120 
o’clock  midnight.  Will  be  joined  at  George- 


lispatches  received.  Orders  obeyed. 

>a,  2 pieces  Missouri  artillery,  left  12  < 
with  30  men,  State  troops. 

TORRENCE,  Major. 

This  record  is  sent  for  the  information  of  the  major-general  com- 
Tnding. 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District . 

^apt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis. 


352 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvmj 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo .,  April  6,  1862.  I 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  th. 
maior-ffeneral  commanding  that  I have  received  information  from  Col 
Fite  Henry  Warren,  at  Clinton,  of  the  return  of  two  scouting  detach 
ments  bringing  15  prisoners;  several  of  them  bad.  The  'eryjte 
weather  had  rendered  it  impossible  to  move  in  any  direction.  1 ^v| 
also  the  honor  to  report  the  particulars  of  an  engagement  on  the  2otl 
f26thl  ultimo,  mention  of  which  was  made  m my  telegram  to  the  major  t 
general  commanding  of  the  27th  ultimo  between  M^or  Foster  M 8- 
M.,  and  a gang-  of  rebels  under  the  notorious  Mat.  Houx,  who  is  no\ 

^O^theComing  ome  26th  of  March,  upon  hearing  of  a small  part; 
of  rebels  a“  a house  3 miles  south  of  Warrensburg,  Major  Foster  move, 
wi&  10  men  with  a design  of  capturing  them.  Proceeding  1 mile  h 
was  reliably  informed  that  the  party  numbered  2o  or  30.  SendiR 
back  to  Captain  Houts  for  re-enforcements,  lie  was  soon  joined  b 
Lieutenant  Jewell  and  10  more  men,  and  he  then  moved  forward  t 
Hunter’s  (the  house  indicated)  without  getting  a ghmpse  of  the  rebel 
While  there  however,  the  enemy  was  discovered  m his  rea 
north  He  4t  once  moved  towards  them,  and  upon  reaching  a hi 
discovered  half  a mile  ahead  about  85  horsemen  drawn  up  in  lin 
awaiting  the  approach  of  the  militia.  Major  Foster  halted  to  recoi, 
noiter  their  position  and  strength,  when  the  enemy,  J^oldei led  b 
the  seeming  hesitancy,  charged  precipitately  down  the  hill  upon 
militia,  who  were  instantly  dismounted  and  prepared  to  receive  th 
charge.  They  came,  however,  only  to  within  400  yards,  when  tti 
broke  and  disappeared  quickly  in  a clump  of  trees i near  then ^ iiBh 
The  militia  were  quickly  moved  to  a point  likely  intercept  then 

dismounted  300  yards  from  the  enemy,  a,nd  “^“f^^^^sitFol 
his  right  and  rear  drove  him  m confusion  again  trom  tl  en  ositK) 
capturing  coats,  blankets,  &c.;  all  this  without  hnng  a shot.  Tb 
enemy  was  followed  again  to  a position  on  Post  Oak .Creek,  protect* 
by  logs  and  rail  pens  and  almost  entirely  concealed l by  heavy  undej 
brush  Receiving  re-enforcements  of  20  men,  under  Capt.  Mel.  1-  ostej 
the  militia  dismounted  to  the  number  of  20,  while  the  remainder  W 
held  mounted  and  as  a reserve.  A brisk  fire  was  0P®“®d  ll  “ : 

enemy  at  shot-gun  range,  which  was  vigorously  returned  by  the  enem. 
The  engagement  was  sharp  and  bloody  tor  about  ten  minutes, 
the  enemy  broke  in  confusion.  Then  a charge  was  made  by  t 
mounted  reserve  of  militia,  which  utterly  routed  the  L^XheH 
made  no  attempt  to  rally  his  scattered  forces.  A ^rge  munber 
guns,  blankets,  coats,  hats,  &c.,  were  found  upon  the  held,  toBetW 

with  7 horses  and  equipments.  <■*,.,  r,,„llv  „. 

Our  loss  in  this  engagement  was  9 wounded,  2 of  them 
have  since  died.  The  enemy  had  5 killed,  among  them  theirchiet,  Ma 
Houx,  and  a number  wounded.  The  men  are  said  to  havefouB 
our  side  with  a desperate  determination  to  be  looked  for  m \ ettra 
rather  than  raw,  undisciplined  militia. 

Lieut,  John  M.  Jewell,  although  mortally  wounded  and  since  dea 
in  the  first  of  the  engagement  never  deserted  lus  post. 

Capt.  Mel.  Foster,  shot  through  the  left  breast,  stood  at  the  head 
his  men  cheering  and  encouraging  them  until  the  field  ''^s  tue 

geant  Rains  contributed  to  our  complete  success  by  the  prompnie 
with,  which  lie  brought  up  tlie  reserve.  fV- 

Maj.  Emory  S.  Foster,  who  commanded  the  militia  upon  this 


SAP.  XVIII.  ] 


353 


ACTION  ON  THE  POST  OAK,  MO. 

ion,  received  a ball  in  the  right  forearm  near  the  wrist,  which  lodged 
ear  the  elbow.  He  seems  to  have  managed  the  affair  with  a great 
eal  of  prudence,  bravery,  and  skill,  and  is  entitled  to  no  little  credit 
>r  the  affair. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEH, 

Brigadier -General.  Commanding  District . 

Capt.  NT.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ho.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Emory  8.  Foster , Missouri  Cavalry , Militia. 

Headquarters  Recruiting  Station  M.  S.  M., 

Warrensburg , March  28,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  movements, 
hich  resulted  in  an  attack  upon  a large  guerrilla  force,  under  the  no  tori  - 
is  Mat.  Houx,  and  the  total  defeat  of  the  same : 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  [26th]  instant  I received  information  that 
small  party  of  rebels  were  hiding  at  the  house  of  one  Hunter,  3 miles 
>uth  of  this  place.  I immediately  started  with  10  men  belonging  to 
aptain  Houts’  company  to  capture  them.  After  proceeding  about  1 
ile  in  the  direction  above  indicated  a reliable  citizen  informed  me  that 
ere  were  about  25  or  30  rebels  near  Hunter’s  house.  I sent  a messenger 
Captain  Houts  for  re-enforcements,  and  in  a short  time  Lieutenant 
'well  came  up  with  10  men.  I proceeded  cautiously  to  Hunter’s  with- 
it  getting  sight  of  the  enemy  ; however,  when  there,  his  pickets  were 
scovered  about  a mile  north  of  us.  I immediately  moved  toward  them, 
ey  disappearing  over  a hill.  When  I reached  the  hill  where  the 
ckets  were  last  seen  I discovered  half  a mile  ahead  of  us  about  85 
>rsemen  drawn  up  in  line  awaiting  our  approach.  I halted  to  recon- 
>iter  their  position  and  strength.  The  enemy,  being  emboldened  by 
y seeming  hesitancy,  charged  precipitately  down  the  hill  towards  us. 
istantly  I dismounted  the  men  and  prepared  to  receive  them.  They 
me  within  400  yards,  halted,  wavered,  and  breaking  Quickly  to  the 
ght,  disappeared  in  a clump  of  trees  about  300  yards  from  my  left.  I 
counted  my  men  and  disappeared  quickly  over  the  hill  to  the  rear,  and 
iug  concealed  by  the  hill  and  brush  turned  his  right,  and  in  a moment 
is  dismounted  300  yards  from  the  enemy,  and  charging  double-quick 
his  rear  the  rebels  broke  in  confusion.  We  found  here  coats, 
janketSj  &c.  All  this  without  the  firing  of  a gun,  the  enemy  retreat- 
g rapidly  to  the  west.  I followed  him  to  the  crossing  of  the  East  Fork 
Post  Oak  Creek,  2 miles  from  Warrensburg. 

In  the  mean  time,  having  sent  back  to  town  for  re-enforcements  and 
ey  not  coming,  I went  there  immediately,  and  found  Captain  Mel. 
)Ster,  with  20  men,  ready  to  march.  I proceeded  immediately  to  the 
jossing  on  Post  Oak,  and  found  on  examination  that  the  rebels  had 
4 the  road  and  gone  through  the  brush.  Following  his  trail  about  4 
;les,  I came  suddenly  upon  him  on  the  east  bank  of  West  Post  Oak. 
is  pickets,  being  posted  on  a hill  to  my  right,  were  cut  off.  The  enemy 
treated  in  confusion  across  the  ford,  and  hastily  took  his  position  on 
e opposite  bank,  protected  by  log  and  rail  pens  and  almost  entirely 
23  R R — VOL  VIII 


354 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XVIII. 


concealed  by  heavy  underbrush.  Dismounting  the  men  I detailed  I 
men  to  remain  in  the  rear  and  guard  against  surprise  m that  quarter, 
left  8 to  hold  horses,  with  instruction  to  hitch  them  immediately  and 
report  to  the  first  sergeant,  Samuel  Rams,  who  had  charge  of  the  rear 
3rd,  or  mounted  reserve,  and  with  the  remainder,  24  moved  upon  the 
Siemv.  From  the  nature  of  the  ground  I was  forced  to  take  a position 
almost  entirely  unprotected,  and  in  short  shot-gun  range  from  the 
enemy.  We  opened  a brisk  fire,  which  was  vigorously  returned  by  the 
enemy.  A sharp  and  bloody  fight  was  kept  up  for  about  ten  minutes,, 
when  the  enemy  broke  in  confusion;  then  the  clear  notes  of  the  bugle, 
sounding  the  charge,  and  the  impatient  reserves  swept  by  m pursuit 
of  the  flying  rebels.  The  almost  impenetrable  brush  into  which  they 
fled  alone  prevented  a terrible  carnage.  As  it  was,  the  enemy  was 
totally  routed  and  made  no  attempt  to  rally  their  scattered  forces.  Wi 
found  on  the  field  a large  number  of  guns,  blankets,  coats,  hats,  &c., 
together  with  7 horses  and  equipments.  Our  loss  is  9 wounded,  2 mor 
tafly,  who  have  since  died.  The  enemy  report  their  loss  o killed,  among 
them  their  chief.  Mat.  Houx,  and  a number  badly  wounded. 

Enough  cannot  be  said  in  commendation  of  the  raw,  undisciplined 
militia,  both  officers  and  men,  which  I had  the  honor  of  commanding 
in  this  sanguinary  affair.  The  men  fought  with  aMesperate  determt 
nation  to  be  looked  for  in  none  but  veterans.  Lieut,  John  M.  Jewell 
although  mortally  wounded  in  the  first  of  the  engagement,  never  de 
serted  his  post.  Capt.  Mel.  Foster,  shot  through  ; 

at  the  head  of  his  men,  cheering  and  encouraging  them,  until  tlie  liel 
was  ours.  Sergeant  Rains  contributed  much  to  our  complete  success 
by  the  promptness  with  which  he  brought  up  the  reserve.  I returnee 
to  town  the  same  evening. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant,^^  g FOgTgKj 

Major , Recruiting  Mo.  S.  M.,Warrensburg , Mo. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten, 

Commanding  District  Central  Missouri. 


MARCH  26,  1862. — Action  at  Humansville,  Mo. 


Report  of  Lieut,  Col.  Joseph  W.  MeClurg,  Missouri  Cavalry,  Militia. 


Headquarters  Missouri  Si'ate  -Militia,  a,9 
Linn  Creek,  Mo.,  March  31,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit,  for  your  perusal XVomty 
eration  the  following  report  of  the  fight  at  Humansville,  Polk  County 
I make  it  from  the  official  report  of  Captain  Stockton,  made  out  ontli 
28th  instant.  His  language  is  abbut  as  follows  : 

About  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  26th  instant  a lady  came 
town  and  informed  Captain  Gravely  (Captain  Gravely,  I suppose,  be 
a lady’s  man)  that  a large  force  of  rebels  were  marchin^  upon 
alarm  was  given,  and  the  officers  and  men  of  Compani  ( P 
Stockton),  B (Captain  Cosgrove),  D (Captam  Gravely),  and  E(  at 
Smith)  were  soon  in  line  ready  for  battle.  In  a few  minutes  1 be enem 
were  seen  passing  town  from  west  to  east  on  the  south  of  • 
east  of  town  is  a thicket  of  underbrush,  coming  up  ™thm50imws 
extending  east  and  south  about  a mile.  Believing  it  was  the  intenn 


Chap.  XVin.] 


ACTION  AT  HUMANSVILLE,  MO. 


355 


of  the  rebels  to  attack  us  from  the  east  merely  to  draw  the  attention  of 
our  forces  and  that  the  main  body  would  attack,  us  from  the  west  and 
north,  Company  A marched  to  the  east  of  town,  taking  position  along 
the  fence  running  east  and  south.  Captain  Cosgrove,  of  Company  B, 
and  70  men  of  his  own  and  Captain  Melton’s  company  (both  of  these 
companies  being  at  Warsaw,  and  Captain  Cosgrove  having  gone  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Humansville  companies  by  request,  as  they  were  an- 
ticipating an  attack  or  intended  to  make  one)  were  in  the  rear  of  Cap- 
tain Stockton,  Company  A,  on  the  east  of  town.  Company  D (Captain 
Gravely)  was  paraded  near  the  center  of  town  on  their  horses,  and  or- 
dered to  watch  the  enemy  and  prevent  flanking.  Company  E (Captain 
Smith)  was  on  the  west  of  town. 

By  this  time  the  guard  fired  on  the  right  of  Company  A,  and  the 
enemy  were  seen  in  the  front  and  were  fired  on  by  Company  A.  The 
fire  was  returned,  and  a charge  ordered  by  the  enemy,  who  rushed 
up  through  the  underbrush,  firing  and  taking  shelter  under  fencing 
and  behind  trees.  Company  A fired  several  rounds,  which  told  with 
considerable  effect,  Captain  Cosgrove  marched  his  company  to  the 
assistance  of  Company  A under  a severe  fire,  and  took  position  on  the 
right  of  Company  A and  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy  with  his  whole 
company.  Twenty-five  men  of  Company  A,  under  Lieutenant  Wake- 
field, kept  up  a brisk  fire  from  the  left,  and  the  main  body  of  Company 
A,  with  Captain  Stockton  and  Lieutenant  Akard,  fought  on  from  the 
center.  The  enemy  was  seen  to  begin  to  retreat,  and  Captain  Cosgrove 
gave  them  a galling  fire  from  the  right.  Captain  Stockton’s  leg  was 
broken  when  the  charge  was  ordered  by  the  enemy,  and  Lieutenant 
Akard  remained  and  continued  the  fire  from  the  center  as  long  as  the 
enemy  could  be  seen.  Captain  Cosgrove  was  severely  wounded  in  the 
arm  as  he  moved  to  the  right  of  Company  A,  but  continued  to  command 
his  men  and  superintend  the  battle  (Captain  Stockton  being  disabled 
by  a broken  leg).  When  the  enemy  retreated  Captain  Cosgrove  ordered 
Captain  Gravely  to  follow  them  and  ascertain  if  they  had  men  back, 
thinking  still  that  they  had  a reserve  in  the  brush  and  intended  to 
decoy  us  from  our  position.  He  promptly  obeyed,  fired  upon  their  rear 
guard  several  times  in  the  brush,  until  all  were  known  to  be  retreating 
with  great  rapidity,  but  in  good  order. 

The  enemy’s  force  was  said  to  be  250  men  by  themselves  after  the 
fight  and  before  it  400.  Captain  Gravely,  who  saw  them  in  the  prairie 
4 miles  south  of  town,  estimates  the  number  at  least  400.  We  lost 
none  killed.  Captain  Stockton,  of  Company  A,  was  badly  wounded  in 
the  leg;  Corporal  Smith  dangerously  wounded  in  the  breast;  Privates 
A.  Gordon  and  Wyatt  very  slightly  wounded.  Of  Company  B,  Captain 
Cosgrove  severely  but  not  dangerously  wounded  in  the  arm;  Private 
Divine  severely  wounded,  and  Halbert,  Evans,  Parker,  and  Kidwell 
slightly.  Of  Company  D,  Captain  Gravely,  Private  Boberson  severely 
wounded. 

So  far  as  known  of  the  enemy  Colonel  Frazier  was  killed,  Captain 
Me  Mi  nil  killed,  4 others  dead  on  the  ground,  4 mortally  wounded  and 
left,  6 others  reported  by  their  surgeon,  who  came  in  next  morning,  as 
pertain  to  die,  and  not  less  than  20  others  wounded  in  various  degrees. 
We  took  3 prisoners  and  a number  of  their  horses.  The  officers  and 
men  in  the  fight  behaved  bravely,  did  their  duty,  and  so  well  that  the 
rebels  themselves  acknowledge  they  were  badly  whipped.  Captain 
Smith  kept  his  position,  and  was  not  needed  to  drive  the  enemy  from 
the  brush.  There  was  no  flinching  in  ranks  anywhere. 

The  wagon  of  Captain  Stockton’s  company  was  5 miles  south  of  town, 


356 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIIL 

and  the  rebels  took  it  and  made  their  escape.  Captain  Stockton  has 
very  little  doubt  about  recovering  it.  He  sent  out  150  men  for  that 
purpose  on  the  28th  instant. 

At  the  fight  we  took  13  horses.  The  men  are  rejoicing,  and  the  ladies  9 
of  the  town  (except  a few  rebel  wives)  are  jubilant.  Drs.  Holbert,  of  9 
Hickory  County,  and  Frazier,  of  Stockton,  Cedar  County,  are  present  1 
and  administering  to  the  wants  and  comforts  of  the  wounded,  and  are  I 
entitled  to  the  thanks  of  the  command.  I 

General,  you  see  that  in  the  command  there  is  some  good  material.  I 
feel  that  these  brave  men  and  officers  have  given  us  a name  of  which  we  'i 
may  be  proud,  and  be  assured  I will  use  every  effort  to  add  new  luster,  jj 
While  I sympathize  with  the  wounded,  I congratulate  them  on  the  Id 
honor  of  having  received  scars  in  the  holy  cause  in  which  we  have  en-  ji 

listed.  , , . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  McCLUBG, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Battalion  Mo.  S.  M. 
Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  Jefferson  City , Mo. 


MARCH  26,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Gouge’s  Mill,  Mo. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten , JJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo.,  March  31,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  that  on  the  evening  of  the  23d,  in  conjunction 
with  the  expedition  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blood,  Sixth  Missouri,  I 
ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eppstein  to  send  out  scouting  parties  to  the 
eastward  and  also  to  keep  himself  well  prepared  for  attack,  which  might 
be  made.  Colonel  Eppstein  sent  out  on  the  25th  Captain  Ostermayer 
with  25  men,  who  had  a skirmish  before  daybreak  on  the  26th,  being 
fired  at  from  woods  15  miles  east  of  Booneville  and  3 miles  east  of 
Gouge’s  Mill.  His  men  returned  the  fire,  but  could  not  pursue  in  the 
night.  Later  they  found  in  the  woods  one  dead  body,  and  followed  a 
bloody  track  for  about  2 miles,  when  this  disappeared.  The  party  were 
to  Booneville,  and  think  the  rebels  numbered  from  40  to  50.  It  is 
thought  they  belonged  to  the  party  which  was  dispersed  by  the  troops 
sent  out  from  this  place  (Jefferson  City  and  Tipton)  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Blood. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 1 JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  District. 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  29,  1862.— Skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  near  Warrensburg,  Mo. 

Report  of  Capt.  James  D.  Thompson,  First  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Warrensburg,  Mo.,  March  30,  1862. 
Sir:  Agreeably  to  your  order  of  the  27th  instant  I assumed  com- 
mand of  the  forces  stated  by  you,  consisting  of  parts  of  Company  A, 
under  command  of  Captain  McQueen ; Company  F,  Captain  Elliott  j 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  THE  BLACKWATER,  MO. 


357 


Company  G,  Lieutenants  McDermott  and  Poster,  and  two  pieces  of 
First  Missouri  Artillery,  in  all  130  men,  and  marched  from  Sedalia  at  1 
o’clock  of  that  night  and  by  a forced  march  reached  Warrensburg  on 
the  next  morning.  Finding  everything  comparatively  quiet  we  went 
into  camp  during  the  day,  and  sending  out  scouts  from  the  State  Militia 
during  the  night,  received  information  of  a body  of  the  rebels,  supposed 
to  be  some  300  or  400,  at  a camp  some  12  or  15  miles  distant  from  War- 
rensburg, on  the  Blackwater,  at  a place  known  as  Murray’s  Ford.  Major 
Foster,  of  the  State  Militia,  taking  Captain  Elliott’s  company  and  50 
of  his  command,  proceeded  to  the  south  of  the  supposed  camp,  while  I 
took  one  piece  of  artillery  and  a portion  of  State  troops,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Ceathe,  with  the  balance  of  my  command,  and  proceeded  in  a 
more  direct  route  to  the  north  of  the  camp.  We  each  made  a rapid 
march  and  soon  arrived  at  the  supposed  camp,  but  found  no  enemy. 
Again  dividing  our  forces,  I took  my  own  command  and  started  on  my 
return,  being  satisfied  that  no  very  large  body  of  the  enemy  were  in 
that  immediate  vicinity. 

About  4 o’clock  p.  m.  of  the  29th,  as  we  emerged  from  the  timber,  I 
discovered  a body  of  what  I at  first  took  to  be  State  Militia,  but  which 
proved  to  be  Colonel  Parker  and  some  60  or  70  rebels  passing  south 
along  the  edge  of  the  timber,  at  right  angles  to  the  road  on  which  I 
was  moving,  and  the  length  of  his  column  to  my  right,  and  some  80  to 
100  rods  distant.  Their  leader  discovered  my  command  about  the 
same  moment  that  I became  satisfied  of  the  nature  of  his  forces. 

I immediately  ordered  Captain  Elliott,  who  was  in  advance,  to 
charge,  which  he  did,  gallantly  followed  by  Lieutenant  McDermott 
and  his  command.  I then  ordered  Captain  McQueen  to  right-about 
his  command  and  endeavor  to  intercept  the  rebels  at  the  ford.  In  ex- 
ecuting this  order  the  guide  led  him  past  the  point  of  intersection  to 
the  lower  ford,  which  prevented  him  from  efiectually  cutting  them  olf. 
Discovering  that  the  enemy  had  taken  to  the  upper  ford,  he  retraced  his 
steps  and  charged  after  the  fleeing  rebels.  A severe  running  fight  of 
some  4 miles,  through  thick  and  almost  impenetrable  thickets,  told 
fearfully  upon  the  fleeing  enemy.  Our  men  charged  gallantly,  leaving 
from  10  to  15  of  the  enemy  dead  upon  the  field  and  wounding  from  5 
to  10  others. 

We  took  15  prisoners,  besides  1 severely  wounded,  and  some  10  or  15 
horses — the  exact  number  1 am  not  able  to  give,  as  Company  F has 
not  yet  reported  in  reference  to  the  same.  Among  the  prisoners  is  the 
notorious  rebel  leader  Colonel  Parker,  who  has  so  long  been  the  terror 
of  the  more  northern  counties.  We  lost  1 man  killed,  Private  Gerrard, 
of  Company  F,  and  2 wounded,  one  of  whom,  Corporal  Johnson,  of  Com- 
pany F,  is  dangerously  if  not  mortally  wounded. 

Though  perhaps  not  essentially  requisite  in  a report  of  this  kind,  yet 
I cannot  refrain  from  calling  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general 
through  you  to  certain  matters  which  I deem  of  vital  importance  to  the 
well-being  of  that  portion  of  this  State  among  which  is  the  wanton 
destruction  of  life  and  property  of  citizens  of  that  section  by  the  State 
Militia.  A few  nights  before  my  arrival  at  Warrensburg  they  set  fire 
to  Colonel  McCowan’s  residence  in  Warrensburg,  and  entirely  destroyed 
the  house,  furniture,  &c.,  leaving  the  family,  consisting  of  his  wife  and 
some  four  or  five  children,  without  anything  to  support  or  protect  them. 
About  the  same  time  a body  of  them  proceeded,  as  I am  informed  by  the 
Union  men  of  Warrensburg,  to  the  house  of  one  Mr.  Burgess,  and  shot 
aim  and  his  brother  and  burned  the  house  over  the  heads  of  his  family. 
Again  on  Sunday,  the  30th,  Captain  Thomas  W.  Houts,  while  out  with  a 


358  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIII.  I 

party  of  some  50  men,  killed  one  Mr.  Piper,  and  burned  five  dwellings,  I 
turning  the  families  out  of  doors  and  destroying  everything  m the  I 
houses.  I learn  this  from  Lieutenant  Ceathe,  who  was  with  him,  and  i 
who  positively  refused  to  permit  his  men  to  engage  in  the  nefarious  I 
business.  The  Union  men  of  the  town  are  highly  incensed  at  such  out- 1 
rages,  and  desired  me  to  lay  the  matter  before  the  proper  authorities.  $ 
The  sufferers  in  these  instances  none  of  them  belong  to  the  bushwhack- 1 
ers,  and  were  all,  with  the  exception  of  Colonel  McCowan,  peaceable  I 
citizens,  though  of  Southern  or  secession  principles.  The  Union  men  fl 
are  fearful,  and  truly  so,  that  the  bushwhackers  will  retaliate,  and  be- 1 
tween  the  two  lay  the  whole  country  in  rums. 

I would  suggest  the  policy  of  a united  movement  from  the  north, 
south,  east,  and  west,  driving  the  rebels  towards  Johnson  County,  and 
endeavor  by  concerted  action  to  destroy  their  whole  forces.  As  we 
have  done  heretofore  they  flee  before  us  from  Johnson  to  Henry  and 
back  to  some  other  point,  and  thus  baffle  our  best  endeavors. 

Very  respectfully,  j D THOMPSON, 

Captain  First  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Major  Torrence,  Commanding  Post , Sedalia , Mo. 


MARCH  30,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Clinton,  Mo. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  U.  8.  Army. 

Saint  Louis,  April  6,  1862. 

Detachment  of  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  sent  out  from  Clinton,  Mo.,  had 
a skirmish  with  rebels  on  the  30th.  Captured  19  prisoners,  8 wagons, 
and  a number  of  horses,  mules,  &c.,  belonging  to  Price’s  army.  One 
rebel  killed  and  7 wounded.  Our  loss  1 man  seriously  wounded. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


MARCH  31,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Pink  Hill,  Mo. 

Report  of  Maj.  Charles  Banzhaf  First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Hdors.  First  Battalion,  First  Missouri  Cavalry, 

Kansas  City , Mo .,  April  5,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  Capt.  Albert  P.  Pea- 
body, commanding  Company  D,  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  hearing  on 
Monday,  March  31,  instant,  of  a collection  of  rebels,  marauders  ot 
Quantrill’s  men,  at  Pink  Hill,  about  19  miles  southeast  of  Independ- 
ence, Mo.,  started  from  Independence  in  pursuit  of  them.  When  near- 
ing Pink  Hill  Captain  Peabody  dispatched  one  party  of  35  men,  under 
Lieutenant  White,  of  Company  C,  to  one  direction,  retaining  with  him 
self  30  men,  and  Second  Lieutenant  Gurnee,  of  Company  D.  The  two 
commands  commenced  to  scour  the  neighborhood  immediately  near 
Pink  Hill.  Captain  Peabody’s  command  in  passing  a double  log-house 
in  an  elevated  position  over  the  road  received  a perfect  volley  of  shots 
fired  from  the  house.  Captain  Peabody  immediately  dismounted  a 
part  of  his  command,  ordering  the  rest  a little  farther  oft  to  take 


HAP.  XVIII.  1 


SKIRMISH  ON  THE  LITTLE  SNI,  MO. 


359 


harge  of  the  horses,  and  then  led  the  command  on  to  the  log-house, 
keeping  up  a constant  firing  through  the  windows  and  doors  for  more 
han  one  hour  and  a half,  but  with  no  more  success  than  to  prevent 
he  marauders,  on  whose  side  all  advantages  were,  from  attacking  his 
mall  command.  At  the  commencement  of  the  attack  the  enemy  had 
ver  60  men  inside  the  log-house,  firing  through  loop-holes  made  by 
mocking  out  the  plaster  from  between  the  logs.  During  this  engage- 
nent  the  rebels  received  re-enforcements  from  all  directions  (neighbor- 
ag  farmers,  &c.),  so  that  before  the  command  under  Lieutenant  White 
ould  come  to  the  rescue  the  rebels  amounted  to  over  150  men,  armed 
nth  all  kinds  of  small-arms,  mostly  Sharp’s  rifles. 

As  soon  as  the  whole  command  had  collected  Captain  Peabody  led 
he  men  on  to  the  log-house  through  the  thick  fire  of  the  enemy,  and 
ucceeded  in  driving  them  from  this  advantageous  position,  during 
diich  6 of  the  enemy  were  killed  instantly  and  many  received  wounds, 
>ut  as  the  enemy  carried  their  wounded  along  with  them  the  correct 
mmber  could  not  be  ascertained.  Subsequent  reports  state  that  2 of 
he  wounded  died  since,  but  the  correctness  of  this  needs  confirmation, 
die  enemy  now  fled  hurriedly  into  all  imaginable  directions  into  a tim- 
>ered,  rough,  and  hilly  country,  where  a pursuit  was  not  an  easy  task, 
s the  enemy  was  but  too  well  acquainted  with  the  road  and  district, 
’aptain  Peabody  and  all  his  men  (officers  eo  ipso)  behaved  bravely 
luring  the  engagement.  Captain  Peabody’s  horse  received  three  shots, 
mmediately  after  driving  out  the  enemy  orders  were  given  to  set  all 
wildings  (four  in  number)  on  fire  from  which  the  attack  had  been 
lade,  after  which  the  whole  command  started  again  in  pursuit  of  the 
nemy,  which  lasted  until  Thursday  night,  April  3.  On  account  of  high 
rater  in  all  small  streams  between  here  and  Captain  Peabody’s  com- 
land  or  camp  he  was  prevented  until  this  day  from  communicating  the 
esult  of  this  engagement  to  these  headquarters,  which  also  accounts 
or  the  lateness  of  the  report.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  consists,  as  above 
lentioned,  of  6 killed.  Twenty  horses  and  equipments  (saddles  and 
•ridles)  and  a number  of  small-arms  fell  into  the  hands  of  Captain 
^abody.  The  loss  on  our  side  was  3 wounded — 2 slightly,  1 seriously; 
filed,  none.  Three  Government  horses  were  shot  dead.  All  of  which 
3 respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  sign  myself,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  BANZHAF, 

Major , First  Missouri  Cavalry , Commanding  Post. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi. 


APRIL  1,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Little  Sni,  Mo. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Capt.  John  B.  Kaiser,  Booneville  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry,  Militia. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten , U.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo .,  April  12,  1862. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  for  the  information  of  the 
aajor-general  commanding  the  substance  of  a report  of  an  expedition 


360 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII.; 

sent  out  by  Col.  John  D.  Stevenson,  Seventh  Missouri  Volunteers,  frorai 
Lexington  to  Pink  Hill,  Mo.,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  John  B.  Kai- 
ser, Missouri  State  Militia,  Soon  after  their  arrival  at  Pink  Hill  they 
took  10  kegs  of  powder  (25  pounds  per  keg),  said  to  have  been  Parkers.) 
Of  a skirmish  which  took  place  between  his  command  and  some  bands® 
of  Quantrill’s  and  Parker’s  jayhawkers,  Captain  Kaiser  speaks  as  fol ; 
lows : | 

That  upon  receipt  of  a dispatch  from  Captain  Peabody,  Pirst  Mis* 
souri  Cavalry,  stating  he  wished  re-enforcements,  as  he  had  found  the 
enemy,  he  at  once  ordered  Captain  Murphy,  with  2 lieutenants  and  50 ! 
men,  to  his  assistance.  They  discovered  the  enemy,  after  a march  of  91 
miles,  upon  a high  bluff,  on  the  waters  of  the  Little  Sni.  Their  posi- 
tion  was  one  of  great  strength  and  advantage.  The  rocks  of  the  bluff 
afforded  them  a strong  breastwork  and  shelter.  Communication  with 
Captain  Peabody  was  impossible,  as  the  rebels  were  between  them. 
Our  men,  upon  discovering  the  enemy  from  the  prairie,  at  once  opened^ 
fire  on  them,  and  received  a spirited  reply  at  first.  After  a few  more* 
volleys,  however,  the  rebels  gave  way,  and  left  their  camp  in  our  pos-< 
session.  It  was  impossible  to  ascend  the  bluff  on  horseback,  and  the 
time  consumed  by  our  men  in  securing  their  horses  and  scaling  the 
bluff  was  long  enough  to  give  the  rebels  sufficient  time  for  getting  out' 
of  their  reach.  Their  loss,  however,  is  5 killed,  6 wounded,  and  1 pris-j 
oner.  Our  loss,  1 man  severely  and  1 man  slightly  wounded,  and  2 
horses  killed.  Eebel  bands  and  marauders  in  the  neighborhood  are 
represented  as  getting  troublesome  and  daring,  and  frequent  scouting 
becomes  necessary  for  the  safety  of  loyal  citizens  and  their  property. 
Lieutenant  Meller,  who  had  been  sent  out  by  Captain  Kaiser,  returned, 
bringing  in  1 wagon. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  District . 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. 


ISTo.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  B.  Kaiser , Booneville  Battalion  Missouri  Cavalry , 

Militia. 

Pink  Hill,  Mo.,  April  1,  1862.  j 
Colonel  : I avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  of  informing  you  of  the 
result  of  the  expedition  sent  by  you  under  my  command. 

I reached  this  point  the  same  day  I left  Lexington.  The  only  thing 
I have  done  of  any  importance  is  the  capture  of  10  kegs  (25  pounds  per 
keg)  of  Parker’s  powder  and  a small  skirmish  with  Quantrill’s  and 
Parker’s  bands  of  jayhawkers.  The  particulars  are  as  follows : 

On  Sunday,  the  30th,  I received  a dispatch  from  Captain  Peabody, 
stating  that  he  had  found  the  enemy  and  wanted  a re-enforcement.  I 
immediately  sent  Captain  Murphy,  with  2 lieutenants,  3 sergeants,  5 
corporals,  and  41  privates,  to  assist  him.  Thef  went  about  9 miles, 
and  found  the  enemy  on  a high  bluff  on  the  waters  of  the  Little  Sni. 
They  had  chosen  a strong  position,  where  nature  had  given  them 
breastworks  of  rocks  of  the  most  formidable  character.  Their  position 


Chap.  XVUI.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  DONIPHAN,  MO. 


361 


was  such  as  to  cut  off  communication  between  our  men  and  Captain 
Peabody,  of  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  and  they  had  got  in  direct 
range  of  the  enemy’s  muskets  before  they  discovered  them  and  our  men 
apon  an  open  prairie;  but  they  opened  fire  upon  the  rebels,  to  which 
^^T.^1^0r0lls^  reP^e(i-  After  a few  volleys  the  enemy  gave  wav  and 
leit  his  camp  m our  possession.  Our  men  could  not  ascend  the  bluff 
horseback,  and  by  the  time  they  hitched  their  horses  and  scaled  the 
jJj™  ithei  eJiemy  wre  entirely  out  of  our  reach,  but  not  without  loss, 
they  had  5 men  killed  and  6 wounded  and  1 taken  prisoner.  Our  loss 
vas  1 private,  of  Company  C,  severely  wounded  in  the  shoulder  by  a 
>all  from  a Mississippi  rifle ; also  one  of  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry  re- 
eived  a mortal  wound  in  the  abdomen.  This  comprises  the  loss  sus- 
amed  by  us,  with  the  exception  of  2 horses,  which  were  shot,  both 
jelongmg  to  Company  A,  of  my  command. 

The  Union  people  here  are  suffering  greatly  from  the  hands  of  these 
uflians.  They  are  daily  driven  from  their  homes  and  many  of  them 
ire  caught  and  either  hung  or  shot.  No  Union  man  is  safe  1 mile 
rom  camp  unless  a force  is  with  him.  Parker’s  and  Quantrill’s  hands 
<ow  number  nearly  200  men,  as  near  as  I can  learn.  The  peaceable 
!Je,re.  are  yery  anxious  that  I should  remain  some  time,  but  if 
„ ? d ™nld  be  very  necessary  to  have  one  piece  of  artillery 

? d™  m rebels  from  the  brush  and  to  dislodge  them  from  their 
, 1 w°uId  also  suggest  the  propriety  of  having  one  com- 
‘7  t°Jgnard,ti!e  camP>  so  that  I could  take  my  command 

0 catch  these  bands;  and  I think  it  will  be  necessary,  for  I learned 
esterday _ evening  that  a band  of  200  rebels,  under  a man  by  the  name 
fGnggsby,  had  crossed  the  river  for  the  purpose  of  helping  Quantrill 

rttafn  fe’  and  a ®reat  many  of  the  rebel  citizens  are 
Park?r  for  that  purpose,  and  indications  are  very  strong  that 
ncn  a move  is  on  hand. 

I am,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

Col.  John  D.  Stevenson.  JOHN  B.  KAISEE. 

,**•  ® — Lieutenant  Meller  has  just  arrived  from  a scout  and  brought 

1 one  wagon.  ® 


APRIL  1,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Doniphan,  Mo. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Fred.  Steele , U.  S.  Army. 

n Rives’  Station,  April  3,  1862. 

r0in°„ntLCar  m’\  ad7aflcIe  guard  bad  a skirmish  with  the  rebels  in 

ounderl  othlr0r  i Driiai1  °n  the  l8t  instaut  Li  lied,  1 lieutenant, 
0 ? others  5 took  their  camp,  all  supplies  of  forage,  provisions 

nt  a“^^fiersmap-arms?  ^tbout  any  loss  on  our  part;  took  impor- 
eet  us  ° rpnASPi'pllfSii  7an,  50rn  1S  at  Jacksonport,  preparing  to 
it-Colone?  1S  at  P°caho?tas>  2,500  men.  Lieuten- 

wv  OnHn&n  command  of  pickets,  is  probably  at  Pitman’s 
^rry.  Our  infantry  was  skirmishing  with  rebels  when  messenger 


General  Halle ck. 


FRED’K  STEELE, 

Brigadier-  General . 


362 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  ANE  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 


APRIL  2-4,  1862. Reconnaissance  from  Cape  Girardeau  to  Jackson,  Whit 

water,  and  Dallas,  Mo. 


■ 


Report  of  Capt.  Lindsay  Murdoch , Missouri  Cavalry , Militia. 


Headquarters, 

Cape  Girardeau , Ifo.,  April  5,  1862.  I 
Sir  : I have  to  report  since  last  communication  that  owing  to  tli< 
reports  constantly  arriving  from  the  country  of  the  intention  of  Jefi 
Thompson  and  command  surprising  the  Cape,  and  the  daily  reportej 
presence  of  bodies  of  secessionists  about  Jackson  and  Dallas,  I consul 
ered  it  advisable  to  make  a reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of  the  tw- 
last-mentioned  places.  For  that  purpose  I telegraphed  to  you  tor  as 
sistance,  which  you  said  you  could  not  furnish.  I telegraphed  to  Brig] 
Gen  W K.  Strong,  commanding  at  Cairo,  who  promptly  sent  two  coni 
panies  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry.  By  agreement  they  were  landel 
at  Commerce,  on  the  2d  instant,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  iolei 
Sixtieth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  proceeded  by  way  of  Bock  Levee  acrosl 
Ni«‘gerwood  Swamp  ; opened  communication  with  my  command  ot  12 
merT  and  agreed  to  form  junction  at  Jackson.  I left  camp  at  8 o’cloca 
evening,  Colonel  Toler  proceeding  by  way  of  Benton  and  Jackson  road 
the  Home  Guards  of  this  place  having  turned  out  and  garrisoned  th 
forts ; proceeded  on  gravel  road  to  within  1 mile  of  J ackson ; halte» 
and  detached  Company  B,  Captain  Walker,  to  surround  the  north  an 
-east  part  of  the  town ; detailed  two  men  to  open  communication  wit 
Colonel  Toler,  but  owing  to  the  darkness  and  a heavy  rain-storm  occui 
ring  did  not  succeed  in  opening  communication ; waited  till  daybreak 
went  into  the  place,  but  found  nothing  of  importance  ; searched  a 
suspected  houses  with  no  result. 

About  9 o’clock  Colonel  Toler  came  into  town  also,  and  we  agree; 
to  go  out  to  Whitewater  and  Dallas.  Proceeded  slowly  to  Wlntd 
water ; found  everything  quiet  there  also.  Proceeded  same  manue 
to  Dallas,  where  we  arrived  and  surrounded  at  2 p.  m. ; made  no  ai 
rest  of  any  importance;  saw  Mr.  James  Noel,  county  and  circuit  clei 
of  Bollinger  County,  who  reported  to  me  that  he  had  been  taken  pnj 
oner  by  Major  Kitchen  about  four  days  previous,  who  had  a body  c 
about  120  secessionists ; that  they  had  destroyed  the  records  ot  th 
county  and  circuit  court,  and  carried  off  the  records  of  the  swam 
lands  and  other  valuable  papers  ; while  in  Bollinger  and  Cape  Gira 
deau  Counties  they  took  several  prisoners;  also  stole  a number  of. horsei 
Among  the  prisoners  they  took  there  were  two  men  named  Miller  aii 
Mclntee,  who  were  brutally  murdered,  Mclntee  being  killed  by  tli 
hand  of  the  miscreant  Bowles,  and  Miller  by  his  orders.  Mr.  Noel  Wc 
taken  bv  them  below  Bloomfield,  where  he  was  released  by  the  mte 
cession  of  some  of  his  friends.  He  reports  that  Jeff.  Thompson  s tore 
is  somewhere  about  1,000  men ; also  he  reports  the  current  beliel 
that  their  destination  is  Pocahontas. 

Left  Dallas  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  instant  and  returned  by  tt 
way  of  Jackson  to  camp,  where  we  arrived  on  the  evening  of  the  sam 
day.  Colonel  Toler’s  command  arrived  next  day  and  proceeded  t 
Oairo  on  steamer  J.  D.  Perry. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ LINDSAY  MURDOCH, 

Captain , Missouri  State  Militia , Commanding  Post. 

Col.  C.  W.  Marsh,  A.  A.  G .,  Mo.  Militia , Saint  Louis , Mo. 


AP.  XVIII.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  MEDICINE  CREEK,  MO.  363 

5RIL  8,  1862— Scout  through  Gadfly,  Newtonia,  Granby,  Neosho,  and  the 
valley  of  Indian  Creek,  Mo.,  with  skirmishes  en  route. 

Report  of  Col . Clark  Wright , Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry, 

Cassville , Mo .,  April  9,  1862. 

Sir  : I arrived  here  late  this  evening  with  my  command,  with  Cap- 
n Banning,  and  train  loaded  with  subsistence,  and  some  65  head  of 
ttle.  I passed  out  by  the  way  of  Gadfly,  Newtonia,  Granby,  Neosho 
cl  down  the  valley  of  Indian  Creek,  dispersing  all  the  rebel  and  iay- 
wkmg  bands  in  the  country  through  which  we  passed.  We  had 
ne  three  skirmishes,  killing  Neut.  Cole,  Dr.  Adams,  Dr.  Cummons, 
d severely  it  not  mortally  wounding  Yancy  Richardson,  Dr.  Wills 
lison,  and  slightly  wounding  several  others,  and  capturing  some  125 
isoners,  all  of  whom  except  25  I turned  loose  after  a critical  exarni- 
tion  and  administering  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  them.  I only  re- 
ned  the  leaders  and  desperadoes,  the  remainder  expressing  a desire 
lay  down  their  arms  and  go  to  work.  I endeavored  to  discriminate 
sely,  and  among  all  the  better  class  of  secessionists  I think  I left  a 
ry  favorable  impression.  We  drove  all  the  gangs  down  to  Stand 
atie,  a point  on  the  line  of  the  Indian  Territory  some  15  miles  be- 
y Neosho.  They  are  embodied  there,  600  in  number,  between  Cow- 
n and  Buffalo  Creek  and  some  10  miles  below.  Pike  has  some  1,500 
bans.  I did  not  think  it  prudent  to  attack  these  combined  forces 
rP  “y  f”rce  and  expose  the  train.  I learned  to-day,  however,  that 
kir  bands  followed  us  as  we  retired  up  the  country  some  distance, 
nmittmg  depredations.  There  is  a horrible  state  of  affairs  in  that 
ner  of  the  State.  Our  trip  was  quite  a success  in  the  way  of  sub- 
tence.  I shall  remain  here  to-morrow  to  shoe  our  horses.  The  com- 
ssary,  Captain  Banning,  will  turn  over  all  our  subsistence,  to  be  for- 
med to  the  army,  and  we  will  reload  the  train  and  join  the  com- 
nd  by  a circuitous  route  at  Forsyth  in  a few  days,  unless  otherwise 

rpce  passed  through  Clarksville,  on  Arkansas  River,  yesterday,  one 
ek  ago  (Sunday  morning),  on  his  way  to  Little  Rock.  I learned 
m a very  intelligent  man  just  from  Price’s  army  that  he  (Price) 
aid  move  to  a point  where  he  could  re-enforce  the  rebels  on  the  Mis- 
sippi  at  any  point  most  needed. 

Ye  captured  horses  enough  to  mount  the  remainder  of  our  men  this 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLARK  WRIGHT, 

Colonel  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 
'apt.  H.  Z.  Curtis,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  8,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Medicine  Creek,  Mo. 

'tort  of  Brig.  Gen.  Ben.  Loan , Missouri  State  Militia , commanding 
District  of  Northwest  Missouri. 

Headquarters  District  of  Northwest  Missouri, 

Saint  Joseph , April  11,  1862. 

>iR:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I this  morning  received  official 
irmation  from  Colonel  King,  in  command  at  Chillicothe,  that  the 


364  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIJ[ 

guard  stationed  at  Medicine  Creek  was  fired  on  by  a party  of  guerrilh 
on  the  night  of  the  8th  instant.  The  guards  immediately  returned  til 
fire,  and  after  several  rounds  from  both  sides  the  guerrillas  fled.  Tf 
result  of  the  affair  was  the  wounding  of  3 of  the  guard,  1 of  the 
mortally.  Mounted  troops  have  been  sent  out  in  different  direction  i| 
Colonel  King  has  evidence  that  two  bands  of  guerrillas  have  recent:  I 
appeared  in  this  neighborhood,  under  the  command  of  Keisengro  ar  I 
Small,  and  he  is  making  every  effort  to  break  them  up. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEN.  LOAN, 

Brigadier -General  Mo.  8.  M.,  Commanding  District  I 

The  Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Headquarters  Missouri  Militia , Saint  Louis , Mo. 


APRIL  9,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Jackson,  Mo. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Capt.  Lindsay  Murdock,  Missouri  Cavalry,  Militia. 

No.  2. — Capt.  William  Flentz,  Missouri  Cavalry,  Militia. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Capt.  Lindsay  Murdoch , Missouri  Cavalry , Militia. 

Headquarters, 

Cape  Girardeau , April  9,  1862.  f 
Sir  : Since  my  last  I have  to  report  that,  owing  to  reliable  inform! 
tion,  I dispatched  a party  of  men,  under  command  of  Capt.  Willia]j 
Flentz,  to  ascertain  the  position  and  numbers  of  certain  bodies  of  me 
concentrating  about  Jackson.  The  party  consisted  of  20  men  of  Con 
pany  A,  Lieut.  G.  W.  Hummel ; 20  men  Company  B,  Sergeant  Randal 
and  25  men  Company  C,  Lieutenant  Wolfers.  Being  without  the  repffl 
of  the  captain  commanding  the  party,  I state  the  general  result. 

The  party  proceeded  by  way  of  Benton  road  to  Jackson,  and  ente 
ing  that  place  they  saw  a small  body  of  men  retreating.  They  followed 
and  were  fired  on  by  a considerable  body  of  men  in  ambush.  Lieutei 
ant  Hummel  bravely  rushed  on,  but  a volley  from  the  enemy  killfl 
his  horse  and  wounded  him  severely;  also  killing  1 man  and  woun<j 
ing  2 fatally.  Captain  Flentz  considered  his  men  in  danger  and  r 
treated,  leaving  Lieutenant  Hummel  wounded  in  hands  of  the  enem; 
Lieutenant  Hummel  has  just  arrived.  He  is  badly  wounded  in  tl 
leg  and  slightly  in  three  other  places.  He  reports  the  rebel  loss  at 
killed  and  3 or  4 wounded.  Captain  Jefferies  was  in  command  of  tl 
partv,  which  consisted  of  56  men.  There  was  another  party  ot  me 
under  Kitchens— he  supposed  to  be  in  southeast  direction  from  Avhei 
he  was.  He  reports  also  that  he  overheard  a conversation  bet  wee 
Captain  Jefferies  and  another  party,  wherein  an  attack  on  Cape  Gira 
deau  was  canvassed,  and  partially  resolved  upon  to  take  place  lfM 
night,  but  it  did  not  take  effect.  The  Home  Guard  garrisoned  tl 
forts,  and  my  command  was  prepared  for  any  emergency.  The  office 
in  command  attributes  the  want  of  success  to  the  inefficient  char  act* 
of  their  carbines.  The  men  have  no  confidence  in  them.  They  are  £ 
liable  to  miss  fire  as  fire,  and  the  bores  varjT  so  much  that  some  of  tkei 
won’t  hold  the  ammunition  put  in  them  when  carried  slung. 


kp.  xvm.] 


SCOUT  TO  SHILOH  CAMP,  MO.,  ETC.  365 

Lieutenant  Hummel  was  released  on  his  parole.  There  is  one  Captain 
>wis  here— one  of  Thompson’s  captains— on  parole.  He  says  he  has 
t Thompson’s  service,  but  Captain  Jefferies  says  he  is  willing  to  re- 
ise  Lieutenant  Hummel  for  him.  I think  the  exchange  would  be 
vantageous  to  us.  I have  given  Lewis  a safe-conduct  till  I hear  from 
adquarters  if  the  exchange  is  approved. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

LINDSAY  MURDOCH, 
Captain , M.  S.  M.,  Commanding  Post 
Jol.  C.  W.  Marsh,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt . William  Flentz , Missouri  Cavalry , Militia. 

Cape  Girardeau,  April  8,  1862. 
n compliance  with  General  Orders,  No.  141,  I proceeded  with  a 
ail  of  25  men  of  my  company,  in  connection  with  23  of  Company  A, 
ier  command  of  Lieutenant  Hummel $ 21  of  Company  B,  under 
amand  of  Captain  Walker.  We  proceeded  on  Bloomfield  road  to 
lliain  Raney’s.  Captain  W alker  and  Thomas  Estes,  of  my  company, 
k sick,  and  returned  to  Cape  Girardeau.  We  thence  proceeded  to 
'kson.  About  5 miles  this  side  of  Jackson  we  were  informed  that 
onel  William  Jefferies,  with  his  force,  was  in  the  vicinity  of  Jack- 
1,  consisting  of  about  three  companies.  We  rushed  into  Jackson  at 
i speed  and  threw  pickets.  The  rebels  had  retreated.  Lieutenant 
mmel,  with  8 or  10  men,  followed  some  of  the  rebels  down  the 
thwest  prong  of  Hable’s  Creek.  They  took  their  stand  about  a 
iirter  of  a mile  below  town  in  ambush,  where  they  commenced  the 
lag  on  our  men.  I with  a squad  of  about  15  went  to  re-enforce  Lieu- 
ant  Hummel,  but  they  were  too  strong,  and  we  had  to  retreat. 

! cl  1 man  killed — Reuben  McDonald.  William  M.  Browner  was 
mded  (since  dead)  and  W.  W.  Praffer  missing— all  of  Company  A. 
|utenant  Hummel  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.  John  A.  Tay- 
i Company  B,  was  wounded,  and  James  Tergin,  of  Company  C,  was 
> wounded $ had  3 horses  killed,  1 badly  wounded.  I missed  3 sad- 
3 au(i  several  arms.  Had  to  return  to  Cape  Girardeau  for  re-en- 
•ements,  on  account  of  bad  arms.  Report  was  that  they  lost  4 men 
2 missing. 

WM.  FLENTZ, 

Captain , Commanding  Company  0,  M.  S.  M. 


9-16,  1862. — Scout  to  Shiloh  Camp,  on  Hoyle’s  Run,  near  Quincy, 
id  skirmishes ; scout  to  Little  Niangua,  Hickory  County,  and  scout  from 
umansville  to  Montevallo,  Vernon  County,  Mo. 

i °rt  °f  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  W.  McClurg , Missouri  Cavalry , Militia. 

Headquarters  Second  Battalion  M.  S.  M., 

Linn  Creek , Mo.,  April  22,  1862. 

,eneral:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report 
aptain  Cosgrove,  Company  B,  under  date  April  11,  informs  me  that 


366 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


Private  James  G.  Bobbitt,  while  in  company  with  5 others,  was  fire 
upon  from  ambush  in  the  vicinity  of  Quincy,  Hickory  County,  an 
wounded,  and  died  in  eight  hours.  Also  that  Corporal  Edward  Po\| 
ers  who  had,  contrary  to  orders,  separated  from  a detachment  | 
twenty “was  taken  prisoner  on  the  Little  Niangua,  Hickory  County,  tl 
a band  of  marauders,  and  murdered.  That  SergeanL  Enos  HalbeJ 


a band  of  marauders,  ana  wuiu-cicu..  — 

who  had  been  fired  upon  from  the  brush  and  seriously  wounded,  hal 
recovered.  That  about  40  compose  that  band  of  guerrillas  m Hickoil 

County,  plundering,  stealing,  and  ordering  off  Union  families.  , 

C Captain  Gravely,  Company  D,  under  date  of  17th  “f<^| 

me  that  he  left  Humansville  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  instant  wit 
100  men,  and  joined  Colouel  Moss,  of  Osceola,  with  75  men;  that  Cc 
onel  Moss  that  night  left  the  whole  command  within  5 miles  of  Mont 
vallo  Vernon  County,  and  with  25  men  went  to  the  town  and  remain! 
during  the  night.  About  daybreak  of  the  14th  15  rebels  rushed  i 
and  fired  upon  Colonel  Moss,  killing  2 men  and  badly  wounding  j 
others  He1  fired  on  the  rebels,  but  only  wounded  1 man.  The  who 
command  was  sent  forward,  rushed  into  town,  and  pursued  the  retreal 
jug  rebels,  killing  2 of  them  and  capturing  1.  Our  men,  while  abseil 
captured  about  10  men  who  were  in  the  Humansville  fight,  found  se 
eral  horses  which  had  been  stolen  from  Union  men  and  returned  the! 
to  their  owners,  and  returned  themselves  to  Humansville  on  the  mgj 
of  the  10th  instant.  Captain  Gravely  says:  “Our  guns  are  not  ei 
eient”  (meaning  the  Austrian  carbines),  and  adds,  “ I wish  to  chan;j 
them  for  rifles.”  He  closes  with  this  language  : 


from  the  brush. 


Lieutenant  Reeder,  under  date  of  April  18,  instant,  says  in  substanc; 


•ss  sit's.”' ™ - ”u  “ 


■perse  tnem  sooii.  me  onmu  - o-  , 

first  fire,  and  others  will  not  stand  more  than  one  more. 


Captain  Moore,  Company  H,  writes  in  substance : 

Rains’  Mill,  Morgan  County,  April  19,  18& 

After  crossing  Osage  River  in  the  ram  we  wfllin|to  rendei 

fext  day  we  arrived  at  Rams  Mill  at  2 ° this  immediate  vicim 


Mill  at  20  ciocHp.  ui.,  . _:„;ni 

every  assistance  in  his  power.  There  are  no  guerrilla  bands  in  this  immediate  r £ 


every  assistance  in  his  power.  1 neie  aa-e  "““7rraffinff  rebellion.  1 ex  I 

b^neces/ary  forns  m re-Lin  here  long, 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


JHAI*.  XVIII.] 


367 


■an  hear  of  no  secessionists  embodied  anywhere.  Numbers  of  them  have  gone  to  Tipton 
ind  taken  the  oath,  and  are  now  perfectly  quiet  and  quite  friendly. 

I herewith  inclose  a letter  from  Lieutenant  Reeder. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  McCLURG, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Battalion  M.  S.  M. 
Brig.  Gen.  James  Totten, 

Commanding  Central  District  of  Missouri , Jefferson  City , Mo. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING  TO 
OPERATIONS  IN  MISSOURI,  ARKANSAS,  KANSAS,  AND 
THE  INDIAN  TERRITORY  FROM  NOVEMBER  19,  1861,  TO 
APRIL  10,  1862. 

UNION  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  October  29,  1861. 
General  Meigs,  Washington , D.  C. : 

Dear  Sir  : I am  sorry  to  have  caused  you  so  much  annoyance  by 
ly  frequent  importunity  for  money  and  complaints  at  existing  state  of 
Wngs,  but  really  our  difficulties  have  been  legion,  and  it  is  now  almost 
doubtful  struggle  in  coming  out  right  in  the  quotient ; that  is,  of  hav- 
lg  gun  and  mortar  boats  in  efficient  condition  for  going  down  the  river 
l December. 

I am  urging  on  the  gunboats  proper,  but  amid  difficulties  almost  in- 
iperable.  Still  I hope  to  succeed.  I have  appointed  Mr.  S.  Hen- 
ques  paymaster-in-chief,  who,  independently  of  doing  a single  paymas- 
pr’s  duty  for  a gunboat,  not  only  acts  as  my  clerk  and  secretary,  but 
Iso  performs  the  duties  of  supervising  contracts;  in  fact,  is  a think- 
ig  as  well  as  working  man.  I appointed  him  to  do  the  work  intended 
>r  Mr.  Wise  while  he  acted  in  that  capacity  before  being  appointed 
ssistant  paymaster.  I give  him  in  all  $200  per  year  less  than  Mr. 
^ise  received.  I trust  that  this  is  all  right ; in  fact,  I cannot  get  on 
ithout  him,  and  he  only  could  be  secured  at  his  present  pay. 

Excuse  my  hurry. 

Respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

A.  H.  FOOTE. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  November  7,  1861. 
eneral  Meigs,  Washington , D.  C.  : 

Dear  Sir  : I am  happy  to  say,  although  at  a late  day,  that  guns, 
)wder,  shell,  small-arms,  as  well  as  all  or  most  material  stores,  are 
>w  here,  and  with  the  men  coming  (as  I infer  from  Secretary  Fox’s 
te  letter  to  me  that  they  will  be  on  hand  before  the  25th  instant),  we 
iall  be  ready,  as  far  as  I can  control  matters,  to  equip  and  soon  have 
ie  gunboats  in  fighting  order.  Still  the  boats  are  not  ready,  and  I 
n nervously  anxious  about  them,  finding  that  they  are  drawing  so 
uch  water  on  being  launched,  and  therefore  consider  it  my  duty  to 
ake  the  following  statement  in  reference  to  the  gunboats  and  the 
ortar  boats  now  building,  most  of  which  are  already  launched. 


368 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  xvm. 


The  gunboats  draw  light;  but  with  the  iron  plating  on  (except  22 
tons  mostly  forward  of  the  center  of  gravity),  5 feet  10  inches  aft  and  3 
feet  ’ll  inches  forward,  the  fan-tail,  forming  the  deck  between  hulls, 
abaft  the  wheel  (the  recess),  is  now  13  inches  from  the  water  lying  still 
in  smooth  water.  Two  rudders  are  still  to  be  shipped,  and  these  in  ajj 
short  time,  by  absorption  of  water,  will  sink  from  their  own  weight  ill 
detached  from  the  vessels.  The  wheel  buckets  are  also  to  be  put  on, 
which  will  increase  the  weight  astern.  All  of  which  you  rf  see ' leaved 
little  or  no  room  for  clearance  of  water,  as  the  wheel  buckets,  rudders 
&c  alluded  to  will  have  an  actual  weight  of  3J  tons  on  the  extrema 
stern,  which  will  reduce  the  clearance  to  114  inches ; I mean  by  clear! 
ance  of  water  the  confined  space  of  114  inches  from  the  surface  of  the 
d,  ; *i  ..  wWftK  water  will  be  so  disturbed 


water  to  the  deck  forming  the  recess, . 

by  the  action  of  the  wheel  as  to  prevent  the  escapement  of  water  m sc 
confined  a place,  for  the  waves  caused  by  the  action  of  the  wheel  will 
be  4 feet  and  the  half  of  which,  of  course,  as  you  will  see,  will  be  re 
quired  for  clearance.  Now,  all  this  is  based  upon  the  draught  they  will 
have  when  ready  to  receive  armament,  outfit,  stores,  and  crew. 

In  my  opinion  the  remedy  which  appears  the  most  feasible  to  correct 
the  evils  that  I have  set  forth  is  to  cut  out  the  deck  and  beams  cover! 
i„  „■  the  clearance,  springing  a heavy  timber  arch  over  the  space,  ancj 
“InectingX  ^d^  of  "the"  arch  helms  with  say,  24;inch  round  ^on 
and  upon  these  beams  construct  a light  deck.  Mr.  Eads,  the  con 
tractor,  believes  that  the  draught  astern  will  not  be : increased,  for thti 
reason  that  so  much  iron  plating  and  a large  portion  of  the  vessel  ' 
armament  will  go  forward  of  the  center  of  gravity,  wh^  wiU,  in  lij 
opinion,  lift  the  stern  and  give  greater  clearance.  Mr.  Bads  also  saya 

that  while  he  had  no  part  in  the  modeling  of  these  boats  and  is  therd 
fore  relieved  of  all  responsibility  as  to  their  imperfections,  he  thmks  i 
am  unnecessarily  concerned  as  to  the  amount  of  clearance  for  the  whee 
and  the  difficulties  which  I fear  will  ensue  from  that  defect. 

I have  had  the  mortar  boats  examined,  and  send  herewith  a rougl 
sketch  and  description  of  them  * It  is  a pity  that  the  decks  will  com< 
nearly  awash  or  even  with  the  water;  but  still,  the  bulwarks  bemg  wdl 
calked  and  secured,  it  is  believed  that  the  boats  will  carry  safely 

mortars  and  beds,  with  necessary  appurtenances,  keepmg  the  weigh] 
below  35  tons.  I am  greatly  exercised  about  the  mortar  boats,  ant 
also  the  propellers  to  tow  them,  which  have  been  ordered  by  Genera 

FlI^m  Obeying  these  orders,  however,  and  fitting  out  the  boats  at 
far  as  having  no  money  or  credit  for  this  work  will  enable  me  to  do. 

Please  telegraph  me  if  lam  authorized  to  appoint  officers  and  ge 
men  for  this  purpose,  as  we  are  behind  time,  arising  from  causes  who  „ 

beyond  my  control.  _ . , , 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servnnt^  j?00TE 

Cavtain,  U.  S.  Navy,  &c. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , November  lo,  1301. 

Gapt.  Andrew  H.  Foote,  U.  S.  N., 

Commanding  Gunboats , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Sir:  I am  instructed  to  say  that  General  Halleckhas  instructions  r 
regard  to  the  gunboats.  — 


Omitted  as  of  no  present  importance. 


Jhap.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


369 


The  appropriation  not  being  sufficient  to  complete  and  equip  more 
ffian  three  altered  and  seven  built  gunboats,  the  department  is  embar- 
rassed by  the  action  of  the  commanding  general  [Department  of  the] 
West,  in  ordering  so  many  mortar  rafts,  tugs,  and  altered  boats  in  ad- 
lition  to  those  contracted  for  by  this  department. 

All  cannot  be  completed  without  further  appropriations,  and  for  the 
iresent  at  least  this  department  cannot  remit  money  except  for  those 
contracted  for  under  its  authority. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster-  General. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , November  15,  1861. 

Japt.  Andrew  H.  Foote,  U.  S.  NT.,  Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Dear  Captain  : I regret  the  bad  promise  of  the  gunboats  in  regard 
o draught. 

I cannot  advise  you  at  this  distance  how  to  remedy  the  evil.  One 
•oat  fitted  up  would  show  its  extent,  and  enable  you  to  determine  the  best 
leans  of  remedy,  if  any  be  needed. 

As  for  the  mortar  boats,  I have  written  to  you  that  the  appropriation 
annot  meet  the  cost.  They  were  never  intended.  I see  Mr.  Adams 
rith  a letter  from  Lieutenant  Porter,  calls  for  forty  more  tugboats* 
mall  propellers. 

Money  is  wanting.  I am  informed  here  that  General  Halleck  has  full 
istructions  and  I hope  will  bring  order  out  of  all  this. 

In  the  mean  time  use  your  own  discretion  as  to  alterations  of  con- 
traction. 

We  relied  upon  the  naval  constructor  who  modeled  these  gunboats, 
still  hope  he  has  not  blundered. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster-  General. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

^°*  1*  ) Saint  Louis , November  19,  1861. 

I.  In  compliance  with  General  Orders,  Ho.  97,  Headquarters  of  the 
rmy,  Washington,  Hovember  9,  1861,  the  undersigned  hereby  takes 
•mrnand  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri,  including  the  States  of 
issouri,  Iowa,  Minnesota,  Wisconsin,  Illinois,  Arkansas,  and  thatpor- 
m of  Kentucky  west  of  Cumberland  Eiver. 

# # # # # # # 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 
Major-General , TJ.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , November  20,  1861. 

>1.  Richard  J.  Oglesby, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Bird’s  Point , Mo. : 

You  will  cause  an  immediate  investigation  to  be  made  of  the  property 
1 w illegally  held  by  officers  and  soldiers  of  your  command.  All  offi- 
24  r r — vol  VIII 


370  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYin 

cers  found 

expedition,  without  written ^mituomy  ! put  in  confinement. 

KuctofS  aninfamoTschLaeter  has  been  reported  tome  as  to 
Conduct  ouutu  du  iiLLo,  . t it  ig  wen  that  the  matter  should 

f11  ^rithJ^lftfue  the  guilty  should  be  punished,  in  order  that  the 
be  set  right.  Iftrue^th. s&u iry  ot£ers.  Knowing  that  your 

™st  S!f iSteSS  with  mine,  I trust  you  will  have  this  mat- 

ter  thoroughly  investigated.  ^ GRANT, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding. 


General  Orders, 
No.  3. 


) Hdqrs.  Dept,  oe  the  Missouri, 

3 ] Saint  Louis , November  20,  1861. 

T Tt  has  been  represented  that  important  information  respecting  the 
numbers  and  condition  of  our  forces  is  conveyed  to  the  enemy  by  means 
Slaves  who  are  admitted  within  our  lines  In  order  to 
remedy  this  evil,  it  is  directed  that  no  such  persons  be  hereafter 
.,,11  Aritpr  the  lines  of  any  camp  or  of  any  forces  on  the  march, 
and  that  any  now  within  such  lines  be  immediately  excluded  therefrom. 

II  The  general  commanding  wishes  to  impress  upon  all  officers  m 
command  ff  posts  and  troops  in  the  field  the  importance  of  preventing 
unauthorized  persons  of  every  description  from  entering  and  leaving 
our  lines,  and\ff  observing  the  greatest  precaution  in  the  employment] 
of  agents  and  clerks  in  confidential  positions. 

By  order  of  Major-General  HaHeok^^  MoMIOHAEL, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  ; 


General  Orders, 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  Kansas, 

No  x j Saint  Louis , Mo .,  November  20,  1861. 

I.  Pursuant  to  orders  from  Headquarters  at  Washington  the  under- 
signed hereby  assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  Kansas, 
h The  following-named  gentlemen  are  announced  as  constit  „ 

the  staff  of  the  major-general  commanding  : , Q Halpiue 

^nrcr  Tospnh  K.  Barnes,  medical  director  Maj.  Chaiies  u. 

T W Shaffer,  chief  quartermaster;  Oapt.  J.  vV.  Turner,  erne 

Richard  W.  Thompson,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  Samue 
aide-de-camp.  p HUNTER, 

Major-General. 


[November  20  (about),  1861/ 
Preamble  and  resolutions  by  a committee  from  Missouri. 


Major-General  Hallegk,  . , ^ A'P  • 

Comdg.  United  States  forces  m the  State  of  Missouri,  Ac.. 

We,  the  undersigned,  citizens  resident  of  Southwestern  Missour  , 


jbap.  xvni.] 


371 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

dew  of  the  great  desolation  of  the  country  and  suffering  of  thousands  of 
women  and  children,  present  the  following  preamble  and  resolutions 
for  your  consideration : 

Whereas  there  is  now  and  has  been  a large  force  of  the  rebel  troops 
n Southwestern  Missouri,  laying  waste  the  whole  country  and  subject- 
ng  women  and  children  to  destitution  and  starvation ; and  whereas 
hat  portion  of  the  State  has  remained  loyal  to  the  Government  under 
ill  the  trials  and  reverses  through  which  she  has  been  compelled  to 
3assj  and  whereas  that  part  of  the  State,  in  an  agricultural  point  of 
dew,  will  compare  favorably  with  any  other  of  the  Western  States 
md  contains  more  mineral  wealth  than  any  other  State  of  the  Union- 
md  whereas  that  portion  of  the  State  lying  between  Springfield  and 
Seosho  is  the  key  to  Southern  and  Western  Missouri,  as  also  to  Kansas 
md  the  Indian  Territories,  from  an  invasion  from  the  South;  and 
vhereas,  if  that  portion  of  the  State  was  held  by  Federal  forces  it 
vould  enable  the  Federal  and  State  authorities  to  raise  several  thou- 
sand troops  for  the  service: 

Resolved , therefore , 1st,  That  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
s under  obligations  to  the  people  of  that  part  of  the  State  to  protect 
hem  in  their  rights  as  American  citizens. 

Resolved , 2d,  That  the  recent  retrograde  movement  of  our  army  from 
Springfield  has  been  the  cause  of  from  3,000  to  5,000  men,  women  and 
hildren  leaving  their  homes,  without  money  and  many  in  a suffering: 
iondition.  s 

Resolved , 3d,  That  the  people  of  the  Southwest  entertain  the  highest 
»pmion  of  the  military  skill  of  Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  and  that  we 
espectfully  petition  you  to  send  to  the  Southwest  sufficient  force  to 
fold  that  part  of  the  State. 

Resolved , 4th,  That  we  believe  that  15,000  men,  under  a competent 
general,  will  be  sufficient  to  drive  the  rebels  from  our  land  and  restore 
>eace  to  the  country. 

Resolved,  5th,  That  Nathan  Bray,  of  Barton;  Ool.  A.  Williamson,  of 
Jade;  J.  B.  Clerk,  of  Dade,  and  Dr.  1ST.  Hocke,  of  Lawrence  Counties 
>e  appointed  a committee  to  present  these  resolutions  and  preamble 
o Major-General  Halleck. 

A.  WILLIAMS  OK, 

vr  ^ President. 

Kathan  Bray,  Secretary. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , November  21,  1861. 
"apt.  Andrew  H.  Foote,  U.  S.  K., 

Commanding  Gunboat  Flotilla , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Captain:  Your  letter  of  the  15th  instant  in  relation  to  the  employ- 
ment of  paymasters  is  received. 

The  system  of  accountability  seems  a good  one,  but  the  name  of  pay- 
master grates  upon  official  ears  here,  paymaster  being  appointed  only 
»y  the  President  and  Senate.  We  should  call  them  clerks.  Ko  chief 
paymaster  can  be  needed.  That  is  the  duty  of  the  captain  and  assista- 
nt quartermaster,  Captain  Wise,  who  is  the  legal  agent  for  the  dis- 
•ursement  of  all  quartermaster’s  funds  connected  with  the  gunboats. 

there  is,  I presume,  a necessity  for  some  one  on  each  gunboat  to 
ake  care  of  the  property  and  make  issues.  On  transports  this  is 


372 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIU. 

usually  the  master  of  the  vessel;  on  Western  boats,  the  clerk,  who 

aCAlf  money  remitted  from  this  department  for  this  service  will  go  to 
the  quartermaster,  Captain  Wise,  and  be  charged  to  him. 

He  must  see,  with  your  assistance  and  direction,  that  it  is  put  into  safe 
hands  and  properly  and  honestly  disbursed.  The  accounts,  therefore, 
of  all  subordinate  agents  must  be  made  up  in  his  office  as  his  accounts. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ MEIGS 

Quartermaster-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  November  21,  1861. 

General  Meigs,  Quartermaster-General:  . . 

General:  We  have  partially  investigated  three  claims  fromCmcm- 
nati,  Ohio,  for  horses.  The  uniform  price  was  $130.  J.  E.  Keeside, 
appointed  by  General  Fremont  inspector  of  horses  at  Cincinnati,  also! 
contracted  for  the  horses.  We  understand  that  there  are  other  con- 
tracts there  made  by  Beeside  at  $125.  His  recede 

Fremont  to  inspect  horses  and  allow  not  to  exceed  $130,  and  to  receive 
2J  per  cent,  for  inspecting.  Ought  an  inspector  of  horses  to  have  any- 

iliinsr  to  do  with  their  purchase1?  t 

* We  would  suggest  that  2f  per  cent,  for  inspection  of  horses  is  an 

“a  witnessThis  morning  testified  that  he  understood  that  Mr.  Reeside 
was  inspecting  harness  in  Cincinnati.  , A 

Ought  there  not  to  be  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  the  same  abuse  does 
not  exist  in  this  as  in  the  case  of  horse  contracts  % Ought  not  Beeside  s 

authority  to  inspect  horses  to  be  revoked  . 

We  are  satisfied  that  any  compensation  given  to  inspectors  of  horses, 
harness,  or  anything  else  which  is  made  to  depend  on  the  value  of  the 
article  inspected  will  lead  to  the  grossest  fraud. 

Most  respectfully,  DAVID  DAVIS, 

Chairman  of  Board  of  Commissioners,  j 


Springfield.  November  21,  1861. 


Maior-General  Halleck:  , 

The  Fifty-second  Regiment,  Colonel  Wilson,  and  Fifty-fifth  Infantry, 
Colonel  Stuart,  and  Fourth  Cavalry  Regiment,  Colonel  Dickey,  and 
Hinth  Cavalry  Regiment,  Colonel  Brackett,  are  nearly  full . 
regiments  have  been  ordered  to  Saint  Louis  by  General  Hunter  withOTt 
consultation  with  me.  I have  directed  Colonels  Stuart  and  Brackett 
to  disregard  the  order.  I have  just  learned  of  the  orders  to  Colonel 
Wilson  and  Dickey.  Both  of  the  latter  regiments  are > now 
and  will  soon  be  ready  for  service.  Referring  you  to  order  No.  78  oi 
the  War  Department,  I have  the  honor  to  request  that .you  0°““,. 
mand  the  orders  to  Colonels  Dickey  and  Wilson,  and  “ 
organization  of  these  regiments  can  be  completed  I will  report  the  fart 
to  you.  I had  a most  pressing  application  from  Generals  Grant  an 
McClernand  for  an  armed  regiment  at  Cave  in  Eock’ “ Hardm  Co  ty, 
Illinois,  and  will,  with  your  approbation,  send  one  of  them i tc .that ; poi 
when  their  organization  can  be  completed.  1 have  no  other  arme  g 
ments  but  these  at  present.  Please  answer  lm^d^p^ATES, 

Governor  Illinois. 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


373 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  November  22,  1861. 

Hon.  Richard  Yates, 

Governor  of  Illinois , Springfield , III. : 

Yours  of  the  21st  received.  Orders  for  moving  troops  suspended. 
Make  no  movements  till  further  orders. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  November  22,  1861. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander  of  the  Western  Department : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  represent  to  you  that  the  force  now 
under  my  command  at  Jefferson  City  is  very  small  (numbering  only 
about  1,000  effective  men),  which  is  to  garrison  the  post,  furnish  the 
police  of  the  city,  and  guard  the  Osage  and  Moreau  Bridges  on  the 
Pacific  Railroad  and  five  bridges  over  Gray’s  Greek  on  the  same  rail- 
road. Jefferson  City  being  the  seat  of  government  of  Missouri,  the 
only  political  point  in  the  State,  the  home  of  Gov.  C.  F.  Jackson,  in- 
creases the  anxiety  of  the  rebel  army  under  General  Price  to  recapture 
Jefferson  City  over  any  other  point  in  Missouri.  The  prestige  given 
the  secessionists  in  Missouri  would  be  very  powerful  in  the  occupation 
of  the  capital  of  the  State;  therefore  the  enemy  will  make  a greater 
effort  to  retake  that  point  than  all  others  in  Missouri. 

I would  respectfully  submit  for  your  consideration  the  propriety  of 
placing  a good  force  at  Jefferson  City  and  at  as  early  a period  as 
possible.  If  we  had,  say,  one  good  regiment  of  cavalry  and  two  or 
three  regiments  of  infantry,  in  addition  to  what  we  have,  with  some 
artillery,  which  we  greatly  need,  we  would  be  able,  with  the  completion 
of  our  fortifications,  which  can  be  finished  in  a few  weeks,  to  hold  Jeffer- 
son City  against  a very  large  force. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TIIOS.  L.  PRICE, 

Brigadier -General,  U.  S.  Army , Comdg.  Post , Jefferson  City. 


Rolla,  Mo.,  November  22,  1861. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General  : 

The  rebel  forces  between  Springfield  and  Lebanon  are  large.  Their 
pickets  extend  10  miles  this  side  of  Lebanon.  Their  forces  are  scat- 
tered over  a large  part  of  the  country  for  subsistence.  They  pick  up 
many  stragglers  and  rob  the  fugitives. 

G.  M.  DODGE, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , November  22,  1861. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

I have  frequently  reported  to  the  Western  Department  that  the  line 
of  steamers  plying  between  Saint  Louis  and  Cairo,  by  landing  at  points 
on  the  Missouri  shore,  were  enabled  to  afford  aid  and  comfort  to  the 


374 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvin. 


enemy.  I have  been  reliably  informed  that  some  of  the  officers,  par- 
ticularly the  clerks  of  these  boats,  were  regularly  m the  employ  of  the 
Southern  Confederacy,  so  called.  The  case  of  the  Platte  Yalley,  a few 
days  since,  confirmed  me  in  this  belief.  I have  heretofore  recommended 
that  all  the  carrying  trade  between  here  aud  Saint  Louis  be  performed  » 
by  Government,  charging  uniform  rates.  I would  respectfully  renew 
the  suggestion,  and  in  consideration  of  the  special  disloyalty  of  South- 1 
eastern  Missouri  I would  further  recommend  that  all  commerce  be  cut 
off  from  all  points  south  of  Cape  Girardeau.  There  is  not  a sufficiency 
of  Union  sentiment  left  in  this  portion  of  the  State  to  save  Sodom. 
This  is  shown  from  the  fact  that  Jeff.  Thompson  or  any  of  the  rebels 
can  go  into  Charleston  and  spend  hours  or  encamp  for  the  mgffit  on 
their  way  north  to  depredate  upon  Union  men,  and  not  one  loyalist  is 
found  to  report  the  fact  to  our  pickets,  stationed  but  l^iniles  on. 

U.  S.  GBANT, 

Briaadier- General . 


Sedalia,  November  23,  1861. 

General  Halleck: 

General:  I have  what  is  deemed  reliable  information  that  Price  is 
marching  north  with  a large  army  at  the  rate  of  30  miles  a day.  r orce 
estimated  at  from  33,000  to  50,000.  He  will  cross  the  Osage  to-day  at 
Huffman’s  Perry.  It  is  said  that  he  is  marching  for  this  place,  lhe 
lines  are  down  between  this  and  Syracuse. 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  23,  1861. 

Col.  Fred.  Steele,  Commanding , Sedalia,  Mo.: 

Make  armed  reconnaissances  in  sufficient  force  in  the  direction  of  the 
enemy’s  reported  movements  and  keep  me  advised  of  the  results. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  8. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 
i November  23,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  having  reported  for  duty  in  this  depart- 
ment, will  proceed  at  once  to  visit  the  different  stations  of  the  troops  m 
this  department,  and  will  report,  during  his  progress,  to  these  head- 
quarters the  number  and  effective  strength  of  the  several  regiments  and 
companies,  the  State  from  which  they  came,  the  character  of  arms  aud 
ammunition,  their  equipment  of  clothing,  wTagons,  tents,  &c.,  the  means 
of  obtaining  subsistence  and  forage,  their  drill  and  discipline,  the  char- 
acter of  defenses,  if  any,  and  their  ability  to  serve  the  guns  in  position 
or  harnessed  up,  and  generally  all  things  considered  to  give  the  com- 
manding general  an  idea  of  their  real  condition  for  service.  He  will 
also  report  upon  the  routes  of  rivers  or  railway  upon  which  these  troops 
depend  for  their  supplies  or  transportation,  and  such  other  matters  as 
may  seem  to  him  proper  to  be  communicated. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

J J.  C.  KELTOI7, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General- 


Chap.  XVIII.  | 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


375 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  November  24,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis, 

Commanding , Saint  Louis , Jfo.  : 

The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  yon  carry  into  effect  the 
recommendations  of  Brig.  Gen.  IT.  S.  Grant,  conveyed  in  a communica- 
tion to  these  headquarters,  dated  November  22,  concerning  the  river 
navigation  of  the  Missouri  as  far  as  you  may  deem  necessary  and  prac- 


ticable. 


J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Roll  A,  Mo.,  November  24,  1861. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General: 

My  scouts  are  just  in  from  Springfield;  left  Wednesday  night.  The 
enemy’s  main  force  was  still  south  of  Springfield.  They  had  scouting 
parties  out  in  all  directions.  The  force  that  followed  Major  Wright 
to  Lebanon  has  disappeared  from  the  country  between  Lebanon  and 
Springfield.  Their  scouting  parties  made  several  of  our  stragglers  pris- 
oners at  Lebanon.  There  was  a scouting  party  of  80  or  more. 

G.  M.  DODGE, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Sedalia,  November  24,  1861. 


General  H.  W.  Halleck:: 


Stage  proprietor  left  Warrensburg  at  1 p.  m.  to-day.  Major  Hough 
has  been  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  three  days.  Our  re-enforce- 
ments passed  through  Warrensburg  at  4 a.  m.  to-day  within  15  miles 
of  Hough.  Six  hundred  rebel  cavalry  entered  Poison  last  night. 
Eighty  cavalry  passed  through  Clinton  yesterday  en  route  to  War- 


rensburg. 


FRED’K  STEELE, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  24,  1861. 

Col.  Fred.  Steele, 

Commanding , (fee.,  Sedalia , Mo. : 

Order  in  all  troops  except  strong  and  well-organized  reconnqitering 
parties,  and  be  prepared  to  resist  or  attack  the  enemy.  Communicate 
this  order  to  General  Pope’s  division,  so  that  they  may  be  ready  to 
move  at  a moment’s  warning. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  24,  1861. 

Generals  Sigel  and  Asboth, 

Commanding  Divisions  at  Bolla , Mo.: 

Hold  your  divisions  in  readiness  for  an  attack  or  to  move  against 


376 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XYTH. 

the  enemy,  and  telegraph  me  all  information.  Send  out  strong  recon- 
noitering  parties  in  the  direction  the  enemy  is  said  to  be  moving. 

TT.  "W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-General. 


Sedalia,  November  24,  1861. 

Col.  Ered.  Steele, 

Commanding  Post , Sedalia  : 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  my  proceedings  as  command-  i 
ant  of  the  post  at  Warsaw,  Mo.  In  obedience  to  orders  from  General 
Sturgis  on  the  14th  instant,  I was  ordered  to  remain  at  Warsaw  with  S 
my  own  company  (H,  First  Regiment  Nebraska  Volunteers),  m con- 
nection with  one  company  of  Merrill’s  Horse,  Capt.  H.  Wilson,  to 
occupy  the  place,  protect  the  Government  stores,  and  remain  until 
all  the  commissary  and  quartermaster’s  stores  were  removed  to  some 
other  point.  On  the  night  of  the  18th,  learning  from  undoubted  au- 
thority that  the  enemy  were  concentrating  in  small  bodies  at  various 
points  within  from  8 to  15  miles  of  us  on  this  side  of  the  Osage  and 
were  contemplating  an  attack  on  us,  I deemed  it  proper  to  telegraph 
you  for  a small  re-enforcement.  On  the  night  of  the  20th  re-enforce- 
ments came  to  the  number  of  about  150  men,  viz : Captain  Baird,  of 
Merrill’s  Horse,  60  men,  and  Captain  Williams,  of  Seventh  Missouri 
Volunteers  (two  detachments),  about  90  men,  together  with  24  wagons. 
On  the  morning  of  the  21st  the  wagons  were  all  loaded.  During  the 
morning  of  the  21st  a telegraphic  dispatch  was  received  by  the  com- 
missary of  the  post,  Captain  Schenck,  at  Sedalia,  from  Captain  Swain, 
quartermaster,  stating  that  52  teams  were  sent.  The  balance  are  only 
ten  hours  behind  those  already  there.  These  teams  did  not  arrive. 

On  the  evening  of  the  21st  a fire  broke  out  in  some  old  buildings 
on  the  southwest  corner  of  the  public  square,  and  diagonally  from  the 
quarters  occupied  by  myself,  my  company,  and  the  hospital  depart- 
ment, on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street.  This  occurred  at  dusk  in  the 
evening  and  as  the  guard  were  being  posted.  I immediately  sent  a 
soldier  to  ascertain  what  the  light  originated  from.  He  quickly  re- 
turned, and  reported  to  me  that  a fire  was  burning  between  two  old 
deserted  houses  about  2 feet  apart,  and  that  a man  in  citizen’s  dress 
ran  away  from  the  place  and  disappeared  in  the  darkness  on  his 
approach.  I immediately  ordered  a portion  of  the  guard  to  the  spot 
with  axes  and  a few  buckets  of  water,  and  endeavored  to  arrest  the 
fire,  but  in  vain,  as  a heavy  wind  was  blowing  from  the  southeast.  The 
whole  corner  of  the  block  was  in  a very  few  moments  in  flames,  with 
the  wind  blowing  very  hard  towards  my  quarters  and  the  hospitals  in 
the  same  building.  It  required  our  utmost  exertions  to  prevent  the 
whole  from  being  in  flames.  At  this  juncture  the  wind  veered  to  the 
southwest,  and  in  a very  short  time  all  of  the  block  of  brick  buildings 
in  which  the  Government  property  was  stored  was  in  flames,  borne  ol 
the  Government  stores  were  got  out  of  the  buildings,  but  the  heat 
became  so  intense  that  it  was  impossible  for  men  to  work  and  it  was 
nearly  all  consumed.  . 

I had  previously  ordered  Captain  Schenck,  commissary  of  the  post, 
that  if  the  balance  of  our  teams  did  not  arrive  soon  and  there  was  no 
prospect  of  getting  away  what  remaining  property  was  not  loaded  into 
the  wagons  already,  to  burn  it,  in  order  to  save  it  from  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  But  very  little  of  the  stores  were  burned  at  our 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


Chap.  XVIII.J 


377 


hands,  as  the  flames  spread  so  rapidly  that  it  was  impossible  to  remove 
them  from  the  buildings. 

We  left  the  place  at  10  o’clock  that  night  (21st)  and  bivouacked  4 
miles  from  town  until  morning;  reached  here  on  the  23d,  in  the  after- 
noon ; met  the  balance  of  the  train  of  wagons  sent  to  us  15  miles  from 
this  place  on  the  23d  at  night. 

My  own  conclusion  is,  in  reference  to  the  origin  of  the  fire,  that  it 
was  done  and  deliberately  planned  by  the  enemy. 

.Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  F.  KENEDY, 

Captain , Comdg.  Post  at  Warsaiv , Co.  if,  First  Begt.  N.  Vols. 


Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

Washington , November  25,  1861. 
flaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  XL  S.  Army, 

Commanding  Dept,  of  the  Missouri,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

^ Sir  : In  reply  to  your  telegram  of  the  20th  instant*  the  General-in- 
)hief  desires  you  to  give  your  views  more  fully  as  to  the  necessity  of 
enforcing  martial  law  in  your  department,  and,  if  you  think  the  neces- 
lty  is  sufficient!}  pressing  for  such  a step,  to  mention  the  names  and 
iddress  of  the  officers  to  whom  you  think  the  power  should  be  given. 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Syracuse,  November  25,  1861. 

"apt.  William  McMichael, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

The  report  of  the  approach  of  the  rebel  general  in  this  direction  is 
trongly  confirmed  this  morning.  I have  sent  out  reliable  scouts  from 

ere. 

. . JEFF.  0.  DAYIS, 

Acting  Brigadier-General , Commanding  Second  Division. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  November  25,  1861. 

ren.  Thomas  L.  Price, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo. : 

All  the  forces  under  your  command  must  be  ready  to  resist  an  attack 
r to  take  the  field  should  the  rumors  of  the  enemy’s  approach  prove 

ll^Hn  I 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  November  25,  1861. 
taj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck: 

Nine  hundred  effective  men  at  the  post ; two  batteries  and  one  cav- 
Jy  company  totally  unarmed;  fortifications  incomplete ; insufficiency 

* See  Appendix,  p.  817. 


378 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XYIII. 


of  guns  and  ammunition;  applications  repeatedly  made  for  necessary,, 
forces;  bad  condition  to  resist  attack,  much  less  to  go  into  the  field. 
The  enemy  will  more  likely  attack  Jefferson  City,  knowing  our  weak- 
ness.  Is  'it  possible  to  furnish  more  force  he^og  L pKICBj 

Brigadier- General.  | 


General  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Missouri  State  Militia 

i J Saint  Louts , November  25,  1861.  I 

An  arrangement  having  been  made  between  the  Governor  of  Mis  ? 
souri  and  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  under  which  troops  tc 
be  raised  as  Missouri  State  Militia,  to  serve  in  the  State  during  th 
war,  are  to  be  armed,  equipped,  clothed,  subsisted,  transported,  and 
paid  by  the  United  States  during  the  time  they  are  embodied  asj 
military  force,  to  be  held  in  camp  and  in  the  field,  drilled  and  dis 
cinlined  according  to  the  regulations  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States 
and  to  be  subject  to  the  Articles  of  War,  the  following  general  otoei 
has  been  issued  from  the  War  Department,  and  is  herewith  publishec 
for  the  information  and  guidance  of  all  concerned. 

^ Sfc  TT  “ 


This  arrangement  has  been  made  in  order  to  secure  to  the  troops 
raised  for  the  purpose  of  suppressing  insurrection  in  and  repellinj  in 
vasion  of  the  State  of  Missouri  the  same  compensation  as  that  receu  e( 
hv  the  United  States  Volunteers. 

To  the  end  that  the  State  Militia  may  be  placed  as  nearly  as  possiblj 
upon  the  same  footing  with  the  United  States  Volunteers,  the  oiea 
ization  will  be  made  the  same,  as  follows,  viz:  , , , . J 

Each  regiment  shall  have  1 colonel,  1 lieutenant-colonel,  1 major, 
adjutant  (a  lieutenant),  1 quartermaster  (a  lieutenant),  1 surgeon  am 
I assistant  surgeon,  1 sergeant-major,  1 quartermaster-sergeant,  1 com 
mtssaS^sergeait,  and  2 principal  musicians,  and  shall  be  composed to 
10  companies,  each  company  to  consist  oi  1 captain,  1 first  lieutenant 
1 secoml  lieutenant,  1 first  sergeant,  4 sergeants,  8 corporals,  2 musl 
cians,  1 wagoner,  and  from  64  to  82  privates.  • 

This  force  to  be  organized  into  brigades  of  not  less  than  four  leg. 
ments  each  ; each  brigade  to  have  1 brigadier-general,  2 aides-de-cam, 
1 assistant  adjutant-general  with  the  rank  of  captain,  X surgeon, 
assistant  quartermaster,  and  1 commissary  of  subsistence  (captains),  j 
The  company  officers  are  to  be  elected  by  their  respective  compame 
and  the  field  and  staff  officers  appointed  by  the  GovwnOT. 

The  troops  already  organized  under  the  call  of  the  Executive  ottn 
State  can  have  the  benefits  of  the  arrangement  made  with  the  CxO\  en 
ment  of  the  United  States  by  increasing  the  numbers  m 
regiments  to  the  requirements  of  the  arrangement,  and  being  mustere 
Service  for  the  war,  according  to  its  terms,  their  officers  having  th 

raMaj:hGen.°Henry  W.  Halleck,  of  the  United  States  Army,  has  bee 
appointed  and  commissioned  major-general  of  the  Missoun  Sta 

Militia-  H.  E.  GAMBLE, 

Governor  of  Missouri. 


* See  General  Orders,  No.  96,  A.  G.  O.,  November  7, 1861,  Series  I,  Vol.  Ill,  P 565 


:hai\  xvhi.] 


379 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Adjutant-General’s  Office, 
Washington , D.  O.,  November  26,  1861. 
Maj.  Gen.  1).  Hunter,  U.  S.  Army, 

Commanding  Department  of  Kansas , Fort  Leavenworth , Fans. : 

Sir  : The  General-in-Chief  thinks  an  expedition  might  be  made  to 
id  vantage  from  your  department  west  of  Arkansas  against  Northeast- 
ern Texas.  He  accordingly  desires  you  to  report  at  an  early  day  what 
roops  and  means  at  your  disposal  you  could  bring  to  bear  on  that 
mint.* 

I am,  sir,  &c., 

L.  THOMAS, 

A djutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  26,  1861. 

^red.  Steele, 

Colonel  Commanding , Sedalia , Mo. : 

Telegrams  from  Eolla  indicate  that  the  enemy  is  moving  north,  but 
iot  in  any  large  force.  This  force  is  spread  over  a wide  extent  of 
ountry,  to  deceive  as  to  strength  and  point  of  attack.  Throw  out 
econnoitering  parties,  and  advise  me  of  all  reliable  information  you 
btain.  It  is  only  by  comparing  reports  from  different  points  that  I 
an  judge  as  to  the  true  facts  of  the  case. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


teneral  Halleck: 


Sedalia,  November  26,  1861. 


Look  well  to  Jefferson  City  and  the  North  Missouri  Eailroad.  Price 
ims  at  both.  He  is  gathering  large  numbers  of  recruits  and  is  driving 
ut  all  Union  men  as  he  comes  north.  1 think  McCulloch  will  threaten 
tolla,  whilst  Price  crosses  the  Osage,  by  large  number  of  detachments, 
i assemble  at  some  agreed  point.  Two  detachments  are  out,  about 
hich  I feel  uneasy. 

SHEEMAN. 


reneral  Halleck  : 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  November  26,  1861. 


My  information  of  Price’s  movements  and  intention  is  good.  A strong 
3connoitering  party  is  in,  confirmatory  of  other  accounts.  Our  troops 
lust  be  in  easy  supporting  distance. 

W.  T.  SHEEMAN, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Jfo.,  November  26,  1861. 

rig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss, 

TJ.  S.  Volunteers , present: 

General  : You  are  assigned,  by  General  Orders,  No.  9,  of  this  date, 
) the  command  of  the  District  of  Northern  Missouri.  You  will  imme- 


See  Hunter  to  Thomas,  December  11,  p.  428. 


380 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO., 


ARK. 


KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [Chap.  XVIII.  I 


diately  proceed  to  the  Hannibal  and  Saint  Joseph  Railroad,  and  stutionl 
along  the  line  of  that  road  and  the  Northern  Missouri  Railioad,  at  the,! 
bridges  &c.,  such  portion  of  the  troops  under  your  command  as  you  I 
maydeem  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  those  lines  of  comj  i 
munication.  You  will  arrange  to  have  the  troops  so  stationed  and  hutd 
themselves  in  such  a manner  as  to  be  protected  from  the  winter  cold 
and  storms  and  to  afford  at  the  same  time  the  desired  protection  to  thtl 
roads  The  remainder  of  your  forces  along  that  route  will  be  collected! 
at  Chillicothe  or  some  point  in  that  vicinity  deemed  best  for  operatm  J 
against  the  enemy  in  Kay  and  the  neighboring  counties.  It  is  repre 
sented  that  rebels,  not  organized  enemy  troops,  have  assembled  at  A1 
bany,  Richmond,  and  other  points  m that  neighborhood,  arrested  loya| 
citizens,  and  seized  and  destroyed  their  property.  You  will  proceed  t( 
arrest  and  coniine  any  persons  so  offending  against  the  peace  and  ordeij 
of  this  State  and  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  ^ott  wdl  be  verJ 
careful  to  ascertain,  by  proper  reconnoitenng  parties,  the  strength  anci 
position  of  all  hostile  forces,  and  not  to  divide  your  own  troops,  so  tha 
they  may  be  cut  off  or  your  line  of  operations  endangered.  You  wiU 
if  possible,  put  yourself  in  communication  with  our  forces  south  of  thj 
Missouri  River,  and  will  keep  me  advised  by  telegraph  and  letter  of  al 
your  movements.  It  is  thought  that  a large  portion  of  your  provision; 
and  forage  can  be  procured  in  the  counties  in  which  you  operate.  Oi 
this  subject,  however,  you  will  communicate  with  the  chiefs  of  th 
supply  departments  as  soon  as  your  troops  are  concentrated.  Thj 
dutv  here  assigned  you,  general,  is  deemed  one  of  great  importance 
and  will  require  much  energy,  care,  and  discretion  for  execuriod 

It  is  hoped  that  by  mild  but  strong  measures  against  these  onenderj 
you  may  be  able  to  restore  peace  and  quiet  in  tnat  portion  of  your  d j 
trict  which  is  now  disturbed  by  marauding  parties.  You  will  assur 
the  inhabitants  of  your  district  that  the  power  of  the  Government  bot 
of  the  State  and  the  Union,  will  be  exercised  to  protect  all  loyal  an 
well-disposed  citizens,  but  that  rebels,  robbers,  and  “ar^ders  wii 
hereafter  be  punished  with  the  utmost  severity.  As  the  leniency  whic 
has  hitherto  been  extended  to  such  offenders  has  only 
crimes  of  this  character,  the  commanding  general  is  determined  hen 
after  to  impose  the  severest  penalties  authorized  by  the  laws  of  war. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  HALLeCK 

Major-General , Commanding.  \ 


General  Orders, 
No.  8. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 
Saint  Louis , Mo .,  November  26,  1861. 

I.  It  having  been  represented  that  many  of  the  troops  in  this  depar 
ment  are  in  want  of  pay,  clothing,  blankets,  &c.,  and  that  thi 
results  from  irregularities  and  neglect  m the  appointment  of  the  < office 
and  the  mustering  of  the  troops  or  in  the  making  of  requisitions  on  ft 
proper  departments  for  supplies,  inspecting  and  mustering 
be  immediately  sent  to  the  different  divisions,  brigades  posts Jg 
detachments  to  apply,  as  speedily  as  possible,  a remedy  for  these  evn 
The  officers  so  detailed  will,  where  no  proper  musters  have  been  in 
muster  or  remuster  the  troops  so  as  to  cover  the  full  time* of  then  se r 
ice,  aud  will  see  that  the  proper  requisitions  for  supplies  be  made 
and  duly  presented.  The  general  commanding  is  convinced  that  ti 
present  wants  of  the  forces  under  his  command  result  from  the  ign 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  381 

auce  or  culpable  neglect  of  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  have  them  organ- 
ised according  to  law  and  properly  furnished  with  arms,  clothing,  and 
ro visions,  and  he  will  hereafter  punish  with  severity  every  neglect  of 
iiis  kind. 

* * # # * # # 

III.  Numerous  cases  have  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  com- 
' landing  general  of  alleged  seizure  and  destruction  of  private  property 
i this  department,  showing  an  outrageous  abuse  of  power  and  a viola- 
on  of  the  laws  of  war.  To  avoid  a recurrence  of  these  evils  the  follow- 
lg  rules  will  hereafter  be  observed : 

1st.  No  private  property  will  be  taken,  except  where  necessary  for 
ie  subsistence  or  transportation  of  the  troops  or  in  cases  of  persons 
1 arms  against  the  United  States  or  affording  aid  and  assistance  to 
he  enemy. 

2d.  Where  it  becomes  necessary  to  take  private  property  for  the 
>rmer  purpose,  intelligent  and  responsible  officers  will  be  detailed  for 
ikt  purpose,  who  will  take  an  accurate  account  of  the  property  so 
iken,  and  give  receipts  therefor.  All  such  property  must  be  duly  re- 
lrned  and  accounted  for,  and  the  authority  for  the  seizure  must  be 
bated  in  the  receipts  and  returns.  Any  unauthorized  and  unnecessary 
Ifizure  or  destruction  of  private  property  will  be  punished  with  the  ex- 
reme  penalty  imposed  by  the  laws  of  war,  which  is  death. 

3d.  The  seizure  and  conversion  of  the  private  property  of  an  enemy 
.vhere  not  required  for  immediate  supplies,  as  provided  in  the  forego  - 
i g paragraph)  is  justifiable  only  in  particular  cases,  provided  for  by 
ie  laws  of  the  United  States  and  the  general  laws  of  war,  and  should 
ever  be  made  except  by  the  orders  of  the  officer  highest  in  command, 

110  will  be  held  accountable  for  the  exercise  of  this  power.  Great 
aution  should  be  used  in  this  matter,  as  much  injustice  has  been  done 
) individuals  who  are  not  enemies,  and  much  discredit  cast  upon  our 
atriotic  army  by  excesses  committed  by  unauthorized  persons  pre- 
siding to  act  in  the  name  of  the  United  States.  All  property  taken 
'om  alleged  enemies  must  be  inventoried  and  duly  accounted  for. 

Any  person  violating  these  rules  will  be  immediately  arrested  and 
iported  to  headquarters. 

IV.  In  all  cases  where  prisoners  taken  at  other  posts  or  in  the  field 
re  sent  to  Saint  Louis,  they  will  be  accompanied  with  a written  state- 
ment of  the  charges  against  them  and  the  evidence  upon  which  the 
rrest  was  based.  Otherwise  prisoners  so  sent  will  be  released  on  their 

rrival  here. 

V.  No  person  will  be  hereafter  arrested  without  good  and  substantial 
lasons,  and  officers  making  arrests  without  sufficient  cause  or  without 
iithority  will  be  held  to  account  and  punished.  And  officers  sending 
nsoners  to  Saint  Louis  without  charges,  proofs,  or  proper  explanations, 

111  be  charged  with  the  expenses  of  their  transportation. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Sedalia,  November  27,  1861. 

reneral  Halleck: 

Steen’s  division  of  the  enemy  is  at  Wilson’s  Ferry,  10  miles  from 
linton  Prairie,  at  Osceola,  and  the  country  full  of  returned  secession- 


382 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI1L 


ists,  who  are  driving  out  all  Union  men.  I have  ordered  forward  the 
whole  force  from  Lexington.  Will  reach  Saint  Louia  and  will  commum- 
cate  the  designs  of  the  enemy.  w T SHEEMAN; 

Br  igadier - General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  27,  1861. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman, 

Or,  in  his  absence , Col.  F.  Steele , Sedaha , Mo. . j 

No  forward  movement  of  troops  on  Osceola  will  be  made.  Onlyj 
strong  reconnoitering  parties  will  be  sent  in  the  supposed  direction  oi 
the  enemy,  the  remainder  of  the  troops  being  held  in  position  till  more 

reliable  information  is  obtained.  ^ w HALLECK,  - 

Major-General,  j 


Headquarters, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  November  27,  1861.  j 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan: 

Affairs  here  in  complete  chaos.  Troops  unpaid ; without  clothing  oi 
arms.  Many  never  properly  mustered  into  service  and  some  utterly 
demoralized.  Hospitals  overflowing  with  sick.  One  division  of  I,o0< 
has  over  2,000  on  sick  list.  Five  divisions  still  in  the  field— two  at  Holla 
and  three  near  Sedalia.  Price  and  McCulloch  said  to  be  moving  north 
crossing  the  Osage  on  Sunday  near  Osceola,  and  intended  to  attack  eithei 
Lexington  or  Jefferson  City.  Have  sent  out  strong  reconnoitering  par 
ties  from  Sedalia  and  Kolia,  Some  skirmishing  with  enemy  s advance 
guard  and  flankers,  but  nothing  certain  as  to  position  ot  main  body 
Telegraph  wires  all  work  well,  and  I am  in  hourly  communication  witl 
headquarters  of  divisions.  All  troops  ordered  to  be  in  readiness  U 
move.  Price’s  forces  estimated  at  from  15,000  to  23,000.  Local  rebel, 
have  risen  in  arms  in  Kay  County  and  are  fortifying  themselves  in  A1 
bany.  General  Prentiss  ordered  to  move  against  them  from  Ohillicotm 

with  all  the  available  troops  of  his  command. 

H.  VV  . HALLLiUIV, 

Major-General,  i 


Syracuse,  November  27,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

My  scouts  have  just  come  in  with  news  from  25  miles  south  ot  tw 
Osage.  There  are  no  signs  of  any  enemy,  except  wandering  parties  o 
guerrillas  in  small  numbers,  who  are  now  probably  trying  to  maki 
their  way  home  north  of  the  Missouri  River.  Price  is  reported  a 
Greenfield,  and  in  my  opinion  there  is  not  the  slightest  prospect  o 
his  attempting  to  come  north.  pQp^ 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


383 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Cairo,  III.,  November • 27,  1861. 

iapt.  J.  C.  Kelton: 

The  rebels  are  fortifying  New  Madrid ; have  500  negroes  at  work.  A 
arty  of  our  cavalry  was  yesterday  in  Belmont.  No  enemy  found  on 
le  Missouri  side. 

U.  S.  GRANT. 


Saint  Louis,  November  27,  1861. 
'uartermaster-General  M.  C.  Meigs, 

Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  15th  [21st]  instant,  and  am 
leased  to  find  that  you  commend  my  system  of  accountability,  although 
Ejecting  particularly  to  the  grade  or  name  of  paymaster. 

Allow  me  in  regard  to  this  subject  to  state  that  Commodore  Rodgers, 
believe  with  your  concurrence,  appointed  three  captains’  clerks  and 
"ting  paymasters  for  the  three  gunboats  under  his  command.  These 
ipointments  were,  in  accordance  with  the  usage  in  the  gunboat  and 
•ansport  service,  at  a salary  of  $1,200  per  annum,  and  a responsible 
3rd  given  by  each  of  these  men  so  appointed,  with  two  good  bonds- 
en,  in  the  sum  of  $5,000,  certified  to  by  the  United  States  district 
torney.  This  plan  prevailed  under  Commodore  Rodgers,  and  I 
lopted  a similar  one,  and  appointed  good  men  for  these  positions, 
ith  responsible  bondsmen,  to  act  under  the  authority  and  direction  of 
leir  respective  commanders  and  myself  in  their  various  disburse- 
ents. 

You  are  aware  that  you  gave  me  the  authority  by  which  I appointed 
r.  Wise  as  a kind  of  an  assistant  to  me  at  a salary  of  $200  per  month. 
On  my  arrival  at  Saint  Louis  and  after  consulting  with  Commodore 
odgers  we  both  saw  the  necessity  of  finding  a person  with  attain- 
ts and  business  capacity,  not  only  to  assist  me  personally  in  my 
irious  duties,  but  a man  with  naval  experience  in  all  needed  matters 
the  difficult  task  of  organizing  a navy  in  the  West. 

Commodore  Rodgers  and  myself  immediately  secured  the  services  of 
r.  S.  Henriques  for  this  purpose,  who  we  both  have  sailed  with  in  the 
avy,  and  in  whom  we  both  knew,  from  personal  experience,  that  we 
ould  find  the  needed  and  requisite  qualities.  He  has  been  in  the 
rvice  of  the  Government  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  and  his  serv- 
es have  been  and  are  indispensable  to  me. 

Not  knowing  what  to  do  with  Mr.  Wise,  who  was  not  fully  qualified 
r my  purposes  in  this  respect,  and  finding,  according  to  your  letters  to 
e,  that  you  intended  to  send  me  the  money  for  disbursement,  I applied 
you  for  a quartermaster,  and  thus  relieve  myself  from  any  direct 
oney  disbursement,  as  my  time  would  necessarily  have  been  occupied 
’ many  detail  matters  of  less  importance.  I also  informed  Mr.  Wise  to 
'Ply  for  the  position,  not  imagining  for  an  instant  that  the  appoint- 
ed; ot  Mr.  Wise  would  debar  me  of  the  more  useful  services  of  Mr. 
enriques,  the  former  of  which  could  not  efficientlv  take  charge  of  all 
e disbursing  agents  on  board  the  gunboats. 

In  view  of  these  circumstances,  and  to  get  up  a system  and  supervis- 
1 all  matters  in  the  flotilla  connected  with  my  arduous  duties,  and 
rer  a due  consultation  with  Commodore  Rodgers,  who  strenuously 
1 ged  me,  for  the  good  of  the  service,  to  secure  the  services  of  Mr. 
mriques,  I appointed  him  paymaster-in-chief  of  the  naval  flotilla 
1 der  my  command,  and  I have  given  him  the  lowest  pay  of  a paymas- 


384 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO., 


ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIlJ 


ter  in  the  Navy,  $2,000,  with  an  extra  $200  per  annum.  His  duties! 
are  as  acting  paymaster  and  my  secretary  on  board  the  flag-ship,  besided 
a general  superintendence  over  ail  matters  m relation  to  a peifect  system 
of  the  details  of  accountability  as  adopted  in  the  gunboats,  similar  as 
in  the  Navy,  with  that  difference  only  that  the  funds  are  supplied  Iron 
the  Army.  I have  dispensed  with  the  services  of  a secretary  at  $1,00( 
JSlZm.  to  which  I am  eo  titled  hj  ll.c  Bariumt ._ot_thc  H.Jjl 


Sssysjscs  sawaraB  *»>»*«** « » —*  ~i 

to  the  following  p.»»g.  of  pJ 
letter  relating  to  having  somebody  on  board  m charge  of  public  prop 
erty  &c.:  u On  transports  this  is  usually  the  master  of  the  vessel;  on 
Western  boats,  the  clerk,  who  acts  as  agent”  and  m reply  to  this  pas; 
sage  would  state  that  transport  vessels  are  not  men-of- war,  neither  ad 
Western  boats.  But  our  twelve  gunboats  are  in  all  essentials  regulaj 
men-of-war,  commanded  by  regular  Navy  officers,  who  are  exempted 
bv  the  Begulations  of  the  Navy  from  any  disbursing  accountability,  am 
who  must  necessarily  employ  all  their  time  on  board  m the  proper  trail 
ing  of  the  undisciplined  material  of  crew  to  insure  success  m our  un 

deit  would  in  my  opinion  embarrass  this  service  very  much  by  makinj 
them  responsible  for  issue  to  the  crew,  and  when  you  take  into  consi id 
eration  that,  unlike  the  Army,  our  men  are  paid  partly  f clothing  ! 
and  “ small  stores,”  and  that  a paymaster’s  duty  on  board  of  a man-of 
war  comprises  in  its  details  the  duties  of  a paymaster,  quartermas^J 
and  commissary  of  subsistence  of  the  Army,  you  will  see  with  hoi 
much  more  economy  our  Navy  is  managed  than  the  Army. 

In  the  emergencies  of  our  service  it  is  often  the  custom  of  the  flag 
officer  to  appoint  proper  disbursing  officers,  if  needed,  taking  “tocon 
sideration  the  bonds  given  by  such  persons  and  their  personal  stand 

1Df  do  not  see  how  the  several  accounts  of  the  acting  paymasters  couh 
be  settled  in  Mr.  Wise’s  office  without  making  him  personally  respon 
sible  for  the  acts  of  persons  appointed  by  me  under  the  authority  vestei 


vou  see  that  Mr"  H.  is  a necessity  to  me,  and  I fear,  with  all  mj 
jou  see  mi.  1,,...1-H  if'  1.1.  pnn Id  nm 


111  Tim  only  duty  l"wfsh  Mr.  Wise  to  perform  is  to  disburse  the  monej 
under  my  approval,  to  these  several  captains’  clerks,  or  acting  paym* 
ters,  who  will  pay  the  officers  and  men  their  wages  due  them,  unde 
the  approval  of  their  respective  commanders ; to  make  all  purchases  fo 

The  several  acting  paymasters  might  make  out  quarterly  rolls  c 
u money  ” “ clothing,”  and  “ small  stores”  furnished  the  officers  andcrew 
with  their  commander’s  approval,  and  forward  them  to  Captain  Wise* 
to  any  accounting  officer  you  may  direct,  but  a conclusr ve 
their  accounts  cannot  be  effected  with  them  as  their  statements  woul 
necessarily  show  a balance  in  their  hands  of  clothing  anc  s . 

for  which,  they  are  accountable. 

I trust  that  the  views  herein  presented,  showing  our  peculiar  cun 
stances,  will  be  satisfactory,  and  earnestly  hope  that  no  chan ge  wfll  b 
required,  as  my  present  duties  are  even  harder  than  I have  health 

perform  satisfactorily  to  myself.  ,.  , i 

1 I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obeflient^semint, 

Flag-Officer,  &c. 


and  I cannot  assist  him  in  this  duty. 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


385 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , November  27,  1861. 
Ion.  Jos.  Holt,  David  Davis,  Hugh  Campbell, 

. Commissioners  on  Liabilities  of  Western  Department : 
Gentlemen  : I have  received  your  letter  in  regard  to  Mr.  Reeside’s 
aspection  of  horses. 

I trust  it  may  be  possible  to  prevent  his  being  paid.  The  informa- 
ion  of  Mr.  Reeside’s  appointment  came  to  me  by  a letter  from  himself 
a a claim  agent,  Mr.  Goszler,  who  referred  it  to  this  office.  I inclose 
copy,  with  the  note  which  I made  upon  it,  and  my  letter  to  Captain 
>ickerson,  assistant-quartermaster,  U.  S.  Army,  at  Cincinnati,  in  re- 
ard  to  it. 

I called  the  attention  of  the  Secretary  of  War  to  the  matter  at  the 
me  of  its  receipt.  Over  General  Fremont  and  his  order  I had  no  au 
lority. 

As  regards  the  purchase  of  horses,  I would  never  have  adopted  this- 

lethod. 

Captain  Turnley,  assistant-quartermaster,  U.  S.  A.,  can  give  you  some 
lformation  in  regard  to  Mr.  Reeside’s  shipment  of  horses,  'which  at 
ie  rate  verbally  reported  to  me  would  net  him  sometimes  $400  or  $500 

day. 

I also  inclose  copies  of  a telegram  and  a letter  to  Captain  Turnley, 
Tit  upon  receipt  of  his  first  estimate  for  purchase  of  horses  at  Saint 

[ouis.* 

The  Secretary  disapproved  one  of  the  contracts — that  for  the  pur- 
liase  of  horses  in  Canada — and  the  purchase  was  forbidden. 

The  prices  estimated  were  disapproved.  Money  was  remitted,  how- 
ler, as  it  was  understood  here  that  more  horses  and  supplies  would 

e needed. 

| I trust  this  matter  may  be  sifted  thoroughly,  and  no  such  eoinpensa- 
on  be  allowed  as  Mr.  Reeside  would  claim.  I take  it  for  granted  that 
e is  no  longer  employed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  O.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster-  Gen  eral. 


flnclosure  No.  1.] 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington  City , September  3,  1861. 

on.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I inclose  a letter!  addressed  by  J.  E.  Reeside,  at  Cincinnati,  to 
ie  of  the  clerks  in  this  office. 

Mr.  Reeside  states  that  he  has  received  and  accepted  the  appointment 
• inspector  of  horses  for  the  Western  Department,  and  that  he  has 
‘mi  ordered  by  General  Fremont  to  Cincinnati.  He  desires  to  be  ap- 
finted  inspector  for  the  Eastern  Department  also,  as  he  says  he  can 
tend  to  all  his  duties  for  the  Western  Department  and  have  idle  time, 
e wishes  to  be  clothed  with  authority  to  confine  contractors  within 
^graphical  districts,  in  order  to  prevent  competition.  He  also  offers 
‘ inspect  all  horses  intended  for  the  Eastern  Department  and  for 

* Omitted  as  unimportant.  f Not  found. 

25  R R — VOL  VIII 


386 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


Western  Virginia  for  the  same  commission  allowed  by  the  Western 
Department,  to  wit,  2£  per  cent,  upon  the  cost  price. 

There  are  some  20,000  horses  and  mules  to  be  brought  to  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  for  artillery  and  transportation,  besides  some  twenty 
regiments  of  cavalry,  requiring  20,000  horses  more. 

Of  these  the  first  20,000  will  probably  be  collected  and  delivered  by 
the  end  of  six  weeks  from  this  time.  Their  average  cost  will  be  $120, 1 
which  would  net  the  inspector  in  six  or  eight  weeks,  were  he  able  to  I 

perform  the  duty,  $60,000.  I 

The  quartermaster  at  Saint  Louis,  under  General  h remont  s direction,  ij 
estimates  superior  cavalry  horses  at  $130.  Thousands  are  contracted  j 
for  to  be  delivered  here,  to  pass  the  inspection  of  cavalry  officers  or  1 
quartermasters  and  to  conform  to  specifications,  which  all  officers  tell  I 
me  are  sufficient,  and  to  cost,  delivered  here,  $120.  These  are  brought 

from  the  West.  ~ , , I 

No  horses  are  being  purchased  in  Cincinnati  by  Government  agents  i 
for  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Those  bought  there  by  the  quartermas- 1 
ter  are  for  Western  Virginia  or  other  Western  armies.  I 

The  practice  of  going  outside  the  legal  agents  of  the  Quartermaster  s - 
Department— the  officers  selected  and  appointed  by  the  President,  by 
and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate — to  make  contracts  and 
disbursements  is  liable  to  great  abuse,  and  should  be  resorted  to  only, 

I think,  in  case  of  extreme  emergency. 

1 also  inclose  a telegram  received  from  James  M.  Beebe  & Co.,  boston, 
bv  which  it  appears  that  they  are  informed  that  General  Fremont  has 
delegated  to  the  Union  Defense  Committee  of  Chicago  the  powers  and 
duties  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  in  relation  to  contracting  for 
and  providing  clothing  for  the  troops.  The  advice  and  assistance  oi 
a committee  of  respectable  and  patriotic  citizens  might  be  of  great  use 
to  this  department,  but  I doubt  the  propriety  and  the  wisdom  of  placing 
its  funds  thus  under  the  control  of  a committee  responsible  only  to  pub- 
lie  opinion.  Certainly  as  Quartermaster-General  and  legal  head  of  this 
department  I cannot  hold  myself  responsible  for  the  acts  of  this  com- 
mittee or  of  Inspector  Beeside,  with  whose  appointment,  so  far  as  at 
present  informed,  no  officer  of  this  department  has  had  anything  to  do, 
and  whose  functions  and  powers  I learn  only  from  themselves  or  from 
those  with  whom  they  attempt  to  deal. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  C.  Mhlub, 
Quartermaster- General. 


To 


United  States  Military  Telegraph,  £ 
[Received  September  2,  1861,  from  Boston.] 

M.  C.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster -General , JJ.  S.  Army : 

General  Fremont  having  appointed  a Union  Defense  Committee  at 
Chicago,  111.,  they  have  made  large  contracts  with  a clothing  bouse 
for  army  clothing,  who  apply  to  us  for  the  goods.  Is  the  U mted  States 
Government  legally  responsible  for  contracts  made  in  this  way? 

.1  AS.  AT.  B LLI3L  A vU« 


[Indorsements.] 

Quartermaster -General’s  Office, 

Washington , September  2,  1861. 

Bespect  fully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

General  Fremont  appears  to  have  delegated,  if  this  statement  w 


ixp.  XVHI.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  387 

>rrect,  the  power  to  make  contracts  for  clothing  to  a Union  Defense 
ommittee. 

All  bills  will  finally  receive  an  examination  in  this  office,  but  I think 
lat  all  contracts  should  be  examined  by  some  Government  officer  he- 
re being  executed. 

M.  0.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster- General. 

Suggestion  of  Quartermaster-General  approved. 

SIMON  CAMEBON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

War  Department, 

| September  3,  1801. 

! 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

. 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , September  3,  1861. 
apt.  J.  H.  Dickerson,  Cincinnati , Ohio : 

Captain:  Mr.  J.  E.  Beeside  writes  here  that  he  is,  by  order  of  Gen- 
al  Fremont,  at  Cincinnati,  with  power  to  inspect  all  horses  for  the 
restern  Department. 

He  desires,  having  “idle  time,”  to  perform  the  same  duties  for  the 
astern  Department  and  for  Western  Virginia. 

This  he  offers  to  do  on  the  terms  allowed  him  for  the  Western  De- 
triment— 2J  per  cent. 

Some  20,000  horses  are  to  be  delivered  here  in  the  next  six  weeks, 
id  at  this  rate,  if  he  performed  the  duties,  the  fees  would  amount  to 
K)ut  $60,000— $10,000  a week. 

The  cost  of  mounting  a regiment  would  be  increased  $3,000  by  such 
spection.  I trust  no  such  arrangement  has  been  made. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster- General . 

[Inclosure  No.  3.J 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington  City , October  4,  1861. 

aj.  Bobert  Allen, 

Quartermaster , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Major:  I have  received  from  Captain  Turnley  several  estimates  of 
’ge  amount,  upon  which  I find  it  necessary  to  make  some  remarks. 
Some  of  the  objects  of  expenditure  are  not  embraced  in  the  appro- 
iations  for  this  department.  They  belong  properly  to  the  Engineer 
apartment  and  to  the  Ordnance  Department,  and  for  them  requisi- 
iis  and  estimates  should  be  addressed  to  those  departments.  Others 
ceed  the  amounts  appropriated  by  Congress.  Upon  these,  however, 
'ill  write  more  fully  at  a later  hour. 

1 have  called  urgently  for  $500,000  to  be  remitted  to  you  for  the 
arterm aster’s  department  in  the  West. 

The  calls  upon  the  Treasury  have  for  some  time  exceeded  its  daily 
•eipts,  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  at  a meeting  of  the  heads 
bureaus  night  before  last,  called  by  the  Secretary  of  War,  informed 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  sjiread  the  payments  for  equipping, 
?anizing,  and  raising  this  army  over  a longer  time. 

Heavy  debts  must  in  some  cases  wait.  Thus  far  the  Government  has 


388 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  ICiiat.  XVIII 


endeavored  to  pay  promptly  as  it  wnt  on.  But  $1,000,000  a day  n ioi 
the  present  its  rate  of  income,  and  it  cannot  pay  at  a more  rapid  rate 
Therefore  use  this  $500,000  to  pay  the  most  necessary  expenses  only 
those  necessary  to  make  the  army  effective.  I 

Use  a careful  discretion  in  relation  to  paying  accounts  for  supplies  no 
1 lurch ased  under  advertisements  and  legal  contracts.  Examine  price 
and  reduce  them  to  fair  and  equitable  rates.  Leave  no  margin  for  prod 
its  in  iobbing  contracts.  Let  speculators  wait. 

1 have  within  a few  days,  for  example,  a letter  from  the  Union  Be 
tense  Committee  of  Chicago,  naming  a person  to  supply  1,000  lioise, 
mdteas  g“od  as  the  Government  has  been  getting  at  Chicago  am 
offering  these  horses  at  $95  each.  Why,  then,  should  the  high  pncei. 
named,  m Saint  Louis  be  paid?  It  is  reported  that  horse  con Uacte  a j 
sold  by  speculators  in  Saint,  Louis.  The  papers  so  publicly  and  loud 
declare  this,  that  the  officers  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  canj 

not  ignore  the  accusation.  . . , i • , uic 

Whenever  a hill  bears  the  aspect  ot  jobbing,  ot  speculation,  of  ilk 
gality,  set  it  aside  as  one  of  those  to  be  deferred.  For  services  dul 

1<?It  iseimderst(»d1that; prices  of  clothing  have  risen  beyond  the  stand 
aid  in  some  places.  Do  not  pay  such  bills  if  much  exceeding  the  stand 
ai  d prices  without  first  referring  them  to  this  office. 

1 - „ . . i O ^«,1  TT 7£\  h QTTA  Tl 


fortifications  and  for  ordnance  we  have  no  jmoney,  and  til 


For  fortifications  anu  ior  (imiiaucc  A i 

$500,000  now  forwarded  should  not  be  applied  to  such  uses,  ow  el 

I,eOf  coSse  you  understand  your  duty  in  case  the  commanding^genewi 
assumes  the  responsibility  of  ordering  an  account  to  be  paid.  He  is  t 
resno  mible  head  in  his  department  and  must  judge  in  extreme  cases 
takffirbv  a dfstinct  order  the  pecuniary  responsibility  upon  hi.nseh. 
But  he  should  be  made  aware,  with  all  respect  and  loyalty , ot  the  lega 
or  other  ob"ection“  So  that  he’can  act  with  knowledge  and  be  protecte 
against  errors  arising  from  inexperience  in  the  regulations. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ q MEIGS, 

Quartermaster - General . 


Special  Order,  ) 
No.  — . J 


Division  Hdqrs.  1st  and  2d  Divisions,  | 
^ ^ Syracuse , November  2 1 , lobl. 

Thefollowing  movements  will  be  made  by  the  First  and  Second  D 


morrow  morning,  me  “W  ^rni+arvillp 

11  * The  J:  Ton*,  wjl-jo  n- 

to-morrow  morning  at  10  o’clock  a.  in.,  and  will  encamp  between  La  Mu 


to-morrow  morning 

at  Sedalia. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : SPEED  BUTLER,  \ 

A ssista nt  A dju ta n t-  G en era L 


’HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


389 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Missouri  State  Militia, 

No.  1.  f Saint  Louis , Mo.,  November  27,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Schofield,  of  the  United  States  Volunteers,  hav- 
ng  been  appointed  and  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  the  Mis- 
souri State  Militia,  is  hereby  placed  in  command  of  all  the  militia  of 
he  State. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 
Major-General  Missouri  State  Militia. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  28,  1861. 

Taj.  Gen.  Georoe  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  the  Army , Washington  City: 

General:  1 reached  this  city  on  the  18tli,  where  I met  General 
lunter,  who  had  just  arrived.  On  the  19th  I assumed  the  command, 
nd  have  since  used  every  endeavor  to  ascertain  the  true  condition  of 
ffairs  here,  but  for  the  want  of  proper  staff  officers  and  in  the  absence 
f returns  my  progress  in  this  matter  has  not  been  as  rapid  as  I could 
rish.  One  week’s  experience,  however,  is  sufficient  to  prove  that 
very  thing  here  is  in  complete  chaos.  The  most  astonishing  orders  and 
ontracts  for  supplies  of  all  kinds  have  been  made  and  large  amounts 
airport  to  have  been  received,  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  they 
ave  ever  been  properly  issued,  and  they  cannot  now  be  found,  if 
ver  really  received,  they  have  either  been  stolen  or  diverted  from 
heir  legitimate  purposes.  Many  of  these  diversions  are  represented 
o have  been  made  by  order  of  Capt.  1.  C.  Woods,  of  the  Commissary 
department,  who  acted  as  a colonel  of  General  Fremont’s  staff  and  chief* 
f transportation.  Captain  Woods  was  ordered  to  report  to  me  in  per 
on  and  to  turn  over  all  property  in  his  possession.  He  has  reported, 
ut  says  he  has  no  property  belonging  to  the  United  States,  and  that 
e has  never  been  responsible  for  any.  It  is  officially  reported  to  me 
hat  such  diversions  were  frequently  made  by  Captain  Woods  and  no 
sceipts  whatever  given  to  the  officers  who  were  accountable  for  the 
roperty  diverted.  Property  invoiced  and  sent  from  this  place  to  offi 
ers  at  other  places  never  reached  its  destination  and  was  never  re- 
e ip  ted  for  either  by  the  officer  to  whom  it  was  directed  or  by  the  per- 
i)n  who  arrested  it  on  the  way  and  diverted  it  to  some  other  purposes, 
ametimes  probably  very  proper,  and  sometimes  very  improper.  It 
» exceedingly  difficult  to  obtain  reliable  information  on  this  matter, 
is  this  business  seems  to  have  been  carried  on  in  such  a manner  as  to 
‘ave  the  least  possible  trace  behind.  Captain  Woods  has  reported  to 
apt.  T.  J.  Haines,  chief  commissary,  but  from  the  reputed  bad  char- 
ter of  Captain  Woods  Captain  Haines  is  unwilling  to  assign  him  to 
ny  duty. 

Many  of  the  troops  at  different  points  are  reported  to  be  without  arms 
nd  suffering  tor  the  want  of  clothing  and  blankets.  It  being  impos- 
ble  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  sufficient  supplies  had  already  been 
sued  in  such  cases,  I detailed  Brigadier-General  Sturgis  to  examine 
ito  the  condition  of  those  in  this  vicinity  and  sent  Brigadier- General 
herman  to  examine  the  three  divisions  near  Sedalia  and  the  detach - 
icnts  along  the  road.  General  Sturgis  has  already  remedied  some  of 
iese  evils  here  and  I hope  soon  to  hear  the  result  of  General  Sherman’s 
ission.  I have  no  officers  to  send  to  other  points  in  the  department. 


390 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


I have  been  greatly  embarrassed  in  my  endeavors  to  ascertain  th 
true  condition  of  affairs  here.  On  my  arrival  I was  without  asmg 
staff  officer  to  assist  me.  General  Hamilton  accompanied  me,  but  M 
was  without  a commission  or  orders  and  could  exercise  no  nut  orib 
1 was  told  by  yourself  and  General  Thomas  that  Captain  Fry,  assistai 
Uutant-generah  was  ordered  to  this  department, but  afterwards  leamd 
that  he  had  been  sent  to  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  where  there  wei 
already  two.  As  most  of  the  officers  here  were  charged  with  beinl 
involved  in  the  existing  disorders,  I have  been  unable  to  obtain  asufl 
cient  number  for  staff  duty.  I hope  that  a few  more  regular  office) 
maybe  sent  to  this  department  for  staff,  mustering,  and  inspecting  dull 
This  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  public  service.  I 

Reports  come  to  me  daily  of  troops  being  in  a suffering,  disorganize! 
andmutlnous  condition,  and  I can  ascertain  the  real ^facts  on  y by  H 
ins  out  officers  of  experience  and  worthy  of  confidence.  11ns  clepar 
ment  is  almost  stripped  of  regular  officers.  The  organizing  and  muj 
tering' in toservice  t^ops  who'claim  to  have 

out  being  mustered  is  a matter  of  pressing  necessity,  but  it  is  is 
difficult  to  find  officers  capable  of  performing  this  duty.  I shall  kee 
you  informed  by  telegraph  and  letter  of  the  condition  of  this  depars 
ment  so  far  as  I can  ascertain  it.  I have  not  written  before,  as  I h,. 
nothing  of  particular  importance  to  communicate. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  hALLBGK, 

Major ■ Genera l,  Commanding, 


General  Orders, 


Hdqrs.  Army  North  Missouri,  ; 
No  L j Quincy,  III.,  November  28,  1861. 

I The  undersigned  having  been,  by  General  Orders,  No.  9,  dab 
Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  Saint  Louis,  November  2 
1861  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  District  of  North  Missoun,  coi 
prising  aSt  portion  of  the  State  of  Missouri  north  of  the  Missed 
River,  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  said  district. 


B.  M.  PRENTISS, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  November  28,  1861. 

Ool.  Fred.  Steele, 

Commanding  at  Sedalia , Mo.: 

Yours  of  the  26th  received.  No  orders  have  been  given  to  fall  bac 
nor  is  there  any  intention  to  do  so.  The  only  movement  contemplat 
is  an  advance.  I fully  approve  your  views.  ^ ^ HALLBCK, 

Major-General 


Rolla,  Mo.,  November  28,  1861 

Major-General  Halleck  : ^ a 

A party  just  from  Springfield  states  there  were  between  4.000  & 
5,000  of  the  enemy,  Arkansas  troops,  at  that  place  on  Friday . 


Chap.  XVIEL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  3<J1 

none  at  Lebanon,  but  heard  that  there  were  80  of  them  there.  Bains 
and  Parsons,  Price’s  generals,  are  farther  west  of  Springfield  with 
their  forces. 

ASBOTH. 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  November  28,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

I have  ordered  forward  Pope’s  and  Turner’s  divisions  to-day,  but  we 
cannot  stay  long  here.  The  cold  is  intense  on  this  naked  prairie.  We 
must  move  forward  or  back.  Will  you  indicate  your  wishes  ? 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Brigadier-  General . 


Headquarters  Department  op  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , J/o.,  November  28,  1861. 
Brigadier-General  Sherman,  Sedalia , Mo. : 

General  Halleck  is  satisfied,  from  reports  of  scouts  received  here,  that 
no  immediate  attack  on  Sedalia  is  intended.  You  will  therefore  return 
to  the  city  and  report  your  observations  on  the  condition  of  the  troops 
you  have  examined.  Please  telegraph  when  you  will  leave. 

SCHUYLER  HAMILTON, 
Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers , U.  S.  Army . 


Syracuse,  November  28,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Your  dispatch  of  this  date  received.  General  Sherman  ordered 
division  from  Tipton  to  this  place,  and  both  divisions  were  on  the  march 
to  Sedalia  when  your  dispatch  arrived.  Do  I understand  that  I am  in 
command  of  all  the  forces  west  of  Jefferson  City  and  expected  to  post 
them  for  comfort  and  convenience  at  my  discretion  ? First  and  Second 
Divisions  now  here. 

JNG.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  Gen  era  l. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis  y November  28,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Syracuse , Mo. : 

General  Sherman  has  been  telegraphed  to  return  to  this  city.  I see 
no  necessity  for  any  movements  of  troops.  I wish  them  left  as  they 
were  and  made  as  comfortable  as  possible. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Lotus , November  28,  1861. 

Gen.  John  Pope,  Syracuse , Mo.: 

General  Sherman  being  directed  to  return  to  this  city,  you,  being  as 
I understand  the  ranking  officer,  will,  if  these  troops  be  united,  be 


392 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK,  KANS,  AND  IND.  T.  ICn*.  *VUt 


your  stations  and  remain  as  before.  H w hALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Jefferson  City,  Mo,  November  28,  1861. 
General  Halleck  : , , . A \ 

,,isy.,s:foX:^s 

souri  Railroad.  Great  number  returning  from  rebel  army  in  detached 
forces  through  upper  country.  THOS.  L.  PRICE, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Saint  Louis,  November  29,  1861. 

Mai.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  : 

After  thoroughly  sifting  for  a whole  week  all  information  received 
from  scouts  spies,  &c,  I am  satisfied  that  the  enemy  is  operating  in 
and  against  this  State’  with  a much  larger  force  than  was  supposed 
then  I left  Washington,  and  also  that  a general  insurrection  is  organ 
izing  in  the  counties  near  the  Missouri  River  between  Boonev.lle  and 
Saint  Joseph.  A desperate  effort  will  be  made  to  supply  and  Minted 
their  troops  in  this  State,  so  as  to  spare  their  own  resources  for  a sum 
mer  campaign.  What  is  wanted  here  most  is  arms.  Many  of  on. 
regiments  have  none  of  any  kind.  H w HALLECK, 

Major-General.  | 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  November  29,  1861. 

Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter,  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans. : 

Price  and  McCulloch  are  said  to  be  moving  towards  Lexington  o. 
Kansas  City,  and  that  insurrections  are  being  organized  on  both  side, 
of  the  Missouri  River  west  of  Sedalia,  both  to  re-enforce  theni  a d 
destroy  the  Hannibal  and  Saint  Joseph  Railroad.  General  PreuW 
has  returned  to  the  command  of  Northwestern  Missouri,  and  is,  oi  soo 
will  be,  at  Chillicothe.  Please  telegraph  me  any  information  of  enemy 

movements  or  your  own  dispositions. 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Third  Division,  j 
November  29,  Iwl- 


Major-General  HALLECK,  Commanding : m 

I>.  W.  Contvere,  who  was  following  the  secession  ainiv  since  ^ oven 
ber  14,  when  he  left  Sarcoxie,  together  with  about  900  men  of 
eral  Rains’  division,  gives  me  the  following  intelligence . 


3AJ*.  xviir.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  393 

There  was  a general  movement  of  the  Missouri  troops  northward, 
nd  their  line  was  formed  on  Tuesday  last,  November  26,  from  Stock 
>n  on  the  right  to  a point  near  Nevada  City  on  the  left— the  right 
ing,  about  6,000,  under  command  of  General  McBride  $ the  left,  under 
eneral  Bains.  General  Price,  commanding  the  center,  was  then  prob- 
bly  near  Montevallo.  Colonel  Clarkson,  bringing  up  the  rear,  left 
reen  field  last  Sunday,  November  24.  The  whole  fighting  force  was 
bout  14,000  men,  as  per  statement  of  the  quartermaster.  The  men  are 
oorly  clad  and  very  short  in  food  and  forage,  and  express  manifest 
ireats  against  Kansas.  They  think  that  their  present  move  is  directed 
gainst  that  State.  Some  entertained  the  hope  that  they  would  remain 
l their  present  position  several  weeks.  They  say  they  have  nearly  sixty 
ieces  of  cannon  and  some  batteries,  lately  received  from  the  Confed- 
•ate  States.  My  scout  further  says  that  an  order  from  General  Price  to 
eneral  McCulloch  to  follow  up  with  his  command  was  disregarded  by 
le  latter,  and  that  he  and  McCulloch  were  performing  retreat  into 
rkansas.  General  McCulloch  was  at  or  near  Springfield  on  the  23d  of 
ovember.  There  are  no  troops,  except  a few  scattering  marauding 
inads,  in  all  the  country  east  of  Stockton.  My  authority  passed  near 
uffalo  on  the  26tli.  The  next  day  he  came  through  Lebanon,  and 
aid  last  night  on  the  road  about  30  miles  from  Rolla,  and  he  met  no 
oops,  but  heard  of  an  occasional  scout. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 

Acting  Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Third  Division. 


eneral  Halleck: 


Syracuse,  November  20,  1861. 


My  opinions  about  Price’s  forces  are  confirmed  by  intelligence  from 
l quarters.  His  army  is  scattered  all  over  the  country  for  a hundred 
iles  in  every  direction  in  squads  more  or  less  large,  it  is  more  than 
mbtful  whether  they  will  again  unite.  I think  it  certain  they  will  not 
is  winter.  1 1 is  known  that  the  term  of  enlistment  of  nearly  ail  of  them 
pires  this  month.  They  are  anxious  to  get  home  to  the  river  counties 
td  North  Missouri.  It  is  probable  that  Price  himself  has  not  crossed 
e Osage,  and  has  a small,  if  any,  force  with  him.  Pursuit  will  only 
atter  them  more,  without  other  result  than  breaking  down  our  own 
oops.  Our  forces  are  suffering  much  for  want  of  shelter,  which  can 
>t  be  found  in  this  section. 


JNO.  POPE, 
Brigadier- General. 


Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  Army  of  Missouri, 

Sedalia , November  29,  1861. 

>1.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Missouri  : 
Colonel:  An  acquiutance  of  mine,  Major  Marvin,  a resident  of 
mrv  County,  of  this  State,  came  from  Clinton  to-day.  He  informs 
' that  there  is  no  considerable  force  of  Price’s  army  in  that  vicinity. 
3 had  seen  two  small  parties  who  were  pressing  animals  for  artillery 
twice.  He  says  most  of  Price’s  army  and  all  his  artillery,  according 
1 the  best  of  his  information  and  belief,  are  still  on  the  other  side  of 
le  Osage. 


394  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap  XVI 

This  Major  Marvin  is  a loyal  citizen,  and  in  my  opinion  perfect 
reliable.  From  the  information  1 have  obtained  from  different  sourc 
1 am  satisfied  that  there  will  be  no  movement  of  the  enemy  upon  tli  t 
point  so  long  as  our  troops  occupy  their  present  position,  nor  do 
believe  that  they  will  move  north  of  us  except  in  small  parties. 

We  frequently  hear  of  marauding  parties  making  their  way  to  wan 
Warrensburg  and  Lexington,  who  are  represented  as  soldiers  on  ft! 
lough  from  Price’s  army.  Major  Marvin  told  me  that  Price’s  army  d 
not  number  as  many  now  by  5,000  as  it  did  two  weeks  ago.  It  is  sa 
that  the  rebel  army  is  almost  destitute  of  clothing  and  their  numbe 
have  been  considerably  diminished  by  desertions.  The  hoof  disease 
among  their  animals  and  has  rendered  a large  proportion  of  the 
totally  unfit  for  service. 

If  it  should  be  ascertained  that  the  principal  part  of  Price’s  am 
had  crossed  the  Osage,  I should  be  in  favor  of  endeavoring  to  enga. 
them  with  a well-organized  force  from  this  command  by  rapid  man 
at  night.  I am  satisfied  that  they  will  not,  with  their  present  fort 
give  us  battle  as  long  as  they  can  run. 

If  it  is  the  intention  for  this  command  to  winter  here,  we  can  get  a go< 
camping  ground  about  3 miles  from  the  depot,  sheltered  from  the  win 
and  with  facilities  for  obtaining  fuel,  good  water,  and  forage.  The 
is  a saw  mill  near  this  place  belonging  to  the  Government,  where  p 
on  el  Bissell’s  battalion  of  mechanics  are  now  stationed.  Colonel  Bite 
informs  me  that  he  has  considerable  timber  out  now,  and  could  m 
short  time  furnish  enough  to  hut  the  whole  command. 

I shall  probably  move  the  division  to  this  locality  to-morrow,  and  wn 
to  be  advised  as  to  whether  I shall  commence  building  huts.  The  t roo 
have  already  suffered  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather;  the  sickly 
is  constantly  increasing,  and  if  we  have  not  soon  some  protection  fro 
the  weather  besides  tents  the  consequences  may  be  still  more  senoi 
I continue  to  throw  out  scouting  and  reconnoitering  parties,  wlii« 
besides  the  information  which  they  bring  me,  has  the  effect  of  intin 
dating  the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serva* 

FRED’K  STEELE, 

Go  lonely  Co mma  tid  ing 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Missouri  Militia, 

No.  1.  ) Saint  Louis , November  29,  1861. 

I.  In  compliance  with  orders  from  Major-General  Halleck,  ot  the  H, 
souri  Militia,  dated  Saint  Louis,  November  27, 1861,  I hereby  assur 
command  of  all  the  militia  of  the  State. 

II.  The  organization  of  the  State  forces  and  their  muster  into  seme 
according  to  the  terms  of  the  arrangement  entered  into  between  t 
President  of  the  United  States  and  the  Governor  of  Missouri,  will 
prosecuted  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Mustering  officers  will  be  appoint 
and  rendezvous  designated  from  time  to  time,  as  circumstances 
require. 

* * * # * * * 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 
Brig  a dier- Gen  era  ?,  Com  m anding 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


395 


Chav.  XVIII.] 


Saint  Louis,  November  30,  1861, 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Major-General , Commanding  TJ.  S.  Army  : 

My  letter  of  the  25th*  explains  in  relation  to  martial  law,  the  authority 
to  be  given  only  to  myself.  I can  do  nothing  here  without  it.  Sur- 
rounded as  I am  by  traitors  and  spies,  I must  have  it.  I know  nothing: 
of  Koerner ; never  heard  of  him  before.  Cannot  appoint  him  till  I make 
inquiries. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  Genera  L 

i 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , November  30,  1861. 
Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commander -in- Chief,  Washington , I).  C. : 

General  : There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  enemy  is  moving  north 
with  a large  force,  and  that  a considerable  part  of  Northern  Missouri  is. 
in  a state  of  insurrection.  The  rebels  have  organized  in  many  counties., 
taken  Union  men  prisoners,  and  are  robbing  them  of  horses,  wagonsl 
provisions,  clothing,  &c.  There  is  as  yet  no  large  gathering  in  any  one 
place  so  that  we  can  strike  them.  To  punish  these  outrages  and  to 
arrest  the  traitors  who  are  organizing  these  forces  and  furnishing  sup- 
plies, it  is  necessary  to  use  the  military  power  and  enforce  martial  law, 
I cannot  arrest  such  men  and  seize  their  papers  without  exercising- 
! martial  law,  for  there  is  no  civil  law  or  civil  authority  to  reach  them. 
The  safety  of  Missouri  requires  the  prompt  and  immediate  exercise  of 
this  power,  and  if  the  President  is  not  willing  to  intrust  me  with  it  he 
should  relieve  me  from  the  command.  It  is  and  has  been  for  months 
exercised  here  by  my  predecessors,  but  I cannot  find  any  written  au- 
thority of  the  President  for  doing  so.  I mean  to  act  strictly  under 
authority  and  according  to  instructions,  and  where  authority  will  not 
be  granted  the  Government  must  not  hold  me  responsible  for  the  result. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 


Roll  A,  Mo.,  November  30,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Another  of  my  scouts  in  from  the  southwest.  Left  Osceola  Tuesday 
light.  Price  was  there  with  4,000  men,  McBride  at  Stockton  with 
5,000,  and  Rains  at  Chester  with  5,000.  The  quartermaster  of  the  force 
s own  cousin  to  my  scout,  who  informed  him  that  Price  is  determined 
o ravage  and  burn  Kansas  even  if  peace  was  declared  to-morrow,  and 
ntends  to  go  into  Kansas  north  of  Fort  Scott  at  or  near  Butler.  Mc- 
Julloch  was  ordered  north  with  his  whole  force,  but  he  refused  to  go, 
ind  is  falling  back  into  Arkansas.  About  one-third  of  the  Cherokees 
ire  rebels.  About  5,000  of  them  are  moving  north  to  join  Price  in 
Kansas. 

John  Ross,  after  being  hung  up  three  times,  was  forced  to  agree  to 
(‘main  neutral,  with  the  remainder  of  the  tribe.  One  of  Price’s  spies; 

* See  Appendix,  p.  e!7. 


396 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap,  xvmj 


«ame  into  liis  camp  Tuesday  morning.  Had  been  to  Fort  Scott;  reportsi 
Lane  there  with  5,000  men.  Price  will  attempt  to  get  into  Kansas  north 
of  him  He  says  he  does  not  intend  to  attack  the  troops  m Missouri. 
They  had  already  sent  back  into  Arkansas  400  stolen  horses. 

J t Jj»  VY  JL  lVlixii « 

Acting  Brigadier -General. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 

Washington , November  30,  1801. 

Hon.  Joseph  Holt,  David  Davis,  Huoh  Campbell, 

Commission , Ac. : 

Gentlemen  : I hud  that  I omitted  in  my  answer  to  your  letter*  in 
regard  to  Mr.  Iteeside  to  take  notice  of  what  you  reported  in  regard  to- 

his  authority  to  inspect  harness.  . 

I was  not  aware  that  he  had  any  authority  to  inspect  harness,  in- 
spection on  commission  is  not  the  policy  of  this  department.  1 do  not 
think  a worse  policy  could  be  adopted.  ,, 

I have  called  the  attention  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  De 
partment  of  the  West,  General  Halleck,  to  this  matter,  and  have  no 
doubt  he  will  revoke  the  order,  if  there  be  one,  under  which  Mr.  Keesicle 
acts.  1 think  that  the  order  issued  by  the  Secretary  ot  War,  while  in 
Saint  Louis,  confining  the  making  of  contracts  and  purchases  to  the 
regularly  and  legally  appointed  officers  of  the  start  departments,  fully 
revoked1  all  authority  under  which  Mr.  Reeside  could  claim  to  act. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J M.  C.  MEIGS, 

Quarterm  aster- Genera  k 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  9 
Washington , November  30,  1861. 

General  H.  W.  Halleck,  . . , 

Commanding  Department  of  the  W est , Saint  Louis , Mo. ; 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  a letter  to  this  office 
from  the  Commission  upon  Expenditures  in  the  Department  ot  the 

I have  answered  the  letter,  and  the  authority  given  to  Mr.  Eeeside 
came  from  General  Fremont,  I had  no  power  over  it.  As  soon  ai  J 
was  informed  of  it  this  fall  I made  it  known  to  the  Secretary  ot  War, 
and  I expressed  to  the  quartermaster  at  Cincinnati,  Captain  Dickerson. 

my  opinion  upon  the  subject.  , r 

I have  sent  copies  of  the  correspondence  upon  the  subject  to  t lie  Loin 
mission.  I advise  that  Mr.  Reeside  be  informed  that  his  appomtmeii 
was  never  approved  by  the  War  Department  and  that  lie  be  stopped 
in  his  operations  as  soon  as  possible,  . Q 

Did  not  the  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  issued  while  m San 
Louis,  revoke  any  authority  to  Mr.  Reeside  ? It  directed  al,  purchase; 
and  contracts  to  be  made  by  the  legally-appointed  officers  ot  the  stan 
departments. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  . 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 

Q u a rterm  a ste  r-  Gen  era  l . 


t See  Davis  to  Meigs,  November 21,  ]>• 


See  November  27,  p.  1185. 


IAi\  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


397 


Saint  Louis,  November  30,  1861. 
uarterin aster- General  M.  C.  Meigs,  Washington , I).  C.  : 

General  : I inclose  two  letters  from  Captain  Howard  in  relation  to 
en,  which  will  explain  themselves.  I await  your  directions  in  the 
after,  yet  we  want  the  men,  but  regret  that  it  will  require  so  much 
oney  to  obtain  them. 

The  remaining  two  of  the  four  gunboats  built  here  in  convoy  of  the 
ew  Era  leave  to-morrow  or  next  day  for  Cairo.  1 hope  to  be  able  to 
ive  myself  in  the  Benton  on  the  4th  proximo,  next  Wednesday,  for 
tiro,  to  have  her  and  the  gunboats  there  completed  with  the  best 
cilities  we  can  command.  We  have  tried  the  engines  successfully  of 
e two  of  the  seven  gunboats  which  leave  to-morrow  or  next  day.  I 
i using  every  means,  working  night  and  day  and  Sundays,  to  get  our 
ats  down  to  Cairo. 

Will  you  please  give  me  instructions  as  to  the  mode  of  accepting 
e several  gunboats,  the  first  of  which  will  be  ready  to  be  handed 
er  soon  after  I reach  Cairo — this  day  week  or  before.  I shall  want 
nds,  or  would  rather  the  advance  and  other  expeuses  of  Captain  How- 
il’s  men  should  be  paid  before  they  leave  New  York,  in  case  you  con- 
ule  to  have  the  men  sent,  as  preferred  by  him. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-  Officer. 

[Inclosures.] 

Washington,  November  26,  1861. 
Dear  Sir  : I wrote  you  this  morning,  since  when  I have  seen  As- 
tant  Secretary  Fox.  He  says  I may  send  you  1,000  men,  although 
3y  are  doing  better  than  he  expected ; still  he  will  be  glad  if  I will 
n you  with  1,000  more  seamen.  If  you  can  arrange  it  in  such  a man  - 
r as  to  have  some  money  (advance)  paid  in  New  York,  the  thing  can 
arranged  at  once.  I shall  make  it  a point  to  see  General  Meigs 
er  (if  possible)  a grand  review  of  regulars  to  be  held  now  (1  p.  m). 

Ever,  yours, 

W.  A.  HOWARD. 


Washington,  November  26,  1861. 

ig-Officer  Foote, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Naval  Forces  of  the  Mississippi: 

My  Dear  Sir  : This  is  the  third  of  to-day,  but  thinking  perhaps 
lad  better  see  General  Meigs  before  I left,  I deferred  my  going 
New  York  until  to-morrow.  I went  to  the  review  and  met  him; 
owned  him  what  I had  done,  what  I had  written  you  respecting 
‘ advance,  what  Fox  had  said,  &c.  The  general  then  said  he  had  no 
lid  you  would  advance  the  money;  hoped  you  would;  that  it  was  in 
ir  power,  &c.  I mention  these  things  to  show  you  the  feeling  of 
officers  at  the  head  of  the  department.  You  will  of  course  be 
kerned  (as  you  always  were)  by  what  you  consider  right.  I said 
lay  I make  this  statement  as  coming  from  you  u Yes,  certainly,’7 
s the  reply.  My  anxiety,  as  you  will  see,  makes  me  seize  every  shrub 
climbing  this  hill.  Don’t  get  tired  of  me. 

Yours,  truly, 


W.  A.  HOWARD. 


398 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


General  Orders, 
No.  11. 

I.  The  following 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

. Saint  Louis , November  30,  1861. 

i xoe  iouowmg  officers  of  the  staff  and  staff  corps  of  this  depart- 
ment having  reported  for  duty  at  headquarters  will  he  recognized  and 

obeyed  accordingly:  . 

Brig.  Gen.  George  W.  Cullum,  chief  of  staff  and  chief  of  engineers. 
Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  assistant  chief  of  staff. 

Oapt  J.  0.  Kelton,  assistant  adjutant-general,  m charge  of  ofcce. 
Capt  William  McMichael,  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Cant.  S.  M.  Preston,  assistant  adjutant- general. 

Mai.  Robert  Allen,  chief  of  quartermaster’s  department. 

Cant  Thomas  J.  Haines,  chief  of  subsistence  department. 

Surg.  J.  J.  B.  Wright,  chief  of  medical  department. 

Lieut.  Col.  T.  P.  Andrews,  chief  of  pay  department. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  B.  McPherson,  aide-de-camp  and  assistant  to  chief  of 


C I Col^George  Thom,  aide-de-camp  and  chief  of  Topographical  Engi-  * 

Tol  Richard  D.  Cutts,  aide-de-camp  on  topographical  duty. 

Capt.  Franklin  D.  Callender,  chief  of  ordnance  department, 

Lieut.  Col.  James  Totten,  chief  of  artillery. 

Capt,  John  Hoskin,  acting  aide-de-camp. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck:  ^ ^ KELTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Headquarters, 


Kolia,  Mo.,  December  1,  1861. 


Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton,  . . . ,r 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louts,  Mo. . j 

Captain:  The  reliable  reports  from  Spring-field  are  that  Trices, 
Bains’,  and  McBride’s  forces  are  in  Vernon,  Cedar,  Saint  Clau, 

and  Barton  counties.  A scout  in  this  morning  34  miles  from  Spring 
field  makes  it  certain  that  no  heavy  force  is  between  here  and  that 
point  Price  has  ordered  Freeman  and  his  band  to  steal,  10b,  and 
pillage  around  us  at  this  point,  which  order  they  arecarryingoutffi 
the  best  of  their  ability.  • I caught  this  morning  a fugitive  slave  from 
the  Cherokee  Nation.  He  says  that  the  Cherokees  are  dissatisfied  and 
afraid  of  the  force  at  Fort  Scott,  and  that  a portion  of  them  have  gone 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  dqdge 

Colonel  Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters, 

Port  Leavenworth , Kans.,  December  1,  1861. 


Major-General  Halleck: 

From  reliable  information  I am  convinced  that  a iarge  force  m m 
ing  north  to  Kansas  City,  Mo  and  that  the  place  must  Mug* 
brigade  is  sent  there  immediately  from  Sedalia  and  kept  the  8 

the  winter.  One  should  also  be  sent  to  Lexington^  jj-jjNTTElt, 

Major-General . 


j>  XVIII.} 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


399 


Headquarters, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans.,  December  1,  1861. 
tjor-General  Halleck: 

[ have  no  reliable  information  with  regard  to  the  movements  of  Price, 
port  says  he  is  moving  north  with  a large  force.  The  rebels  have 
usession  of  the  railroad  between  Weston  and  Saint  Joseph,  and  have 
' our  I think  it  all  important  that  an  efficient  officer 

mid  be  placed  at  Saint  Joseph  and  a regiment  sent  to  Weston  and 
3 to  Liberty.  These  regiments  should  come  together  to  Weston,  and 
\re  some  artillery,  as  the  rebels  have  several  pieces  there.  Please 
agraph  me  what  you  do  in  the  premises,  that  I may  co-operate  with 

D.  HUNTEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


. « . „ Saint  Joseph,  Mo.,  December  1,  1861. 

jor-General  Halleck: 

will  move  from  this  point  with  forces  into  the  counties  directed  ou 
xmesda-y.  Many  of  Price’s  men  are  north  of  Missouri  Biver.  From 
fs  tak^n  from  prisoners  a large  force  from  Price’s  army  is  en  route 
Lexington.  Will  write  you  first  train. 

B.  M.  PBENTISS, 

Brigadier- General. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Brigade, 

n , _ Folia  Mo.,  December  2,  1861. 

lor-General  Halleck:  ’ 

wo  companies  of  cavalry,  returning  from  a reconnaissance — one 
way  ot  Little  Pmey,  across  the  Gasconade,  and  another  5 miles 
n Haines ville,  on  the  right  bank  of  that  river — confirm  mv  former 
arts.  ffo  rebel  troops  are  at  Lebanon  nor  in  its  vicinity;  but  many 
1 ot  the  enemy,  returning  to  their  respective  homes,  are  committing 
redactions  and  other  outrages  on  Union  men.  Our  camps  are  cov- 
'ivith  snow,  and  I am  obliged  to  move  some  of  mv  regiments  to 
tier  ground.  ‘ & 

, „ ASBOTH, 

Acting  Major-General,  Commanding  Fourth  Division. 


Syracuse,  December  2,  1861. 


or-General  Halleck  : 

r.  Moore,  a prominent  citizen  of  this  section,  desires  to  go  to  Price’s 
P,  south  of  Osceola,  with  letters  from  Governor  Gamble,  having  in 
negotiations  for  disbanding  Price’s  forces  and  their  return  toalle- 
ri°(,  !'e  Govern?M®t-  Shall  Dr.  Moore  be  passed  through  our 
h r this  purpose t The  letter  of  Governor  Gamble  states  the  con 
1 ftnuiunity  tor  past  offenses,  as  defined  to  him  by  the  Presi- 

n, ,„jnv  1V?i.a\de8perate  conditioib  and  no  doubt  many  of  his 
mand,  it  not  the  larger  part  ot  it,  would  avail  themselves  of  such  a 

loir  /i  1L  n * . . _ 


H*e  to  lay  down  their  arms.  Dr 


Moore  awaits  your  decision. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Br  igadier - General , Commanding. 


400 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  10—.  svm 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  2,  1861. 

General  B.  M.  Prentiss,  Saint  Joseph,  Mo. : 

Please  consult  and  act  in  concert  with  General  Hunter  at  Foifc 
Leavenworth.  If  deemed  advisable,  you  can  move  trom  Saint  •biwpli 
on  Weston.  Telegraph  me  the  numbers  and  position  ol  your  mo\ab .e 

force. 


H.  W.  HALLBCK, 


If,,!  A M ^ /l  1 . I'/l  I 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Misso vni , 

Saint  Louis , December  2,  1801. 

Mai.  Gen.  D.  Hunter,  Port  Leavenworth , Kans.: 

General  Prentiss  is  now  at  Saint  Joseph.  He  is  directed  to  consul 

movements  and  numbers  of  your  troops.  ^ \ LLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  2,  1801, 

Col.  Fred.  Steele, 

Commanding  at  Sedalia ? Mo.: 

It  is  proposed  that  you  send  a cavalry  force  ot,  say,  4D0  to  Marsh* 

rss-jvss  sb  S3 

approved,  state  reasons.  w HALLEGK. 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  2,  1861. 


ll  PiTvtmsto^receiving  your  dispatch  I Had  ordered  pouting  part; 
from  Merrill’s  Horse,  400,  to  go  towards  Marshall  ' « 

sr.  ss  a jsks  sastt  ss^  sac 

aua  «s?.  »=  St ; 

aTmTimSXSk  to  &» 

division  ii,  Saint  Loni.t  Sno.  4 mobe. 

r.nhineL  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  2,  bwi. 


Col.  Fred.  Steele, 

Commanding  at  Sedalia,  Mo. : 

Send  additional  forces  in  direction  of  Marshall  to  sustain  the  detaoi 


j>.  xvra.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


401 


nt.  In  other  respects  carry  out  my  orders  on  that  subject.  Gen- 
ii Sturgis  does  not  command  your  division.  Send  no  one  here  with- 
;fc  orders  from  these  headquarters. 

H.  W.  HALLECK. 


j.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck:, 

Commanding  in  the  Department  of  Missouri : 

General  : As  an  insurrection  exists  in  the  United  States  and  is 
arms  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  you  are  hereby  authorized  and  em- 
wered  to  suspend  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  within  the  limits  of  the 
itary  division  under  your  command,  and  to  exercise  martial  law  as 
i find  it  necessary,  in  your  discretion,  to  secure  the  public  safety  and 
s authority  of  the  United  States* 

n witness  whereof  I have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  caused  the  seal 
the  United  States  to  be  affixed,  at  Washington,  this  second  dav  of 
cember,  A.  D.  1861.  J 

ABRAHAM  LINCOLN. 

$y  the  President : 

William  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State . 


scial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  24.  ) Saint  Louis , December  2,  1861. 

Irig.  Gen.  George  W.  Cullurn,  Col.  George  Thom,  Lieut.  Col.  James 
'ten,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  B.  McPherson,  and  Capt.  Franklin  D.  Callender 
1 constitute  a board  to  examine  and  report  upon  the  defenses  of  this 
r.  They  will  make  a reconnaissance  of  the  country  immediately 
acent,  the  approaches,  barracks,  camps,  &c.,  and  examine  the  forti- 
fions  which  have  been  erected,  particularly  with  reference  to  the 
ition,  plan,  strength,  present  and  required  garrisons,  accommoda- 
is  for  troops,  &c.  They  will  state  particularly  whether  these  works, 
any  of  them,  are  improperly  located  or  planned ; and,  if  so,  what 
itions  and  plans  ought  to  have  been  adopted.  They  will  also  report 
r these  defects,  if  any  be  found,  can  now  be  best  remedied,  so  as  to 
ee  this  city  in  the  best  possible  state  of  defense.  In  this  relation 
y give  particular  attention  to  the  present  position  of  the  bar- 
ks and  camps.  The  armament  of  each  fort,  its  supply  of  ordnance 
fe®>  present  and  required,  will  be  examined  and  reported. 

L l).rief  preliminary  report  on  these  points  will  be  made  to  the  com- 
uling general  as  soon  as  possible,  to  be  followed  by  a more  detailed 
L formal  statement,  accompanied  by  such  sketches,  maps,  and  draw- 
ls as  may  be  necessary  for  a full  understanding  of  the  whole  subject, 
s board  will  also  inquire  into  and  report  upon  the  construction  and 
t of  these  works,  whether  built  by  the  troops,  by  hired  labor,  or  by 
tract ; it  by  day  labor,  the  amount  paid  or  due,  and  if  by  contract, 

. forms  of  the  contracts,  and  whether  or  not  if  works  paid  for  or 
1 wed  was  the  real  amount  of  work  done  in  conformity  with  such 
tract  or  contracts,  and  also  whether  the  contract  prices  were  fair 
1 just.  In  making  this  investigation  they  are  authorized  to  call  for 
1 examine  any  papers  in  the  quartermaster  or  other  departments  in 
! command,  and  will  call  upon  the  commissioners  of  claims  ap- 
26  r r — VOL  VIII 


402  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVL 

pointed,  by  the  President  for  such  information  as  they  may  deem  prop 

t0 The  president  of  the  board  will  notify  the  members  of  their  appoit 
ment,  and  fix  the  times  of  meeting,  &c. 

By  order  of  Major  General  Halleck : 


• * * 

J.  C.  KELTON,  I 
Assistant  Adjutant- GeneraLl 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  3,  1861—11  a.  m. 
Major-General  McClellan,  Commanding  TJ.  8.  Army : 

Price  is  probably  still  near  Oscedla.  Our  preparations  have  check 
his  advance.  McCulloch  near  Springfield,  falling  back  towards  A 
kansas.  Perhaps  his  retreat  is  a mere  ruse,  to  draw  our  forces  Ire 
Rolla  in  the  direction  of  Osceola.  Our  troops  suffering  terribly  fre 
sickness  and  cold.  Every  effort  is  being  made  to  supply  their  wan 
Neither  the  quartermaster’s  nor  pay  department  have  money.  W. 

tsthlS?  H.  W.  HALLECE, 

Maior-General 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  3,  1861, 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commander-in- Chiefs  Washington , D.  C.:  \ 

General:  Your  telegram  of  yesterday,  desiring  a report  of  ti 
general  state  of  affairs,  condition  of  gunboats  finished,  their  draug 
of  water,  number  of  guns,  &c.,  is  received.  My  letters  Nos. • 1 .and 
will  afford  some  information  on  these  points,  especially  as  to  their  <x 
dition.  I have  not  yet  been  able  to  obtain  reports  of  their  nurnbj 
and  organization,  although  such  reports  were  ordered  soon  after  d 

arrival  li6rc  J 

As  already  stated,  my  first  efforts,  after  making  provisions  against  t 
enemy’s  movements  in  the  west  and  north,  have  been  directed  to  si 
plying  and  reorganizing  the  troops,  who  are  in  a most  disorganize 
and  some  of  them  in  a suffering,  condition.  I have  not  been  able,  a 
shall  not  for  some  time  be  able,  to  give  any  attention  to  the  gun  >o 
Flag-Officer  Foote  is  now  at  Cairo.  He  has  made  no  formal  reports 
me  As  soon  as  he  returns  I will  call  upon  him  to  report  to  me  1 
information  you  desire.  In  the  mean  time  the  information,  if  imme 
ately  required,  can  probably  be  obtained  from  his  reports  to  the  JNa 

D The  cofd  here  is  very  severe,  and  our  troops,  in  miserable  tents  a 
poorlv  clothed,  suffer  very  much,  and  the  sick  list  is  enormous.  Ev< 
one  at  headquarters  is  working  night  and  day  to  remedy  these  evi 
but  this  requires  time,  for  the  volunteer  officers  are  generally  ignore 
of  their  duties  and  have  to  be  taught.  My  supply  of  regular  oinc 
should  be  increased,  at  least  temporarily,  in  order  to  enable  me 
muster  in  and  organize  the  fragments  and  regiments  now  in  serv 
As  soon  as  possible  I will  send  you  more  formal  and  complete  repoi 
In  the  mean  time  I will  give  you  all  the  information  I can  mysel  o *> 
Price  is  still  near  Osceola.  His  force  is  variously  estimated  at  it 


\p.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


403 


000  to  30,000  men,  but  greatly  demoralized  and  dissatisfied.  The 
lowing  have  been  represented  to  me  as  the  enemy’s  plans  and  inten- 
ds: Insurrections  were  to  be  organized  in  various  counties  north  of 

1 Missouri,  so  as  to  draw  off  our  troops  in  various  directions.  Jn  the 
an  time  Price  was  to  threaten  Sedalia,  not  supposed  to  be  strong, 
1 make  a dash  at  Jefferson  City,  the  insurgents  at  different  points 

0 moving  in  that  direction.  If  the  troops  at  Kolia  moved  in  Price’s 
ir  McCulloch  was  to  cut  them  off  from  Saint  Louis. 

t is  said  that  these  plans  were  abandoned  on  finding  our  forces  in 
vicinity  of  Sedalia  much  stronger  than  was  supposed".  Price  halted 
ir  Osceola,  not  venturing  to  advance  any  farther.  He  and  McCul- 
h are  said  to  be  waiting  for  us  to  make  some  move.  If  Price  suc- 
ded  in  the  north,  the  large  Confederate  forces  at  Columbus  were  either 
attack  Paducah  or  to  cross  the  river  and  threaten  this  city.  I give 

1 these  reported  plans  for  what  they  are  worth.  I shall  prepare  as 
£e  a force  as  possible  for  the  field,  but  I shall  make  no  movements 
hout  some  definite  object,  except  the  sending  out  of  strong  scouting 
’ties.  This  I am  doing  daily. 

have  directed  to  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army  the  correspond- 
pe  between  General  Grant  and  Bishop  General  Polk  in  relation  to 
exchange  of  prisoners.*  After  full  consideration  of  the  subject  I am 
he  opinion  that  prisoners  ought  to  be  exchanged.  This  exchange  is 
nere  military  convention.  A prisoner  exchanged  under  the  laws  of 
r is  not  thereby  exempted  from  trial  and  punishment  as  a traitor, 
iason  is  a state  or  civil  offense,  punishable  by  the  civil  courts ; the 
Range  of  prisoners  of  war  is  only  a part  of  the  ordinary  commercia 
pt. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 


Headquarters  Third  Division, 

Rolla , Jfo.,  December  3,  1861. 

jor-General  Halleck: 

Ieneral  : My  scout,  Isaac  S.  Coe,  left  Linn  Creek  on  the  3d  at 
a.  He  met  no  secessionists  until  he  got  there,  when  he  found  a 
armed  men,  and  reports  that  the  right  wing  of  Price’s  army  had 
ssed  the  Osage  below  Warsaw  and  Osceola — there  are  three* prao- 
ble  fords  below  the  place — and  is  contemplating  an  attack  on  our 
*es  at  and  near  Sedalia,  with  a view  to  destroy  the  principal  railroad 
lges.  From  another  source  I learn  that  part  of  McCulloch’s  army 
already  reached  Cassville  on  its  retreat. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 

Acting  Brigadier- General. 


serai,  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Army  of  Western  Missouri, 

No.  11-  ) Syracuse , December  3,  1861. 

i compliance  with  orders  from  the  headquarters  of  the  Department 
he  Missouri,  the  undersigned  assumes  command  of  all  the  forces 
^een  the  Missouri  and  O.-age  Rivers. 

******* 

JKO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


To  appear  in  Series  II. 


404 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , December  4,  1861. 


°01-  ^Commanding  U.  8.  Forces,  Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.: 

Your  communication  of  yesterday*  is  received  and  the  follow* 

inYouCwillSrtqufre  CMonel Murdoch  to  give  over  to  the  quartermast. 
all  property  taken  by  them  from  citizens  of  Missouri.  Such  as  may  ll 
^claimed  by  owners  you  will  direct  to  be  returned,  unless  taken  fro 
nersons  directly  giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy. 

When  you  know  of  depredations  being  committed  by  armed  bod, 
of  rebels  within  reach  of  you,  you  can  use  your  own  discretion  abo 
the  propriety  of  suppressing  them.  I know  your  views  about  allowuj 
troops  to  interpret  the  confiscation  laws ; therefore  no  instructions  a 
Sred  on  S point.  One  thing  I will  add:  In  cases  of  outrageo 
marauding  I would  fully  justify  shooting  the  perpetrators  down 
caught  in  the  act — I mean  our  own  men  as  well  , ■ . 

you  are  satisfied  that  Thompson’s  men  are  coming  in  with  honest  in* 
tions  you  may  swear  them,  but  in  this  matter  I would  advise  gre 
caution  As  a rule  it  would  be  better  to  keep  them  entirel  j out  of  >o 
lamp  lr  confine  them  as  prisoners  of  war.  A few  examples  of  confin 
ment  would  prevent  others  from  coming  in.  ^ g GRANT, 

Briaadier- General,  Commanding.] 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

^ . Cairo , December  4,  1861. 

Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

I would  respectfully  report  that  the  goods  landed  at  Pnces^ Landni 
on  Monday  last  by  steamer  Perry  were  movcd  d rect  y by  teim 
Hickman  Kv.  and  New  Madrid,  Mo.  I learned  these  facts  too  late 
c ‘in t ure  the  o-Jods  and  the  teams  used  in  their  transportation.  Eig  i 
barrels  of  this  freight  were  whisky;  a character  °| 
i.„vp  nn  obicction  to  being  carried  on  with  the  couth,  out  tneie 
possibility  that  some  barrels  marked  whisky  migHt  contMn 
more  objectionable.  I would  not  be  understood  as  saying  that  I won 
sanction  the  passage  South  of  anything  intel^lc^%RANT) 

Brigadier-  General 


Saint  Joseph,  Mo.,  December  4,  1861. 
Major-General  Commanding  the  Dept,  of  the  Mo.: 

I start  this  afternoon  with  four  field  5 cavalry, . , ( 


infantry. 


Colonel  Morgan’s  regiment  has  left  for  Weston. 


Lon  el  Morgans  iebuucui  Tlli  noi 

road  will  be  : Hannibal  and  Salt  River  Bridge,  Twenty-sixth  111  u 
Palmyra,  Glover’s  cavalry,  four  companies;  ^.e,, 

Bridge,  Foster’s  regiment;  Grand  River  ’ of  the  I'ffU'en 

Saint  Joseph  and  Cloth  River  Bridge,  five  companies  ot  the 

and  Sixteenth  Illinois  and  300  State  Militia.  ^ ^ PRENTISS, 

Brigadier-General. 


* Not  found. 


|iP-  XVin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  405 

;neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  13.  I Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  4,  1861. 

[.  Lieut.  Col.  Bernard  G.  Farrar  is  hereby  appointed  provost-mar  - 
ll -general  of  this  department.  Capt.  George  E.  Leighton  is  provost- 
j-shal  of  the  city  of  Saint  Louis  and  its  vicinity.  All  local  provost- 
rshals  will  be  subject  to  the  orders  of  the  provost-marshal-general, 

0 will  receive  his  instructions  direct  from  these  headquarters. 

{I.  It  is  represented  that  there  are  numerous  rebels  and  spies  within 
f camps  and  in  the  territory  occupied  by  our  troops,  who  give  infor- 
tion,  aid,  and  assistance  to  the  enemy;  that  rebels  scattered  through 
:5  country  threaten  and  drive  out  loyal  citizens  and  rob  them  of  their 
|>perty;  that  they  furnish  the  enemy  with  arms,  provisions,  clothing, 
rses,  and  means  of  transportation ; and  that  insurgents  are  banding 
^ether  in  several  of  the  interior  counties  for  the  purpose  of  assisting 
|>  enemy  to  rob,  to  maraud,  and  to  lay  waste  the  country.  All  such 
"sons  are  by  the  laws  of  war,  in  every  civilized  country,  liable  to 
pital  punishment.  The  mild  and  indulgent  course  heretofore  pursued 
rard  this  class  of  men  has  utterly  failed  to  restrain  them  from  such 
lawful  conduct.  The  safety  of  the  country  and  the  protection  of  the 
es  and  property  of  loyal  citizens  justify  and  require  the  enforcement 
a more  severe  policy.  Peace  and  war  cannot  exist  together.  We 
mot  at  the  same  time  extend  to  rebels  the  rights  of  peace  and  enforce 
linst  them  the  penalties  of  war.  They  have  forfeited  their  civil  rights 
citizens  by  making  war  against  the  Government,  and  upon  their  own 
ids  must  fall  the  consequences. 

II.  Commanding  officers  of  districts,  posts,  and  corps  will  arrest  and 
ee  in  confinement  all  persons  in  arms  against  the  lawful  authorities 
the  United  States,  or  who  give  aid,  assistance,  or  encouragement  to 
! enemy.  The  evidence  against  persons  so  arrested  will  be  reduced 
writing  and  verified  on  oath,  and  the  originals  or  certified  copies  of 
•h  affidavits  will  be  immediately  furnished  to  the  provost-marsh  al- 
lieral  in  this  city.  All  arms,  ammunition,  and  other  personal  prop- 
y required  for  the  use  of  the  Army,  such  as  horses,  wagons,  provis- 
s,  &c.,  belonging  to  persons  so  in  arms  or  so  assisting  and  encour- 
ng  the  enemy,  will  be  taken  possession  of,  and  turned  over  and  ac- 
uited  for.  Such  property,  not  of  a proper  character  for  issue,  will 
examined  by  a board  of  officers,  and  sold  as  directed  by  the  Army 
io-ulations. 

V.  Commissions  will  be  ordered  from  these  headquarters  for  the  trial 
persons  charged  with  aiding  and  assisting  the  enemy,  the  destruc- 

1 of  bridges,  roads,  and  buildings,  and  the  taking  of  public  or  pri- 
e property  for  hostile  purposes,  and  also  for  the  condemnation  of 
•perty  taken  by  our  forces  from  disloyal  inhabitants  for  the  use  of 
Army. 

L In  all  certificates  given  for  private  property  taken  for  public  use, 
iccordanee  with  General  Orders,  No.  8,  of  this  department,  it  will  be 
ted  whether  the  property  was  taken  from  loyal  or  disloyal  persons,  and 
i test  of  the  loyalty  of  persons  claiming  to  be  such,  from  whom  prop- 
y is  so  taken,  officers  commanding  districts,  posts,  divisions,  or  sepa- 
e brigades  are  authorized  to  appoint  some  competent  and  reliable 
cer  to  require  and  administer  the  usual  oath  of  allegiance  to  the 
ited  States. 

/TI.  All  persons  found  in  disguise  as  pretended  loyal  citizens,  or  un- 
other  false  pretenses,  within  our  lines,  giving  information  to  or 
' anunicating  with  the  enemy,  will  be  arrested,  tried,  condemned,  and 


406 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIll 


shot  as  spies.  It  should  be  remembered  that  in  this  respect  the  laws  A 
war  make  no  distinction  of  sex ; all  are  liable  to  the  same  penalty.  I 
VII  Persons  not  commissioned  or  enlisted  in  the  service  of  the  8| 
called’ Confederate  States,  who  commit  acts  of  hostility,  will  not  | 
treated  as  prisoners  of  war,  but  will  be  held  and  punished  as  criminal; 
And  all  persons  found  guilty  of  murder,  robbery,  theft,  pillaging,  ail 
marauding,  under  whatever  authority,  will  either  be  shot  or  otherwii 
less  severely  punished,  as  is  prescribed  by  the  Rules  and  Articles  of  Wal 
or  authorized  by  the  usages  and  customs  of  war  in  like  cases. 

VIII.  The  law  of  military  retaliation  has  fixed  and  well-establishtl 
rules  While  it  allows  no  cruel  or  barbarous  acts  on  our  part  in  retsl 
iation  for  like  acts  of  the  enemy,  it  permits  any  retaliatory  measimi 
within  the  prescribed  limits  of  military  usage.  If  the  enemy  murclel 
and  robs  Union  men,  we  are  not  justified  in  murdering  and  robbii' 
other  persons  who  are  in  a legal  sense  enemies  to  our  Government,  bi, 
we  may  enforce  on  them  the  severest  penalties  justified  by  the  laws 
war  for  the  crimes  of  their  fellow  rebels.  The  rebel  forces  in  the  sout 
western  counties  of  this  State  have  robbed  and  plundered  the  peace 
ful  non-combatant  inhabitants,  taking  from  them  their  clothing  arl 
means  of  subsistence.  Men,  women,  and  children  have  alike  bee 
stripped  and  plundered.  Thousands  of  such  persons  are  finding  the! 
wav  to  this  city  barefooted,  half  clad,  and  in  a destitute  and  star\  ill 
condition.  Humanity  and  justice  require  that  these  sufferings  shou 
be  relieved  and  that  the  outrages  committed  upon  them  should  be  r, 
taliated  upon  the  enemy.  The  individuals  who  have  directly  cans* 
these  sufferings  are  at  present  mostly  beyond  our  reach.  Put  the 
are  in  this  city  and  in  other  places  within  our  lines  numerous  wealth 
secessionists  who  render  aid,  assistance,  and  encouragement  to  tlio; 
who  commit  these  outrages.  They  do  not  themselves  rob  and  plundej 
but  they  abet  and  countenance  these  acts  in  others.  Although  le 
bold,  they  are  equally  guilty.  It  is  therefore  ordered  and  directed  tli 
the  provost-marshals  immediately  inquire  into  the  condition  of  the  pe 
sons  so  driven  from  their  homes,  and  that  measures  be  taken  to  quart 
them  in  the  houses,  and  to  feed  and  clothe  them  at  the  expense 
avowed  secessionists  and  of  those  who  are  found  guilty  of  giving  ai 
assistance,  and  encouragement  to  the  enemy.  _ _ 

IX.  The  laws  of  the  United  States  confiscate  the  property  of  ai 
master  in  a slave  used  for  insurrectionary  purposes.  Should  Congre 
extend  this  penalty  to  the  property  of  all  rebels  m arms,  or  giving  ai 
assistance,  and  encouragement  to  the  enemy,  such  provisions  will 
strictly  enforced.  Military  officers  do  not  make  laws,  but  they  snou 
obey  and  enforce  them  when  made. 

X.  Where  the  necessities  of  service  require  it,  the  forced  la?or 
citizens,  slaves,  and  even  prisoners  of  war,  may  be  employed  in  t 
construction  of  military  defenses,  but  no  one  will  be  forced  to  s 
labor  without  orders  from  these  headquarters,  except  in  case  ol  su, 
or  attack.  All  persons  so  impressed  will  be  fed  and  quartered  at 
public  expense,  and  an  account  be  taken  of  their  labor,  to  be  setti 
as  may  be  directed  by  the  War  Department.  All  such  working  parti 
will  be  strictly  guarded,  and  kept  as  far  as  possible  from  communiCc 
ing  with  the  command  where  employed. 

XI.  These  orders  may  by  some  be  regarded  as  severe,  but  tney 
certainly  justified  by  the  laws  of  war,  and  it  is  believed  they  ai 
only  right,  but  necessary;  it  is  therefore  expected  that  all  loyaic 
zens  in  this  department  will  assist  the  military  authorities  in  • 
enforcing  them.  There  is  already  a large  military  force  in  this  bta 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


407 


up.  xvm.] 


liicli  is  daily  increasing  in  numbers  and  improving  in  organization 
id  discipline.  In  a few  weeks  tliis  force  will  be  able  not  only  to  expel 
■ punish  all  traitors  and  rebels,  but  also  to  strike  the  enemy  in  his 
rougholds. 

Xli.  All  communications  relating  to  prisoners  of  war  will  be  directed 
> the  provost-marshal-general,  to  be  by  him  laid  before  the  command- 
.g  general  daily,  at  orderly  hours. 

Bv  order  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


pecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  34.  f Saint  Louis , December  4,  18G1. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  J.  McKean  is  hereby  assigned  command  of 
sfierson  City,  Mo.,  and  the  troops  in  that  vicinity.  He  will  be  under 
le  general  orders  of  Brigadier-General  Pope,  commanding  the  district, 
at  will  also  report  directly  to  these  headquarters. 

#*##### 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


ajor-General  Halleck: 


Syracuse,  December  5,  1861. 


Heard  from  Warsaw  by  scouts  day  before  yesterday.  About  300  of 
iem  in  the  town,  belonging  to  companies  raised  in  the  neighborhood, 
y cavalry  pickets  are  out  as  far  as  Cole  Camp,  and  visited  beyond 
lat  place  yesterday.  Nothing  but  marauding  squads,  at  from  5 to  40, 
tis  side  of  Warsaw.  Will  send  five  companies  and  two  pieces  of 
tillery  at  daylight  to-morrow.  Have  sent  orders  to  Colonel  Steele  to 
>nd  a regiment  of  cavalry  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  to  feel  enemy  on 
sceola  road.  There  are  no  large  bodies  of  the  enemv  north  of  Osage. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General. 


Syracuse,  December  5,  1861. 


ajor-General  Halleck: 

Colonel  Steele  telegraphs  me  that  all  his  available  cavalry  has  been 
nt  north  by  your  orders.  All  from  here  leave  for  Warsaw  at  day- 
?ht,  according  to  your  dispatch.  There  are  only  four  more  companies, 
id  they  are  at  Tipton.  Shall  I send  them  ? They  are  very  inferior 
id  unreliable.  Judge  Birch,  just  at  Sedalia  from  Price’s  camp,  will 
> here  to-night.  No  considerable  force  north  of  Osage.  I have  had 
veral  reliable  spies  from  Price’s  camp  within  a day  or  two.  One  left 
ere  day  before  yesterday.  He  reports  Price  7 miles  above  Osceola 
ith  about  4,000  men.  Parsons  at  Osceola  with  about  7,000.  I think, 
om  other  information  that  their  figures  are  too  large.  I do  not  sup- 
>se  Price  to  have  altogether  more  than  7,000  or  8,000. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


408 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVnil 

Boll  A,  Mo.,  December  5,  1861.  I 
Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Two  reliable  men  arrived  here  to-night,  one  from  Springfield  and  on* 
from  Granby  Lead  Mines,  Newton  County,  Mo.  Both  report  McCulloc  | 
at  Pea  Bidge,  Benton  County,  Ark.,  building  barracks.  McBride,  witil 
2,000  men,  arrived  at  Springfield  on  Sunday  morning  from  the  nortlj 
All  reports  agree  that  all  parts  of  the  rebel  army  are  in  a deplorabl  < 
state  and  large  numbers  going  home  and  enlistments  running  oui m 
Manv  of  them  who  reside  near  here  are  coming  to  give  themselves  uj 

G.  M.  DODGE, 

Commanding  Post,  % 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  5,  1861.  1 

General  Halleck:  I 

I heard  from  part  of  the  cavalry  to-day.  Nothing  important.  Judg< 
Birch  arrived  from  Price’s  camp  this  evening,  and  says  he  expects  t<j 
see  you  to-morrow.  Price  is  making  desperate  exertions  to  raise  ami 
start  out  a large  army.  Stage  just  in  from  Warrensburg.  Bebels  ar 
plundering  the  whole  country  in  that  direction.  All  the  wagons  arii 
horses  are  taken.  All  the  stage  horses  are  taken.  All  the  stage  horse 
west  of  W arrensburg  have  been  seized.  General  P ope  ordered  me  t 
make  a reconnaissance  in  force  in  direction  of  Osceola.  It  is  not  ned 

essary,  and  I have  no  cavalry.  FItED’K  STEELE, 

Colonel , Commanding . 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  6,  1861. 


Major-General  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Army  : 

The  information  respecting  gunboats  will  be  telegraphed  as  soon  a 
it  can  be  obtained.  One  or  more  unarmed  regiments  can  be  details 
as  crews,  but  not  any  armed  can  be  spared  from  Missouri.  You  ca 
form  no  conception  of  the  condition  of  affairs  here.  The  ep6my  is  1 
possession  of  nearly  one-half  of  the  State,  and  a majority  of  60,00  o 
80,000  of  the  inhabitants  are  secessionists.  Our  arm y is  utterly  disorgar 
ized,  clamorous  for  pay,  but  refusing  to  be  regularly  mustered  in— i 
many  places  mutinous  and  disbanding.  I will  restore  order  and  ron 
the  enemy  if  you  will  give  me  time  and  assistance.  We  are  not  prt 
pared  for  any  important  expedition  out  of  the  State;  it  would  lmperi 
the  safety  of  Missouri.  Wait  till  we  are  ready.  The  “On  to  Bid 
mond”  policy  here  will  produce  another  Bull  Bun  disaster.  You  ma 


rely  on  this. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  6,  tool. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army , Washington , D.  G.: 

General:  General  Prentiss  is  moving  from  Saint  Joseph  with  » 
the  available  means  he  can  collect  in  Northern  Missouri  against 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


409 


iai\  xvmo 


-ganized  insurgents  at  Weston,  Platte  City,  Liberty,  and  Eichmond* 
order  to-day  a regiment  from  this  place  to  re-enforce  him.  I also 
hnd  one  to  Jefferson  City  to  replace  the  Home  Guards,  who  refuse  to 
3 mustered  out  or  in  or  to  obey  any  orders.  They  are  reported  as 
scidedly  mutinous  and  it  may  be  necessary  to  forcibly  disarm  them, 
he  garrison  at  Boonevilleis  in  a similar  condition.  A force  was  sent 
om  Sedalia  two  days  ago  to  Marshall,  Waverly,  and  Arrow  Eock,  to 
sperse  the  rebels,  and  to  destroy  the  stores  and  boats  collected  at 
lose  places.  Eesult  not  yet  known.  Major  Bowen,  with  500  cavalry, 
in  pursuit  of  rebels,  under  Colonel  Turner,  south  of  Salem. 

Scouting  parties  from  Eolla  and  Sedalia  represent  Price  as  only  7 
iles  north  of  Osceola.  Spies  and  others  say  his  force  is  larger  than 
had  supposed.  Our  forces  at  Sedalia  and  Eolla  are  held  in  readiness 
» move,  but  their  efficiency  is  greatly  reduced  by  disorganization  and 
ckness.  Many  have  never  regularly  been  mustered  into  service,  and 
is  doubtful  if  they  can  be  persuaded  to  come  in.  The  camp  measles 
re  prevailing,  and  daily  increase  our  sick  list. 

We  have  already  done  much  to  relieve  the  pressing  wants  of  the 
oops,  and  now  are  engaged  night  and  day  in  attempting  to  organize 
tern  according  to  law  and  regulations.  This,  however,  is  a very  diffi- 
dt  task,  for  want  of  returns  and  muster  rolls.  Many  of  them  are 
egally  mustered,  and  refuse  to  be  mustered  over  again  for  future  or 
» cover  past  services.  Some  were  merely  sworn  in  without  any  mus- 
r rolls  at  all,  and  yet  they  have  been  paid  and  supplied  as  regular 
oops.  The  officers  in  many  cases  oppose  being  mustered,  hoping  in 
iis  way  to  avoid  accountability  for  public  property  wasted  and  stolen 
id  for  offenses  committed.  Moreover,  many  of  the  organizations  on 
iper  are  mere  shams — companies  and  regiments  not  having  half  the 
imbers  returned  and  paid  for,  the  officers  in  such  cases  having  appro- 
bated to  their  own  use  the  surplus  clothing  and  provisions  issued 
i these  false  returns.  The  most  outrageous  frauds  are  daily  being 
iveloped,  especially  in  the  quartermaster’s  department.  Many  of  the 
gimental  quartermasters  are  unworthy  of  trust  or  confidence.  It  will 
ke  time,  General,  to  ferret  out  these  abuses  and  to  properly  organize 
id  discipline  our  forces  here,  but  I will  do  it  if  you  will  give  me  time 
id  assistance.  The  material,  so  far  as  the  men  are  concerned,  is 
m er ally  excellent,  but  that  of  the  officers  very  poor.  It  is  impossible 
it  to  form  any  correct  idea  of  their  numbers.  In  many  cases  no 
turns  have  been  made  and  many  of  those  sent  in  are  entirely  unre- 
ible.  There  is  probably  not  one-half  the  effective  force  shown  on 
iper. 

This,  General,  is  no  army,  but  rather  a military  rabble.  A high 
freer,  who  was  at  Washington  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Bull  Eun, 
ys  the  army  here  is  more  disorganized  than  that  of  the  Potomac 
ter  its  defeat.  Every  one  appreciates  the  change  which  you  have 
tected  in  that  army  in  five  months.  I hope,  with  your  assistance,  to 
> the  same  here.  You  are  aware  that  I am  almost  destitute  of  reg- 
ar  officers,  and  those  of  the  volunteers  are,  with  some  exceptions, 
itirely  ignorant  of  their  duties.  It  is  said,  General,  that  you  have 
iarly  as  many  regular  officers  on  your  personal  staff  as  I have  in  this 
kole  department.  I was  very  sorry  to  receive  your  orders  to-day 
king  away  four  or  five  of  the  very  few  I now  have.  I will,  however, 

) the  best  I can  without  them. 

Your  telegram  of  last  evening  indicates  your  intention  to  withdra  w 
so  a portion  of  the  troops  from  Missouri.  I assure  you,  General,  this 
nnot  be  done  with  safety  at  present.  Some  weeks  hence  I hope  to 


410 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  xvm 


have  a large  disposable  force  for  other  points;  but  now,  dest  tute  a 
we  are  of  Inns,  organization,  and  discipline,  it  seems  to  me  madness  t 
Remove  any  of  our  troops  from  this  State.  You  will  pardon  me  if 
use  strong^  language,  for  you  must  know  that  I have  no  object  m vieil 
other  than  the  success  of  our  cause.  At  your  distance  from  the  seen 
of  hostilities  here  you  cannot  fully  appreciate  the  true  condition  c« 

affI  write  you  hastily  and  in  a desultory  style,  for  as  yet  I have  neithel 
the  time  nor  the  means  for  formal  reports. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  HALLE0K 

Major-General,  si 


Headquarters, 
Pilot  Knob,  December'  0,  1861. 


General  H.  W.  Halleck:  _ , 

I have  sent  out  scouts  from  Potosi  and  this  post  towards  Saler 
Steel  ville,  and  Oentreville.  The  Potosi  scouts  report  no  rebel  troori 
at  or  east  of  Salem  or  Steelville ; that  Freeman’s  b“d-^00-Jad  M 
to  both  places,  but  were  driven  away  by  Colonel  Wyman.  My  scou. 
have  not  returned,  but  will  probably  bring  the  same  reports.  A tor« 
of  400  rebels,  under  Freeman,  is  on  Current  River,  80  miles  southed 

of  this  point.  w p 0AELIN.  j 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III,  December  6,  18G1. 


Col.  Richard  J.  Oglesby, 

Commanding  at  Bird’s  Point,  Mo. : 

Information  having  been  received  at  these  headquarters  that  tJj 
enemv  have  some  heavy  pieces  of  artillery  at  Belmont,  or  at  the  pon 
on  the  river  immediately  this  side,  not  yet  mounted,  with  but  asm 
guard  and  working  party  to  protect  them,  you  will  order  the  entire Tor 
of  cavalry  at  Bird’s  Point,  Mo.,  to  make  a reconnaissance  towards 
mont  to-night,  and  if  the  enemy  are  found  in  force  not  too  strong  tk 
will  make  a dash  upon  him  and  spike  all  his  guns  they  may  find,  ait 
which  they  will  immediately  return  to  Bird’s  Point.  They  will  obser 
great  caution  not  to  be  drawn  into  ambush  or  engage  a superior  for 
of  the  enemy.  A detachment  will  be  sent  from  Cairo  to  act  in  conct 
with  those  of  your  command. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Grant : ^ a RAWLINS) 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


P.  S.— The  expedition  will  be  in  readiness  to  move  immediate 
upon  the  arrival  of  the  force  from  Cairo,  between  the  hours  of  6 and 
o’clock. 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  6,  1861. 

General  Halleck: 

It  i»  reported  by  a Union  man,  who  lias  before  He^ 

County  to  give  information  concerning  the  enemy,  that  Price's  an 


jhap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


411 


jrossed  tlie  Osage  day  before  yesterday.  The  day  Judge  Birch  left 
)ne  division  marched  towards  Warsaw  and  one  towards  Clinton.  This 
le  heard  from  both  Union  and  rebels.  There  are  20,000  pounds  of  flour 
it  Robinson’s  Mill,  near  Leesville,  and  considerable  amounts  at  other 
nills  in  that  section.  A movement  of  troops  from  here  to  La  Mine  has 
>een  ordered.  The  surgeons  object,  on  account  of  small-pox  at  Syra- 
)use. 

FRED’K  STEELE, 
Colonel,  Commanding . 


Irders,  ) Office  Pro.  Mar.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  2.  ) Saint  Louis , December  6,  1861. 

>apt.  Leighton,  Provost-Marslial: 

Sir  : With  a view  of  carrying  out  the  orders  of  the  commanding 
general  in  regard  to  quartering  Union  refugees  upon  persons  who  are 
iisloyal  to  the  Government,  you  will  please  take  the  necessary  steps 
without  delay  to  make  out  a list  of  such  persons  residing  in  the  lines 
rithin  your  jurisdiction.  I wish,  first,  to  have  made  out  a list  which 
hall  embrace  that  class  of  persons  who  reside  within  the  city,  and  who 
bre,  judging  by  their  mode  of  living,  in  good  circumstances. 

This  list  you  will  please  have  completed,  if  practicable,  by  to-morrow 
afternoon,  and  annex  to  each  name  the  j>lace  of  residence  and  size  of 
muse,  and  also,  if  known  to  you,  any  unoccupied  buildings  belonging  to 
uch  persons.  The  list  of  persons  outside  of  the  city  it  is  desirable  to 
lave  at  the  earliest  practicable  time.  Let  each  list  embrace  two  classes, 
n the  first  include  those  persons  known  to  you  to  be  disloyal.  In  the 
econd  those  persons  strongly  suspected  by  you,  briefly  stating  grounds 
>f  suspicion. 

Respectfully, 

BERNARD  G.  FARRAR, 

Provost-Marshal-  General. 


Syracuse,  December  7,  1861. 

lajor-General  Halleck: 

It  is  reported  to  me  by  a reliable  scout  that  Price  crossed  the  Osage 
osterday  morning  with  a large  part  of  his  force,  one  division  taking 
he  road  to  Warsaw,  the  other  moving  in  the  direction  of  Clinton, 
tews  is  not  yet  confirmed  by  other  scouts.  Cavalry  force  sent  yes- 
arday  morning.  I presume  Price  only  intends  to  occupy  counties 
orth  of  Osage  for  subsistence,  but  it  may  be  necessary,  within  a few 
ays,  to  move  against  him  in  force  to  defeat  this  purpose.  Will  write 
illy  by  mail,  and  telegraph  if  news  is  confirmed. 

JNO.  POPE, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  7,  1861. 

General  John  Pope,  Syracuse,  Mo.: 

Don’t  move  the  troops  from  Sedalia  till  the  other  forces  are  in  posh 
ton  at  La  Mine. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


412 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

n T\  r\  si  /i  sin/*  7 


December  7,  1861. 


Syracuse 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  W.  CULLUM,  Chief  of  Staff : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the 
general  commanding  the  department,  that  it  is  reported  to  me  on  tol| 
frahly  reliable  authority  that  Price,  with  the  greater  part  of  his  force! 
crossed  the  Osage  yesterday  morning,  one  division  taking  the  aisav 
road,  the  other  moving  on  Clinton.  I shall  know  certainly  before  th<  I 
.. 5 - i o fi nn  io  p.nrrp.pt.  as  also  the  exact  posi 


mail  goes  oht  whether  this  information  is  correct,  as  also  the  exact  posi 
mdU  8 7 i i a Li,  ^ riwteirm  Thp  five  companies  o 


tion  and  about  the  strength  of  each  division.  The  five  companies  o 
cavalry  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  sent  to  Warsaw  yesterday  mormnJ 
were  doubtless  in  that  town  early  this  morning.  I shall  hear  from 
there  to-night.  There  is  as  yet  no  news  from  the  cavalry  force  sen 

north  from  Sedalia.  . ~ -ij 

I have  strong  bodies  of  cavalry  scouring  the  country  for  15  mile! 
north  and  south  of  this  place.  My  pickets  of  cavalry  are  as  far  out  a 
Cole  Camp  in  the  south  and  Bell  Air  and  Palestine  in  the  north.  Bacl| 
picket  consists  of  one  company  of  cavalry  80  strong.  . 

P I presume  Price  only  intends  to  occupy  the  counties  bordering  th 
north  side  of  the  Osage  for  subsistence,  and  to  defeat  this  purpose  r. 
may  be  necessary  to  move  against  him  m such  force7,st^p11d®®™^u1ethe 
to  recross  the  river.  I shall  know  in  the  course  of  the  day  whethe, 

SUFrom  'all  ^^information  I can  gather  I do  not  doubt  that  Price’ 
force  is  greatly  reduced,  and  that  he  is  losing  many  more  men  by  dead 
tion  and  expiration  of  service  than  he  is  recruiting.  It  is  more  tha 


probable  that  by  maintaining  our  position  in  force  in  this  section 
piUUdUW  mail  J noTralrtT  hpfwAPTl  tllft  MlSSOUri 


an* 


keeping  the  country  scoured  by  our  cavalry  between  the ,M H 
Osage  for  a month  or  six  weeks  longer  the  greater  P^  of  liis  forc 
will  be  dispersed.  Many  of  his  men  have  come  m and  asked  to  la 
down  their  arms,  promising  to  take  them  up  no  more.  Of  course  sue 
promises,  even  when  accompanied  by  the  oath  of  allegiance,  amount  t 
nothing.  One-half  the  men  in  this  section  of  country  have  been  thu 
sworn  by  one  side  or  the  other,  but  there  are  few  of  them  who  observi 

UThe  patrolling  parties  frequently  capture  men  from  Price’s  army  wli 
are  at  home  on  furlough  or  to  recruit.  I have  many  such  prisoners  J 
I would  also  say  that  I am  fearful  that  important  dispatches  by  tel 
orapk  are  intercepted  between  here  and  Saint  Louis ; that  is,  that  t 
are  token  off  from  the  lines  in  course  of  transmittal  and  communicate 
to  the  enemy.  It  is  easy  with  a short  wire  and  mstrument  to  do  th 
at  any  point  of  the  line,  and  I therefore  very  Mch  ctoltoe  to  sen 
important  news  by  telegraph,  unless  m cipher.  A cipher  has  bee 
made  for  this  department,  and  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  it  fc 

used  in  all  dispatches  of  importance. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  sej™Qt?pQpE 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Rolla,  Mo.,  December  7, 1861. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

The  following  dispatch  is  just  received  from  the  commander  ot  a r 
connoitering  party  sent  out  by  me  the  5th.  From  another  source  I leai 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


413 


hat  considerable  numbers  of  the  enemy  are  scattered  in  the  valley  and 
idges  of  the  Gasconade.  I will  detail  the  men  of  the  Third  Division, 
lolonel  Marshall,  to  proceed  on  the  Union  or  Northern  road  towards 
jebanon,  to  support  Captain  Woldemar  in  case  of  an  engagement. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Commanding  Third  Division . 


[Inclosure.] 

California  House,  December  6,  1861. 
Acting  Brigadier-General  Osterhaus, 

Commanding  Third  Division : 

General  : I arrived  here  at  10  a.  m.  with  my  command,  having  left 
N aynesville  early  this  morning.  We  passed  the  whole  night  on  horse- 
back, expecting  to  be  attacked  before  morning.  We  heard  firing  in 
hree  different  directions.  Mv  scouts  inform  me  that  between  200  and 
00  men  are  encamped  near  Gasconade,  about  16  miles  south  of  Waynes- 
ille.  I will  reconnoiter  in  that  direction  and  return  by  the  Union  road, 
leeming  it  imprudent  to  come  back  the  same  road  I went.  It  is  ru~ 
aored  here  that  a brigade  of  General  McBride’s  command  will  reach 
he  Gasconade  to-day. 

Very  respectfully, 

C.  A.  VON  WOLDEMAR, 
Captain,  Benton  Hussars , Commanding  Company  G. 


Headquarters  Third  Division, 

Camp  near  Bolla , Mo.,  December  7,  1861. 

lajor-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri : 

General  : Captain  Woldemar,  of  Benton  Hussars,  whose  dispatch 
rom  California  House,  as  telegraphed  to-day,  reports  himself  back  with 
iis  command  at  this  moment.  He  was  yesterday,  at  11  p.  m.,  within 
miles  of  Lebanon,  and  in  sight  of  the  camp-fires  of  a corps  of  the  en- 
my,  said  to  be  3,000  strong,  under  command  of  General  McBride, 
'he  captain  returned  on  the  so-called  Union  road,  north  of  the  Gas- 
onade,  and  learned  at  Humboldt  that  another  secession  force  was 
pproaching  that  point  from  Iberia.  I will  have  my  scouts  there  to- 
lorrow. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Third  Division. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  Mo .,  December  7,  1861. 
hi.  Fred’k  Steele,  Sedalia,  Mo. : 

What  of  your  detachment  ? You  should  have  ascertained  the  result 
efore  this.  Find  out  about  it  immediately.  It  may  have  required 
b enforcement.  See  to  this. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General 


414 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIE 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  7,  1861. 


General  Halleck,  Headquarters : 

No  news  from  the  cavalry,  but  I apprehend  no  disaster.  Sent  ai 
express  to-day,  which  will  probably  return  to-morrow  evening.  Tin 
afternoon,  as  our  teams  were  out  a tew  miles  lrom  camp  north  c 
Georgetown,  for  hay,  the  men  were  attacked  by  rebels  and  disarmed 
The  teams  and  rneii  are  safe.  An  irregular  mounted  force  and  som- 
infantry  in  wagons  were  sent  in  pursuit.  We  frequently  perceive  th 
want  of  cavalry.  Mr.  Allen,  from  Lexington,  states  that  nearly  every 
body  in  that  part  of  the  State  has  gone  to  join  Puce,  and  it  is  believe* 
there  Sedalia  will  be  attacked  in  a few  days.  I have  spies  watchmj 

the  movements  of  the  enemy.  FRED’IC  STEELE, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


General  Orders, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 


No.  19. 


Saint  Louis , ilfo.,  December 


7.  1861. 


I.  The  mayor  of  the  city  of  Saint  Louis  will  require  all  municipa 
officers  to  immediately  subscribe  to  the  oath  of  allegiance  prescribe* 
in  the  ordinance  passed  by  the  Convention  of  this  State  on  the  16th  da 

of  October,  1861.  . 

II.  The  provost-marshal-general  will  take  measures  to  ascertai) 
whether  any  civil  officer  of  this  State  fails  within  the  time  fixed  b 
said  ordinance  to  subscribe  and  file  the  oath  there  prescribed,  and  an, 
person  having  failed  to  take  such  oath,  who  attempts  to  exercise  civi 
authority  in  violation  of  the  terms  of  said  ordinance,  will  be  arrested. 


By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck 


J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

\ 


Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  8,  3861. 

Major  General  Halleck  : 

News  that  Price  has  crossed  the  Osage  not  yet  confirmed.  Detaeb 
ment  sent  to  Warsaw  will  be  in  to-day.  Are  the  disposition  of  troop 
and  the  selection  of  my  headquarters  approved  ? First  and  Seoon* 
Divisions  in  position  at  La  Mine  to-day. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Tiri.nndier-  General. 


Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  8,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Steen’s  division  of  Price’s  force  crossed  the  Osage  three  days  since 
and  scattered  along  tbe  river  above  and  below  Osceola.  1 rice  on  sou  J 
side.  Steen’s  returns  of  his  force  show  8,000  men.  It  is  iindonbtedf 
his  purpose  to  scatter  most  of  his  forces  in  counties  adjoining  w 
Osage,  on  north  side,  for  subsistence.  One  battalion  of  Steens  div* 
ion  descended  the  river  towards  Warsaw.  If  it  be  deemed  necessak 
to  keep  Price’s  force  on  south  side  of  Osage,  our  advance  in  force  w 

wards  Clinton  will  be  necessary.  _ ___ 

JiSO»  I Ui  Jlj} 

Brigadier-  General • 


bap.  xvm.j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


415 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  8,  1861. 

xeneral  Halleck,  Saint  Louis : 

No  news  from  the  north ; reliable  information  from  Price.  Steen’s 
livision  crossed  the  Osage  and  scattered  his  forces  along  the  river;  one 
taitalion  marched  towards  Warsaw.  Camp  talk  says  Price’s  returns 
how  8,000.  Ten  thousand  rebels  in  Saint  Louis  ready  to  spring  to 
mis  at  a moment’s  warning ; this  from  a prisoner  in  Price’s  camp. 
Tagoffin’s  son  and  son-in-law  taken  prisoners  by  my  scouts ; both  been 
a Price’s  army.  If  I had  cavalry,  could  confiscate  property  to  a large 
mount.  There  are  considerable  parties  of  the  enemy  scouting  within 
0 miles  of  us  and  quite  a large  force  at  Blackwater. 

FBED’K  STEELE, 

Colonel,  &c. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  8,  1861. 
)ol.  Fred’k  Steele,  Sedalia , Mo. : 

Stay  where  you  are  till  you  get  orders  from  me. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 

Rolla,  Mo .,  December  8,  1861. 

'apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Captain  : All  the  reliable  scouts  that  come  from  the  west  report 
hat  there  are  no  forces  of  the  enemy,  except  small  scouting  and  steal- 
Qg  bands,  which  are  in  all  the  counties  around  this  post.  The  news 
rom  Lebanon  is  the  same.  Mr.  Scott,  one  of  my  scouts  who  left  Leb- 
non  yesterday  morning,  says  there  were  no  forces  there,  except  a band 
f State  Guards  under  Captains  Sweeney  and  McNey.  All  the  little 
lands  of  horse- thieves,  robbers,  and  destitute  rebels  are  stealing  on 
ccount  of  Price’s  army. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  M.  DODGE, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Osawatomie,  Kans.,  December  8,  1861. 

len.  James  H.  Lane  : 

Sir  : Everything  is  going  wrong  here.  What  you  and  I feared  at 
Ipringfield  is  coining  to  pass.  The  enemy  is  advancing.  He  disbanded 
is  three-months’  men  about  the  20th  of  November,  and  moved  north 
rith  his  regulars,*  some  10,000  strong.  He  marched  by  way  of  Sar- 
oxie,  Greenfield,  Stockton,  and  Bolivar,  striking  the  Osage  at  Warsaw 
nd  Osceola.  The  disbanded  men  have  carried  their  arms  home  with 
hem  and  engaged  in  guerrilla  operations.  The  country  swarms  with 
uerrillas,  and  this  makes  it  difficult  to  procure  information.  Our  faith- 
til  scouts  (Breedin  and  Nelson)  brought  me  accurate  information  of 
he  enemy’s  movements,  though  they  obtained  it  with  great  difficulty, 
•eing  shot  at  not  less  than  one  hundred  times. 


416  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvni 


The  enemy  moved  in  three  divisions  and  with  great  caution,  throw 
ing  oft*  at  Greenfield  a strong  flank  guard  to  MontevaLo.  His  ad^  anct 
was  at  Stockton  before  Iknew  it.  Ritchie  had  gone  to  Carthage.  Hear 
ing  the  enemy  had  some  force  still  behind,  I dared  not  move  all  tli< 
force  from  Fort  Scott.  The  movement  of  the  enemy  evidently  menac* 
Sedalia,  but  I feared  he  would  strike  to  the  left  if  he  found  Sedali: 
too  strong.  I informed  General  Hunter  of  the  enemy’s  advance,  and 
without  waiting  for  orders  advanced  to  Osawatomie,  to  cover  ou 
trains  and  prevent  the  enemy  from  outflanking  me. 

The  enemy  numbers  full  10,000,  and  has  twenty  pieces  of  artillery 
most  of  them  rifled.  Here,  at  Osawatomie,  General  Denver’s  orde 
reached  me,  directing  the  Fourth  Regiment  to  Wyandotte;  New  gent; 
to  remain  at  Paola;  Jennison’s  to  Leavenworth;  Rabb’s  battery  U 


Leavenworth;  Third  and  Fourth  to  Fort  Scott.  I have  kept  Denyej 
posted  in  the  movements  of  the  enemy;  but  I am  coolly  snubbed  witlj 
the  information  that  Price’s  advance  is  all  stuff;  that  Price  has  n< 
army;  that  his  army  is  disbanded,  &c.  I 

To-day  my  scouts  bring  the  word  that  a force  < 00  to  1,000  strong  i 
at  Butler.  A dispatch  this  evening  brings  the  word  that  400  or  50| 
rebels  are  in  full  view  of  Barnesville  and  advancing.  The  dispatcll 
thinks  the  enemy  is  advancing  in  force.  Price  made  a speech  in  hi 
camp  at  Sauk  Crossing,  in  which  he  said  he  would  make  a “wide  sweep  i 
into  Kansas  before  Christmas.  This  last  move  looks  as  if  he  intend 
to  make  his  words  good. 

You  will  see  at  a glance  that  I am  in  no  condition  to  fight  it  tii 
enemy  comes  in  force.  The  measles  are  still  raging  in  our  camps,  and 
our  regiments  are  reduced  to  mere  skeletons.  One  mountain  liowitze 
and  an  8-pounder  gun,  with  6-pounder  ammunition,  constitute  my  slioi 
for  artillery.  With  such  a show  I must  say  1 fear  the  worst.  • 

In  haste,  yours,  JAMES  MONTGOMERY. 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III.,  December  8,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand, 

Commanding  Post: 

Col.  W.  H.  L.  Wallace, 

Commanding  Third  Brigade: 

I am  instructed  by  Brig.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  to  say,  owing  to  the  ilia 
bility  of  the  gunboats  to  co-operate,  the  proposed  expedition  to  Nct 

Madrid  is  postponed.  jno.  A RAWLINS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Rolla,  December  9,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis  : 

A dispatch  from  Salem  has  just  reached  me.  Bowen  was  in  ful 
chase  of  Freeman  in  Texas  County,  5 miles  in  his  rear;  intends  gi'Jfi 
him  battle  if  he  can  overtake  him.  A rumor  had  reached  Salem  tlia 
McBride  was  moving  from  Huntsville  with  1,600  men  and  two  piece 


!haf.  XY1II.J 


CORRBSPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


417 


>f  artillery  to  re-enforce  Freeman.  If  such  proves  to  be  the  fact,  I 
rish  permission  to  re-enforce  Bowen  with  one  battery  of  artillery. 

J.  B.  WYMAN, 

i Colonel  and  Acting  Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  9,  1861. 
Jol.  J.  B.  Wyman,  Bolla , Mo.: 

You  are  authorized  to  re-enforce  Major  Bowen  if  you  deem  it  advis- 
,ble.  Do  not  let  him  advance  so  far  in  pursuit  as  to  be  cut  off  by 
IcBride.  Look  out  for  that. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


lajor-General  Halleck  : 


Syracuse,  December  9,  1861. 


Detachment  returned  from  Warsaw  this  morning.  Drove  in  enemy’s 
tickets  from  points  10  miles  this  side.  Found  no  forces  in  Warsaw, 
rtiich  confirms  information  that  Steen  is  on  north  side  of  Osage. 
>trong  pickets  of  enemy  from  Bolivar  to  Osceola  to  cover  his  rear. 
Vhole  region  south  of  Osage  devastated  by  Price.  It  was  understood 
•y  people  at  Warsaw  and  along  the  road  that  this  detachment  was  our 
dvance  guard,  moving  on  ^Springfield.  The  people  understand  that  it 
$ the  determination  of  Price  to  force  his  way  to  the  Missouri.  Doubt- 
ed. No  news  of  importance  from  the  front.  I shall  not  move  to  Tip- 
on  until  I hear  from  you. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  9,  1861. 

lajor-General  Halleck  : 

The  west  bank  of  La  Mine  is  very  rough  and  rocky ; most  of  good 
round  is  on  the  east  bank  and  all  large  timber.  I have  ordered  3,000 
len  to  occupy  the  west  bank  below  the  intrenchments.  I did  propose 
o make  the  cantonment  conform  exactly  to  a military  encampment,  but 
>r  color  line  to  follow  the  winding  of  the  stream.  There  are  easy  fords 
nd  bridges  for  wagons  across  La  Mine,  so  that  communication  will  be 
asy.  My  objection  to  Syracuse  is  want  of  shelter.  It  is  a small,  dilap- 
lated  place,  depending  for  water  on  cisterns  ; no  running  water  within 
everal  miles.  Tipton  is  12  miles  from  La  Mine,  a large  town,  and  plenty 
f water. 

JNO.  POPE, 
Brigadier- General. 


Pilot  Knob,  Mo.,  December  9,  1861. 

lajor-General  Halleck  : 

My  scouts  from  the  southwest  report  no  rebel  troops  nearer  than 
lowell  County,  where  McBride’s  division  is  said  to  be  moving  north- 
astward.  Secessionists  of  Shannon  County  report  McCulloch  at  Poca- 
27  r r — vol  viu 


418 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII] 


hontas  Deserters  from  Thompson’s  army  report  that  the  Confederat 
Government  is  building  a new  fort  at  New  Madrid,  having  500  negroe 

at  wort  on  it.  w p CARRIN, 

Thirty -eighth  Illinois  Volunteers 


Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  9,  1861.  i 

Major-General  Halleck: 

Magoffin,  son,  and  son-in-law  captured  by  our  patrols.  Father  an. 
son  wiU  lay  down  their  arms  and  take  the  oath  if  permitted  1 hay 
many  others  of  Price’s  men  in  same  condition.  What  shall  1 do  witi 

them?  JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General . 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  9,  1861. 

General  Halleck  : 

Eumor  says  the  cavalry  are  returning  with  a large  captured  tram 
but  nothing  definite  from  them  or  the  spies.  In  case  of  disaster 
should  certainly  have  heard.  They  had  a long  march.  I did  no 
expect  them  back  before  to-morrow.  General  Pope  has /n 
could  send  out  a force  with  the  same  facility  that  I could  if  I had  11 
I will  endeavor  t®  send  another  spy.  Colone^^®ngp^,|LE”SOne' 

Colonel , Commanding . 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

21.  ’ ] Saint  Louis , $fo.,  December  9,  1861. 

I The  following  letter,  having  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  majoi 
general  commanding  this  department,  is  published  for  the  mformatio 
of  all  concerned,  viz : 


Adjutant-General^  Office, 

Washington , October  25,  1861. 

oTR.  Information  having  been  received  that  bodies  of  troops  are  bring  formed! 
i A... .+  Qiint  T onis  Mo.  which,  under  the  name  of  Home  Guards,  Reserve  Corn 

to  them  will  be  sanctioned  by  the  Government. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ THOMAS, 

Adjutan  t-  General. 

To  the  Paymaster-General,  Washington , D.  C. 


Officers  appointed  from  these  headquarters  to He'd  Stab 
authorized  to  muster  or  remuster  into  the  service  of  the  United  State 
all  such  bodies  of  troops  for  three  years  or  during  the  war,  unie 
sooner  discharged,  as  directed  by  the  act  of  Congress  on 
provided  their  plan  of  organization  conforms  to  the  or<k^ „ the  nerio 
Department,  including  in  the  muster  or  remaster  sommlethe  per^ 
during  which  the  bodies  of  troops  above  referred  to  have  been  in  actu 

SeiL°All  persons  commissioned  by  Major-General  Ftemont,  and  di 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


419 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


harged  under  the  second  paragraph  of  Special  Orders,  No.  304,  dated 
leadquarters  of  the  Army,  Washington,  November  12, 1861,  and  whose 
aaines  are  not  included  in  the  lists  furnished  to  the  chief  of  the  pay 
epartment,  in  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  Secretary  of  War, 
ated  November  25,  1861,  will  refer  their  claims  for  payment  to  the 
adjutant- General,  at  Washington,  the  commanding  general  of  this 
epartment  not  being  authorized  to  act  upon  such  claims. 

By  order  of  Major-feeneral  Halleck: 

J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , December  10,  1861. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  Missouri : 

General  : Yours  of  the  6th  has  this  moment  reached  me.  I am 
bliged  to  you  for  the  spirit  of  frankness  in  which  it  is  written.  Let 
Le  begin  by  replying  to  the  last  part  of  your  letter. 

You  will  probably  remember  that  soon  after  General  Hunter  assumed 
mmand  of  the  department  he  ordered  two  divisions  from  Western 
[issouri  to  Saint  Louis,  regarding  them  as  available  for  other  service. 
Y dispatch  was  predicated  on  that,  and  if  you  had  informed  me  that 
m had  any  available  troops  I intended  to  propose  to  you  a movement 
i concert  with  Buell.  His  project,  though  very  important,  must 
ther  be  deferred  or  be  carried  ®ut  in  some  other  way.  I have  no 
tention  of  stripping  you  of  troops  when  you  cannot  spare  them.  I 
>-day  directed  General  Thomas  to  telegraph  to  you  that  Major  Ketch um 
ight  remain  with  you  and  that  I would  recommend  him  as  a brigadier- 
3neral.  I had  already  determined  to  try  to  secure  his  appointment, 
do  not  understand  your  statement  that  four  or  five  of  the  regular 
ficers  you  now  have  are  ordered  away,  but  will  look  into  it  in  the 
orning.  There  is  some  mistake  about  it,  unless  you  allude  to  the 
iroled  officers,  who  cannot  under  their  parole  be  of  any  service  to  you. 
ou  are  also  misinformed  as  to  the  number  of  regular  officers  on  my 
qrsonal  staff.  I have  two  regular  aides,  instead  of  the  authorized, 
imber  of  three,  and  one  chief  of  staff ; the  others  apparently  are  my 
irsonal  staff,  and  are  really  doing  their  appropriate  duties  in  the  line 
id  their  respective  corps.  Even  my  personal  aides  are  on  duty  con- 
antly  as  inspectors. 

I am  sorry  to  learn  the  very  disorganized  condition  of  the  troops, 
appreciate  the  difficulty  of  the  task  before  you,  and  you  may  rest 
sured  that  I will  support  you  to  the  full  extent  of  my  ability.  Da* 
>t  hesitate  to  use  force  with  the  refractory.  Can  you  yet  form  any 
ea  of  the  time  necessary  to  prepare  an  expedition  against  Columbus; 
j 0I*e  up  the  Cumberland  and  Tennessee  rivers,  in  connection  with 
lelPs  movements'?  I shall  send  troops  to  Hunter,  to  enable  him  to 
• 3ve  into  the  Indian  Territory  west  of  Arkansas  and  upon  Northern 
ixas.  That  movement  should  relieve  you  very  materially.  It  will 
j quire  some  little  time  to  prepare  Hunter,  but  when  he  moves  you 
ight  act  in  concert  with  him. 

In  haste,  very  truly,  yours, 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General , Commanding  U.  8.  Army . 


420 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  10,  1861. 

Bri£.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Commanding , &c .,  Syracuse,  Mo. : 

Gfneral : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  the  report  and  accompanying 
/.  j • t tj  McPherson.*  I approve  the  recommendations 

Se  made Th  fesj^t  to  the  encamping Pand  hutting  of  the  troops  | 
La  Mine.  You  will  seek  to  carry  out  these  views,  with  such  modihca| 
tions  as  circumstances  may  require.  As  stated  m my  previous  mstruc I 
tions  it  may  or  may  not  be  found  necessary  to  place  your  troops  n 
winter  quarters  there,  but  the  encampment  should  be  formed  in  pari 
with  reference  to  that  idea,  while  at  the  same  time  the  army  should  b< 
held  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s  warning.  Your  troops,  supplies,  ant 
mean^ of  transportation  should  be  arranged  as  if  you  might  at  any  tun, 
break  np  Vour  encampment  to  march  against  the  enemy  or  as  if  the 
enemy  might  at  any  moment  attack  you.  Your  attention  is  particularly 
railed  to  this  matter,  for  commanders  of  corps  darmee  and  division, 
are  properly  and  will  be  held  accountable  that  their  commands  are  n 
fioLtin P^and  marching  order  when  in  the  vicinity  of  an  enemy. 

As  alreadvXected,  the  force  left  at  Syracuse  and  Tipton  need  oil; 
be  sufficient\o  guard  those  points  from  a surprise  of  detached  bodie, 
of  thfenemy  sent  to  destroy  the  road.  Sedalia  will  be  considered  a 
an  advance  tost  of  the  main  encampment.  If  the  troops  should  reman 

at  La  Mine  it  will  probablv  be  well  to  reduce  its  garrison  to  about  tw 
at  Lninmeii  m not  be  well  to  withdraw  many  of  th 

E now  there.  wish  the  cavalry  to  be  held  in  hand  for  scont  n, 
nurnoses  and  for  expeditions  which  will  probably  soon  be  ordered < 
Pu  ^ in  «dionld  not  be  moved.  Ho  considerable  expense  mm 

be^Mareed  in\he  en^mpmwit'at  La  Mine.  The  work  must  be  all  don 
bv  the  command.  Each  squad  should  be  required  to  provide  font 
oWn  comforts  in  a hut  or  tent  With  proper  attention 
the  officers  this  can  be  readily  accomplished  A few an" 

QTifl  a little  lumber  are  the  only  things  required.  Very  little  lumoei 

however,  should  ESS 

e?  .iesxrs  « p—  » 

thI  Think™  VeSaCsI^uWbe  atYa  Mine  or  Otterville,.  ne» 
the  mat  bodj  of  yo?r  army,  where  you  can  attend  to  their  disciphr 

^Do^rtSaphtetpon  unimportant  matters  or  business  of  r 
pressinfimpSce.  This  is  contrary  to  positive  orders  from  Wasl 

mgt0nVery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, ^ jjALlECk, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

^ Syracuse , December  10,  1861. 

Briff  Gen.  G.  W.  Cullum,  Chief  of  Staff: 

general:  Since  my  dispatch  of  this  date  to  the  general  commJ 

* Not  found. 


hap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


421 


ag  a trusty  man,  sent  some  ten  days  ago  into  the  counties  of  Henry 
nd  Cass,  came  in  direct  from  Price’s  camp,  which  he  left  yesterday 
mrning.  He  is  a resident  of  this  neighborhood,  trusty,  and  well  ac- 
uainted  with  many  of  the  men  in  Price’s  force,  who  were  enlisted  in 
his  neighborhood.  He  gives  a full  account  of  the  condition  of  things 
1 the  counties  of  Henry  and  Cass  and  in  Price’s  army,  corroborating 
rhat  I have  gotten  from  other  sources. 

Price’s  forces  are  greatly  in  need  of  clothing  and  are  suffering  very 
mch.  In  a speech  he  made  them  on  Sunday  Price  stated  to  them 
lat  Missouri  had  been  annexed  to  the  Southern  Confederacy ; that  his 
rmy  would  be  reorganized  and  incorporated  with  the  Southern  Army, 
lad  that  money  and  clothing  would  be  immediately  furnished  to  all 
ho  remained  in  service.  Price  was  daily  expecting  his  commission 
3 major-general  from  Kichmond,  though  it  was  already  whispered  in 
imp  that  Jackson  had  succeeded  in  having  him  superseded.  The 
reatest  dissatisfaction  prevailed  in  the  army  in  consequence  of  this 
;port,  one-half  of  the  men  declaring  openly  that  they  would  serve 
ader  no  one  else;  that  they  were  fighting  for  Missouri,  and  not  for 
te  Southern  Confederacy. 

It  is  very  sure  that  no  graver  mistake  could  possibly  be  made  in 
ichmond  than  to  displace  Price  from  the  command  of  this  Missouri 
’my.  He  is  greatly  beloved  by  his  whole  force,  and  it  is  his  popu- 
rity  and  his  influence  which  keep  so  large  a body  of  men  in  arms  in 
lis  State  without  pay,  without  clothing,  and  with  very  scanty  rations, 
any  of  Price’s  men,  even  as  it  is,  are  very  anxious  to  return  home, 
id  will  take  almost  any  oath  if  they  can  thus  be  exempted  from 
rest.  Those  whose  time  has  expired  are  also  afraid  to  return  home 
st  they  be  arrested  and  taken  to  Saint  Louis.  If  there  were  any 
ethod  of  holding  such  men  to  their  engagements  I have  little  doubt 
at  an  assurance  of  exemption  from  arrest  on  taking  the  proper  oath 
auld  bring  many  hundreds  to  their  homes. 

Price  is  not  recruiting  nearly  so  fast  as  he  is  losing  men.  My  scout  es- 
nates  his  whole  force  at  12,000  or  13,000,  which  I am  sure  is  too  large  an 
lowance.  They  have,  for  the  present,  plenty  of  corn  meal,  flour,  and 
ef,  but  the  region  in  which  they  are  encamped  will  soon  be  exhausted, 
ley  have  almost  destroyed  the  country  in  their  rear.  Price  notified 
em  in  the  speech  to  which  I refer  that  they  must  try  and  get  shoes 
(1  clothing  from  their  homes  as  soon  as  possible,  as  he  did  not  mean 
i remain  in  winter  quarters,  but  intended  to  be  constantly  on  the 
)Ve*  The  belief  in  the  camp  was  that  as  soon  as  he  got  all  the  men 
could  hope  for  he  would  make  a dash  into  Kansas.  He  does  not 
lieve  that  there  are  7,000  or  8,000  Federal  troops  west  of  Jefferson 
ty.  I will  send  you  a paper  published  in  his  camp.  His  advanced 
Mkets  are  near  Calhoun,  as  are  ours,  though  they  have  not  yet  met. 

I propose,  as  soon  as  I can  assemble  cavalry  sufficient  at  Sedalia,  to 
vance  upon  Calhoun  and  to  points  this  side  of  Clinton,  and  destroy 
veral  mills  which  have  been  used  for  a few  days  by  the  rebels.  One 
a large  steam  mill,  4 miles  south  of  Calhoun. 

I have  not  yet  heard  of  the  expedition  sent  north  in  any  official 
inner,  though  I have  occasionally  heard  of  it  from  citizens,  who 
amselves  heard  from  other  people  what  they  told  me.  I have  tele- 
■ aphed  and  written  Colonel  Steele  on  the  subject, 
r keep  the  cavalry  fully  occupied,  and  could  employ  a much  larger 
pee  of  it  very  advantageously.  Already  I am  making  the  Missouri 
: d Osage  too  hot  for  security  for  Price.  Companies  of  cavalry  are 
Dvmg  about  every  night  through  the  country,  and  have  already  ar- 


422  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIH 


rested  a large  number  of  returning  soldiers  and  recruiting  Parties.  1 
trust  the  general  commanding  will  send  up  tbe  four  companies  of  th( 
Iowa  Cavalry  now  at  Benton  Barracks.  The  eight  companies  o 
that  regiment  are  now  with  this  command,  though  the  colonel,  lieu 
tenant-colonel,  and  one  major  remain  in  Saint  Louis  with  the  otheij 

foui  respectfully,  your  obedient  BOBE,  I 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . \ 


Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  10,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck:  . 

Have  you  received  Colonel  Steele’s  dispatch  of  this  date  ? He  tele 
graphs  that  he  has  sent  it.  All  my  cavalry  is  out  through  the  country 
breaking  up  small  camps  of  rebels.  Can  send  full  regiment  of  mfan* 
and  four  pieces  of  artillery  to  re-enforce  the  cavalry  near  Lexington  i 

you  think  it  advisable.  JNO  POPE 

Brigadier- General,  j 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  10,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Syracuse: 

The  troops  at  Sedalia  are  all  subject  to  yoiw  orders,  but ; I . wisl  a 
retrograde  movement  to  La  Mine  at  present.  Why  is  it  that  I can  ge 
uo  information  from  Colonel  Steele  about  the  expedition  sent  to  Ma 
shall,  &cJ  If  this  results  from  neglect,  it  should  be  investigated.  Fn^ 
instructions  will  be  sent  you  in  writing.  ^ w HALLECK,  1 

Major-General. 


Brig. 


Headquarters  Missouri  Mllitia, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  10,  1861. 

Gen.  Ben.  Loan, 

Saint  Joseph , Mo.: 

I inclose  herewith  an  order  assigning  you  to  the  command  of  all  te 
State  troops  in  vour  vicinity.*  You  cannot  legally  be  placed  m c 
mand  of  United  States  troops  until  your  brigade  is 
ice  for  the  war,  according  to  the  agreement  between  the  Governor  an 

President;  nor  can  any  United  States  officer  ass™X^mmand  b 
State  troops,  unless  they  are  expressly  assigned  to  his  command  D 

competent  authority. 


I desire  that  you  may  have  a perfect  understanding  with  the ^offict 
tt TT^+^rl  SU-al-oa  trnnns  in  VOUT  district.  A Oil  Will  U 


commanding  tbe  United  States  troops  in  your  district.  You 
operate  with  him  as  far  as  possible  in  carrying  out  *"*Guctlons 
he  may  receive  from  time  to  time  from  the  general  d, 

department  or  other  competent  authority,  and  furnisi  oueg 

tachments  from  the  command  for  active  operations,  up  . t n 

whenever  in  your  judgment  it  is  practicable.  You  wi  p 


* Inclosnre  omitted.  It  assigns  Brigadier-General  Loan  to  command  in  the  tounti 
of  Buchanan,  Andrew,  Nodaway,  Atchison,  and  Holt. 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


423 


tie  organization  of  the  militia  for  service  for  the  war,  uniting  eom- 
anies  into  battalions  and  regiments  as  rapidly  as  they  may  be  formed 
nd  mustered  into  service.  Until  field  officers  are  appointed  by  the 
rovernor  the  command  of  a battalion  or  regiment  will  devolve  upon 
tie  senior  captain. 

The  selection  of  competent  field  officers  is  a matter  whose  importance 
ou  will  readily  appreciate,  and  your  recommendations  will  doubtless 
ave  much  weight  with  His  Excellency.  I prefer  to  have  such  appoint- 
lents  postponed  in  general  until  the  candidates  have  exhibited  their 
ualities  as  company  officers.  Aspirants  for  field  commissions  should 
aise  companies,  and  show  by  their  efficiency  in  drill  and  discipline 
leir  fitness  for  higher  command. 

You  are  authorized  to  furnish  subsistence  at  the  expense  of  the 
tate  to  companies  not  fully  organized  in  the  same  manner  as  to  the 
ix-months’  militia.  This  must  be  done  with  the  strictest  economy 
ossible.  Becruits  must  be  united  into  companies  and  mustered  into 
ervice  as  quickly  as  possible,  so  as  to  place  them  in  condition  to  draw 
leir  subsistence  from  the  United  States.  A small  supply  of  clothing 
ill  be  sent  you  soon  for  issue  to  men  mustered  into  service  for  the 
far. 

Send  me  a return  of  the  entire  force  under  your  command  as  soon  as 
ossible. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier- General . 


pecial  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Troops  in  Kansas, 

8.  j Leavenworth  City , December  10,  1861. 

I.  Colonel  Montgomery,  Third  Kansas,  will  concentrate  the  troops 
ow  in  his  command  at  or  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Scott,  Kans.,  which 
ist  he  will,  if  possible,  defend;  retreating  in  case  of  necessity  to 
fest  Point,  Mo.,  or  in  that  direction.  Colonel  Montgomery  will  be 
aided  in  his  movements  as  his  judgment  will  dictate  as  being  the  most 
mducive  to  the  public  interest. 

II.  Colonel  Jennison,  First  Kansas  Cavalry,  will,  with  the  troops 
)w  under  his  command,  proceed  immediately  to  West  Point,  Mo.,  and, 
possible,  protect  the  frontier  of  Kansas  from  incursions  of  the  rebel 
inds  now  in  that  neighborhood. 

III.  Colonel  Wessells,  Eighth  Kansas  Volunteers,  will  immediately 
poceed  with  such  troops  as  he  may  have  in  his  command  ready  for 
Tvice  to  West  Point,  Mo.,  and  report  to  Colonel  Jennison,  First 
ansas  Cavalry,  for  duty  in  that  vicinity. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Denver : 

C.  FBAKCIS  CLABKE, 

Captain , Sixth  Kansas , Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


„ Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  11,  1861. 

ajor-General  Halleck: 

Colonel  Steele  telegraphs: 


* . y * scouts  within  10  miles  of  Osceola  road.  Large  cavalry  force,  estimated  at 

if*  C(£e  Camp  last  night.  The  infantry  battalion,  1,500,  arrived  at  Warsaw  yes- 
<iay.  Refugees  flocking  m say  Price  is  advancing  in  force.  Do  not  believe  it.  A 
in  just  in  from  Price’s  camp  says  Rains’  division  will  be  at  Warsaw  to-night. 

FRED’K  STEELE, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


424  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV1IL 

I think,  from  other  sources  of  information,  that  Price  is  moving; 
whether  in  this  direction  is  doubtful.  News  of  his  being  suspended 
in  command  may  have  occasioned  his  advance.  Will  keep  you  ad- 

vlSe<1,  JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  Genera  l.  ■ 


Syracuse,  Mo.,  December  11,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

Intelligent  men  just  from  Price’s  camp.  His  army  occupies  samel 
position,  viz:  one  division  north  side  of  Osage;  the  other  soutlu 
Price’s  headquarters  7 miles  west  of  Osceola.  Price  states  that, I 
Missouri  being  admitted  into  the  Southern  Confederacy,  policy  and! 
operations  of  his  army  dictated  from  Richmond.  I have  just  returned! 
from  La  Mine.  Troops  in  position  and  at  work  getting  out  timbers 
Will  write  fully  by  mail.  JNO  p0pE 

Brigadier- General,  I 


Sedalia,  December  11,  1861. 

General  Halleck: 

Spy  iust  in.  Been  captured  twice.  Cavalry  at  Grand  Pass.  Have 
been  within  3J  miles  of  Waverly.  Joe  Shelby  fired  two  cannon  shots 
into  their  camp  last  night;  did  no  harm.  Men  going  to  Waverly  to- 
day in  pursuit  of  Shelby ; will  return  to  Marshall.  The  major  com- 
manding says  800  rebels  at  Lexington.  Wishes  re-enforcements  to  go 
there.  He  surrounded  a rebel  camp ; took  2 captains — one  Sweeney 
3 lieutenants,  40  men,  and  several  Government  wagons.  His  pickets 
had  been  fired  into  several  times. 

FRED’K  STEELE, 

Colonel . Commanding. 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  11,  1861. 

General  Halleck:  j 

A Union  man  from  a few  miles  this  side  of  Waverly  reports  that  Joe 
Shelby  sent  to  Lexington  for  re-enforcements ; that  he  can  raise  2,000 
or  3,000  men  in  twenty-four  hours ; that  our  troops  had  a fight  with 
him  yesterday,  and  that  they  were  fighting  this  morning  when  he  lelt. 
The  800  that  left  Lexington  yesterday  probably  went  to  Shelby  s as- 
sistance. I withhold  my  scouts  for  your  answer. 

FRED’K  STEELE, 

Colonel. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  December  11,  1861. 

Col.  Fred’k  Steele,  Sedalia , Mo. : 

Send  re-enforcements,  say  1,000  men,  or  more  if  you  deem  necessary, 
in  direction  of  Marshall  and  Waverly,  and  inform  General  Pope. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Jhap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  425 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  11,  1861. 

Irig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Syracuse , Mo.: 

Colonel  Steele  is  ordered  to  re-enforce  his  expedition  to  Marshall  and 
*Vaverly.  Expedition  to  Warren shurg  suspended  till  further  orders. 

H.  W.  HALLECK4 

Major- General . 


December  11,  1861. 

dajor-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri  : 

General  : The  constantly-increasing  disturbances  in  all  this  region,, 
occasioned  by  the  efforts  of  Price’s  scouting  officers  and  straggling 
>arties  of  guerrillas,  exhibited  in  the  general  alarm,  the  robbing  of 
>eaceful  inhabitants,  the  outrages  of  every  description  perpetrated  in 
very  village,  hamlet,  and  farm-house,  are  caused  directly  by  the  en- 
ouragement  and  countenance  given  to  such  acts  by  the  presence  of 
he  enemy  in  such  force  on  the  Osage.  Once  driven  from  that  position 
nd  forced  back  into  the  region  of  country  which  he  has  so  recently 
aid  waste,  and  all  encouragements  would  be  withdrawn  from  his  ad- 
herents and  sympathizers  now  disposed  to  enlist  in  his  army. 

We  can  march  from  the  railroad  in  this  vicinity  with  a full  and  well- 
ppointed  army  of  15,000  men  and  forty  pieces  of  artillery  and  still 
save  force  enough  along  the  railroad  to  guard  all  the  public  stores  and 
>rotect  the  road  itself  from  any  damage.  I would  respectfully  suggest,, 
herefore,  that  to  quiet  all  the  disturbances  and  uneasiness  engendered 
y the  presence  of  so  large  a hostile  force  in  this  region  an  advance  in 
orce  against  Price  be  made  as  soon  as  possible.  For  this  army  of 
5,000  men  there  is  abundance  of  transportation  and  of  supplies,  and 
hey  constitute  a force  large  enough,  considering  the  difference  of  or- 
ganization, discipline,  and  arms,  to  deal  with  Price  easily,  even  had  he 
he  50,000  men  he  calls  for  in  his  proclamation.  Most  of  his  men  are 
nly  armed  with  shot-guns,  and  have  scarcely  the  pretense  of  an  organ- 
nation.  He  has  perhaps  4,000  or  5,000  tolerable  troops,  armed  with 
mskets,  and  about  thirty  pieces  of  artillery,  few  of  which  can  be  prop- 
rly  served,  and  some  of  which  are  rough  iron  pieces,  made  in  Missouri. 

Our  forces  here  are  in  such  condition  that  they  can  march  with  two 
ours’  notice.  Each  regiment  has  its  own  transportation,  and  there  is 
othing  necessary  except  to  throw  into  the  wagons  camp  equipage  and 
at  ions. 

Should  such  a movement  be  intrusted  to  me  I would  respectfully 
uggest  the  following  plan : The  first  object  to  be  kept  in  view  is  that 
be  enemy  to  some  extent  must  be  surprised,  in  order  that  he  may  be 
rought  to  an  engagement.  For  this  purpose  I would  propose  that  for 
sveral  days  before  the  real  movement  was  made  strong  bodies  of  cav- 
lry,  with  some  artillery,  be  sent  forward  on  the  Warsaw  and  Clinton 
aads,  to  force  in  their  pickets,  reconnoiter  in  force,  and  then  return  j 
bat  this  operation  be  repeated  several  times,  and  that  finally,  under 
°ver  of  such  a movement,  the  whole  force  be  rapidly  thrown  forward 
) the  Osage  at  Warsaw.  I believe  by  proper  management  and  vigor 
be  advanced  division  of  this  army  could  cross  the  Osage  before  the 
ews  of  the  movement  could  reach  the  enemy.  If  he  then  crossed  the 
ver  and  attempted  to  retreat  to  the  southwest  he  must  at  least  lose 
is  baggage  train  and  supplies.  Whilst  his  line  of  retreat  would  be 


426 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T. 


[Chap.  XVIIT. 


threatened,  if  not  intercepted,  by  such  a movement,  ours  would  be 
open  to  the  railroad  at  almost  any  point  east  of  Otterville.  1,  however, 
do  not  suppose  for  a moment  that  he  will  stand  unless  retreat  is  cut  off 
and  in  either  event  the  disturbances  in  this  section  will  be  ended.  Such 
a campaign  would  not  last  more  than  twenty  days,  if  so  long,  and  £he 
forces  here  would  enter  upon  it  with  a feeling  very  different  from  that 
of  going  into  winter  quarters  on  the  La  Mine.  ^ , 

I submit  these  views  to  you  with  much  diffidence,  and  should  prob 
ably  not  do  so  at  all,  but  that  I am  impressed  with  the  belief  that 
neither  secession  in  Missouri  nor  Price’s  army  can  survive  another  re 
treat  toward  Arkansas. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant,  jNO  p0pB 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Syracuse,  December  11, 1861. 


Major-General  Halleck: 

I transmit  a number  of  letters  captured  with  the  mail-carrier. 
There  is  a large  number  of  them,  but  in  substance  they  convey  the 
same  information,  viz,  that  Price’s  force  is  disintegrating;  that  he  has 
short  of  10,000  men  now  with  him ; that  recruiting  is  very  slow ; that 
unless  he  can  raise  five  regiments  to  enter  the  Confederate  service  he 
cannot  get  a commission  in  their  army,  &c. 

I am  satisfied  that  a rapid  movement  would  utterly  destroy  his  army, 
either  as  the  result  of  an  action  or  of  a retreat.  His  army  cannot  pos 
siblv  survive  another  retreat  south.  His  men  are  only  kept  togethe 
noW  by  the  speedy  termination  of  their  terms  of  service  and  the  pros- 
pect of  getting  home  by  New  Year’s  Day.  They  will  not  be  led  soutt 
again  in  any  large  number.  With  the  delightful  weather  we  have  hat 
and  which  promises  to  continue  for  some  time  and  the  good  roads, 
such  a movement  would  consume  but  a few  days,  and  would  destroy  u 
a moment  all  hope  of  recruiting  for  Price  in  this  whole  region. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  p0pE 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  11,  1861. 

Col.  J.  W.  Birge,  Present : 

Sir-  Your  regiment  or  command  will  immediately  proceed  to  Cen 
tralia  and  Renick,  Mo.,  about  one-half  to  be  stationed  at  each  place 
Immediately  on  your  arrival  you  will  send  out  strong  detachme 
one  from  Centraiia,  in  the  direction  of  Columbia,  and  another  fron 
Renick,  in  the  direction  of  Payette,  to  scour  the  country  and  anest^ 
enemies  Particular  caution  should  be  observed  in  regard  to  thes 
detachments  as  rebel  forces  may  be  moving  from  the  river  countie, 
uponlE  pofnts  or  the  railroad.  Little  or  no  transportation  wUl| 
required  for  these  detachments,  as  they  are  not  expected  be  abw 
more  than  two  or  three  days  from  their  posts,  and  ^ J™!.."  a 
able  to  get  a part  of  their  subsistence  in  the  country  passed  over.  A 


* Not  found. 


:0hap.  xvrri.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


427 


you  will  probably  remain  but  a short  time  at  Centralia  and  Eenick  no 
particular  arrangements  will  be  required  for  quartering  your  men  • 
tents,  barns,  and  unoccupied  buildings  may  be  taken  for  this  purpose. 

| The  object  of  this  expedition  being  an  important  one,  you  will  be 
prompt  and  vigilant  in  the  execution  of  these  instructions.  You  will 
keep  these  headquarters  advised  by  telegraph  of  all  your  movements 
and  will  report  fully  by  mail.  In  regard  to  taking  prisoners  and  seiz- 
ing property,  you  will  be  governed  by  General  Orders,  Ho.  8 and  13,  of 
this  department. 

Additional  instructions  will  probably  be  given  you  soon  after  your 
arrival  at  your  destination. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  11,  1861. 
Brig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Jefferson  City,  Mo. : 

I General  : You  will  receive  this  to-morrow  evening.  In  the  mean 
time  you  will  receive  instructions  to  have  the  Eleventh  Iowa  Eegiment 
m board  a steamer  for  transportation  up  the  river.  The  destination  of 
that  regiment  is  Providence,  at  which  place  it  will  land,  and  immedi- 
ately proceed  to  capture  or  disperse  a band  of  rebels  said  to  be  assem- 
bled at  Columbia.  Having  accomplished  this  object,  it  will  proceed 
direct,  or  by  Eochefort  or  Boone ville,  to  Fayette,  for  the  same  purpose, 
and  thence  to  Glasgow  and  Brunswick. 

| General  Pope  will  probably  send  a force  across  from  Booneville  to 
bayette,  to  co-operate  with  the  Eleventh  Iowa.  A regiment  has  been 
dispatched  to  Centralia  and  Eenick,  to  operate  south  against  Columbia 
nut  Fayette,  to  intercept  any  of  the  enemy  moving  from  these  places 
:owards  the  Horth  Missouri  Eailroad. 

steamer  sent  with  the  Eleventh  Iowa  will  remain  at  Providence 
i ill  the  result  of  the  expedition  to  Columbia  is  known,  to  carry  the 
roops  to  Eochefort  or  Booneville,  or  will  be  permitted  to  proceed  up 
die  river  to  those  places  and  Glasgow,  as  you  may  deem  advisable. 
Lt  is  supposed  that  from  your  position  you  will  be  better  able  to  judge 
)1  the  rebel  forces  at  the  places  named  than  can  be  done  here.  As  the 
expedition  will  move  but  a short  distance  on  land  they  will  require 
)ut  little  transportation — say  five  or  six  wagons — and  provisions  of 
^ days.  Additional  supplies  should  be  put  on  the  boat, 
vhich,  if  not  wanted,  may  be  landed  and  turned  over  to  the  proper 
pmcers  at  Booneville.  The  four  companies  of  cavalry  which  you  will 
•eceive  to-morrow  afternoon  will  be  sent  in  another  steamer  to  Provi- 
ience,  Eochefort,  or  Booneville,  to  co-operate  with  the  Eleventh  Iowa. 
AH  these  forces  should  be  well  supplied  with  ammunition.  You  will 
teep  me  informed  by  telegraph  of  the  movement  of  these  forces. 

11  steamers  should  not  be  able  to  ascend  the  river  to  Providence  the 
'xpemtion  should  cross  the  river  at  Jefferson  City  and  march  by  land 
o Columbia.  In  this  case  a larger  amount  of  transportation  should  be 
>lven*  It  is  supposed  that  a portion  at  least  of  supplies  and  forage  may 
>e  procured  in  the  country  passed  over.  In  regard  to  taking  prisoners 
iaa  Pri7.ate  Property,  strict  compliance  with  General  Orders,  Hos.  8 and 
o,  ot  this  department,  will  be  required. 


428 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVULl 


These  instructions  will  be  read  to  the  commanding  officer  of  thej 
expedition,  but  not  communicated  to  any  other  person. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* ’■  H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 
Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  December  11,  1861. 


[Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas:] 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  26th  ultimo,  in  consequence  ot  the 
destruction  by  the  enemy  of  railroad  bridges,  was  delayed  a number  of 
days.  In  reply  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I think  the  expedition 
proposed  by  the  General-in-Chief  altogether  impracticable.  We  have! 
a hostile  Indian  force,  estimated  at  10,000,  on  the  south,  and  Price’sji 
command,  some  20,000,  on  our  east  and  north.  To  cope  with  this  force 
we  have  only  about  3,000  effective  men,  scattered  over  an  extended 
frontier.  So  far  from  being  able  to  make  successful  expeditions  into 
the  enemy’s  country  with  our  present  force,  I think  we  shall  be  very 
fortunate  if  we  prevent  his  having  possession  of  the  whole  of  Kansas.! 
The  guns  necessary  for  the  defense  of  this  post  were  taken  away  by 
order  of  General  Fr6mont,  and  have  not  been  replaced.  The  posses- 
sion of  Leavenworth  would  be  a great  feather  in  the  enemy’s  cap,  and 
really  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  his  having  it  any  day  he  may  see  fit. 
We  will  give  him  a hard  fight,  but  he  will  have  ten  to  our  one. 

In  my  humble  opinion  the  division  of  the  Western  Department  was 
not  for  the  good  of  the  service, 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  serv- 


ant, 


D.  HUNTER, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Unofficial.]  Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , December  11,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  Kansas  : 

General  : Your  telegram  to  General  Thomas*  surprised  me  exceed- 
ingly. Realizing  as  I do  the  very  trying  nature  of  the  circumstances 
in  which  you  are  placed,  I have  attributed  it  to  momentary  irritation, 
which  your  cooler  judgment  will  at  least  lead  you  to  regard  as  unnec- 
essary. 

In  regard  to  placing  General  Halleck  in  command  of  the  Department 
of  Missouri,  that  step  was  taken  from  the  evident  necessity  of  placing 
some  one  there  who  was  in  no  manner  connected,  for  or  against,  with 
the  unfortunate  state  of  affairs  previously  existing  in  that  department. 
Immediately  after  you  were  assigned  to  your  present  department  1 
requested  the  Adjutant-General  to  inform  you  that  it  was  deemed 
expedient  to  organize  an  expedition  under  your  command  to  secure 
the  Indian  territory  west  of  Arkansas,  as  well  as  to  make  a descent 
upon  Northern  Texas,  in  connection  with  one  to  strike  at  Y estem 
Texas  from  the  Gulf.  The  general  was  to  invite  your  prompt  attention 


Probably  dispatch  of  same  date,  above. 


Chap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  429 

to  this  subject,  and  to  ask  you  to  indicate  the  necessary  force  and 
means  for  the  undertaking. 

I would  again  call  your  attention  to  this  very  important  subject, 
stating  the  necessary  force  shall  be  placed  at  your  disposal.  Three 
regiments  of  Wisconsin  infantry  have  been  ordered  to  report  to  you  j 
also  a battery  and  two  companies  of  cavalry  from  Minnesota.  This  is 
intended  only  as  a commencement,  and  will  be  followed  up  by  other 
troops  as  rapidly  as  your  wants  are  known  and  circumstances  will 
permit. 

Requesting  your  early  attention  to  this  subject,  I am,  general,  verv 
respectfully,  yours,  ’ ’ * 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General , Commanding  JJ.  S.  Army. 


Syracuse,  Deceynber  12,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

The  expedition  from  Waverly  will  be  at  Sedalia  at  4 o’clock  to-day. 
They  have  4 captains,  2 assistant  adjutant-generals,  1 lieutenant,  and 
40  men,  with  all  their  arms ; also  Shelby’s  mortar.  His  cannon  burst. 
Sixty  horses,  seven  wagons.  Some  of  the  wagons  taken  oft  the  Sun- 
shine destroyed.  He  lost  1 corporal. 

JKO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Syracuse,  December  12,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

I omitted  to  state  last  night  that  force  sent  towards  Lexington  con- 
sists of  1,600  infantry  and  four  pieces,  sent  in  empty  wagons  for  speed. 
Yesterday  Captain  Cunningham’s  full  brass  band  of  rebels  captured. 
Have  several  hundred  prisoners  above  I will  dispose  of  according  to 
your  order.  Sent  you  captured  mail  from  enemy’s  camp.  Gives  full 
account  of  their  condition.  Their  number  said  to  be  8,000,  and  de- 
creasing. Great  gloom  and  apprehension  in  their  camp.  McCulloch 
in  Arkansas,  and  much  abused.  Rapid  advance  on  Price  will  destroy 
iiis  army  in  a few  days.  Have  written  by  mail. 

JKO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  12,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope, 

Commanding  at  Syracuse , Mo.  : 

One  and  a half  regiments  have  been  sent  to  Jefferson  City.  They 
^ill  move  to  Columbia  and  Fayette,  and  possibly  Glasgow,  under  in- 
fractions sent  to  General  McKean.  Have  all  disposable  forces  at 
looneville  ready  on  arrival  of  steamer  to  cross  if  necessary,  and  move 
>n  layette  or  ascend  the  river  to  Glasgow.  In  the  mean  time  scour 
ne  country  between  Tipton  and  Booneville.  I wish  no  considerable 
novement  made  towards  Lexington  till  General  Prentiss’  forces  are  in 


430 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIIJ 

proper  positioD.  I wish  to  break  up  all  recruiting  camps  the  first  thing* 
Keep  ready,  but  make  no  movements  except^or^ecmmoitenng 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  12,  1861, 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Jefferson  City , Mo. : 

You  will  receive  written  orders  (instructions)  to-night  by  mail  with 
the  Thirteenth  Iowa  Kegiment.  In  the  mean  time  embark  the  Eleventh 
Iowa  on  the  steamer,  with  eight  baggage  wagons,  a small  supply  ol 
tents,  ten  days’ provisions,  and  full  supply  of  ammunition,  andbereadj 
to  move  as  soon  as  the  Thirteenth  and  my  dispatches  arrive ; also  have 
another  steamer  ready  to-morrow  for  four  companies  of  cavalry  alse 
sent  you  to-day.  Use  Sioux  City  and  other  steamers  bound  up  the  river 
Is  the  river  still  navigable  to  Lexington  ? ^ HALLECK 

Maior-  General 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III.,  December  13,  1861. 


Col.  Kichard  J.  Oglesby,  . __ 

Commanding  TJ.  S.  Forces , Bird  s Bomt , Mo. : 

Indications  are  that  an  attack  upon  Bird’s  Point  or  Fort  Holt  ma^ 
be  made  to-night  or  to-morrow.  You  will  therefore  instruct , yom : out 
guards  to  be  extra  vigilant.  Send  scouting  parties  out  by  the  diiferen 
approaches,  and  see  that  the  entire  command  are  kept  at  their  posts- 
men  sleeping  under  arms,  with  their  cartridge-boxes  filled.  Informs 
tion  will  be  given  the  gunboats,  to  the  end  that  they  may  be  able  t< 
give  all  the  assistance  in  their  power.  g GBAKT 

Briaadier- General,  Commanding . 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III.,  December  13,  1861, 


Commodore  Graham, 

Commanding  Transports,  Cairo,  III. : 

Let  no  boats  go  out  from  here  to-night.  Keep  them  all  fired  up  am 
ready  to  start  at  a moment’s  warning.  Keport  how  many  transports 
and  their  names,  you  have  now  in  port. 

By  order  Brigadier-General  Grant,  commanding: 


a i/1  p./Ip..  damn. 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo,  III.,  December  13,  1861. 

Commodore  Andrew  H.  Eoote,  IJ.  S.  K., 

Commanding  Gunboat  Flotilla,  Cairo,  1 U. : 

Information  that  I have  received  indicates  the  probaDiliby  » 
attack  being  made  upon  either  Fort  Holt  or  Bird’s  Point  to-night  c 


Uhap.  XVHL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


431 


o-morrow.  I have  given  instructions  to  the  commanding  officers  at 
liese  two  points.  Have  given  directions  also  to  have  all  the  transports 
ally  ready,  in  case  a move  on  the  water  should  be  necessary.  I would 
'espectfully  ask  your  co-operation  with  the  gunboats. 

U.  S.  GBANT, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding* 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

Bo.  24.  f Saint  Louis , December  12,  1861. 

I.  The  suffering  families  driven  by  rebels  from  Southwestern  Mis- 
souri which  have  already  arrived  here  have  been  supplied  by  volun- 
ary  contributions  made  by  Union  men.  Others  are  on  the  way  to 
jrive  in  a few  days.  These  must  be  supplied  by  the  charity  of  men 
mown  to  be  hostile  to  the  Union.  A list  will  be  prepared  of  the 
lames  of  all  persons  of  this  class  who  do  not  voluntarily  furnish  their 
luota,  and  a contribution  will  be  levied  on  them  of  $10,000,  in  cloth- 
Qg,  provisions,  and  quarters,  or  money  in  lieu  thereof.  This  levy  will 
>e  made  upon  the  following  classes  of  persons,  in  proportion  to  the 
-uilt  and  property  of  each  individual : 1st,  Those  in  arms  with  the  en- 
my  who  have  property  in  this  city;  2d,  Those  who  have  furnished 
•ecuniary  or  other  aid  to  the  enemy  or  to  persons  in  the  enemy’s  serv- 
3e;  3d,  Those  who  have  verbally,  in  writing,  or  by  publication  given 
ncouragement  to  insurgents  and  rebels. 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Curtis,  U.  S.  Volunteers ; Lieut.  Col.  B.  G.  Far- 
ar,  provost-marshal-general,  and  Charles  Borg,  esq.,  assessor  of  the 
ounty  of  Saint  Louis,  will  constitute  a board  of  assessors  for  levying 
tie  aforementioned  contribution.  In  determining  the  amount  of  prop- 
rty  of  the  individuals  assessed  the  board  will  take  into  consideration 
tie  official  assessment  lists  for  municipal  taxes. 

III.  As  soon  as  any  part  of  this  contribution  has  been  assessed  by 
ae  board  the  provost-marshal-general  will  notify  the  parties  assessed 
leir  agents  or  representatives,  stating  the  amount  of  provisions,  cloth- 
lg,  or  quarters,  and  the  money  value  thereof  required  of  each  ; and  if 
ot  furnished  within  the  time  specified  in  such  notice  he  will  issue  an 
xecution,  and  sufficient  property  will  be  taken  and  sold  at  public  auc- 
on  to  satisfy  the  assessment,  with  costs,  and  a penalty  of  25  per  cent 

i addition.  Where  buildings  or  parts  of  buildings  are  to  be  used! 
nd  where  any  of  the  sufferers  are  to  be  quartered  on  families,  care 
lould  be  taken  to  produce  as  little  inconvenience  to  the  owners  or 
unities  as  possible,  this  not  being  considered  a military  contribution 
■vied  upon  the  enemy,  but  merely  a collection  to  be  made  from  friends 
c the  enemy  for  charitable  purposes. 

person  upon  whom  such  assessment  shall  be  made  shall 
le  with  the  provost-marshal-general  an  affidavit  that  he  is  a loyal  citi- 
m and  has  been  true  to  his  allegiance  to  the  United  States/he  will 
3 allowed  one  week  to  furnish  evidence  to  the  board  to  vindicate  his 
laracter  ; and  if  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  shall  not  be  able  to  satisfy 
of  his  loyalty,  the  assessment  shall  be  increased  10  percent' 
Q(|  the  levy  immediately  made. 

V.  The  supplies  so  collected  will  be  expended  for  the  obiectdesig- 
ue(l,  under  the  direction  of  the  provost-marshal-general,  with  the  ad- 
1 e °;  ttie  Srato  Sanitary  Commission.  Where  moneys  are  received  in 
3u  ot  supplies,  it  will  be  expended  for  them,  as  they  maybe  required. 


432  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ch«.  XVI 


I 

It 


Anv  monev  not  so  expended  will  be  turned  over  to  the  Sanitary  Con 
tdlstin  for  the  benefit  of  sick  soldiers.  A strict  and  accurate  accour 
of  these  receipts  and  expenditures  will  be  kept  and  returned  to  the 

headquarters  shaU  resist  or  attempt  to  resist  the  execution 

these  orders  will  be  immediately  arrested  and  imprisoned,  and  will  1 
tried  by  a military  commission. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck : j ^ 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo,  December  13,  1851. 


CaPt‘  As?i.  Adit^Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Missouri,  Saint  Louis,  Mo. : 

Sir:  From  information  received  this  afternoon  from  Columbus  sod 
movement  is  taking  place  from  that  point.  I am  inclined  to  belie 
thatMt  willbe  mad?  on  Bird’s  Point-possibly  at  an  early  hour  in  d 
morning  I am  fully  prepared  for  the  best  defense  our  means  v ill  alloj 
"fcur  where  it'mV  Every  possible 

to  detect  the  intention  of  the  enemy.  All  the  troops  at  Dim  s roll 
Fort  Holt,  and  Cairo  are  sleeping  upon  their  arms,  with  cartndg^b^ 
filled.  Steamers  are  in  readiness  to  move  the  Cairo  troops  to  anj  pop 

9 ' llnclose  herewith  a report  from  Colonel 

Girardeau,  which  may  contain  some  information  of  interest  to  the  c 
partment. 

Respectfully,  &c.,  ^ g GRANT, 

Brigadier -General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Cape  Girardeau, 

December  12,  1861. 


General  TJ.  S.  Grant  : . , - 

Dear  Sir  : I have  just  received  information  &om  New  Madrid  frj 
a reliable  source.  My  informant  arrived  there  on  Monday  last,  Gj 
ernor Jackson  was  addressing  the  troops  there  on  his  arrival  Ac 
onel  from  Tennessee  and  M.  Jeff.  Thompson  followed,  all  ursuigt 
whose  term  of  enlistment  had  about  expired  to  re-emhst,  stating  tt 

hs^sssas^^ 

South”  in  her  efforts  to  “free  herself.” 

Richard  Watkins,  one  of  the  sons  of  the  general,  hM  come  in^ 

taken  the  oath  of  allegiance.  I rather  think  the  general 

From  two  to  five  of  Thompson’s  daily  are  coming  in  and  renewing  tn 

allegiance  and  going  to  their  homes. 

In  haste,  yours,  truly,  ^ F ROSS 

Colonel  Seventeenth  Illinois  Volunteers , Commanding 


Ohai\  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


433 


Richmond,  Mo.,  December  13,  1861. 

Major-General  Hallecic  : 

On  yesterday  we  drove  the  last  of  the  organized  forces  of  rebels  from 
l latte  and  Clay  across  river  at  Lexington.  Had  slight  skirmish.  We 
ailed  some  3 or  4.  They  fired  from  houses  in  Lexington,  and  to  silence 
,hem  we  gave  them  eleven  shots  from  6-pounder  field  pieces.  Will 

Sirolltcm1  fr°m  tlllS  COunty  and  to-morrow,  and  then  move  to 

B.  M.  PRENTISS. 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III .,  December  13,  1861. 

Jol.  John  Cook, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Forces , Fort  Dolt , Ky . ; 

Be  on  the  qui  vive  to-night  and  to-morrow.  Strengthen  your  pickets 
nd  tell  them  to  keep  a vigilant  lookout.  Let  every  man  be  at  his  post 
nd  have  your  men  sleep  on  their  arms.  1 1 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Grant: 


JNO.  A.  RAWLINS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III .,  December  13,  1861. 

eneral  John  A.  McClernand, 

Commanding  Post , Cairo , III. : 

,!frat;°n,jUSt  rfe;VL:d’  iu  connection  with  that  obtained  a few 
lys  ago,  leads  me  to  believe  an  attack  upon  Bird’s  Point  or  Fort 
olt  to-mght  or  to-morrow  quite  imminent.  I have  given  the  neces- 

wpSf  c°mrnanders  there  ; also  orders  to  secure  prompt 

avements  with  our  transports.  Commodore  Foote  has  also  been  noti- 

vpIii Ti anp  guested  to  co-operate.  It  will  be  advisable  to 
ve  all  the  troops  at  this  point  notified  that  they  are  to  keep  within 

uPS‘  .^P11111111*1011  should  be  issued,  so  as  to  give  cartridge- 
xes  full,  and  the  command  sleep  under  arms. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III  December  13,  1861. 

igadier-General  McClernand, 

Commanding , Cairo , III. : 

Aov  security  and  expedition,  in  case  of  an  attack,  you  will  please 

itiepa0nhthe  S!iean^rS in?,W  in  port  four  regiments.  The  following 
its  can  be  used : Aleck  Scott,  Memphis,  White  Cloud,  and  J.  WiL 


28  R R — VOL  VIII 


u.  S.  GRANT, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


434 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS./AND  IND.  T.  10—.  -HI. 


HoinmlARTEES  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  MISSOURI, 
HEADQUARTERS  ^ Deceml,er  13,  1861. 


Brie  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas,  , ,,  , 

S Adjutant-General  of  the  Army,  Washington,  D.  C..  j 

to  the  law  and  regulations.  I t use(|  ,ny  best  endeavor.* 

In  the  case  protest* 

to  induce  tlle’"  thev  were  not  enlisted  to  serve  the  United 

against  it,  on  tlie  giound  that QTiri  that,  on  his  remova 


against  it,  on  Fremont,  and  that  on  his  remova, 

States,  but  to  seive  a j a ^ cantains  of  companies  t( 

siiisisssisg 


mustering  in  tnat  n vreuerm  a-  "service  would  cease.  I therd 

°a^  not  a rSar  organization  ; some  hav 

protnddyCprefer  t® ^j^|r^tj^  ggrvices^away 'from'homey61^ 

cult  to  ascertain  the  length  of  t ;h«1?  [s  a very  peculiar  or 

ji^van^jragr'*  ■»  " - • 

can  lie  ascertained  this  organization  is  as  follows  . 


Colonel  Bissell’s  Engineer  regiment.. -- 

Two  companies  of  telegraph  men 

One  company  of  telegraph  guards 

Signal  company 

Force  of  sappers  and  miners 

Company  of  pioneers,  sappers  and  miners.. 

Company  of  pontoniers  ------ 

Engineer  detachment  at  Ironton 

Engineer  Corps,  


Officers. 

— 

36 

6 



3 

4 

”’*3 

3 

3 

: 

«r*  "“jtfasiassnss  swsms 


ing  infantry  pay. 


;hap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


435 


The  other  ten  companies,  under  various  names,  I propose  to  unite  into 
i battalion,  and  to  muster  them  in  as  infantry  on  the  saihe  terms  as 
BisselPs  regiment ; that  is,  to  have  the  extra  allowance  when  acting  as 
ingineer  troops.  To  effect  this  it  will  probably  be  necessary  to  break 
ip  the  present  organizations,  so  as  to  dispense  in  the  new  with  the 
>xtra  officers.  The  two  companies  of  telegraph  men  and  telegraph 
guards,  9 officers  and  225  men,  have  already  been  mustered  out,  but 
nany  of  them  are  ready  to  reorganize  as  infantry  in  the  manner  pro- 
>osed.  1 

The  Engineer  Corps  proper,  as  it  is  called,  has  no  troops,  but  proba- 
cy about  50  officers.  The  names  of  43  have  already  been  ascertained 
>ut  some  one  turns  up  every  few  days  holding  a commission  or  appoint- 
ment from  General  Fremont.  Some  of  these  are  already  discharged* 
•ut  it  is  impossible  to  discharge  them  all  at  present,  their  services  being 
bsolutely  indispensable  in  the  construction  of  the  works  which  are  now 
emg  built  at  Paducah,  Cairo,  Fort  Holt,  Girardeau,  Eolla,  Jefferson 
'ity,  ba  Mine  Cantonment  near  Sedalia,  &c.  The  commanding  officers 
t these  places  report  that  it  is  impossible  to  proceed  with  these  de- 
mises, now  partially  constructed,  without  the  aid  of  one  or  more  en- 
ineer  officer  at  each  place.  I coincide  in  their  opinion,  and  shall  be 
bilged  to  retain  in  service  some  10  or  12  of  the  most  competent  of  these 
fficers,  with  the  pay  of  captains  and  lieutenants  of  Engineers,  until 
)me  arrangement  can  be  made  to  replace  them  by  regular  officers. 

I would  remark  that  the  pontonier  company  has  a large  and  costly 
ridge  train  nearly  complete,  and  that  the  signal  company  has  in  its 
ossession  signal  instruments,  not,  perhaps,  of  much  value  for  military 
aerations,  but  which  have  cost  a large  sum  of  money. 

The  changes  proposed  will  obviate  the  present  irregularities  and 
lomalies  of  organization $ greatly  reduce  the  expenses,  and  give  effi- 
ency  to  this  branch  of  the  service,  which  now  seems  to  be  without 
rm  and  almost  without  use.  I consider  myself  authorized  by  the  in- 
ructions  of  the  2d  instant  to  make  them,  and  shall  do  so  as  rapidly  as 
issible,  unless  otherwise  directed.  The  reorganization  of  the  frag- 
entary  bodies  of  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry  will  be  pushed  forward 
i th  all  possible  dispatch. 

I inclose  herewith  a communication  of  this  date  from  General  Cul- 
m*  It  is  of  vital  importance  that  this  request  be  granted.  I have 
it  one  regular  engineer  and  one  topographical  officer  for  duty  in  this 
• partment,  and  these  have  also  to  perform  the  duties  of  aides-de-camp, 
lportant  defenses  are  being  constructed  without  any  competent  person 
direct  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-General. 


Otter ville,  December  14,  1861. 
j ljor-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis: 

Reliable  information  just  from  Lexington.  The  rebels,  4,000  strong, 
r Lexington  to-day  to  join  Price,  with  large  train.  Prentiss,  after 
mg  several  rounds  into  the  town,  fell  back  out  of  sight.  I think  there 
io  iieed  to  send  to  Lexington,  but  best  to  intercept  rebels  before  they 
ich  w arrensburg.  Please  reply,  as  force  ready  to  move  from  Sedalia. 

JNO.  POPE, 

J Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


* Not  found. 


436  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Ciiap.  xvm 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

, Saint  Louis , December  14,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Syracuse , Mo. : 

Send  strong  party  in  direction  of  Lexington;  cavalry,  artillery,  am 

ms  A 

aSCSSS^*ft‘S53-  »-,.»  «.  .«ep  ».  Mvised 
1ms  movements  so  that  I could  co-operate  ^ • jjAbLECK, 

11  Z ^ n m fl  /4/M  /"l/V*  /V  / 


General  Halleck,  Louis  : 


Otterville,  December  14,  1861. 


Z-—  Le^  2,000  « * ^ M 


500  cavalry.  Have  ordered  the  eommandin 

rensburg.  JKO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding.  jj 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , -Mo.,  December  14,  1861. 


~£2£?^^®SSii 

Sedal”8’  Do'no"  uttt  ZZ har 
been,  I think,  too  low.  H w nALLECK, 


H /I  /i  i'»  />/v«/V  l 


Otterville,  December  14,  1861. 

march  on  Warrensburg,  as  you  direct.  j^O.  POPE, 

' Brigadier- General. 


Maior-General  McClellan:  « PTitire 


Headquarters, 

Saint  Louis , December  14,  1861. 


Jhaf.  XVXII.j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


437 


cleaned  out;  also  Platte,  Clay,  and  Ray  counties.  We  have  taken  in 
lie  last  few  days  300  prisoners,  artillery,  arms,  and  wagons.  General 
Prentiss  was  opposite  Lexington  last  night.  A force  ordered  this 
norning  from  Sedalia  to  co-operate  on  the  south  side  of  the  river, 
fifteen  hundred  men  have  been  sent  into  Boone  and  Howard  Counties. 
Salem,  south  of  Rolla,  threatened  by  a large  force.  It  has  been  re-en- 
orced.  Returns  as  far  as  received  will  be  immediately  forwarded. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

1 Major- General 


Richmond,  Ray  County,  Mo.,  December  14, 

( Via  Saint  Joseph , Mo.,  December  16,  1861.) 
lajor-General  Halleck: 

I shall  not  leave  here  until  to-night.  Find  in  this  country  several 
xovernment  horses  taken  at  Lexington.  Many  rebels  willing  to  return 
iome  from  Price’s  army.  Some  are  candid ; others  not.  Will  be  in  Car- 
ollton  Monday.  Our  trip  is  doing  good.  Union  men  feel  more  confi- 
dent. State  troops  will  be  able  to  keep  peace  in  North  Missouri  after 
en  days  is  my  opinion. 

B.  M.  PRENTISS. 


Sedalia,  December  15,  1861. 


lajor-General  Halleck  : 

Troops  from  this  place  on  road  (4,000)  replaced  by  troops  from  La  Mine, 
hall  take  command  in  person  of  the  column  on  Warrensburg.  Several 
espectable  men  just  in  from  Lexington.  Secessionists  certainly  left 
/exington  yesterday.  Immense  train  of  supplies,  rope,  &c.  About 
,000  men,  only  one-half  armed.  All  concur  that  it  is  too  late  to  inter- 
ept  them  at  Warrensburg,  but  possible  to  do  so  at  points  half  way  be- 
fireen  Warrensburg  and  Clinton.  Only  two  ways  of  getting  to  Osceola 
)y  Clinton  and  by  Rose  Hill).  Have  sent  to  burn  bridge  at  Rose  Hill. 
Inemy  will  be  forced  to  Clinton  or  to  move  west  towards  Kansas.  Jen- 
ison,  with  considerable  force,  at  West  Point.  Have  pushed  cavalry 
iconnaissance  toward  Clinton  to  cover  flank  by  keeping  south  of  War- 
msburg.  Certain  at  least  to  capture  train.  Can  guard  against  any 
lovement  of  Price  on  flank.  Will  wait  myself  one-half  hour  for  answer. 


JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  oe  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  16,  1861. 
aj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army , Washington  City : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  10th  instant  is  received  and  I am  much 
ratified  with  its  contents.  I was  satisfied  that  the  orders  which  I had 
reviously  received  had  been  issued  without  your  knowledge  or  upon  a 
isconception  of  the  condition  of  the  troops  in  this  department.  I think 
have  plenty  of  men  for  the  service  here,  but  we  are  terribly  deficient 
organization,  discipline,  and  arms.  I hope  to  remove  the  former  defi- 
encies  as  soon  as  possible,  and  when  the  11,000  arms  sent  by  you  are 
ceived  I shall  feel  that  the  latter  is  partially  supplied.  Your  telegram 


438 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [Chap.  XV Til 


with  respect  to  these  arms  is  almost  the  only  good  news  1 have  hearc 
since  1 arrived  here.  There  is  a large  body  ol  troops  at  Benton  Bar 
racks  but  most  of  them  are  without  arms,  and  therefore  can  neithe 
be  sent  into  the  field  nor  be  used  to  suppress  insurrection  here,  if  on 

%USr  Bowen  wrote  from  Salem  on  the  9th  that  he  had  driven  th 
enemy  through  the  Current  Hills,  taking  20  prisoners  and  some  3 
horses.  I have  since  learned  that  about  1,500  of  the  enemy  returned  o 
f ® He  has  been  re  enforced  with  infantry  and  artillery  from  Boll; 
Yt  Pilot  Knob  a number  of  prisoners  have  been  taken,  and  scatteiin 
men  from  Price’s  army  are  coming  in  daily  and  taking  the  oath  of  all< 

gl  General  Prentiss  has  cleaned  out  all  the  co™ties  north  of  the  Mu 
souri  River  and  west  of  Brunswick.  He  is  at  Carrollton  to-day.  lh 
three  regiments  sent  through  Callaway,  Boone,  Howard,  and  Randolp 
Counties  will  meet  General  Prentiss  about  Glasgow.  They  hav  e alread, 
taken  several  hundred  prisoners  and  broken  up  the  insurgent  organs 
tions  The  expedition  sent  by  Colonel  Steele  to  Marshall,  Arrow  Roc 
and  Waverly  have  returned  to  Sedalia,  having  been  complete  ysu 
cessful  They  took  some  50  prisoners,  including  one  piece  of  aitillerjj 
fnn^Vitv  of  arms  and  destroyed  a number  of  wagons  and  othd 
property  Among  the  prisoners  are  two  assistant  adjutant-general 
andtemf lieutenant  of  Price’s  army  A mail-bag  was  also  taken  g.viJ 
im  valuable  information.  We  had  one  corporal  killed  in  the  skirmisS 
near  Waverly  where  one  of  the  enemy’s  field  pieces  burst  in  discharg. 
Ing  it  As  well  as  I could  ascertain,  about  8,000  or  10  000  msurgen 
were  organizing  in  the  counties  north  of  the  river,  and  X deemed  it  m 
prudent' to  move  against  Price  with  this  large  force  in  our  rear.  Thd 
will  bp  thoroughly  broken  up  this  week.  . I 

Unfortunately  General  Prentiss  neglected  to  obey  my  orders  to  keel 
me  advised  of  his  movements.  Expecting  that  the  insurgents  scatterd 
bv  him  would  cross  the  river,  I had  a large  force  of  cavalry  and  mfantd 
(in  emptv  wagous)  at  Sedalia,  ready  to  co-operate  on  the  south  side  ad 
cut  off  their  retreat.  Early  yesterday  morning  I learned  that  aboi 
4 000  of  the  insurgents  had  crossed  at  Lexington,  with  the  mteiition 
ioining  Price  at  Osceola,  I immediately  telegraphed  General  Pope  j 
Sedalia  to  move  with  all  possible  dispatch  4,000  men  to  some  pon 
between  Warrensburg  and  Clinton  to  cut  off  their  retreat.  The  exp 
dfficm^as  midy  and  started  instantly,  but  I fear  it 
catch  them.  Had  Prentiss  advised  me  m time  I would  have  taken  tl 
whole  of  them.  His  carelessness,  neglect,  or  obstinacy,  whichev  j 
may  be  cafled,  thwarted  my  plans.  Possibly  W ^yet juccee 
A large  force  has  been  placed  in  position  to  re-enforce  General  i 1 
and  to  protect  his  flank  from  any  advance  made  by  Price’s  army  to  c 

0ftT h e larg™  number  of  prisoners  taken  and  about  to  be  sent  to  this  ci 
alread  ybegins  to  be  embarrassing,  and  some  means  must  be  dev  s, 
for  disposing  of  them.  I will  address  you  a communication  on  tli 

**.  and  1 1... 

commander  for  the  troops,  mostly  German,  at  Rolla.  If  Y®n®r®  " ^ 
has  not  been  appointed,  or  if  there  be  any  obieet  ons  ’S  g 

P.  J.  Osterhaus  made  brigadier  general  of  volunteers,  lerhaps, 
things  considered,  he  is  the  better  man  of  the  two.  within  t’ 

The  following  regular  officers,  not  on  parole,  have  bee 


439 


HAP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

ist  few  days  ordered  by  the  Adjutant-General  away  from  this  depart  - 
lent,  viz : 

Capt.  J.  0.  Davis,  artillery ; Capt.  H.  B.  Hendershott,  artillery;  Capt. 
. M.  Schofield,  artillery;  Lieut.  A.  M.  Randol,  First  Artillery;  Maj. 
7.  L.  Elliott,  First  Cavalry;  Lieut.  L.  Merrill,  First  Cavalry;  also  the 
fficers  of  Companies  B and  E,  Second  Infantry,  names  not  known. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Saint  Louis,  December  16,  1861. 

ol.  J.  W.  Birge, 

Commanding  Sharpshooters , Centralia , Mo. : 

Colonel  : As  soon  as  you  have  cleaned  out  Centralia,  Sturgeon,  and 
tenick,  and  the  roads  leading  to  Columbia  and  Fayette,  I wish  you  to 
irn  your  attention  to  the  rebels  about  Huntsville,  Randolph  County, 
ad  Mexico,  Anderson  County.  You  will  arrest  not  only  enemies  in 
rms,  but  all  who  aid  and  assist  them,  and  you  will  have  it  distinctly 
nderstood  everywhere  that  rebels  will  be  punished  and  Union  men 
rotected  ; but  the  latter,  in  order  to  deserve  protection,  must  do  some- 
ling  for  themselves.  Induce  them  to  unite  under  the  protection  of 
our  forces  in  that  part  of  the  country  and  form  companies  of  State 
lilitia.  Heretofore  probably  many  have  been  deterred  from  acting 
l self-defense  against  rebels  from  a fear  that  the  Union  troops  might 
nally  abandon  this  State.  This  will  never  be  done.  Missouri  is  and 
lust  remain  in  the  Union  and  all  rebels  must  be  driven  out  or  punished, 
'here  must  be  no  more  half-way  measures,  and  there  can  be  no  middle 
ourse  of  individual  neutrality.  All  citizens  who  are  not  rebels  must 
>yally  support  the  Government.  If  they  aid  rebels,  they  are  traitors ; 

‘ they  refuse  aid  to  the  cause  of  the  Union,  they  are  disloyal,  and  by 
ais  disloyalty  give  countenance  to  those  who  are  openly  enemies. 
>otk  classes  will  be  treated  as  their  conduct  deserves.  Those  who  are 
ot  for  us  will  be  regarded  as  against  us.  We  must  know  who  are 
iends  and  who  are  enemies ; the  line  will  be  distinctly  drawn.  There 
an  be  no  individual  neutrality  in  the  rear  in  Missouri.  Let  the  people 
here  you  go  distinctly  understand  this. 

It  is  said  that  parties  of  men  are  cutting  down  telegraph  posts  and 
ttempting  to  destroy  the  railroad.  Shoot  down  every  one  engaged  in 
uch  attempts  and  put  in  close  confinement  every  one  who  lias  done 
a ; also  seize  every  one  making  signal-fires  or  who  conveys  informa- 
ion  to  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  December  16,  1861. 
tajor-General  Halleck  : 

The  expedition  up  the  river  will  probably  be  in  Booneville  to-mor- 
ow.  The  river  is  falling,  and  I doubt  the  expediency  of  trying  to  get 
hove  there  with  boats,  unless  you  have  strong  reasons.  General  Pope 
as  a small  force  at  Booneville  to  co-operate  against  Fayette,  and  if 
nything  further  is  to  be  done  there  should  be  an  experienced  com- 


440 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Cuf.  xvm 


mander.  The  boats  were  not  in  as  good  order  as  I should  have  wished 
Some  men  left  in  the  hospital  by  the  Eleventh  Iowa  are  taken  wit 
small-pox. 


THOS.  J.  McKEAX, 


Brigadier -General.  I 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , December  17,  1861.  I 

Oapt.  J.  C.  Kelton,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

On  the  strength  of  a telegraphic  dispatch  received  from  Saint  Louij 
that  the  prisoners  arriving  here  yesterday  were  imposters,  I have  orderel 
them  back  to  Saint  Louis.  Eight  of  these  prisoners  did  not  claim  to  hav 
been  taken  at  Camp  Jackson,  and  had  with  them  regular  certificates  (H 
exchange.  As  I am  anxious  to  make  as  few  shipments  ot  these  mei 
as  possible,  and  as  there  was  nothing  in  my  telegraphic  instructions  t| 

prevent  it,  I returned  these  also.  . . J 

I would  report  that  I received  a dispatch  a few  days  agp  that  quinnJ 
was  being  shipped  from  Saint  Louis  via  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  an 
the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  to  Duquoin,  where  it  was  Received 


the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  to  Duquoin,  wiiere  it  was  leceiveu  u 
special  agents  and  transported  across  land  to  the  Mississippi  River,  them; 
through  Missouri  south . I sent  up  a detective,  who  captured  100  ounce) 
i-.® -at.  -a u-  woo  rioatinAil  for  Mp, mnhis.  and  that  tU 


together  wUb  evidence  that  it  was  destined  for  Memphis  and  that  tl 
agent  was  to  receive  $500  for  his  trouble  if  he  succeeded  m getting  I 
through.  Shall  I turn  this  over  to  the  marshal  of  the  district,  with  tl 
evidence  ^ 

I have  heretofore  reported  the  fact  that  the  quartermaster’s  depar 
ment  has  been  carried  on  at  this  place  almost  without  funds  from  tfl 
earliest  assembling  of  troops.  There  is  therefore  necessarily  a lard 
indebtedness  accrued  against  the  Government.  The  vouchers  issue) 
in  payment  of  these  claims  are  constantly  coming  before  me  for  approv 
(the  quartermaster  declining  to  settle  anything  without),  and  necessanl 
occupy  much  of  my  time.  As  many  of  these  accounts  should  no 
allowed  and  others  should  be  reduced,  I would  respectfully  ur^e  tj 
necessity  of  sending  here  an  experienced  agent  of 
Aside  from  the  necessity  of  an  experienced  agent  to  settle  the  old  clam) 
I think  the  good  of  the  service  would  be  subserved  by  having  an  o 
officer  of  the^Quartermaster’s  Department  here^  ^ ^ 

Brigadi  er-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  December  17,  1861. 


Brig. 


Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss,  . 

Carrollton , via  Chillicothe  : 

You  will  continue  your  march  east  to  Brunswick  and  Glasgow  t 
you  meet  the  force  sent  out  from  Jefferson  City.  Having  cleared 
the  rebels  from  the  counties  north  of  the  river,  you  will  report  to  the 
headquarters  for  further  orders.  0 w HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


3hap.  XVIII.j 


correspondence,  etc. — union.  441 

Saint  Louis,  December  17,  1861. 

Brigadier-General  Curtis, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.  : 

General  : You  will  immediately  detail  1,100  or  1,200  unarmed  men 
from  Benton  Barracks  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  for  service  down 
the  river  on  the  gunboats. 

By  order  of  General  McClellan  : 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Saint  Louis,  December  17,  1861. 

Flag-Officer  Foote,  Cairo , III. : 

Sir  : I have  ready  in  this  city  some  1,100  or  1,200  unarmed  men  to 
be  sent  to  man  your  gunboats,  if  you  wish  them.  They  are  volunteers. 
You  will  please  inform  me  if  you  want  them;  and,  if  so,  when  and 
where  ? 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Carrollton,  December  17,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

I leave  here  to-day  for  Utica,  having  accomplished  object  of  trip. 
Some  500  have  crossed  from  this  county  to  join  Price.  They  have 
gone  without  outfit,  and  have  destroyed  all  ferries  that  I could  find. 
The  counties  through  which  we  have  passed  have  furnished  large  quan- 
tities of  clothing  for  Price,  most  of  which  crosses  at  Lexington,  which 
place,  in  my  opinion,  should  be  held  by  our  troops. 

B.  M.  PBENTISS. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  17,  1861. 

P.  B.  Ewino,  Esq.,  Cincinnati , Ohio: 

Dear  Sir:  Your  note  of  the  13th,  with  inclosure,  is  received.  I am 
not  surprised  that  General  Sherman  should  be  abused  by  the  newspa- 
pers, for  it  seems  to  have  become  the  fashion  all  over  the  United  States 
for  editors  and  scribblers  to  criticise,  abuse,  and  even  blackguard  any 
officer  who  devotes  his  time  and  health  and  life  to  the  service  of  his 
country.  I have  had  a pretty  good  share  of  it  myself  within  the  last 
few  weeks,  but  I have  not  and  shall  not  notice  anything  they  say  of 
me.  I hope  General  Sherman  will  not  let  these  squibs  trouble  him  in 
the  least.  They  can  do  him  no  serious  injury.  When  General  Sher- 
man came  here  his  health  was  much  broken  by  long  and  severe  labor 
and  his  nervous  system  somewhat  shaken  by  continuous  excitement 
and  responsibility.  Those  who  saw  him  here  may  have  drawn  wrong 
inferences  from  his  broken-down  appearance  and  rather  imprudent  re- 
marks; but  no  one  who  was  personally  acquainted  with  him  thought 
that  anything  was  the  matter  with  him  except  a want  of  rest.  I have 
no  doubt  that  the  quiet  of  home  will  enable  him  in  a short  time  to  re- 


442 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  |Chap.  XVIIL 


surne  his  duties  and  silence  all 
paper  attacks. 

Very  respectfully,  your 


these  scandalous  and  slanderous  news 

obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 


Major-General . 


Headquarters, 

Rolla , Mo.,  December  18,  1861. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton,  „ . T . __ 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Captain  : Franklin  Asbell  arrived  here  to-day  and  makes  the  fol 
lowing  statement,  viz : Price  was  on  the  Osage  River,  at  the  mouth  o 
Sac,  on  Saturday,  at  1 o’clock.  His  whole  force  would  not  exceed  8,000 
He  intended  to  stop  where  he  was  until  he  could  get  re-enforcement* 
from  the  South  and  Lexington,  and  then  go  to  Kansas.  McBride  wa* 
in  Springfield  ; most  of  his  men  had  gone  home.  Robbing  and  thiev 
ing  companies  are  organized  in  all  the  counties,  which  are  taking  ant 
destroying  everything  wherever  they  go.  One  hundred  and  fifty  rebel! 
attacked  Mr.  Asbell  23  miles  this  side  of  Lebanon  and  took  his  hors( 
and  everything  else  that  he  had. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  M.  DODGE, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Camp  Three  Miles  West  of  Warrensburg, 


December  18,  1861. 


Major-General  Halleck  . 

By  forced  march  interposed  between  enemy  and  Clinton  intersectioi 
road  from  Warrensburg  to  Clinton,  near  Shawnee  Mound.  Enem? 
immediately  broke  up  his  camp,  6 miles  northwest  of  Chilhowee,  ant 
beat  hasty  retreat  towards  Rose  Hill.  Threw  forward  ten  compame: 
cavalry  and  section  of  artillery  and  pursued  with  whole  force.  Jbol 
lowed  him  as  far  as  Johnstown,  when  his  force  scattered  towards  But 
ler  and  Papinsville.  Party  sent  out  to  burn  bridge  at  Rose  Hill  utterly 
failed  to  get  through.  To  cover  pursuit,  forced  strong  cavalry  recoji 
naissance  through  Clinton,  within  15  miles  of  Osceola.  One  hundrei 
and  fifty  prisoners,  7 wagons,  tents,  baggage,  horses,  &c.,  fell  into  on 
- " * '*  about  2,200—1,200  of  them  recruits.  Only  7< 


hands.  Enemy’s  force 


country  wagons  altogether.  Whole  country  clear  as  far  west  as  Los* 
Hill  and  as  far  south  as  Grand  River.  Return  with  main  body  to-dal 
to  Sedalia,  sending  cavalry  force  to  Lexington  to  destroy  ferry-boats 
Be  in  Sedalia  day  after  to-morrow.  Price  not  8,000  men ; more  leaving 

than  going.  ' JN0.  P0PE, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Camp  Southwest  of  Warrensburg, 

December  18,  1861. 

General  : In  addition  to  the  dispatch  of  this  date  sent  to  you 
have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  remarks : . . 

The  whole  account  of  the  enemy  being  in  such  force  at  Lexing 
and  having  passed  west  in  large  todies  from  the  Osage  is  a most  gros 


ha  I*,  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


443 


xaggeration.  I have  been  very  reluctant  from  my  previous  experience 
ii  this  State  to  credit  such  reports,  but  they  were  brought  from  Lexing- 
j on  and  communicated  to  me  by  persons  of  undoubted  respectability, 
Lnd  asserted  with  such  positive  certainty  that,  although  not  fully  con- 
vinced of  their  truth,  I could  not  without  obstinacy  refuse  to  credit 
i liem  to  some  extent. 

The  plain  facts  are  these  : A few  men  detailed  from  each  of  the  five 
>r  six  divisions  of  Price’s  army  made  their  way  in  squads  of  from  10 
o 150  to  the  neighborhood  of  Lexington.  They  were  never  in  the  town 
bt  all,  and  did  not  number  altogether  more  than  800  or  1,000  men.  The 
ecruits  they  were  sent  up  to  bring  down  are  largely  estimated  at  1,200, 
n rags,  without  arms,  and  without  supplies.  In  their  march  to  the 
outh  they  picked  up  in  all  about  70  two-horse  wagons.  They  fled  pre- 
cipitately as  soon  as  they  heard  of  our  approach,  and  when  the  pursuit 
erminated,  near  Johnstown,  it  is  to  be  doubted  if  there  were  500  men 
md  10  wagons  left  together.  Only  15  wagons  crossed  Grand  River. 
The  rebel  force  scattered  as  they  ran ; the  wagons  were  driven  into 
arm-yards,  and  the  men,  going  in  small  parties,  sought  refuge  in  paths 
tnd  by-ways.  The  cavalry  reconnaissance  through  Clinton,  designed 
o cover  our  pursuit,  drove  in  and  captured  the  pickets  of  Rains’  di vis- 
on,  which  is  encamped  this  side  the  Osage,  pursuing  and  capturing 
hem  inside  the  lines. 

All  information,  both  from  the  prisoners  and  from  the  people  of  the 
country,  concurs  that  Price  has  not  over  8,000  or  10,000  men,  and  that 
le  is  losing  many  more  men  than  he  can  recruit.  I have  no  doubt  that 
f it  were  known  that  those  willing  to  return  home  could  do  so  without 
nolestation,  by  taking  the  oath  not  again  to  take  up  arms  or  to  aid  or 
jibet  the  rebels,  a very  large  number  of  his  men  would  leave  him  at 
mce.  I say  this  after  examination  of  the  prisoners  and  full  commu- 
nication with  people  of  this  section  entirely  acquainted  with  the  con- 
dition of  affairs  in  Price’s  command. 

I do  not,  of  course,  know  what  are  your  views  in  relation  to  Price, 
jut  it  is  certain  that  as  long  as  he  remains  in  this  part  of  the  country 
here  will  be  excitement  and  more  or  less  recruiting  for  him.  Compel 
lim  to  fly,  and  the  inducement  is  at  an  end.  I have  no  idea  that,  with 
my  possible  means  of  surrounding  him,  his  forces  could  be  captured. 
They  would  disperse  in  all  directions  at  the  approach  of  danger,  hiding 
cheir  artillery  in  the  woods  and  distributing  their  wagons  among  the 
farm-houses,  where  it  would  be  impossible  to  identify  them.  Opera- 
tions against  him  as  if  he  commanded  an  organized  army  must  be 
futile.  I have  abundant  force  to  drive  his  from  the  country,  and  should 
be  glad  to  be  allowed  to  do  so. 

My  command  will  return  slowly  to  Sedalia,  and  if  you  think  it  best 
will  resume  their  positions  at  Otterville.  I shall  proceed  there,  and 
will  probably  be  in  Sedalia  day  after  to-morrow.  The  whole  region  as 
far  south  as  the  Osage  is  in  a just  state  of  alarm  from  this  expedition, 
and  I think  their  rest  north  will  not  soon  be  troubled  again  by  Price’s 
peojfle.  The  cavalry  force  I sent  in  advance  encamped  in  Johnstown 
last  night,  and  scouted  the  country  south  of  Grand  River  on  their 
return  to  within  a few  miles  of  Clinton.  I should  not  be  at  all  sur- 
prised to  learn  that  the  movement  had  caused  Price  to  break  up  his 
camp  and  retreat  south. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JRO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


444 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVnii 


Ohillicothe,  Mo.,  December  18,  1861. 


Major-General  Halleck  : 

I arrived  here  at  5 o’clock  to-day,  and  received  your  dispatch  ordering 
me  from  Carrollton  east  to  Brunswick  and  Glasgow.  After  arrival  here! 
bein<>'  without  rations  and  having  over  100  sick  with  measles,  will  no 
be  able  to  move  until  Friday,  to  obey  your  order,  which  I shall  do  a 
early  as  possible.  I am  satisfied  there  is  not  an  organized  force  ot  5' 
armed  rebels  north  of  the  Missouri  River,  and  that  the  State  troops 
could  keep  the  peace  if  it  was  not  for  their  anxiety  to  defend  the  immel 
diate  locality  of  their  homes.  Of  one  thing  rest  assured,  our  trip  lia 
done  much  good.  Besides  driving  the  rebels  south,  we  have  satisfied 
the  community  that  Federal  troops  could  move  without  committml 
depredations.  The  mounted  men  with  me  are  State  troops.  Shall  I 

move  from  here  to  comply  with  your  dispatch  t 

B.  M.  PRENTISS, 

Briaadier- General,  il 


Roll  A,  Mo.,  December  18,  1861.  j 

Oapt.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  Wood  and  command  have  just  arrived  from  Arkansas  line. 
They  chased  Freeman  to  Springfield,  and  returned  by  way  of  the  fork 
of  White  River  and  Houston.  There  are  no  forces  south  and  west  c 
here  this  side  of  Springfield.  McBride  is  at  sPriDgfifld.  _ _ __ 

G.  M.  DODGE, 
Colonel , Commandinq  Post.  I 


Saint  Louis,  December  18,  1861.  1 

Col.  B.  G.  Farrar,  . a • + t • 

Provost-Marshal- General,  Dept,  of  the  Missouri , Saint  Louis: 

Colonel  : From  your  verbal  statements  and  the  written  commun. 
cation  submitted  by  you  yesterday  I am  informed  that  there  are  som 
sixteen  negro  men  confined  in  the  city  prisons  in  your  charge  am 
advertised  for  sale  under  a statute  of  this  State. 

You  have  stated  the  facts  of  the  case  as  you  understand  them ; hav 
called  my  attention  to  the  statute  of  this  State  on  the  subject  and 
the  law  of  Congress  of  last  session,  and  have  asked  my  orders  as  tj 
how  you  shall  proceed  in  this  matter— whether  to  release  these  niej 
from  custody  and  to  place  them  outside  of  your  particular  jurisdiction 
as  a military  officer  in  charge  of  the  prisons,  in  accordance  with  Gen 
eral  Orders,  No.  3,  of  this  department,  or  whether  the  sheriff*  (who,  a 
I understand,  is  now  under  your  orders)  is  to  proceed  and  sell  the  san 
negro  men  as  he  has  advertised  and  as  is  directed  by  the  statute  c 
this  State,  if  said  statute  has  not  been  modified  or  changed  by  the  lai 
of  the  last  session  of  Congress. 

As  I am  informed,  most  of  these  negroes  came  with  the  torces  untie 
Major-General  FrOnont  from  Southwestern  Missouri,  and  have  eithe 
been  used  in  the  military  service  against  the  United  States  or  ar 
claimed  by  persons  now  in  arms  against  the  Federal  Government,  bu 
that  none  of  them  have  been  condemned  in  accordance  with  the  ac 
approved  August  6,  1861,  and  that  no  proceedings  for  such  condemns 
tion  have  ever  been  instituted. 

As  I understand  the  matter,  the  statute  of  this  State  creates  the  pit 


AT.  XVIII.  | 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


445 


miption  that  these  men  are  slaves,  and  if  not  called  for  within  three 
onths  of  the  date  of  the  advertisement  of  the  sheriff  they  are  to  he 

>ld  as  slaves.  • 1D/I1  .. 

It  would  seem  that  the  act  of  Congress  approved  August  0,  1801,  it 
institutional,  overrules  this  statute  so  far  as  this  presumption  is  con- 

This  act  of  Congress  cannot  he  regarded  as  unconstitutional  until 
nrided  to  be  so  hy  the  United  States  Supreme  Court. 

It  results,  then,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  these  negroes  are  held  m 
j istody  without  the  authority  of  law  and  contrary  to  General  Orders, 
o.3,  and  you  are  hereby  directed  to  release  them  from  prison.  It 
Tricars,  however,  that  they  have  received  from  the  quartermaster’s 
Apartment  certain  articles  of  clothing  required  for  their  immediate 
id  pressing  necessities,  with  the  promise  that  they  would  pay  for  the 
othing  so  delivered  to  them  with  their  labor.  They  will  therefore  be 
irned  over  to  the  chief  of  the  quartermaster’s  department  in  this  city 
j*r  labor  till  they  have  paid  the  United  States  for  the  clothing  and 
! [her  articles  so  issued  to  them  at  the  expense  of  the  Government, 

This  order  will  in  no  way  debar  any  one  from  enforcing  his  legal 
ghts  to  the  services  of  these  negroes.  Such  rights,  if  any  exist,  can 
|e  enforced  through  the  loyal  civil  tribunals  of  this  State,  whose  man- 
ates  will  always  be  duly  respected  by  the  military  authorities  of  this 

epartment.  . 

Military  officers  cannot  decide  upon  rights  of  property  or  claims  to 
Arvice  except  so  far  as  may  be  authorized  by  the  laws  of  war  or  the 
cts  of  Congress.  When  not  so  authorized  they  will  avoid  all  inter- 
jrence  with  such  questions. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General,  Commanding . 


Saint  Louis,  December  18,  1861. 

5 rig.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  Lancaster , Ohio: 

My  Dear  General  : Yours  of  the  12th*  was  received  a day  or  two 
go,  but  was  mislaid  for  the  moment  among  private  papers,  or  I should 
ave  answered  sooner.  The  newspaper  attacks  are  certainly  shameless 
nd  scandalous,  but  I cannot  agree  with  you  that  they  have  us  in  their 
tower  uto  destroy  us  as  they  please.”  I certainly  get  my  share  of 
ibuse,  but  it  will  not  disturb  me. 

Your  movement  of  the  troops  was  not  countermanded  by  me  because 
thought  it  an  unwise  one  in  itself,  but  because  I was  not  then  ready 
or  it.  I had  better  information  of  Price’s  movements  than  you  had, 
ud  I had  no  apprehension  of  an  attack.  I intended  to  concentrate 
he  forces  on  that  line,  but  I wished  the  movement  delayed  until  I 
ould  determine  on  a better  position.  After  receiving  Lieutenant-Colo- 
iel  McPherson’s  report  I made  precisely  the  location  you  had  ordered, 
was  desirous  at  the  time  not  to  prevent  the  advance  of  Price  by  any 
novement  on  our  part,  hoping  that  he  would  move  on  Lexington,  but 
indin g that  he  had  determined  to  remain  at  Osceola  for  some  time  at 
east,  I made  the  movement  you  proposed.  As  you  could  not  know 
ny  plans,  you  and  others  may  have  misconstrued  the  reason  of  my 
countermanding  your  orders. 

* See  Appendix,  p.  819. 


446 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL 


I deem  it  my  duty,  however,  to  say  to  you,  general,  in  all  franknes. 
and  kindness,  that  remarks  made  by  you,  both  at  Sedalia  and  in  thfi 
city  (if  I am  correctly  informed),  about  our  defenseless  condition  ant 
the  probability  that  the  enemy  would  take  this  city,  have  led  to  unfai:i 
and  harsh  comments  by  those  who  did  not  know.  I say  this  merely  t<, 


put  you  on  your  guard  in  future. 

I hope  to  see  you  well  enough  for  duty  soon, 
goes  on  slowly,  but  we  will  effect  it  in  time. 
Yours,  truly, 


Our  reorganizatioi 


H.  W.  HALLEOK. 


Orders,  ) Office  Provost-Marshal-Oeneral, 

14  j Saint  Louis , December  18,  1861. 


Capt.  George  E.  Leighton, 

Provost-Marshal , Saint  Louis  : 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  General  Orders,  No.  24,  of  the  commanding 
general  of  this  department,  you  are  directed  to  notify  in  person  or  br 
writing  the  persons  specified  in  the  inclosed  list  that  they  are  required 
to  pay  to  you  the  sums  placed  opposite  their  several  names ; in  defaul 
of  which,  you  will,  at  the  expiration  of  the  time  specified  in  said  ordej- 
No.  24,  proceed  to  levy  on  all  property  held  by  them  or  their  agentii 
until  such  claims  shall  be  satisfied.  All  money  so  collected  shall  b< 
duly  receipted  for  by  you  and  an  account  of  same  rendered  at  thil 
office. 


Yours,  truly, 


BERNARD  G.  FARRAR, 


Provost-Marshal-  General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  19,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss,  Chillicothe , Mo.: 

You  will  move  with  your  forces  upon  Brunswick,  Keytesville,  am 
Glasgow  till  you  open  communication  with  troops  sent  from  Jeffersoi 
City-5  also,  if  necessary  to  clean  out  the  rebels  completely,  throw  a 
force  in  direction  of  Huntsville.  Troops  from  Jefferson  City  will  return 
to  that  place  or  cross  at  Booneville  or  any  convenient  point  on  th 
river,  and  proceed  to  General  Pope’s  camp  near  Otterville. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Chillicothe,  Mo.,  December  19,  1861. 
Major-General  Halleck  : J 

I can  move  with  800  infantry,  200  cavalry,  one  battery,  four  fielc 
pieces,  and,  if  more  is  needed,  can  take  300  infantry  from  Colone 
Tindall,  who  is  3 miles  from  here.  R M PRENTISS, 

Briqadier- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  19,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Jefferson  City , Mo.  : 

As  soon  as  expedition  has  carried  out  orders  it  will  cross  at  Boone 


(LAP.  XVIII.j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


447 


ille  or  some  other  convenient  point,  and  proceed  to  General  Pope’s 
amp  near  Otterville. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Jefferson  City,  Mo., 

December  19,  1861. 

lajor-General  Halleck  : 

The  expedition  has  returned  from  Glasgow  with  about  two  tons  of 
owder  and  a few  prisoners,  having  ascertained  that  Brunswick  was 
ccupied  by  United  States  troops  and  navigation  difficult.  Shall  the 
ame  troops  go  to  Otterville  *? 

THOS.  J.  McKEAN. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  19,  1861. 
»rig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss,  Ghillicothe , Mo.  : 

Movement  on  Brunswick,  &c.,  countermanded.  McKean’s  forces 
ave  occupied  Glasgow,  capturing  two  tons  of  powder.  Bandolph, 
Toward,  and  Boone  well  cleaned  out.  General  Pope  intercepted  the 
exington  forces  south  of  Warrensburg,  capturing  tents,  baggage,  &c., 
nd  a large  number  of  prisoners.  Be-enforcements  for  Price’s  army 
itber  taken  prisoners  or  scattered. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Chillicothe,  Mo.,  December  19,  1861. 

lajor-General  Halleck  : 

1 shall  send  the  forces  with  me  to  their  rendezvous  (Saint  Joseph), 
nth  exception  of  four  companies,  which  will  go  with  me  to  Palmyra, 
f it  meets  your  approval.  Answer. 

B.  M.  PBENTISS. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Gamp  Three  Miles  West  of  Knobnoster , Mo.,  December  19,  1861. 
lajor-General  Halleck  : 

My  spies  having  informed  me  early  this  morning  of  the  march  of 
* strong  body  of  the  enemy  from  Arrow  Bock  and  Waverly,  and  that 
hey  would  camp  near  Milford,  at  mouth  of  Clear  Creek,  I posted  my 
nain  body  between  Warrensburg  and  Knobnoster,  and  directed  Major 
Marshall  to  march  on  same  point  from  Warrensburg  with  Merrill’s 
egiment  of  horse.  Colonel  Davis  came  upon  the  enemy  near  Milford 
ate  this  afternoon,  and,  having  driven  in  his  pickets,  assaulted  him  in 
orce.  A brisk  skirmish  ensued,  when  the  enemy,  finding  himself  sur- 
ounded  and  cut  off,  surrendered  at  discretion.  One  thousand  three 
mndred  prisoners,  including  3 colonels  and  17  captains  j 1,000  stand 
>f  arms,  1,000  horses,  65  wagons,  tents,  baggage,  and  supplies  have 
alien  into  our  hands.  Our  loss  is  2 killed  and  8 wounded.  Enemy’s 
oss  not  yet  known.  Will  be  in  Sedalia  to-morrow. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General. 


I 


448 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChai>.  XVITL 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  19,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  Georoe  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army , Washington  City: 

General  : The  expeditions  of  Generals  Prentiss  and  McKean  through 
the  counties  north  of  the  Missouri  River  have  been  entirely  successful. 
Every  insurgent  organization  there  has  now  been  broken  up,  and  I 
think  it  will  be  safe  in  a short  time  to  withdraw  a portion  of  the  troops 
from  that  district.  At  Glasgow  our  troops  yesterday  captured  about 
two  tons  of  powder,  which  it  is  said  was  purchased,  in  Chicago  and 
brought  in  on  the  Saint  Joseph  and  Hannibal  Railroad  among  dry 
goods  and  in  demijohns  marked  “brandy.”  It  was  carried  through  in 
small  quantities  by  rebel  country  merchants  and  farmers  and  collected 
at  Glasgow,  to  be  thence  forwarded  to  General  Price.  Colonel  Mar- 
shall’s expedition  to  Arrow  Rock  and  Waverly  prevented  its  crossing 
the  river,  and  it  consequently  fell  into  the  hands  of  our  troops  on  the 

north  side.  , . 

General  Pope’s  party  intercepted  a portion  of  the  insurgents  who 
crossed  at  Lexington.  He  attacked  their  camps  of  2,200  near  Shawnee 
Mound,  between  Warrensburg  and  Clinton,  and  completely  scattered 
them,  capturing  their  tents,  wagons,  horses,  baggage,  &c.,  and  taking 
150  prisoners.  If  General  Prentiss  had  kept  me  advised  of  his  move- 
ments, as  I had  directed,  I would  have  taken  the  whole  party.  Our 
forces  at  Sedalia  were  for  several  days  ready  to  move  at  a moment  s 
warning,  and  only  waiting  to  hear  where  Prentiss  was.  On  the  whole, 
however,  the  result  is  satisfactory.  We  have  within  the  last  two  weeks 
taken  about  500  prisoners,  one  piece  of  artillery,  a number  of  arms, 
wagons,  horses,  and  a considerable  amount  of  ammunition  and  cloth- 
ing": and,  what  is  of  most  importance,  we  have  pretty  effectually  crushed 
out  the  insurrection  along  the  Missouri  River,  upon  which  Price  placed 
his  main  reliance  for  recruits  and  clothing.  His  army  is  pretty  welM 
supplied  with  provisions  and  arms,  but  is  greatly  in  want  of  clothing 
and  shoes.  He  has  a large  park  of  artillery,  and  from  all  I can  learnl 
will  make  a good  fight.  He  and  many  of  his  men  are  virtually  outj 
laws,  and,  it  is  said,  are  determined  to  win  a victory  or  die.  Another 
retreat  would  effectually  ruin  his  cause  in  this  State.  I had  hoped  to 
draw  him  north  to  the  Missouri  River,  so  that  I could  effectually  cutofl 
his  retreat,  but  his  main  force  has  not  yet  crossed  the  Osage,  and  the 
columns  which  he  advanced  on  Clinton  and  Warsaw  have  been  with- 
drawn. In  that  position  I cannot  cut  him  off  by  moving  from  Rolla, 
as  our  troops  would  be  compelled  to  cross  the  Osage  Mountains  oven 
narrow  and  difficult  roads,  which  would  make  our  movements  necesj 
sarily  slow,  affording  him  plenty  of  time  to  fall  back.  It  is  therefore 
possible  that  I may  be  compelled  to  attack  him  in  front.  The  ravaged 
committed  by  his  troops  may  make  it  advisable  to  move  against  hinfl 
soon,  notwithstanding  the  great  inconveniences  of  a winter  campaign 
in  this  climate,  which  is  very  much  more  unfavorable  than  that  ol 
Washington.  The  roads,  too,  will  probably  be  almost  impassable,  4 
hope,  however,  to  be  able  to  overcome  these  obstacles.  At  any  rate,  I 
shall  not  hesitate  to  act  as  soon  as  I can  get  the  troops  in  anything  like 
organization  and  discipline. 

The  conduct  of  the  columns  sent  through  the  river  counties  forms  aj 
striking  contrast  to  that  of  previous  expeditions.  Citizens  from  thes€| 
counties  assure  me  that  they  have  all  acted  with  perfect  propriety,  com 
mitting  no  depredations,  and  producing  a most  favorable  impression. 
This  certainly  indicates  a vast  improvement  in  discipline.  By  a le\* 


u*.  XVUX] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


449 


>vere  punishments  for  marauding  and  pillaging  I hope  to  put  an  end 
► these  depredations.  The  conduct  of  the  forces  under  Lane  and 
mnison  has  done  more  for  the  enemy  in  this  State  than  could  have 
ien  accomplished  by  20,000  of  his  own  army.  I receive  almost  daily 
unplaints  of  outrages  committed  by  these  men  in  the  name  of  the 
nited  States,  and  the  evidence  is  so  conclusive  as  to  leave  no  doubt 
‘ their  correctness.  It  is  rumored  that  Lane  has  been  made  a briga- 
er-general.  I cannot  conceive  of  a more  injudicious  appointment.  It 
ill  take  20,000  men  to  counteract  its  effect  in  this  State,  and,  more- 
rer,  is  offering  a premium  for  rascality  and  robbing  generally. 

I am  progressing  slowly  with  the  reorganization  of  the  forces  here.  It 
a most  difficult  task,  increased  by  the  injudicious  orders  of  the  War 
epartment  and  the  jealousies  of  the  Governors  of  States.  The  ad- 
inistration  and  machinery  for  the  supply  of  the  army  is  rapidly  get- 
ig  into  working  order.  This  was  a matter  of  the  greatest  necessity 
consequently  has  absorbed  most  of  my  attention.  An  army  is 
on  disorganized  unless  properly  supplied  and  its  wants  provided  for. 
am  discharging  most  of  the  steamers  formerly  in  the  Government  em 
oyment,  and  mustering  out  of  service  what  is  called  “ Marine  Corps,” 
aich  are  nothing  more  than  hired  men  on  these  boats.  This  will  be 
great  saving  of  expense.  The  Home  Guards  are  also  being  dis- 
rnded  as  rapidly  as  I can  supply  their  places.  The  U.  S.  Reserve 
)rps,  as  they  are  called,  are  generally  regularly-organized  Missouri 
flunteers,  mustered  in  for  three  years  or  the  war,  without  limitation 
to  place  of  service.  The  Pay  Department  has  objected  to  pay  these 
x>ps,  on  the  ground  that  there  was  some  outside  verbal  or  tacit  under  - 
rnding  that  they  would  not  be  ordered  out  of  the  State.  I cannot 
cognize  any  such  unrecorded  verbal  understanding,  and  must  be 
jiided  alone  by  the  muster  rolls,  which  are  perfectly  regular.  More- 
|er  General  Curtis  informs  me  that  he  refused  to  permit  them  to  be 
nstered  in  with  any  reservation  whatever.  I have  therefore  ordered 
|em,  or  rather  all  of  them  in  actual  service,  to  be  paid  on  their  nius- 
l rolls.  They  are  not  generally  very  efficient  troops,  and  I purpose 
« disband  a part  of  them  as  soon  as  I can  do  so  with  safety.  1 shall 
1 50  disband  most  of  the  fragmentary  and  irregular  organizations.  This 
. *mld  not  do  all  at  once.  The  condition  of  the  country  and  the  state 
< public  feeling  here,  resulting  from  General  Fremont’s  removal,  ex- 
led  by  designing  party  politicians,  rendered  it  prudent  to  move  in 
hs  matter  slowly  and  cautiously.  The  task  imposed  on  me  here  in 
ns  chaos  of  incendiary  elements  is  not  an  easy  one,  and  those  at  a dis- 
Juce,  who  cannot  understand  the  real  condition  of  affairs,  should  not 
hasty  m judging  of  my  conduct,  and,  above  all,  they  should  not  em- 
iTTass  me  by  unnecessary  interference.  This  I know  very  well  you 
not  do>  for  you  will  readily  appreciate  the  difficulties  of  my  posi- 
1 n.  I shall  obey  all  orders  sent  to  me,  but  I hope  the  War  Depart- 
jbnt  will  allow  me  a hearing  before  it  acts  hereafter  on  mere  ex-part  e 
* dements.  My  efforts  to  introduce  a system  of  order  and  economy" 
ju  to  ferret  out  frauds  will  very  naturally  create  opposition,  and  I 
| all  not  be  surprised  to  find  myself  an  object  of  very  bitter  abuse  in 
3 newspapers  and  on  the  floor  of  Congress.  This,  however,  will  not 
mbie  me  much,  so  long  as  I am  sustained  by  my  superiors  and  feel 
' it  I am  pursuing  the  right  course  of  conduct. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General 


29  r r — vol  VIII 


450 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap,  xvn 

[Indorsement  of  President  Lincoln.] 

December  27,  1861. 

An  excellent  letter;  though  1 am  sorry  General  Halleck  is  so  U 
favorably  impressed  with  General  Lane.  ^ 


Mai.  Gen, 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans.,  December  19,  1861 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Army : 

General:  I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  commurlJ 
tion,  “unofficial,”  dated  the  11th  instant;  and,  as  a main  part  of ^ J 
reply  thereto,  herewith  is  transmitted  a copy  of  the  letter  sent  to  u 
liv  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army  and  referred  to  in  your  letter.! 

' From  this  copy  you  will  perceive  that  the  instructions  as  to  the  pij 
posed  expedition^  against  Northeastern  Texas  and  to  secn^re  the  Indil 
territory  west  of  the  Arkansas  were  vague  in  the  extreme,  and  that  tl 
from  having  been  requested  to  “ indicate  the  necessary  force  and  meal 
tor  the  undertaking,”  with  a promise,  or  even  suggestion,  that  theij 
should  be  forthcoming  when  called  for,  I was  asked  by  General  T oinj 
“ what  troops  and  means  at  your  (my)  disposal  you  (I)  could  bring! 

" Ti,  Vliis  question  it  seemed  that  my  telegrain  stating  the 
ouaev  of  the  force  and  means  at  my  command  even  to  guard  Kam| 
against  an  organized  attack  was  an  abundant  and  proper  answj 
Your  letter  conveys  the  first  intimation  received  that  it  was  expect! 
of  me  then  to  state  what  additions  of  men  and  material  to  my  presJ 
force  would  be  sufficient  for  the  execution  of  the  services  named 
In  reference  to  that  portion  of  your  letter  in  which  jou  state  t 
the  step  of  placing  General  Halleck  in  command  of  the  Western  U 
partment  “was  taken  from  the  evident  necessity 
there  who  was  in  no  manner  connected,  for  or  against,  n itli  the 
; unale  state  of  affairs  previously  existing  in  that  department,  I mu 
protest  that  £ never  was,  in  the  sense  here  apparently  used,  either  i 
or  ao-ainst”  Major-General  Fremont;  nor  can  I admit  the  expedied 
of  a principle  which  would  practically  punish  an  officer  for ' ha^j 
truly! though  reluctantly,  answered  certain  questions  of  a Proie^j 
nature  put  to  him  by  the  Secretary  of  War  and  Adjutant-General 

thI  ^“assure  you,  however,  that  General  Haneck’s  appointincntj 

accepted  by  me  without  a murmur,  there  haying  been  in  that  caafl 
least  some  semblance  of  political  expediency  in  my  non 
the  successor  of  General  Fremont.  But  when .in  Kentucky -I 
Brigadier-General  Buell  placed  in  command  of  neail,\  100,090 
(as  "stated),  and  with  splendid  prospects  of  usefulness i to ,our _counj 
laid  open  before  him,  I could  not  but  ask  myse  w < ‘ 

mined  or  in  what  duty  failed  to  be  thus  overslaughed  by  an  offij 
whom  1 rank,  and  sent  to  command  an  immense  wildeiness  o 
partment  with  scarcely  3,000  troops  for  its  defense.  General  Sherm 
too  whom  you  should  know,  I find  in  an  important  command  in  Sol 
Carolina  and  Georgia.  In  relation  to  these  matters  I must  confess  t 
I was  hurt,  and  still  feel  that  my  treatment  has  not  been  in  accorda. 


See  Thomas  to  Hunter,  November  26,  p 379. 


JHM’.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


451 


vitli  the  established  usages  of  military  law.  I speak  frankly,  as  you 
»ee,  in  return  for  the  frankness  of  your  letter. 

Being  now  for  the  first  time  made  aware  of  what  is  expected  of  this 
lepartment,  I shall  lose  no  time  in  preparing  and  forwarding  exact 
stimates  of  the  force  that  will  be  necessary  for  the  proposed  expedi- 
ion ; and  at  present  may  say  in  rough  that  at  least  20,000  men  will  be 
lecessary,  in  addition  to  those  already  in  and  ordered  to  the  Depart  - 
aent ; and  as  the  nearest  point  in  Northeastern  Texas  is  440  miles 
rom  this  point  and  the  route  through  a country  entirely  destitute  of 
applies,  a large  transportation  train  will  be  absolutely  necessary. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Fremont  Hussars, 

Camp  Hallecl ;,  near  Rolla , Tfo.,  December  19,  1861. 
acting  Major-General  Asboth, 

Commanding  Fourth  Division  : 

| General  : In  obedience  to  the  order  contained  in  your  circular  (No. 
)*  received  this  day,  I beg  to  report  that  on  receipt  of  your  Order 
To.  23, * communicating  General  Orders,  No.  3,t  from  the  commanding 
eneral,  ordering  fugitive  slaves  to  be  excluded  from  the  lines,  1 caused 
11  negroes  in  my  camp  to  be  examined,  and  it  was  reported  to  me  that 
|iey  all  stoutly  asserted  that  they  were  free.  Since  that  time  a woman 
jtnployed  in  my  own  mess  as  cook  has  been  claimed  by  one  Captain 
folland  as  the  fugitive  slave  of  his  father-in-law.  In  compliance  with 
our  order  to  that  end,  which  he  produced,  she  was  given  up  to  him. 
ince  the  receipt  of  your  circular  of  to-day  I have  again  caused  an 
Uvestigation  to  be  thoroughly  made,  which  has  resulted  as  in  the  first 
| istance.  I beg  now,  general,  to  ask  for  your  instructions  in  the  matter, 
hese  negroes  all  claim  and  insist  that  they  are  free.  Some  of  them  1 
ave  no  question  are  so.  Others  I have  as  little  doubt  have  been 
aves,  but  no  one  is  here  to  prove  it,  and  I hesitate  to  take  so  serious 
responsibility  as  to  decide  arbitrarily  in  the  absence  of  any  direct 
ridence  that  they  are  such.  If  I turn  them  away  I inflict  great  hard- 
n'p  upon  them,  as  they  would  be  homeless  and  helpless.  Further- 
ore,  such  a course  wrould  occasion  much  personal  inconvenience  and 
ncere  regret  to  other  officers  no  less  than  to  myself.  These  people 
re  mainly  our  servants  and  we  can  get  no  others.  They  have  been 
nployed  in  this  capacity  for  some  time — long  enough  for  us  to  like 
iem  as  servants,  to  find  them  useful  and  trustworthy,  and  to  feel  an 
terest  in  their  welfare.  The  commanding  general,  in  his  letter  to 
jolonel  Blair,  as  published  in  the  Missouri  Democrat  of  the  16th 
stant,*  says,  in  explanation  of  General  Orders,  No.  3 : “ Unauthorized 
1‘rsons,  black  or  white',  free  or  slave,  must  be  kept  out  of  our  camps.” 
ae  negroes  in  my  camp  are  employed,  in  accordance  with  the  Army 
I emulations,  as  officers’  servants,  teamsters,  and  hospital  attendants, 
id,  with  the  exception  of  one  little  child,  are  such  as  we  are  author- 
ed to  have  in  the  camp.  It  seems  to  me  that  they  are  without  the 
I ile  of  the  order  and  the  intention  of  the  commanding  general,  and  1 
|(ist  that  I may  be  excused  for  awaiting  more  explicit  instructions 

* Not  found. 


t See  p.  370. 


452 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  xvii 


before  doing  what  may  be  an  extra-official  act,  at  which  my  privat 

recognize  the  fact  that  obedience  to  General  Orders,  No.  3,  is  a par 
of  mv  military  duty,  and  I shall  unflinchingly  comply  with  it,  m th 
consciousness  thatl  am  in  no  way  responsible  therefor;  but  I am  pe 
sonally  responsible  for  my  decision  when  it  is  to  affect  the  happrnS 

and  security  of  others.  . 

May  I ask  you,  general,  to  relievo  me  of  this  responsibility  by  givm 
me  your  formal  decision  at  your  earliest  convenience  . 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient^servant,  WAm^  ^ 

Major , Commanding  Fremont  Hussars, 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  20,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck  : _ 

Just  arrived  here.  Troops  much  embarrassed  with  nearly  -,01 
prisoners  and  great  quantity  of  captured  property.  Unless  otherwJ 
directed,  to  day  I will  direct  the  troops  to  reoccupy  their  position  I 
La  Mine. 


JNO.  POPE, 
igadier- General,  Commanding . I 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  I 
Saint  Lords,  Mo.,  December  20,  1861.1 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Sedalia,  Mo.: 

I congratulate  you  and  your  command  on  the  briliiant  success  I 
your  expedition.  I hope  it  will  prove  the  forerunner  of  still  gieatl 

snccess-  H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General,  f 


Orders, 


i Office  Pro.  Mar.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Mo 
No  16  ) Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  20,  1861. 

The  following  form  of  notice  is  hereby  ordered  to  be  used in  notif 
ing  the  friends  of  the  enemy  of  their  assessments  m aid  of  the  sufl  ri 
femilies  driven  by  the  rebels  from  Southwestern  Missouri,  pursuant 
Orders,  No.  24,  issued  from  department  headquarters. 


[Tnclosure.] 

You  will  therefore  pay  the  amount  so  assessed,  oi • its 
clothing*  provisions,  or  quarters,  to  me  within  five  days  attei  the  ser 
Softhisnotice  upon  you,  or’ in  default 

issued  against  your  property  lor  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  assess  < 
costs,  and  25  per  cent,  penalty  in  addition.  ^"^  ^iif^enoS 
your  assessment  in  clothing,  provisions, or  fluartm»,  J 8 . 

of  such  intention  to  this  office,  accompanying  the  sa me  with . wi  mve 
lory  and  description  of  the  articles  or  of  the  situation  and  value  of  ti 
quarters  tendered,  which  will  be  accepted  subject  t . PP 
of  the  same  by  me.  BERNARD  G.  FARRAR,  I 

Pro  vost-M  a rsha  l-  Genet  al. 


at.  XYIH.3 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


453 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December'  21, 1861. 
rig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Sedalia , Mo. : 

Send  prisoners  and  captured  arms  to  this  city ; captured  property  to 
^ turned  over  to  proper  department;  troops  to  occupy  former  posi 
ms ; will  send  you  additional  cavalry.  Lookout  sharp  for  a move 
ent  by  Price ; he  is  prettv  certain  to  make  one. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Sedalia,  Mo.,  December  21,  1861. 

ajor-General  Halleck  : 

Prisoners  and  arms  (90)  down  to-morrow.  I found  among  the  pos- 
ters, after  telegraphing  you,  the  notorious  Colonel  Magoffin,  who  has 
fcely  violated  his  parole.  He  was  conspicuous  in  the  skirmish.  I send 
m,  under  charge  of  the  guard,  in  close  confinement.  Col.  J.  C.  Davis 
►es  in  charge.  His  conduct  was  distinguished^  and  will  be  properly 
»ticed  in  my  report.  I hope  he  will  not  be  detained  in  Saint  Louis,  as 
\ is  much  needed  here. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Com  man  ding. 


Headquarters  Tenth  Missouri  Volunteers, 

Hermann , Mo.,  December  21, 1861. 

ajor-General  Halleck  : 

We  have  information  that  several  parties  of  secessionists  are  gather- 
g and  committing  depredations  in  Montgomery  County,  within  10 
les  of  us.  Shall  I cross  the  river  to-night  with  100  of  my  command 
; (l  capture  or  disperse  them  ? I think  good  may  be  done  by  it. 

GEO.  B.  TODD, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  21,  1861. 

61.  Georoe  E.  Todd,  Hermann,  Mo. : 

Send  strong  force  to  cross  in  the  direction  of  Warren  ton.  Arrest  all 
cessionists  and  bridge-burners. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , III.,  December  21,  1861. 

91.  Kichard  J.  Oolesby, 

Commanding  Bird's  Point , Mo. : 

Understanding  that  a heavy  trade  is  being  carried  on  between  points 
Yth  of  Bird’s  Point  and  Charleston,  Mo.,  and  south  by  means  of 
»ms,  I am  desirous  of  breaking  it  up.  To  this  end  you  will  send  to- 
>rrow  or  Monday  a sufficient  force,  say  two  squadrons  of  cavalry,  un 
r Lieutenant-Colonel  Prince,  to  the  neighborhood  of  Belmont,  with 
sections  to  proceed  back  on  the  main  traveled  road  towards  Charles- 


454 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  IvANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI] 


ton,  taking  possession  of  all  teams  loaded  with  produce  or  goods  d< 
tined  for  the  South  and  send  them  back  to  Birds  Point.  The  obje 
of  this  expedition,  it  is  hardly  necessary  for  me  to  inform  you,  shoulj 

be  kept  entirely  secret.  g GRANT 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . I 


Palmyra,  Mo.,  December  21,  1861. 1 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri : 

Track  torn  up  on  North  Missouri  Railroad  near  Hudson.  Amoui 
of  damage  not  yet  ascertained.  Two  companies  of  cavalry  sent  dow| 
the  road  to  arrest  perpetrators. 


R PRF/NTTISS. 


War  Department, 
Washington , December  21,  1861.1 

Hon.  Hannibal  Hamlin, 

President  of  the  Senate : 

Sir:  In  answer  to  a resolution  of  the  Senate  of  the  17th  instant  I 
have  the  honor  to  inclose  to  you  a report  of  the  Adjutant-General,  suw 
mitting  a copy  of  a plan,  dated  Executive  Mansion,  Washington  S 
vember  5,  1861,  with  a copy  of  the  Presidents  mdorsement,  dated  M 
vember  6,  1861,  and  a copy  of  a letter  to  Charles  Gibson,  dated  W as 
ington,  November  7,  1861,  from  Governor  Gamble.  These  documenj 
furnish  all  the  information  on  file  in  this  Department  in  lelation 
raising  and  employing  volunteer  militia  in  the  State  of  Missouri. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient^ervant,  ^ 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War, I 


[Inclosures. 


Washington,  November  7,  1861.  | 

Charles  Gibson,  Esq.: 

Sir  • I have  made  an  arrangement  with  the  President  tor  armini 
equipping,  clothing,  subsisting,  transporting,  and  paying  troops  to  t 
raised  in  Missouri  as  Missouri  State  Militia,  and  a geneial  oid< er  wj 
issue  to  the  different  departments  of  the  United  States  ser\ice  to  card 
the  arrangement  into  effect.  I appoint  you  to  ac^s  agent  of  the  SU 
to  make  arrangements  with  the  officers  of  the  United  States 
different  departments  of  the  military  service  to  carry  o^  Bie  a re^ 
ment  with  all  possible  dispatch,  as  the  safety  of  the  State  and  ti 
interest  of  the  United  States  require  the  utmost  diligence  m carrying 
into  effect. 

Your  obedient  servant,  H R GAMBLE, 

^ Governor  of  Missouri. 


Executive  Mansion,  ;j 
Washington , November  5,  1861. 

The  Governor of  the  State  of  Missouri,  acting  under  the  direction 
the  Convention  of  that  State,  proposes  to  the  Government  of  the  Unw 


• JAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


455 


tates  that  he  will  raise  a military  force,  to*se^evfiJlft$  JpetState  as 
tate  militia  during  the  war  there,  to  co-operate  with  the  troops  in  the 
en  ice  of  the  United  States  in  repelling  .the  i a v asiop  Of  the  Sta  te  and 
oppressing  rebellion  therein  ; the  said "S'tate Mjlifih, ip  be.  embodied 
nd  to  be  held  in  the  camp  and  in  the  field,  drilled,  disciplined,  and 
overned  according  to  the  Army  Regulations  Ted  subject  tQ  thd  Articles 
f War ; the  said  State  Militia  not  to  be  ordered l * b f th e State  except 
ir  the  immediate  defense  of  the  State  of  Missouri,  but  to  co-operate 
rith  the  troops  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  in  military  opera - 
ions  within  the  State  or  necessary  to  its  defense,  and  when  officers  of 
lie  State  Militia  act  with  officers  in  the  service  of  the  United  States 
f the  same  grade  the  officers  of  the  United  States  service  shall  com- 
land  the  combined  force ; the  State  Militia  to  be  armed,  equipped, 
lotlied,  subsisted,  transported,  and  paid  by  the  United  States  during 
uch  time  as  they  shall  be  actually  engaged  as  an  embodied  military 
3rce  in  service  in  accordance  with  Regulations  of  the  United  States 
mny  or  general  orders  as  issued  from  time  to  time. 

In  order  that  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  may  not  be  burdened 
ith  the  pay  of  unnecessary  officers,  the  Governor  proposes  that,  although 
lie  State  law  requires  him  to  appoint  upon  the  general  staff*  an  adjutant- 
eneral,  a commissary-general,  an  inspector- general,  a quartermaster- 
eneral,  a paymaster-general,  and  a surgeon-general,  each  with  the 
jank  of  colonel  of  cavalry,  yet  he  proposes  that  the  Government  of  the 
Tnited  States  pay  only  the  adjutant-general,  the  quartermaster-general, 
nd  inspector-general,  their  services  being  necessary  in  the  relations 
r hich  would  exist  between  the  State  Militia  and  theUnited  States.  The 
governor  further  proposes  that,  while  he  is  allowed  by  the  State  law  to 
ppoint  aides-de-camp  to  the  Governor  at  his  discretion,  with  the  rank 
f colonel,  three  only  shall  be  reported  to  the  United  States  for  pav- 
lent.  He  also  proposes  that  the  State  Militia  shall  be  commanded  by 
, single  major-general  and  by  such  number  of  brigadier- generals  as 
hall  allow  one  for  a brigade  of  not  less  than  four  regiments,  and  that 

0 greater  number  of  staff*  officers  shall  be  appointed  for  regimental, 
rigade,  and  division  duties  than  is  provided  for  in  the  act  of  Congress 
f the  22d  July,  1861,  and  that  whatever  be  the  rank  of  such  officers  as 
xed  by  the  law  of  the  State  the  compensation  that  they  shall  receive 
rom  the  United  States  shall  only  be  that  which  belongs  to  the  rank 
iven  by  said  act  of  Congress  to  officers  in  the  United  States  service 
►erforming  the  same  duties. 

The  field  officers  of  a regiment  in  the  State  Militia  are  1 colonel,  1 
ieutenant-colonel,  and  1 major,  and  the  company  officers  are  a captain, 
first  lieutenant,  and  a second  lieutenant. 

The  Governor  proposes  that,  as  the  money  to  be  disbursed  is  the  money 

1 the  United  States,  such  staff  officers  in  the  service  of  the  United 
'fates  as  may  be  necessary  to  act  as  disbursing  officers  for  the  State 
lilitia  shall  be  assigned  by  the  War  Department  for  that  duty;  or,  if 
uch  cannot  be  spared  from  their  present  duty,  he  will  appoint  such 
arsons  disbursing  officers  for  the  State  Militia  as  the  President  of  the 
Jmted  States  may  designate.  Such  regulations  as  may  be  required,  in 
he  judgment  of  the  President,  to  insure  regularity  of  returns  and  to 
protect  the  United  States  from  any  fraudulent  practices,  shall  be  ob- 
erved  and  obeyed  by  all  in  office  in  the  State  Militia. 

The  above  propositions  are  accepted  on  the  part  of  the  United  States, 
nd  the  Secretary  of  War  is  directed  to  make  the  necessary  orders  upon 
he  Ordnance,  Quartermaster,  Commissary,  Pay,  and  Medical  Depart  - 
nents  to  carry  this  agreement  into  effect.  Me  will  cause  the  necessary 


456  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XWin 

staff  officers'  iiV  tbe  United  States  service  to  be  detailed  for  duty  in  cor 
neetion  witlr  the  Mikouri  State  Militia,  and  will  order  them  to  make  th 
necessary  ^pro  vision  f iij  their  respective  offices  for  fulfilling  this  agree 
ment,  All  re^n  isitit'hs  upon  the  different  officers  of  the  United  State 
underYFs* agreement  to  be  made  in  substance  in  the  same  mode  forth 
Missouri  State  Militia  as  similar  requisitions  are  im.  de  for  troops  in  th 
service  of  the  United  States,  and  the  Secretary  of  \\  ar  will  cause  an 
additional  regulations  that  may  be  necessary  to  insure  regularity  an 
economy  in  carrying  this  agreement  into  effect  to  be  adopted  and  con 
municated  to  the  Governor  of  Missouri  for  the  government  of  th 
Missouri  State  Militia. 

November  0,  1861. 

This  plan,  approved  with  the  modification  that  the  Governor  stipi 
lates  that  when  he  commissions  a major-general  of  militia  it  shall  be  th 
same  person  at  the  time  in  command  of  the  United  States  Departmer 
of  the  West,  and  in  case  the  United  States  shall  change  such  con 
mander  of  the  department,  he,  the  Governor,  > ill  revoke  the  State  coal 
mission  given  to  the  person  relieved,  and  give  one  to  the  person  sun 
stituted  to  the  United  States  command  of  said  department, 

A.  LINCOLN. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  Kansas, 

No.  2,  f Fort  Leavenworth , December  21  [2],  1861.  I 

I.  Brigadier-General  Denver,  having  reported  for  duty,  is  assigned  t| 
the  command  of  all  the  troops  within  the  State  of  Kansas.  He  wi| 
visit  the  different  commands,  make  a complete  inspection  of  each,  ftnl 
report  their  condition  to  department  headquarters. 

******* 


By  order  of  Mai  or- General  Hunter : 

EDWARD  W.  SMITH, 
Lieut.,  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  _ , 
Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  22,  1861. 

Cob  Georoe  R.  Todd,  Commanding  at  Hermann,  Mo. : 

Send  additional  forces  in  direction  of  Warrenton  to  carry  out  it 


sirnctions  given  yesterday. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  22,  1861. 

Col.  Georoe  R.  Todd.  Hermann,  Mo.: 

Use  the  means  at  hand  at  Hermann.  Do  not  wait  for  ferry-boa 
from  Jefferson  City.  General  McKean  has  been  ordered  to  let  yo 
know  if  he  has  one  to  spare  j if  so,  he  will  send  it.  Be  prompt  in  t- 
execution  of  the  instructions  sent  yon. 

Bv  order  of  Major-General  H.  W.  Halleek: 

SCHUYLER  HAMILTON, 

Brigadier- Genet  at. 


kt.  XVIII.  J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


457 


Headquarters  District  Southeast  Missouri, 

Cairo , /?/.,  December  22,  1861. 
Mieral  John  A.  McClernand,  Commanding , Cairo,  III.: 

A trade  being  carried  on  between  Jonesborough  and  the  Mississippi 
ver,  thence  with  the  Southern  Army  by  the  way  of  Neely’s  Land- 
ry I want  Captain  Stewart’s  company  to  go  to  the  neighborhood  of 
e mouth  of  Big  Muddy  and,  if  practicable,  break  up  the  traffic, 
lere  is  also  a number  of  armed  desperadoes  in  that  vicinity  that  I 
»pe  may  be  broken  up.  The  company  will  go  on  the  steamer  Ment- 
is, taking  with  them  ten  days’  rations.  Forage  for  their  horses  can 
procured  where  they  encamp,  giving  proper  vouchers,  to  be  settled 
the  quartermaster  at  this  place.  1 Would  like  the  company  to  go 
day,  if  practicable ; if  not,  early  to-morrow.  I will  see  Captain 
jewart  before  he  starts,  and  give  him  all  the  information  in  my  pos- 
ition on  the  subject. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  December  22,  1861. 
ig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.: 

Protect  North  Missouri  Railroad,  and  capture  if  possible  those  en 
I ged  in  its  destruction.  You  will  send  your  disposable  force  across 
ie  river  in  the  direction  of  Fulton  to  break  up  an  encampment  and 
jpture  all  parties  and  squads  moving  west.  A portion  of  Merrill’s 
iirse  will  be  sent  to  Jefferson  City  by  special  train.  [George]  A., 
illiams’  company  of  First  Infantry  will  be  halted  at  Jefferson  City, 
d for  the  present  placed  under  your  orders. 

H.  W.  IIALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Rolla,  Mo.,  December  22.  1861. 

bneral  Halleck, 

Major-General , Department  of  the  Missouri,  Saint  Louis , Mo, : 
General:  Citizens  have  just  arrived  from  Webster  County  who 
ionn  me  that  the  rebels  are  collecting  hogs  and  cattle,  which  they 
3 driving  towards  Arkansas.  Some  of  the  droves  go  in  the  direction 
Bates ville,  Ark.,  others  in  the  direction  of  Forsyth,  Taney  County, 
\ ssouri.  It  is  rumored  the  rebels  are  collecting  pork,  hogs,  and  cattle 
White  River,  near  the  Arkansas  line,  making  that  point  a depot, 
e rebels  are  also  robbing  dwelling-houses  of  bed-clothing  and  wear 
i,r  apparel.  Such  is  the  information  from  Laclede,  Wright,  Dallas, 

' d Webster  Counties. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

JNO.  S.  PHELPS. 


Otterville,  Mo.,  December  22,  1861. 
yor-General  Halleck,  Department  of  Missouri: 
froops  will  occupy  their  former  positions  to-day. 

‘ JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


458 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


Warrenton,  Mo.,  December  23,  1861 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

I arrived  with  my  command,  250  men,  yesterday  morning.  Am 
pairing  bridge  above  here.  Track  much  injured  at  Mexico  Station  a 


cars  a>u  ucnouuig  -•* ■ — o — - ~ \ 

to  be  moving  to  Warrenton  and  Troy  to  attack  our  force.  Send 


jo  UHUwC  cl  I/O  » o nci  vi  ' — j 

at  Wellsburg  burned.  A large  force  at  Danville,  1,500,  report 


airy  with  re-enforcements.  Bridge  above  Mexico  burned.  1 ay  mas 

Flynn  here:  gives  information  as  to  the  road;  says  that  firing  i 

heard  vesterday  in  the  direction  of  Danville  from  Florence, 
nearuyesuu  y KREKEL,  Mam 


Palmyra,  Mo.,  December  23,  1861 

Major-General  Halleck: 

On  Saturday  I ordered  Colonel  Bishop  to  send  forward  detaclime 
of  men  to  punish  parties  that  tore  up  the  track  of  the  North  Misso 
Railroad.  They  overtook  them,  killed  10,  took  17  prisoners,  and  c. 
lured  30  horses.  Five  of  our  men  slightly  wounded. 

B.  M.  PRENTISS, 

Brigadier- General 


Otterville,  Mo.,  December  23,  186l| 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Price  withdrew  Rains’  division  from  north  side  of  Osage  on  Fridj 
Moved  whole  camp  8 miles  south  up  Sac  River.  None  of  his  tori 

now  north  of  Osage.  This  news  is  up  to  Friday  last. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding ; 


Jefferson  City,  Mo., 

December  23,  186i| 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Maior  Caldwell  came  from  Fulton  this  morning  with  some  powd 
the  rebel  band  having  been  dispersed.  I hear  of  others  over  the  riM 
and  design  sending  his  cavalry  battalion  and  five  companies  ol  1 
Eleventh  Iowa  Volunteers  to  Fulton  to-morrow  morning.  I he  ice  4 
interfered  to-day.  I do  this  under  your  former  instructions.  I his  M 
leave  but  eight ‘companies  of  infantry  here,  three  of  cavalry  (partia 
armed),  and  two  of  artillery,  without  guns.  In  view  of  anticipa 
troubles  on  this,  have  you  any  new  instructions  m regard  to  sendi 
troops  over  the  river  1 The  crossing  will  soon  be  uncertain. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Bonis,  Mo.,  December  23,  186 1 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Otterville,  Mo.: 

Will  send  cavalry  as  soon  as  I get  arms.  Sent  you  a battalion 
week  from  Jefferson  City.  Another  battalion  intended  for  you  m 
stop  temporarily  at  Jefferson  City  to  operate  on  Fulton.  Gbligoo 
send  another  battalion  of  horses  to  Warrenton  to  catch  bridge- bur 


ap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


459 


ishop  just  had  a fight  on  the  railroad  between  Eenick  and  Hudsons 
ty.  Killed  10,  took  17  prisoners,  and  captured  30  horses.  Our  loss* 
wounded. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  23,  1861. 
ig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss,  Palmyra , Mo.  : 

You  will  immediately  repair  to  North  Missouri  Eailroad  and  take 
mmand  of  forces  there.  Our  troops  are  moving  from  Jefferson  City,, 
ermann,  Warrenton,  and  Troy  against  bridge-burners.  Kill  or  cap 
re  them.  Keep  me  advised  of  your  movements  and  force. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  23,  1861. 

eut.  Col.  Frank  J.  Herron, 

Commanding  at  Pacific  City , Mo.  : 

Look  out  for  bridge-burners.  It  is  reported  that  concerted  attempts 
11  be  made  to  destroy  railroads  and  telegraph  lines.  Shoot  down 
iery  one  making  the  attempt. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 

[A  like  telegram  was  sent  to  the  following  places  : Commanding 
icer  at  Sedalia,  Otterville,  Syracuse,  Tipton,  Jefferson  City,  Hermann, 
)lla,  Sulphur  Springs,  Mineral  Point,  Ironton,  Chillicothe,  Cameron* 
(1  Saint  Joseph.] 


Otterville,  December  23,  1861. 

ijor-General  Halleck  : 

The  cavalry  force  sent  from  Warrensburg  to  Lexington  just  returned  , 
irned  both  steam  ferry-boats  and  foundery  at  that  place.  Took  2 cap> 
ins,  1 lieutenant,  and  4 men,  horses,  &c. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


•ecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  87.  j Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  23,  1861. 

L Brig.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  is  hereby  assigned 
the  command  of  the  camp  of  instruction  and  post  at  Benton  Bar- 
icks.  He  will  have  every  armed  regiment  and  company  in  his  com- 
md  ready  for  service  at  a moment’s  warning,  and  will  notify  all  con- 
wned  that  when  marching  orders  are  received  it  is  expected  that  they 
11  be  instantly  obeyed.  No  excuses  for  delay  will  be  admitted.  Gen- 
iil  Sherman  will^immediately  report  to  these  headquarters  what  rcgi- 
Ants  and  companies  at  Benton  Barracks  are  ready  for  the  field. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


460 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  tc UAP-  xvn 


Palmyra,  Mo.,  December  24, 1861. 

General  Halleck  : 

I leave  here  with  400  cavalry  for  Paris  to-morrow ; from  thence 
Sturgeon.  Two  companies  will  leave  Hudson  for  Eemck  and  will  cor 
municate  with  me.  Snow  6 inches  deep.  Secessionists  must  feed  * 

®n  this  trip.  B M PKENTISS 


Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  December  24,  1861. 
Major-General  Halleck: 

1 have  no  troops  over  the  river  now.  Will  have  tour  companies  . 
cavalry  and  five  of  infantry  by  to-morrow  morning.  The  ice  has  pr 
vented  crossing  since  Major  Caldwell  returned  yesterday  morning  wit 

?owder'  THOS.  J.  McKEAN, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters, 
Hermann , Mo.,  December  24,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck,  . . 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri  : 

Colonel  Todd  effected  a crossing  with  the  last  of  his  men  about! 
o’clock  this  morning.  He  has  between  700  and  800  men  now  on  tH 
way  to  Warrenton,  but  they  cannot  have  rcached^thero^yct.^^ 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Post.  I 


Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  December  24,  1861. 
Major-General  Halleck: 

T cannot  get  any  troops  across  the  river  ytrton  ^McKEAN,  'U°'  | 

Brigadier-  General. ! 


Headquarters  Department  oe  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  24,  1801. 

Brigadier-General  Pope , Otterville,  Mo.: 

Have  detachment  of  1,000  men  ready  to  move  to  Jf  C^i 

required.  Three  thousand  insurgents  reported  in  ai  ms  in  Montgomej 

Cwlnty-  H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General .1 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mmsouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  24,  1861  • 

Brigadier-General  Sigel,  Bolla , Mo. : . . . 

You  will  assume  command  of  all  the  troops  at  Kolia  and  vicimt 
including  the  Fourth  Division.  H w HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


XV.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


461 


Otterville,  Mo.,  December  24,  1861. 

ajor-General  Halleck  : 

My  spies  just  in.  Price  has  retreated  to  Humansville  with  his  whole 
rce.  Part  of  his  command  going  farther  still.  Will  have  full  infor- 
ation  to-night  or  to-morrow. 

JKO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.}  December  25,  1861. 
tigadier-General  Sigel,  Rolla , Mo.  ; 

Get  all  your  troops  ready  for  the  field.  The  cavalry  as  soon  as  pos- 

1 Die. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  U.  S.  Forces, 

Rolla , ifo.,  December  25,  1861. 

ajor-General  Halleck: 

I have  received  your  dispatch  dated  25th,  and  will  make  the  neces- 
ry  preparations. 

F.  SIGEL, 

Brigadier-  Genera  l , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  25,  1861. 
jj.  A.  Krekel,  Warrenton , Mo. : 

Two  pieces  of  artillery  and  a regiment  of  infantry  will  be  sent  up  the 
id  to-day.  There  is  a regiment  of  infantry  and  squadron  of  horse 
; Fulton.  Eight  hundred  men  from  Hermann  should  join  you  this 

i >rning. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Warrenton,  Mo.,  December  25,  1861. 

bneral  Halleck: 

General  Henderson  and  myself  will  move  up  the  railroad,  so  as  to 
jve  possession  of  it  up  to  Wellsville  by  Friday  evening.  We  have 
jt  heard  from  the  troops  that  crossed  at  Hermann  and  other  points, 
e need  200  or  300  infantry,  to  protect  the  road  as  we  pass  on.  Four 
I ndred  cavalry  have  arrived. 

A.  KBEKEL, 
Major , Commanding. 


Otteryille,  Mo.,  December  25,  1861. 

I qor- General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Price  in  full  retreat  for  Arkansas;  says  it  is  by  order  from  Richmond, 
based  Humansville  on  Saturday. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


462 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XYI 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  25,  1861, 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman, 

Benton  Barracks , Mo. : 

Have  tlie  battery  at  the  North  Missouri  Railroad  depot  at  3 o’clo 
this  afternoon  and  the  Iowa  regiment  at  the  same  place  at  8 o’clo 


to-morrow  morning. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  25,  18611 

Brigadier-General  Schofield  : 

General:  You  will  immediately  repair  to  Warren  ton,  on  the  Non 
Missouri  Railroad,  and  take  command  of  the  troops  in  that  vicinil 
One  regiment  of  infantry  and  two  companies  of  cavalry  crossed  I 
Jefferson  City  last  night  and  will  be  at  Fulton  to-night.  Seven  v 
eight  hundred  men  crossed  at  Hermann,  and  ought  to  be  at  Warren 
burg  to-day.  The  enemy  is  supposed  to  be  at  or  near  the  railrol 
between  Warrenton  and  Renick.  Birge’s  Sharpshooters,  about  81 
ought  to  be  on  the  road  somewhere  about  Renick  and  Centralia,  G(| 
oral  Prentiss  is  moving  south  by  Paris  with  a body  of  cavalry  al 
another  body  of  cavalry  is  coming  south  from  Hudson  City.  Genel 
Henderson,  with  State  troops,  is  supposed  to  be  in  Lincoln  Counj 
It  is  hoped  that  most  of  the  bridge-burners  maybe  surrounded  a] 
captured.  If  possible,  keep  between  them  and  the  Missouri  Rivil 
As  soon  as  General  Prentiss  arrives  in  your  vicinity  he  will  have  tj 
general  command,  in  virtue  of  his  rank.  Keep  me  advised  by  telegrai 
of  everything,  so  that  I mav  direct  the  movements  of  other  troops! 

co-operation.  ' jj  w.  HALLECfc, 

Major-General 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  92.  ) Saint  Louis , December  25,  18611 

******  * 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Soui 
western  District  of  Missouri,  including  the  country  south  of  the  OsaJ 
and  west  of  the  Meramec  River. 

******* 

Bv  order  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

J J.  C.  KELTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.  : 

General:  My  telegrams  will  have  informed  you  of  the  success 
General  Pope’s  expedition  to  cut  off  the  forces  moving  from  Lexiu 
ton,  Waverly,  &c.,  to  join  Price.  It  is  now  pretty  well  ascertain 


at.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


463 


(at  these  forces  numbered  about  5,000.  Had  the  expedition  moved 
reive  hours  sooner  it  would  probably  have  caught  the  whole.  Gen- 
al  Pope  was  held  in  readiness  some  forty-eight  hours,  but  the  gen- 
al  commanding  north  of  the  river  failed  to  keep  me  informed  of  his 
ovements.  The  result,  however,  is  satisfactory,  as  the  enemy  was 
•mpletely  broken  up  and  deprived  of  most  of  his  supplies. 

Recent  events  have  proved  that  the  information  received  soon  after 
assumed  the  command,  that  an  insurrection  of  some  12,000  or  15,000 
med  men  had  been  organized  north  of  the  Missouri  River,  was  cor- 
ct.  The  two  expeditions  sent  from  Saint  Joseph  and  Jefferson  City 
rough  the  river  counties  broke  up  a part  of  this  organization  and 
reed  those  who  had  already  taken  arms  to  move  south,  where  they 
ere  captured  and  scattered  by  Pope’s  forces.  The  insurrection  in 
ncoln,  Pike,  Ralls,  Monroe,  and  Adrian  Counties  broke  out  before 
ey  heard  of  the  capture  of  the  rebels  at  Shawnee  Mound  and  Mil- 
l'd. The  burning  of  the  railroad  bridges  and  destruction  of  the  tele- 
aph  lines  formed  a part  of  the  plan.  I had  anticipated  this,  and 
rected  General  Prentiss  to  have  the  railroad  bridges  well  guarded 
‘fore  he  went  to  Saint  Joseph.  These  orders  were  probably  very  im- 
■rfectly  executed.  Had  I moved  General  Pope’s  command  at  Sedalia 
rainst  Price  before  partially  breaking  up  these  insurrectionary  organ i- 
tions  1 should  have  had  some  15,000  insurgents  in  his  rear,  without 
e means  of  re-enforcing  him,  on  account  of  the  destruction  of  the 
ilroads  and  telegraphs.  As  it  is,  the  insurrection  is  pretty  well 
ushed  out ; the  injuries  to  the  roads  will  not  materially  affect  our 
ilitary  operations,  and  Price’s  army  is  completely  cut  off  from  all 
>pes  of  re-enforcements  or  supplies. *”  He  is  believed  to  be  still  in  the 
cinity  of  Osceola,  in  such  a position  that  I cannot  well  reach  him  or 
>t  in  his  rear,  as  he  is  nearer  to  the  Arkansas  line  than  I am,  and  even 
an  I am  to  him.  I am  satisfied  that  he  will  retreat  the  moment  I 
ake  a move,  and  as  a majority  of  the  people  are  secessionists,  he  is 
Pt  fully  advised  of  everything  I do.  It  is  barely  possible  that  I 
| ay  throw  a large  cavalry  force  in  his  rear  and  flank  so  as  to  greatly 
ibarrass  his  retreat,  but  unfortunately  our  cavalry  is  but  half  armed, 
jim  waiting  most  impatiently  for  the  11,000  arms  you  promised,  hoping 
at  they  may  partly  supply  the  wants  of  the  cavalry  arm.  The  forces 
Rolla  are  ready,  and  will  move  the  moment  that  arms  are  received, 
ice’s  army  will  certainly  be  driven  out  of  the  State,  and  possibly, 
ough  not  very  probably,  a portion  of  it  may  be  captured. 

These  bridge  burnings  are  the  most  annoying  features  of  the  war. 
iey  are  effected  by  small  parties  of  mounted  men,  disguised  as  farm- 
s' but  well  armed.  They  overpower  or  overawe  the  guards,  set  fire 
the  bridges,  and  escape  before  a force  can  be  collected  against  them, 
samples  of  severe  punishment  are  the  only  remedies.  I shall  carry 
t in  this  respect  my  General  Orders,  NTo.  32,  inclosed  herewith. 

It  I receive  arms  in  time  to  carry  out  my  present  plans  in  Missouri 
Jiink  I shall  be  able  to  strongly  re-enforce  Cairo  and  Paducah  for 
terior  operations  by  the  early  part  of  February. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 

[Tnclosurc.] 

eneral  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

32.  \ Saint  Louis , December  22,  1861. 

I.  insurgent  rebels  scattered  through  the  northern  counties  of  this 
ate,  which  are  occupied  by  our  troops,  under  the  guise  of  peaceful 

■ 


464 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK., 


KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [CaAi*.  XT m 


citizens,  have  resumed  their  occupation  of  burning  bridges  and  destroy 
iiig  railroads  and  telegraph  wires.  These  men  are  guilty  of  the  highes 
erime  known  to  the  code  of  war  and  the  punishment  is  death.  An 
one  caught  in  the  act  will  be  immediately  shot,  and  any  one  accused  < 
this  crime  will  be  arrested  and  placed  in  close  confinement  until  hi 
case  can  be  examined  by  a military  commission,  and,  if  found  guilt; 

he  also  will  suffer  death.  , 

XJ.  Where  injuries  are  done  to  railroads  or  telegraph  lines  th 
commanding  officer  of  the  nearest  post  will  immediately  impress  int 
service,  for  repairing  damages,  the  slaves  of  all  secessionists  in  th 
vicinitv,  and,  if  necessary,  the  secessionists  themselves  and  their  pro] 
ertv.  Any  pretended  Union  man  having  information  of  lntende 
attempts  to  destroy  such  roads  and  lines  or  of  the  guilty  parties,  wn 
does  not  communicate  such  intention  to  the  proper  authorities,  an 
give  aid  and  assistance  in  arresting  and  punishing  them,  will  l 
regarded  as  particeps  criminis , and  treated  accordingly  . 

Ill  Hereafter  the  towns  and  counties  in  which  such  destruction  < 
public  property  takes  place  will  be  made  to  pay  tlie  expenses  ot  a 
repairs,  unless  it  be  shown  that  the  people  of  such  towns  or  count* 
could  not  have  prevented  it  on  account  of  the  superior  force  of  tli 


enemy. 

By  order  of  Major-General 


Halleck : 


J.  0.  KELTOK, 
Assistant  A djutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Camp  of  Instruction, 

December  26,  1861. 


Capt,  J.  C.  Keeton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General , Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Seventh  Iowa,  Lieutenan 
Colonel  Parrott  commanding,  can  put  into  the  field  about  8. >0  we 
armed  and  equipped  men,  and  that  the  Thirteenth  Missouri,  Col.  C.  - 
Wright  reports  for  duty  in  the  field  465  men,  armed  with  Austria 
muskets.  There  are  already  two  detachments  absent  from  their  reg 
ments  and  other  disorganizing  causes,  of  which  I inclose  their  colonel 
report,  but  I have  notified  him  that  the  generaPs  orders  arc  he  mat 
hold  his  men  ready  for  immediate  service.  The  two  companies  oi  tl 
Third  Missouri,  Capt.  Joseph  Indest  commanding,  have  43  rifled  muj 
kets  and  69  smooth-bore  muskets,  and  might  be  used  for  guard  to  I 
bridge  or  like  purpose.  The  two  companies  of  the  Forty-third  lllinoi 
Capt.  Joseph  Stiffin,  95  men,  are  armed  with  foreign  muskets,  au 
might  also  be  used  for  a guard.  The  above  are  the  only  bodies  \ 
armed  infantry  at  Benton  Barracks.  Of  the  cavalry,  the  First  lowj 
Colonel  Warren— aggregates  present  for  duty,  386— is  well  equippc 
except  in  pistols  and  carbines.  They  could  put  m the  held  the  abo> 
number  of  men,  of  which  200  would  have  Colt’s  pistols.  The  Thfi 
Iowa  Cavalry,  Col.  C.  Bussey  commanding— aggregate  present  fl 
duty,  655— is  also  armed  with  sabers,  and  has  340  Colt  s revolvei 
All  other  cavalry  without  fire-arms. 

Fletcher’s  battery  of  artillery  is  composed  of  four  smooth  6-pouBj 
guns  and  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  with  horses,  harness,  and  uiumui 
tion,  but  none  have  been  hitched  up.  I will  cause  it  to  be  pus  lied 
drill.  The  men  have  no  swords  or  pistols,  but  these  are  not  essento* 


ap.  XVOT.] 


465 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

tvo  guns  of  Spoor’s  battery  remain  here,  and  will  soon  be  ready.  The 
innesota  battery  has  149  men,  but  no  guns,  horses,  or  anything  in 
e way  of  equipment.  There  are  two  batteries  attached  to  the  Sec- 
id  and  Third  Michigan  Cavalry  which  have  not  yet  been  harnessed 
>,  but  shall  have  immediate  attention.  Of  the  unarmed  regiments, 
e two  regiments  of  Michigan  cavalry  have  fine  material — men  and 
>rses ; also  Curtis’  Horse  and  the  Second  Iowa.  Ask  the  general  to 
ve  as  long  notice  as  possible  when  he  orders  away  any  regiment  or 
itachment,  for  these  men  are  very  inexperienced,  and  say  they  can 
art  at  a given  time,  when  they  cannot. 

I am,  &c., 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861. 
meral  Asboth,  Bolla , Mo. : 

General  : It  would  seem,  from  the  report  of  Major  Waring  to  you 
iferred  to  these  headquarters),  that  he  had,  in  compliance  with  your 
fractions.  delivered  to  a Captain  Holland  a fugitive  in  his  camp, 
timed  by  Captain  Holland  as  the  property  of  his  father-in-law.  This 
contrary  to  the  intent  of  General  Orders,  No.  3.  The  object  of  these 
lers  is  to  prevent  any  person  in  the  Army  from  acting  in  the  capacity 
negro-catcher  or  negro -stealer.  The  relation  between  the  slave  and 
> master  or  pretended  master  is  not  a matter  to  be  determined  by 
litary  officers,  except  in  the  single  case  provided  for  by  Congress, 
is  matter  in  all  other  cases  must  be  decided  by  the  civil  authorities, 
le  object  in  keeping  fugitive  slaves  out  of  our  camp  is  to  keep  clear 
all  such  questions.  Masters  or  pretended  masters  must  establish 
i rights  of  property  to  the  negroes  as  best  they  may  without  our 
^stance  or  interference,  except  where  the  law  authorizes  such  inter  - 
ence.  Orders,  No.  3,  do  not  apply  to  the  authorized  private  servants 
officers  nor  the  negroes  employed  by  proper  authority  in  the  camps, 
ipplies  only  to  fugitive  slaves.  The  prohibition  to  admit  them  within 
r lines  does  not  prevent  the  exercise  of  all  proper  offices  of  humanity 
giving  them  food  and  clothing  outside  where  such  offices  are  neces- 
7 to  prevent  suffering. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 

— 

Palmyra,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861. 

pt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Gener al : 

Jhariton  Bridge,  two  span,  150  feet  each,  Stockton  and  Collas 
med  last  night.  Force  in  pursuit.  Have  here  33  bridge-burners 
1 accomplices.  What  shall  I do  with  them  ? Have  witnesses 

uinst  them  here. 

HENRY  BINMORE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


30  r r — vol  vm 


466 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH 


Headquarters 


Department  of  the  Missouri, 
Saint  Louis , Mo .,  December  26,  1861. 


Brig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.: 

If  Merrill’s  Horse  can  be  crossed  over,  send  it  to  Columbia  to  opera* 


against  the  bridge-burners.  H w hALLECK, 


Major-  General.  I 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  1 
Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December .26,  1861.1 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  Hundhausen,  Hermann , Mo. : 

A small  force  should  be  sent  to  New  Haven  to  guard  the flfeny-bo 
and  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing  over.  General  Schofield  will 

at  Danville  to-night  with  a large  force.  ^ w HALLECk, 


HTninr.  ftp.np.ral.rn 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  December  26,  1861.1 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Otterville,  Mo.: 

Insurrection  in  northwestern  counties  very  serious.  If  troops  ci 
be  crossed  over  at  Booneville,  send  400  or  500  horse  to  Fayette  , 
operate  against  bridge-burners.  H w HALLB0K, 


Otteryille,  December  26,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck:  J 

Four  hundred  and  fifty  cavalry  march  to  Booneville  to- day,  J* 
orders  to  scour  the  country  from  Booneville  and  Glasgow  to  Sturge 
and  Renick ; to  disarm  everybody,  and  arrest  all  suspimou^piwso  . 

~RvinnAip.r- General.  Commanding, 


Headquarters 


Department  of  the  Missouri, 
Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  26,  1861; 


Brig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean, 
If  possible  send  word  by 
Fulton  not  to  move  towards 


Jefferson  City,  Mo. : 
messenger  to  the  commanding  officer 
Concord  before  to-morrow  morning. 

H.  W.  HALLECK 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  26,  1861 

Brigadier-General  Schofield,  Warrenton , Mo. : 

A cavalry  force  has  been  ordered  to  Columbia  and  another  to  aye 
but  it  is  not  known  yet  whether  they  can  cross  at  Booneville  and 


AP.  XYffl.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


467 


rson  City.  I have  telegraphed  to  the  latter  place,  to  direct,  if  possible, 
e commanding  officer  at  Fulton  not  to  move  on  Concord  till  to-morrow 
orning.  liegiment  of  infantry  will  join  you  to-day.  Look  out  for  the 
idges  in  your  rear  and  have  them  well  guarded. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Warrenton,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861. 
igadier- General  Henderson,  Truxton , Lincoln  County , Mo.: 
[General  : Major  Krekel  informs  me  that  you  will  be  at  Truxton 
night  with  a force  of  infantry,  and  that  a part  of  your  command, 
valry,  as  he  understands,  marches  from  Ashley  towards  Wellsville 
day.  I desire  you  to  march  your  entire  command  to  Wellsville  to- 
>rrow  to  co-operate  with  me.  I shall  send  aid  from  Danville  and 
' amrock  towards  Mexico.  I will  either  accompany  this  latter  force 
go  with  another  column,  via  Williamsburg,  towards  Concord.  When 
in  arrive  at  Wellsville  communicate  with  the  force  near  Shamrock, 

i lick  will  have  orders  from as  to  its  and  your  future  rnove- 

pnts.  Other  columns  are  moving  m various  directions,  in  the  hope 
capturing  the  insurgents  in  the  vicinity  of  Mexico  and  Concord, 
pep  me  advised  of  everything  of  importance.  I regret  very  much 
jit  the  supplies  for  your  men  could  not  have  reached  them  before  this 
bedition.  I have  ordered  them  to  be  sent  to  this  place,  where  I hope 
b will  be  able  to  get  them  in  a few  days. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861. 
i jor-General  Halleck: 

-he  messenger  I sent  to  Fulton  sent  back  word  that3,500  rebels  were 
i rching  from  Mexico  to  attack  our  forces  at  Fulton.  He  thinks  his 
i irmati on  reliable.  Have  you  any  troops  near  there?  I can  send 
i le  before  to-morrow. 

THOS.  J.  McKEAN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Warrenton,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861. 

5 fieral  Halleck: 

have  information  that  Culonel  Todd,  of  Hermann,  is  at  Danville, 
l find  from  500  to  1,000  of  the  enemy  between  Danville  and  Williams- 
’ g.  Henderson  will  be  at  Truxton  to-day  with  a part  of  his  force, 
*|le  another  part  will  leave  Ashley  and  move  towards  Wellsville.  I 
d move  Henderson  from  Montgomery  City  and  Wellsville  towards 
xico  to-morrow.  As  soon  as  the  infantry  arrives  from  Saint  Louis 
ill  move  to  Danville,  reaching  that  place  to-night;  thence,  via  Will- 
tsburg,  to  Concord  to-morrow.  Should  not  a force  be  sent  to  Colum- 
1 thence  towards  Mexico  ? Who  is  in  command  of  the  force 
Pulton?  He  should  not  move  towards  Concord  before  to-morrow 
Iming. 


J.  M.  SCHOFIELD. 


468 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  34.  j Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  26,  1861 

X.  In  virtue  of  authority  conferred  by  the  President  of  the  Unite 
States  martial  law,  heretofore  declared  in  this  city,  will  be  eufoieei 
fnlirtue  of  the  same  authority,  martial  law  is  hereby  declared,  ar 
will  be  enforced  in  and  about  all  railroads  m this  State.  . .. 

It  is  not  intended  by  this  declaration  to  interfere  with  the  jur  sdi 
tion  of  any  civil  court  which  is  loyal  to  the  Government  of  the  Unit 
States  and  which  will  aid  the  military  authorities  in  enforcing  oidf 
and  punishing  crimes.  # * * 


By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck 


J.  C.  KELTON,  j 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


General  Orders, 


) Hdqrs.,  North  Missouri  R.  R»>  j: 

l ] Warrenton,  Mo .,  December  26,  1861. i! 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  the  major-general  commanding  the  D 
partment  of  the  Missouri,  I assume  command  of  all  the  troops  in  th 
vicinity.  # # # * * 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 
Briaadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , December  27,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  Bolla , Mo. : . , 

Telegram  this  morning  from  Sedalia  says  that  information  as  ji 
been  received  that  main  part  of  Price’s  army  passed  through  Spnr 
field  on  Monday  last  in  full  retreat.  To®  late  to  reach  him, e J 
cavalry.  No  infantry  movement  will  therefore  be  made.  Cavali  y m 
get  supplies  as  far  as  possible  on  the  road.  ^ ^ HALLECK, 

Afn  inr.  BpwPYdl 


Headquarters 


Pilot  Knob, 
December  27,  1861 


Major-General  Halleck  : . J 

For  two  days  there  have  been  indications  of  attempt  to  destroy  r. 

- ■ " • T have  given  such  orders  as  I hope  will  prevt 

• n ~ 4-l-»  4-*  4-  TTT/\  -pan 


road  above  Big  River. 


the  success  of  their  schemes.  I am  indirectly  in|or“e^flt^  *n°i ^sv 
have  already  been  shot  at  Victoria.  I have  ordered  all  taken  m 
attempts  to  be  shot  without  delay.  I have  had  Big  Ri\  er  re-entor 
and  ordered  Colonel  Murphy,  at  Sulphur  Springs,  to  move  on  hisj  1 
command  whenever  convinced  that  the  rebels  are  in  force  between  t 
and  Potosi.  I have  sent  a cavalry  force  above  Potosi  to  scout 
country.  The  guards  are  all  watchful.  p CARLIN 


469 


i'ap.  XYin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Rolla,  Mo.,  December  27,  1861. 

ipt.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Just  arrived.  General’s  dispatch  received.  News  corroborated  here 
Price’s  retreat.  Will  send  forward  cavalry,  hut  cannot  expect  to 
ertake  him,  since  he  has  120  miles  and  five  days  the  start.  My  only 
>pe  is  to  accelerate  his  flight  and  embarrass  his  rear.  If,  as  most 
ply,  he  makes  a stand  at  his  old  station,  near  Neosho,  he  can  only 
s routed  with  a considerable  force  of  all  arms. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS. 


Otterville,  Mo.,  December  27,  1861. 

ajor-General  Haeleck: 

Price  passed  through  Springfield  on  Sunday  evening  j large  part  of 
I s army  next  day.  No  enemy  left  in  this  section.  Price  destroyed  the 
idge  at  Warsaw. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Florence,  Mo.,  December  27, 1861— 1 p.  m. 
ajor-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Todd’s  force  will  reach  Centreville  to-night.  The  Third  Iowa  will  be 
i Flint  Point  and  General  Henderson  at  Wellsville.  I have  no  intel- 
i fence  yet  from  the  force  at  Fulton.  The  enemy  has  gone  from  Will- 
i nsburg  towards  Concord.  I expect  to  move  on  Concord  and  Mexico 
' morrow.  I hear  nothing  from  Prentiss. 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  December  28,  1861. 
4jor-General  Halleck: 

Our  troops  at  Fulton  marched  on  Concord  yesterday  and  made  about 
ilozen  prisoners.  The  rebels  dispersed.  Our  troops  are  now  in  Ful- 
ta,  without  having  met  any  of  the  troops  you  sent  up  on  the  other  side. 

THOS.  J.  McKEAN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Rolla,  Mo.,  December  28,  1861. 

!>pt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Will  move  the  cavalry  8 a.  m.  to-morrow  morning.  Supplies  so  scarce 
| is  side  of  Springfield  I will  expedite  progress  by  sending  some.  With 
'nr  leave  I will  follow  in  support  with  artillery  and  infantry  as  far  as 
canon,  creating  a depot  for  the  cavalry  to  fall  back  on.  This  move- 
1 mt  will  increase  the  stampede  in  Price’s  army,  and  the  force  will  be 
♦avenient  in  any  emergency. 


SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General . 


470  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYUi 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  December  28,  1861.  ' 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  K.  Curtis,  Bolla,  Mo. : 

Infantry  and  artillery  will  not  move  until  further  orders. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  December  28, 1861.  i 
Major-General  Halleck: 

I have  heard  nothing  officialdom  Fulton.  The  five  companies  of  i 
fantry  and  four  of  cavalry  were  there  on  the  evening  of  the  2fr 
(Thursday).  I did  hear  yesterday  that  6,000  rebels  were  about  Fulfil 

the  day  before,  but  it  probably  was  our  own  men. 

J 7 THOS.  J.  McKEAN, 

Brigadier-  General,  j 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  ; 

Saint  Louis , December  28,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Otterville,  Mo.  : 

Send  re-enforcements  to  Fayette — say  500  horse.  Insurrection  in  tl 
north  increasing.  H w.  HALLE0K, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  December  28, 1861. 
Brigadier-General  Pope,  Otterville , Mo.  : 

General:  Major-General  Hunter  has  been  requested  to  send  t 
companies  of  the  Seventh  Missouri  and  Eighth  Iowa  and  Missor 
Light  Artillery  to  Kansas  City  and  Independence,  to  report  to  you  I 
letter.  You  will  direct  the  First  Kansas  Infantry  what  route  to  purs 
to  those  places.  The  five  companies  Thirty -ninth  Ohio  cannot  be  wit 
drawn  from  General  Prentiss  at  present.  The  regiment,  however,  w 
soon  be  united.  The  cavalry  from  Eolla  are  in  pursuit  of  Price.  11 1 
report  of  his  flight  from  the  State  proves  true,  a considerable  Portion 
your  command  will  probably  be  assigned  to  other  duty.  You  will  thei 
fore  make  arrangements  at  La  Mine  Cantonment  for  a smaller  lore 
General  McClellan  is  now  sick.  As  soon  as  he  is  able  to  attend  to  bu 
ness  you  will  probably  receive  instructions  in  reference  to  new  opei 
tions.  This  is  confidential,  and  must  not  be  repeated.  Let  it  be  ge 
erally  understood  that  your  troops  are  all  going  into  winter  quartei 
La  Mine  should  be  made  as  strong  as  possible  for,  say,  two  or  three  rej 
ments. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

H.  W.  HALLELJA, 

Major- General. 


sap.  xvm.] 


471 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Central  Missouri, 

No.  29.  ( Otterville , December  28,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Palmer  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  canton- 
ient  at  La  Mine  Crossing  and  of  all  the  troops  in  the  vicinity. 

By  order  of  General  Pope  : 

SPEED  BUTLER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Jefferson  City , Mo.,  December  29,  1861. 

ol,  Lewis  Merrill, 

Commanding  MerrilVs  Horse: 

Sir  : In  addition  to  the  orders  given  you  on  the  26th  instant  to  hold 
ourself  in  readiness  to  proceed  to  Columbia,  the  general  directs  me 
) instruct  you  to  march  to  that  point  as  soon  as  it  is  practicable  to  get 
our  command  over  the  river.  Your  duties,  as  heretofore  made  known 
) you,  will  be  to  operate  against  the  rebels  generally  ; to  disperse  or 
apture  all  organized  bands ; seize  all  arms,  &c.,  intended  for  use  against 
le  United  States.  There  will  be  other  United  States  forces  at  Fulton, 
>anville,  and  probably  at  Mexico,  with  whom  you  can  co-operate  or 
immunicate  whenever  you  may  deem  it  proper  to  do  so. 

By  command  of  General  McKean,  commanding  this  post : 

WM.  T.  CLARK, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Roll  A,  Mo.,  December  29,  1861. 

apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Twenty-four  cavalry  companies,  Colonel  Carr  commanding  in  my 
bsence,  are  moving  towards  Springfield,  on  a road  a little  south  of  the 
immon  traveled  way.  Scouting  party  drove  out  rebels  from  Lebanon 
hursday  and  left  there  Friday  morning.  The  report  there  was  that 
pringfield  was  occupied  with  2,200  rebels.  Will  report  by  letter. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Southwestern  District, 

Bolla , December  29,  1861. 

apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Captain  : I arrived  here  8 p.  m.  Thursday  night  and  immediately 
5de  to  the  camp  of  Brigadier-General  Sigel,  about  3 miles  from  town, 
communicated  to  him  the  wishes  of  the  major-general  in  regard  to 
loving  the  cavalry  forthwith,  and  requested  him  to  order  immediate 
reparation  for  the  movements. 

The  general  not  having  received  the  order  placing  me  in  command 
f the  district  and  I not  having  assumed  command  (wishing  to  treat 
iie  general  with  all  possible  courtesy  by  conferring  with  him  before- 
and),  it  was  with  some  expressions  of  doubt  as  to  my  rank  and  au- 


472  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chat.  xvrnj 

thority  that  he  Anally  issued  the  order  to  the  cavalry  to  report  whei 

they  could  move.  - ^ 

Yesterday  morning  your  telegraphic  copy  of  Order  92  was  receiver? 
by  General  ‘Sigel,  and  at  his  request  I gave  him  the  date  of  my  commis 
sion  and  showed  him  our  relative  position  in  the  Army  Registers. 

I then  assumed  command  (see  Orders,  No.  1),  and  immediately  issued 
Special  Orders,  No.  1,  to  move  the  cavalry  at  8 this  morning,  which  was 
according  to  my  judgment,  the  earliest  moment  they  could  be  got  readj 

t0 Those  best  acquainted  with  the  road  say  the  route  to  Springfield  hai 
been  stripped  of  everything  near  the  road,  and  the  country  being  veq 
rough,  and  side  roads,  it  became  necessary  to  carry  some  supplies,  whicl 
were  accordingly  provided  and  ready  at  the  proper  hour  this  morning 
As  a further  precaution  against  scarcity  of  supplies,  the  command  will 
go  on  a road  south  of  the  road  so  often  traversed,  passing  by  Cassage’sj 
crossing  Big  Piney  at  McCourtney’s,  and  the  Gasconade  at  Wisdom; 
Ford,  aiming  to  strike  the  old  military  road  7 miles  this  side  of  Spring 
field.  I send  copy  of  instructions  given  to  Colonel  Carr. 

The  movement  of  the  troops  displayed  the  usual  lack  of  discipline 
I had  urged  exact  time  and  was  early  in  the  saddle  myself,  but  it  wa; 
after  9 before  the  bright  warm  sun  was  reflected  from  the  long  line  o 
sabers  which  were  displayed  in  passing  off  in  form  of  review. 

I left  the  command  4 miles  out,  about  1,500  strong,  in  good  spmts 
and  well  equipped  for  the  service.  . 

I will  take. another  occasion  to  report  further  details  m regard  to  thi 
command.  General  Asboth  has  been  very  cordial,  and  so  1 can  say  o 
the  officers  generally,  especially  the  Iowa  and  Illinois  troops.  General 
Sigel  complains  of  ill  health,  but  seems  able  for  duty.  Moving  th 
troops  would  do  them  good.  They  have  made  very  little  defens 
against  the  cold,  and  some  of  them  on  bleak  hills  will  be  ordered  mh 
timber  valleys  for  the  purpose  of  better  providing  against  cold,  lhe; 
are  generally  in  tents,  most  of  them  very  good. 

I expressed  my  desire  to  occupy  Lebanon  with  forces  of  infantry  an< 
artillery.  Some  point  farther  south,  where  our  regular  trains  coul( 
easily  transport  supplies  from  the  end  of  the  railroad,  would  not  id 
crease  the  expense  of  the  command,  but  give  us  a better  stand-pout 
to  operate  against  the  enemy.  Scattering  bands  in  the  counties,  o 
Howard  and  Douglas  deserve  attention;  but  the  general  impressioi 
here  is  Price  will  make  a stand  at  or  near  Neosho  or  retreat  beyoD< 
the  Ozark  Mountains.  In  either  event  our  cavalry  movement  canno; 
do  much  more  than  embarrass  the  enemy  in  his  foraging  excursion 
and  increase  desertions  from  his  ranks,  which  are  now  very  great. 

I am  organizing  the  defense  of  the  railroad  between  this  point  an< 
Pacific  City.  I design  to  locate  a U.  S.  rifle  cavalry  regiment  on  th 
line,  and  have  log  block-houses,  such  as  I had  made  on  the  Iron  Mount 
ain  Road,  erected  on  this  by  the  troops  themselves.  Small  cannon 
like  mountain  howitzers,  such  as  they  make  in  Quincy,  111.,  and  cost 
ing  about  $130  each,  would,  in  my  judgment,  be  an  economical  addi 
tion  to  these  block-houses,  and  diminish  the  numbers  now  required  V 
prevent  the  mounted  bands  from  burning  bridges.  ,. 

Hoping  the  general  will  approve  my  exertions  to  organize  this  cus 
trict  and  aid  him  in  expelling  the  enemy  from  Missouri,  I have  th 
honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding . 


,p.  XVIH.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  473 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

;neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Mo., 

No.  1.  / Bolla , December  28,  1861. 

Pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  No.  92,  Department  of  Missouri,  the 
dersigned  assumes  command  of  the  portion  of  country  in  Missouri 
ith  of  the  Osage  and  west  of  the  Meramec  Rivers. 

Commanders  of  divisions,  brigades,  and  detachments  will  report  to 
i forthwith  the  strength  and  position  of  their  forces, 
i SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Volunteers , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

iECiAL  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Mo., 

No.  1.  j Bolla , Mo.,  December  28,  1861. 

line  companies  of  Illinois  Third  Cavalry  (Colonel  Carr)  ; six  com- 
bes of  Fremont  Hussars  (Major  Waring) ; four  companies  of  Major 
Ight’s  battalion  (Major  Wright) ; four  companies  of  Missouri  cavalry 
eutenant-Colonel  Lewis);  one  company  of  Thirty-sixth  Illinois  Cav- 
y,  and  Captain  Gerster’s  company  of  pioneers,  will  march  to-morrow 
rning  at  8 o’clock.  All  extra  baggage,  bands  of  music,  and  surplus 
lipment  will  be  left  in  charge  of  proper  officers, 
lolonel  Carr  will  take  command  and  proceed  under  special  instruc- 
ts received  at  these  headquarters. 

lenerals  of  divisions,  brigades,  and  regiments  to  which  these  corps 
' ong  will  see  that  proper  equipment  for  sixteen  days’  expedition  is 

i iy  supplied. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General . 


[In closure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Missouri, 

Bolla , Mo.,  December  28,  1861. 

. E.  A.  Carr,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry : 

Colonel  : In  my  absence  you  will  command  the  cavalry  expedition 
dch  is  ordered  to  move  from  this  point  to-morrow  morning  at  8 
ock.  At  an  early  period  you  will  ascertain  and  report  to  me  the 
ungth  of  your  command,  which  1 estimate  at  1,700. 

Tou  are  expected  to  go  beyond  Springfield,  or  as  far  as  to  feel  the 
my,  and,  if  in  broken  ranks,  fall  on  him  and  cut  him  to  pieces.  If 
tnd  in  superior  numbers,  and  with  artillery  and  infantry  in  force, 
i will  not  give  him  battle,  but  strive  to  draw  him  up  by  cautious 
l safe  retrograde  movements. 

ou  will  carefully  husband  your  supplies  by  adopting  measures  for 
1 ii g whatever  you  can  procure  on  the  way.  Let  all  foraging  be  done 
i ier  orders  of  prudent  officers,  giving  certificates  of  the  amount  and 
ue  of  property  taken  of  good  Union  men,  but  giving  no  certificates 
< those  who  are  in  rebellion  against  the  United  States.  Persons 
‘ erting  from  the  retreating  army  and  surrendering  to  us  may  be 
'eived,  and  discharged  upon  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the 
ited  States  and  obligating  themselves  to  forfeit  their  lives  property, 

L l honor  if  they  betray  our  National  Government  or  return  to  the 
’'■•el  army. 

^ou  will  avoid  the  incumbrance  of  your  command  with  contraband 


474  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap. 


XVII 


property  by  sending  it  back  to  these  headquarters  at  your  earliel 
convenience.  You  will  advise  me  frequently  of  your  progress,  ad 
avoid  undue  exposures  to  the  enemy,  and  the  difficulties  of  procuria 

^Approaching  near  the  enemy,  leave  your  train  with  a portion  of  yoil 
command  and  dash  down  upon  him  with  the  forage  and  rations  yil 
can  carry  on  yonr  horses,  hurrying  hack  to  the  support  of  your  trail 
I am,  colonel,  very  truly,  yours,  gAMLu  E CURTIS, 

n n fl  i PV.  d-P.YlP.Yn].-  l 


Saint  Louis,  December  30,  1861. 

Brig  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss,  Commanding , &c . : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  27th  and  your  telegram  of  last  eve- 
ine  are  received.  I congratulate  you  and  your  command  on  the  aft. 
ofSMount  Zion.  Keep  on  doing  so,  a,nd  the  rebels  wl11  so°“ ^ 
up  Give  me  a full  report  at  your  earliest  convenience.*  I hope  befo^ 
vou  receive  this  you  will  have  communicated  with  Generals  Scliofiet 
Sd  Henderson,  and  also  with our  cavalry,  about  W - the  vmiml 


of  Fayette  and  Glasgow 
Yours,  truly, 


Handle  these  bridge-burners  without  glovi. 


H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-General. 


Warrenton,  Mo.,  December  30,  1861. 

Major-General  Halleck:  J 

There  are  now  30  men  of  my  command  at  Dardenne  Bridge ; t . 
companies  at  Perruque ; one  company  at  Wells vil  e;  two  companies  a 
60  cavalry  here,  and  three  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  at  Floren 
Our  troops  are  reported  as  being  in  Mexico.  Road  repaired  to  Wei 
ville  • will  be  repaired  to  Martinsburg  by  to-morrow  night.  Rehi 
are  reported  as  disbanding.  The  country  is  quiet,  but  in  great  fe.i 
of  the** cavalry,  who  have  scouted  extensively  and  dealt  out  sevo 

blows.  A r'dk.R'EL 


[December  31,  1861.— For  return  of  troops  in  the  District  of  Oai 
see  operations  in  Kentucky,  &c.,  Series  I,  Vol.  YU,  p.  525.] 


[January  1, 1862.— For  Lincoln  to  Halleck  and  Halleck  to  Lincc 
in  reference  to  co-operation  with  Buell,  see  operations  in  Kentucky, 
Series  I,  Yol.  VII,  p.  526.] 


Headquarters, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo January  1,  1862 
J 0.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Sm:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  direct 
heretofore  received  from  department  headquarters  there  have  P 

* See  p.  43. 


iap.  xvin.i 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


475 


mt  from  this  post  across  the  Missouri  River  the  following-named 
•oops,  viz : Five  companies  of  the  Eleventh  Regiment  Iowa  Volun- 
iers,  and  four  companies  of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  now  at  Fulton,  in 
allaway  County;  also  a detachment  of  Merrill’s  Horse,  numbering 
bout  300,  which  will  probably  be  in  Columbia,  Boone  County,  to- 
torrow. 

I would  recommend  that  troops  be  kept  at  these  places  during  the 
itire  winter  or  until  the  bands  of  rebels  infesting  that  neighborhood 
re  effectually  dispersed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  J.  McKEAN, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , January  1,  1862. 
rig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  Holla , Mo. : 

Information  received  here  that  Price  does  not  intend  to  leave  the 
bate,  but  to  return  with  additional  artillery  and  troops  sent  him  from 
rkansas,  which  he  fell  back  to  receive,  directing  his  men  to  destroy  in 
Le  mean  time  all  railroad  bridges  and  telegraphs.  You  will  therefore 
we  your  forces  ready  for  a movement. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Martinsburo,  January  1,  1862.  ' 

ajor-General  Halleck  : 

I have  thoroughly  scoured  the  whole  country  as  far  west  as  the  field 
Prentiss’  fight.  Have  captured  about  50  prisoners,  among  the  rest 
ip.tain  Owen,  the  leader  of  the  bridge-burners  about  High  Hill,  and 
fi.  Jeff.  Jones.  Colonels  Todd  and  Morton  are  now  coming  in  towards 
anville  and  Wellsville.  Most  of  the  bridge-burners  not  killed  or 
ptured  have  passed  back  across  the  railroad.  I am  disposing  my 
oops  so  as  to  protect  the  road  and  clean  the  country  northwest  of  it. 
it  is  deemed  necessary  to  keep  me  in  this  command  I would  like  to 
turn  to  Saint  Louis  for  a day  or  two. 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  January  1,  1862. 

on.  T.  Ewing,  Lancaster , Ohio : 

Sir  : I thank  you  for  your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo.*  I am  satisfied 
at  nothing  but  the  severest  punishment  can  prevent  the  burning  of 
ilroad  bridges  and  the  great  destruction  of  human  life.  I shall  punish 
3 I can  catch,  although  I have  no  doubt  there  will  be  a newspaper 
>wl  against  me  as  a blood-thirsty  monster.  These  incendiaries  have 
' Stroyed  in  the  last  ten  days  $150,000  worth  of  railroad  property,  not- 
thstanding  that  there  are  more  than  10,000  troops  kept  guarding  the 

*Not  found. 


476 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


railroads  in  this  State.  A plot  was  discovered  on  the  20th  ultimo  t 
burn  all  the  bridges  in  the  State  and  at  the  same  time  to  fire  this  citj 
Fortunately  a part  of  the  intended  mischief  was  prevented  This  i 
not  usually  done  by  armed  and  open  enemies,  but  by  pretended  quie 
citizens,  living  on  their  farms.  A bridge  or  building  is  set  on  fire,  an 
the  culprit  an  hour  after  is  quietly  plowing  or  working  in  his  fiel( 
The  civil  courts  can  give  us  no  assistance,  as  they  are  very  generall 
unreliable.  There  is  no  alternative  but  to  enforce  martial  law.  Ou 
army  here  is  almost  as  much  in  a hostile  country  as  it  was  when  1 

Mexico. 


I have  determined  to  put  down  these  insurgents  and  bridge-burne 
with  a strong  hand.  It  must  be  done ; there  is  no  other  remedy.  If 
am  sustained  by  the  Government  and  country,  well  and  good ; it  not 
will  take  the  consequences. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  jjALLECK 

Maior-  General 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  op  the  ilissouRi,  y 

i j Saint  Louis , January  1,  l»o2. 1 

I In  carrying  on  war  in  a portion  of  country  occupied  or  threatend 
to  bo  attacked  by  an  enemy,  whether  within  or  without  the  territor 
of  the  United  States,  crimes  and  military  oitenses  are  frequently  con 
mitted  which  are  not  triable  or  punishable  by  courts-martial  and  whic 
are  not  within  the  jurisdiction  of  any  existing  civil  court.  Such  case 
however,  must  be  investigated  and  the  guilty  parties  punished.  T1 
good  of  society  and  the  safety  of  the  army  imperiously  demand  thil 
They  must  therefore  be  taken  cognizance  of  by  the  military  powei 
but,  except  in  cases  of  extreme  urgency,  a military  commander  shoul, 
not  himself  attempt  to  decide  upon  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  mdivitj 
uals.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  usage  and  custom  of  war  among  » 
civilized  nations  to  refer  such  cases  to  a duly-constituted  military  t 
bunal  composed  of  reliable  officers,  who,  acting  under  the  solemnity 
an  oath  ami  the  responsibility  always  attached  to  a court  of  recor. 
will  examine  witnesses,  determine  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  the  parti 
accused  and  fix  the  punishment.  This  is  usually  done  by  courts-ma 
tial ; but  in  our  country  these  courts  have  a very  limited  junsdictio 
both  in  regard  to  persons  and  offenses.  Many  classes  of  persons  ca. 
not  be  arraigned  before  such  courts  for  any  offense  wliatsoei  er,  ar 
many  crimes  committed,  even  by  military  officers,  enlisted  men,  ' 
camp  retainers,  cannot  be  tried  under  the  Rules  and  Articles  of  TV  a 
Military  commissions  must  be  resorted  to  for  such  cases,  and  these  coi 
missions  should  be  ordered  by  the  same  authority,  be  constituted  in 
similar  manner,  and  their  proceedings  be  conducted  according  to  t 
same  general  rules  as  courts-martial,  in  order  to  prevent  abuses  wln< 

miSIhtAshmuch  misapprehension  has  arisen  in  this 

tion  to  this  subject  the  following  rules  are  published  for  the  inform 

t'Tst°f Military  commissions  can  be  ordered  only  by  the  Gen®™1'1'1|jbt' 
of  the  Army  or  by  the  commanding  officer  of  the  department,  and  t 
proceedings  must  be  sent  to  Headquarters  for  revision. 

2d.  They  will  be  composed  of  not  less  than  three  membe  , 
whom  will  act  as  judge-advocate  and  recorder,  where  no  o c 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


ap.  xvm.] 


477 


aated  for  that  duty.  A larger  number  will  be  detailed  where  the  pub- 
i service  will  permit. 

3d.  All  the  proceedings  will  be  recorded  and  signed  by  the  president 
d judge-advocate  and  recorder,  as  in  the  case  of  courts-martial, 
lese  proceedings  will  be  governed  by  the  same  rules  as  courts-mar- 

11,  so  far  as  they  may  be  applicable. 

4th.  Civil  offenses  cognizable  by  civil  courts,  whenever  such  loyal 
turts  exist,  will  not  be  tried  by  a military  commission.  It  should 
erefore  be  stated  in  every  application  for  a commission  whether  or 
t there  is  any  loyal  civil  court  to  which  the  civil  offenses  charged  can 
referred  for  trial.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  many  offenses 
lich  in  time  of  peace  are  civil  offenses  become  in  time  of  war  military 
enses,  and  are  to  be  tried  by  a military  tribunal,  even  in  places  where 
ril  tribunals  exist. 

5th.  No  case  which,  by  the  Eules  and  Articles  of  War,  is  triable 
I a court-martial  will  be  tried  by  a military  commission.  Charges, 
| erefore,  preferred  against  prisoners  before  a military  commission 
sould  be  “ Violation  of  the  laws  of  war,”  and  never  “Violation  of 
le  Eules  and  Articles  of  War,”  which  are  statutory  provisions,  defin- 
i?  and  modifying  the  general  laws  of  war  in  particular  cases  and  in 

12, ’ard  to  particular  persons  and  offenses.  They  do  not  apply  to  cases 

It  embraced  in  the  statute  ; but  all  cases  so  embraced  must  be  tried 
a court-martial.  In  other  cases  we  must  be  governed  by  the  general 
i.de  of  war. 

6th.  Treason,  as  a distinct  offense,  is  defined  by  the  Constitution,  and 
list  be  tried  by  courts  duly  constituted  by  law;  but  certain  acts  of  a 
Dasonable  character,  such  as  conveying  information  to  the  enemy,  act- 
as  spies,  &c.,  are  military  offenses,  triable  by  military  tribunals,  and 
] nishable  by  military  authority. 

7th.  The  fact  that  those  persons  who  are  now  carrying  on  hostilities 
J ainst  the  lawful  authorities  of  the  United  States  are  rebels  and  trai- 
ls to  the  Government  does  not  deprive  them  of  any  of  the  rights  of 
nr,  so  far  as  the  military  authorities  are  concerned.  In  our  inter- 
<urse  with  the  duly- authorized  forces  of  the  so-called  Confederate 
S ates  and  in  the  treatment  of  prisoners  of  war  taken  from  such  forces 
n must  be  governed  by  the  usages  and  customs  of  war  in  like  cases. 

1 it  the  rights  so  given  to  such  prisoners  by  the  laws  of  war  do  not, 
i cording  to  the  same  code,  exempt  them  from  trial  and  punishment  by 
1 3 proper  courts  for  treason  or  other  offenses  against  the  Government. 

- te  rights  which  they  may  very  properly  claim  as  belligerents  under 
1 3 general  rules  of  belligerent  intercourse — commercia  belli — cannot 
t empt  them  from  the  punishment  to  which  they  may  have  subjected 
t cmselves  as  citizens  under  the  general  laws  of  the  land. 

3th.  Again,  a soldier  duly  enrolled  and  authorized  to  act  in  a mili- 
tpy  capacity  in  the  enemy’s  service  is  not,  according  to  the  code 
ilitary,  individually  responsible  for  the  taking  of  human  life  in  bat- 
t , siege,  &c.,  while  at  the  same  time  he  is  held  individually  responsi- 
J } for  any  act  which  he  may  commit  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  war. 
r us  he  cannot  be  punished  by  a military  tribunal  for  committing  acts 
( hostility  which  are  authorized  by  the  laws  of  war,  but  if  he  has 
unmitted  murder,  robbery,  theft,  arson,  &c.,  the  fact  of  his  being  a 
1 isoner  of  war  does  not  exempt  him  from  trial  by  a military  tribunal. 
1th.  And,  again,  while  the  code  of  war  gives  certain  exemptions  to  a 
idier  regularly  in  the  military  service  of  an  enemy,  it  is  a well- 
jj  :ablished  principle  that  insurgents,  not  militarily  organized  under 
U laws  of  the  State,  predatory  partisans,  and  guerrilla  bands  are 


478 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvni 

not  entitled  to  such  exemptions;  such  men  are  not  legitimately  A 
arms,  and  the  military  name  and  garb  which  they  have  assumed  cal 
not  give  a military  exemption  to  the  crimes  which  they  may  commijj 
They  are,  in  a legal  sense,  mere  freebooters  and  banditti,  and  ai 
liable  to  the  same  punishment  which  was  imposed  upon  guerrill 
bands  by  Napoleon  in  Spain  and  by  Scott  in  Mexico. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

* J.  0.  KELTON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters,  North  Missouri  R.  R.  I 
No.  2.  J Wellsville , January  1,  1862.1 

The  practice  of  plundering  and  robbing  peaceable  citizens  and  I 
wantonly  destroying  private  property  has  become  so  prevalent  in  son! 
portion  of  this  command  as  to  require  the  most  vigorous  measures  f<| 
its  suppression. 

Any  soldier  who  shall  be  guilty  of  either  of  the  crimes  above  meal 
tioned  will  be  immediately  arrested  and  placed  in  irons.  I 

Any  officer  who  shall  fail  to  arrest  and  bring  to  trial  any  soldiel 
whether  of  his  own  command  or  not,  whom  he  shall  detect  in  the  cori 
mission  of  such  crimes,  or  who  shall  fail  to  use  his  utmost  endeavol 
to  prevent  the  men  of  his  own  command  from  committing  them,  wi|| 
be  regarded  as  particeps  criminis  and  be  punished  accordingly. 

This  order  will  be  read  and  explained  to  each  company  of  the  cor 
mand  on  parade. 

B v order  of  Brigadier- General  Schofield : 

J H.  HESCOOK, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  j 


Special  Orders,  1 Headquarters  District  of  Cairo, 

N0#  3.  ( Cario , HI .,  January  1,  1862. 

I.  The  whole  of  the  forces  at  Bird’s  Point  are  hereby  consolidate 
into  one  brigade,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine,  and  will  1 
known  as  the  Second  Brigade.  The  force  at  Fort  Holt,  Ky.,  con 
manded  by  Col.  John  Cook,  will  hereafter  be  known  as  the  Third  Br 
gade,  and  the  command  at  Cape  Girardeau,  Mo.,  as  the  Fourth  Brigade 
******* 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Grant: 

J [JNO.  A.  RAWLINS,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Sedalia,  January  2,  1862. 

General  Halleck: 

Two  of  my  spies  just  in  from  Springfield  humbugged  Price  con 
pletely ; went  through  all  his  camps  safely ; saw  everything.  Trai 
of  forty  wagons  just  in  from  the  south  with  supplies,  ammunition,  &c 
as  well  as  artillery.  Has  in  all  sixty -three  pieces;  none  rifled.  Horse 

very  poor.  ^ 

A considerable  force  at  Bolivar.  Price’s  whole  force  not  over  16, 


lap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


479 


cOullocli  is  at  Fayetteville,  Ark.  Price  says  lie  is  going  to  Jefferson 
Lty  as  soon  as  they  are  organized.  At  present  lie  lias  no  discipline, 
> roll-calls,  no  sentinels,  nor  picket  to  prevent  passing  in  and  out  of 
Ipringfield.  Rains  drunk  all  the  time.  Price  also  drinking  too  much, 
o Union  men  between  8 miles  from  here  and  them. 

FRED’K  STEELE. 


Wellsville,  January  2,  1862. 

ajor-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri: 

General:  Your  messenger  arrived  with  dispatches  last  night.  I 
ill  at  once  institute  measures  to  carry  out  your  instructions  as  far  as 
: in  my  power.  After  sending  you  a~dispatch  from  Cross  Plains  on 
e 28th,  finding  it  impossible  to  get  any  information  on  which  to  base 
:y  operations,  I went  the  next  morning  with  a small  force  to  Mexico, 
lere  I obtained  the  secession  account  of  General  Prentiss’  fight.  I at 
tice  sent  three  columns.,  under  General  Henderson,  Colonel  Todd,  and 
' ilonel  Hare,  from  Mexico,  Concord,  and  Fulton  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of 
|e  insurgents.  I have  not  yet  heard  the  result  of  these  expeditions, 
iing  far  from  any  telegraph  station  and  it  being  no  longer  possible 
jf  you  to  order  other  troops  to  co-operate  with  me,  I did  not  attempt 
i communicate  with  you  until  my  arrival  at  Martinsburg. 

Before  leaving  Mexico  I succeeded  in  getting  news  from  General 
•entiss  at  Sturgeon.  He  was  about  starting  for  Hudson,  and  directed 
13  to  take  charge  of  affairs  along  this  road.  I have  lef  t a part  of  Gen- 
ial Henderson’s  command  at  Mexico,  and  will  distribute  my  command 
!>m  that  place  to  Saint  Charles,  so  as  to  give  protection  to  the  road 
i cl  pick  up  the  scattering  bridge-burners.  Many  of  them  have  passed 
! ck  across  the  road  and  seem  to  be  attempting  to  conceal  themselves. 
I have  no  doubt  we  will  be  able  to  arrest  nearly  all  of  them  in  time. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

BHgadier - General . 


Headquarters,  North  Missouri  R.  R., 

Wellsville , January  2,  1862. 
ligadier-General  Henderson,  Mexico , Mo.: 

General  : I have  heard  nothing  yet  of  the  result  of  the  expedition 
t yards  Columbia,  but  presume  you  returned  to  Mexico  last  night  or 
t s morning. 

[ wish  you  to  keep  at  Mexico  a force  sufficient  for  any  emergency  and 
t use  the  remainder  in  scouting  the  country  to  the  north  and  east  of 

In. 

f am  establishing  posts  along  the  road  to  give  it  protection  and  to 
5 ve  as  centers  of  operations. 

d will  doubtless  soon  be  necessary  to  make  expeditions  into  Pike  and 
hcoln  counties.  In  this  I shall  require  the  co-operation  of  your  troops 
account  of  their  intimate  knowledge  of  the  country  and  people. 

Keep  me  advised  of  all  your  movements  and  of  all  important  infor- 
c ition  you  get. 

[ am  going  to  Montgomery  this  evening  and  farther  down  to-morrow, 
i will  send  you  supplies  of  clothing  and  ammunition  as  far  as  the 


480 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


road  is  repaired  and  inform  you  by  telegraph,  so  that  you  can  ha 

men  there  to  receive  it.  _ , 0 0 . . , , 

I inclose  copies  of  General  Orders,  Nos.  2 and  3.  No.  2 is  intend 
chiefly  for  my  German  cavalry,  but  will  of  course  be  applied  to  a 
case  that  comes  within  its  terms* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  gOHOFIELD 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding 


Rolla,  January  2,  1862. 

Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton: 

My  cavalry  arrived  Tuesday  night,  as  I said,  52  miles  from  bpriri 
field  15  miles  south  of  Lebanon.  Two  hundred  and  fifty  rebels  ] 
ported  in  Lebanon.  A company  6 miles  southeast  collecting  por 
another  4 miles  southwest  reported.  Four  thousand  m Sprmgfie 
Will  attack  camps  about  Lebanon.  Will  concentrate  cavalry  the 

All  right  here.  SAML.  B.  CURTIS 


Rolla,  January  2,  1862. 

Oapt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Rebels  fled  from  Lebanon  before  our  cavalry  arrived.  The  fora 
camp  southwest  from  Colonel  Carr  was  routed  from  breakfast.  1 
rebels  were  pursued  miles.  Some  of  them  will  never  return.  1 oui  pi 
oners  and  a lot  of  cattle  and  sheep  taken.  ramt  r curtis> 

Brigadier-  General 


Oapt. 


Headquarters  Southwestern  District, 

Rolla , January  2,  1862. 

J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  telegraphed  the  substance  of  news  from  my  caval 
which  halted  52  miles  this  side  of  Springfield.  Before  receiving ; t 
news  1 had  ordered  the  four  cavalry  companies  from  Salem  to  Lebano 
and  also  two  more  companies  from  this  place,  to  support  the  rear 
Carr’s  command,  and  drive  out  the  rebels,  who  I heard  had  returned 
Lebanon  on  Monday.  Colonel  Carr’s  news  of  40,000  at  Springfield  w 
received  from  Lebanon.  There  was  also  a report  that  500  moie  iei 
cavalry  was  hourly  expected  at  Lebanon.  Consequently  Colonel  f. 
halted  and  sent  five  of  his  companies  to  Lebanon.  You  undorsta 
Carr’s  command  passed  east  of  Lebanon.  The  messenger  which  bioiif. 
dispatches  saw  no  force,  and  the  40,000  at  Springfield  is  of  course 
exaggeration,  but  all  accounts  concur  in  the  opinion  that  Puce  has  w 
considerably  re-enforced.  , , i 

The  general’s  dispatch  directing  me  to  prepare  to  march  was  duly 
ceived.  I have  had  quartermasters  and  commissaries  waiting  night  a 

- • * * — ~A  The  country 


UC1VCU.  

day,  but  how  this  matter  stands  is  not  yet  ascertained. 


uay,  out  I1U\Y  LU1B  LUrlLLCl  Otauuo  r-o  .7  - 

generally  , a rough,  unsettled  wilderness,  every  road  a defile,  and  sup] 


Not  found. 


.P.  XYHI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


481 


•angements  must  be  extensive ; do  the  best  we  can.  Some  point, 
her  Waynesville  or  Lebanon,  will,  in  my  judgment,  have  to  be  made 
iepot  and  reserve  location  in  the  event  of  a forward  movement.  It 
1 lessen  very  much  the  amount  of  wagons  necessary  for  the  move- 
nt. A large  portion  of  this  force  could  move  to  such  a point  very 
n— I think  any  day— but  supply  trains  would  have  to  constantly 
ve  to  and  fro  from  this  place.  Captain  Sheridan  will  be  able  to  re- 
’t  more  accurately  his  power  to  supply  in  the  course  of  to-day,  and 
ill  give  more  accurate  intelligence. 

Meantime  I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Fort  Leavenworth,  January  2,  1862. 

jor-General  Halleck  : 

’rice,  who  has  only  10,000,  is  undoubtedly  moving  towards  Memphis, 
rou  will  send  Sigel  to  Springfield  I can  send  a force  to  encourage 
m Ross  and  the  Union  Creeks. 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

I . _ , „ Saint  Louis , January  2,  18G2. 

J or-General  Hunter,  7 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans. : 

rice  was  at  Springfieid  two  days  ago,  and  has  probably  been  at- 
• b7U’°.  of  our  cavalry  to-day.  If  necessary,  they  will  soon  be 
:amed  by  infantry  and  artillery.  He  will  leave  this  either  willingly 
o-bly.  His  day  is  over.  Encourage  Johnston,  Ross,  and  friendly 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Saint  Louis,  January  2,  1862. 
Lrles  C.  Whittlesey,  Esq.,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.: 

[R : Your  letter  of  the  31st  has  been  received  and  its  contents  noted.  * 
r are  entirely  mistaken  in  relation  to  the  animus  of  General  Price, 
tairest  offers  have  been  made  to  him  but  he  scouts  them,  and  says 
[v  ill  fight  the  Federal  Government  to  the  bitter  end.  The  time  for 
filiation,  I am  sorry  to  say,  has  passed.  Nothing  but  the  military 
j ercan  now  put  down  the  rebellion  and  save  Union  men  in  this 
re;  Y 1S.  useless  now  to  try  any  other  remedy.  Your  suggestions 
| it  detecting  railroad  bridge-burners  will  receive  due  consideration 
he  acted  on  where  circumstances  will  permit. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

|Hr_ Major-General. 


31  R R — VOL  VIII 


Not  found. 


482 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVU 


Montgomery  City,  January  3,  1862. 


Brigadier- General  Prentiss, 

Palmyra , Mo.  : 

General  : I received  your  letter  of  yesterday  this  afternoon  as 
was  about  starting  from  Wellsville.  I reciprocate  most  cordially  tl 
feelings  you  express,  and  do  not  doubt  for  a moment  that  we  can  co-o 
erate  harmoniously  in  the  important  work  in  which  we  are  engaged. 

I shall  gladly  embrace  the  privilege  of  writing  you  freely  in  respe 
to  the  affairs  of  this  district,  and  hope  that  ere  long  I may  have  tl 
pleasure  of  forming  a personal  acquaintance  and  lasting  friendship 
a general  whom  I have  already  learned  to  esteem  so  highly. 

I have  left  General  Henderson  with  his  command  ot  State  troops 
Mexico,  with  instructions  to  operate  in  the  country  north  and  east 
that  point.  I presume  the  force  between  Mexico  and  Hudson  is  si 
ficient  for  the  protection  of  the  road ; if  not,  please  inform  me,  and 
will  send  a force  for  that  purpose.  I am  occupying  all  the  importa 
points  along  the  road  frtrai  Mexico  to  Saint  Charles,  and  organizing 
regular  system  of  scouting,  by  which  I hope  to  capture  the  small  ban 
of  rebels  that  are  now  scattered  over  this  part  of  the  State.  1 clo 
think  they  will  make  any  further  attempts  at  organization,  out, 
you  say,  we  must  give  them  no  rest  until  we  have  caught  and  broug 
to  punishment  those  guilty  of  the  destruction  of  the  road  and  th 

The^only  cavalry  force  now  at  my  disposal  is  a battalion  of  Germai 
utterly  worthless  for  this  kind  of  service.  If  I trust  them  out  ofi 
sight  for  a moment  they  will  plunder  and  rob  friends  and  toes  alii 
I have  arrested  two  of  the  officers  and  have  five  of  the  men  m iroi 
I have  asked  General  Halleck  to  recall  this  battalion  and  send  me  a 
ilized  human  beings  in  their  stead.  If  this  be  done,  as  I doubt jncfl 
will,  I shall  hope  to  carry  on  my  operations  with  success,  and  " it  ho 
making  more  enemies  than  friends  to  the  Union.  , 

I shall  go  to  Saint  Louis  to-morrow  night  and  return  on  Monde 
when  I hope  to  hear  from  you  again.  I congratulate  you,  gen® 
upon  your  recent  success,  and  hope  that  it  may  be  often  repeated,  u» 
the  rebels  shall  be  driven  from  the  State. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  g0H0plELD( 

Brigadier- G encral 


Washington,  D.  0.,  January  3,  1862i 

Major-General  Hunter, 

Commanding  Kansas  Department : 

It  is  the  intention  of  the  Government  to  order  me  to  report  to  J 
for  an  active  winter’s  campaign.  They  have  ordered  General  Den 
to  another  department.  They  have  ordered  to  report  to  you  eight  re 
ments  cavalry,  three  of  infantry,  and  three  batteries,  m addition 
your  present  force.  They  have  also  ordered  you,  in  conjunction  w 
the  Indian  Department,  to  organize  4,000  Indians.  Mr.  Doles,  Ot 


missioner,  will  come  out  with  me. 


J.  H.  LANE 


ha:*.  XVIII.j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


483 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Expedition, 

Camp  Buggies,  on  Gasconade,  Laclede  County,  Mo.,  Jan.  3,  1862. 

'o  the  Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Hdqrs.  Southwestern  List.,  Dept,  of  Missouri,  Bolla,  Mo.  : 

Sir  : I sent  off  this  morning  a report  by  the  expressman  returning 
iving  an  account  of  my  operations  up  to  last  night.  The  party  which 
sent  out  under  Colonel  Lewis  ran  60  of  the  enemy  about  10  miles, 
hey  ate  the  enemy’s  breakfast,  and  took  about  100  cattle,  30  sheep,  and 
) fat  hogs.  Some  of  the  cattle  escaped.  Being  in  a brushy  country 
ad  driving  in  the  night,  the  hogs  could  not  travel.  I shall  have  such 
3 are  fit  for  food  killed  for  this  command,  and  such  as  are  stock  cattle 
shall  send  in,  if  practicable. 

The  expedition  to  Lebanon  failed  on  account  of  a message  having 
sen  sent  from  Cook’s  Mill,  where  we  crossed  the  Boubideaux.  There 
as  no  enemy  found  in  town,  but  2 men  ran  and  were  caught.  The 
lemy  has  a hospital  in  town,  where  there  were  1 wounded  and  1 sick 
an — perhaps  more. 

The  weather  turned  very  bad  yesterday  evening,  with  rain  and 
eet— such  weather  as  none  but  a soldier  would  be  out  in.  I had  a party 
;ady  to  send  toward  Hartville  this  morning,  but  it  was  so  very  cold 
id  bad  and  the  rains  had  made  the  roads  so  bad  that  I did  not  send, 
ine  of  my  parties  was  at  the  house  of  Bowman,  a noted  secession  cap- 
yesterday,  towards  Hartville,  but  he  was  not  at  home,  and  very 
w men  were  at  home,  but  there  were  many  tracks  of  horses,  mostlv 
hshod,  going  west. 

About  3 o’clock  this  afternoon  some  of  my  men,  who  were  out  getting 
rage,  thought  they  heard  cannon-firing  in  the  direction  of  Lebanon, 
j seems  very  improbable,  but  the  men  stick  to  their  story,  and  say  that 
|e  woman  of  the  house  told  them  that  she  had  heard  that  Price  was 
;>ing  to  attack  us  before  12  o’clock  to-morrow.  I have  sent  a party  of 
: towards  Lebanon  to  gain  information  and  shall  send  out  other  scout- 
|g  parties  in  the  morning. 

My  greatest  trouble  is  with  this  train,  which,  now  that  the  roads  are 
d,  can  only  move  very  slowly.  The  mules  are  weak  and  the  drivers 
id.  Two  scouts  towards  Springfield,  who  should  have  been  here 
Is  ter  day,  have  not  returned,  which  looks  bad,  and  I have  received  no 
pssage  from  you  except  the  one  started  New  Year’s  Eve.  The  dupli- 
te  arrived  here  to-day,  having  been  nearly  to  Lebanon.  He  does 
\t  satisfy  me  that  he  is  all  right. 

|I  hope  you  will  tell  the  quartermaster  to  send  good  men,  and  also  to 
Mid  our  mail  whenever  a safe  opportunity  offers, 
it  have  an  escort  of  20  men  left  back  to  escort  up  the  doctor.  They 
jp  under  the  charge  of  Lieutenant  Black,  of  my  regiment,  a member 
3 the  court-martial  in  Asboth’s  division.  If  the  doctor  is  not  coming 
pant  my  men. 

1 find  that  instead  of  being  in  Wright  County,  as  my  guide  led  me  to 
Jheve,  I am  in  Laclede,  2£  miles  from  the  line  between  it  and  Pulaski, 
r the  Gasconade. 

jrhe  enemy’s  guides  are  perfect  and  he  is  constantly  apprised  of  all 
Jr  movements,  while  my  guides  are  bad  and  means  of  information 
j certain.  The  enemy  knew  of  our  movements  before  we  had  been 
P»e  twenty -four  hours  from  Rolla. 

, l have  heard  from  the  party  sent  to  Lebanon.  It  had  got  8 miles  on 
1 way  Irom  that  place.  Firing  had  been  heard  of  small-arms  in  the 
1 action  of  Chesby’s  Mill,  which  is  10  miles  from  here. 


484 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 


I have  scouting  parties  in  every  direction.  . 

The  roads  are  so  bad  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  move  my  Iran 
rapidly,  but  I am  not  sorry  I brought  it,  as  the  weather  has  been  s# 
bad  that  many  men  would  be  sick,  as  a few  are  now. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ CAUR 

Colonel , Commanding . 


Rolla,  January  3,  1862. 


Col.  E.  A.  Carr.  , .. 

Colonel  : Your  communication  from  Camp  Ruggles,  12  miles  soutJ 
of  the  Gasconade,  giving  an  account  of  your  position  and  the  success c 
Major  McConnell’s  expedition  to  Lebanon  and  Colonel  Lewis  sail},  1} 
which  yon  captured  4 prisoners  and  a quantity  of  cattle  and  sheep,  ai 
duly  received.  1 congratulate  you  on  the  exact  fulfillment  ol  m^  turn 
reported  at  the  moment  of  your  arrival  at  that  distance  from  Sprm| 
fiekl  and  I heartily  approve  of  your  location  of  your  train  on  this  sid 
and  Vonr  sending  out  the  parties  designated  to  scatter  the  rebel  picket, 
lieu  ten  ant-  Colo  del  Lewis  is  especially  entitled  to  my  congmtrdao 

fnr  T»i«  success.  I hope  ere  this  you  have  come eommumeatio 

with  the  troops  I sent  to  Lebanon.  If  — concentrates,  but  try  t| 


le  troops  jl  scut  lu  licuftuvn.  — ~ * 3 

enemy’s  pickets,  if  you  cannot and  bring  away  stock 


the  enemy  is  trying  to 


You  are  having  very  bad  weather  just  now.  Exert  your  efforts  t| 

preserve and  your  stock  till  the  weather  moderates.  Keep  ml 

advised  as  often  as  occasion  may  offer.  It  is  very  important  to  lead 


advised  as  oiten  as  uixasiuu  a . , 

the  strength  and  position,  of  the .enemy.  On* 


l ami  pusiLiuii  ut  uLit,  ~ — ^ „ ■ 

same  time  I directed  you  to  delay  the  tram  has  not  been  heard  frio| 
He  went  by  the  old  road.  If  he  has  not  reached  you  it  will  be  well 
shift  your  train  location,  as  the  enemy  would  learn  something  of  011 
purposes  by  that  accident.  I think  your  force  more  than  a match  fc 
any^ cavalry  they  can  send  against  you,  but  it  may  be  otherwise.  1 
tLv  move  infantry  and  artillery  towards  you,  you  must  move  this  wd 
I return  your  compliments  of  the  season,  with  my  best  wishes  for  fin  tM 
success, 

Truly,  yours,  SAML.  R,  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding  Southwestern  District 


U.  S.  Military  Hospital,  cor.  Chestnut  and  Fifth  Sts., 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  January  3,  1M>~. 


Major-General  Halleck  : , . , 

Genfral  • It  is  required  by  the  terms  of  the  order  appointing  tb 
Sandan^^ommission^  that  they  should  from  time  to  time  repoi 
directly  to  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  department  the  condition 

the  camps  and  hospitals.”  . tl 

Incompliance  with  this  obligation  I have  now  to 
condition  of  the  general  hospitals  in  this  city,  with o P , K ^ 

a steady  improvement.  The  nurses  and  attendants  all  understaud»e 
duties  and  are  discharging  them  to  the  general  sa 
surgeons.  . — 


Daslies  indicate  illegible  words. 


AP.  XVIII.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


485 


rllie  number  of  the  sick  now  in  the  hospitals  is  less  than  it  ever  has 
*en  before  since  their  organization.  This  is  not  to  be  attributed  so 
uch  to  the  diminution  of  sickness  in  the  command  as  to  the  policy  of 
e medical  director,  which  is  to  have  the  sick  of  the  regiments  taken 
re  of  by  the  regimental  surgeons  in  camps  and  regimental  hospitals, 
is  proper  in  light  cases,  which  are  not  likely  to  continue  but  for  a few 
ys,  that  they  should  be  taken  care  of,  and  they  will  do  well  in  camp 
d regimental  hospitals ; but  in  serious  cases,  which  are  likely  to  be  of 
ig  duration,  where  careful  nursing  and  properly-prepared  diet  are 
tui red,  the  general  hospital  is  to  be  preferred. 

Where  general  hospitals  have  been  established,  as  in  this  city,  there 
n be  no  necessity  for  renting  other  buildings  for  the  purpose  of  estab- 
hing  regimental  hospitals.  The  very  sick  of  the  regiment  can  readily 
sent  to  the  general  hospital  and  light  cases  taken  care  of  in  the 
rracks  or  camp. 

With  the  hospital  accommodations  which  we  now  have  and  with  the 
establishment  of  the  convalescent  barracks  there  will  be  sufficient 
iommodation  for  the  very  sick  of  this  division.  There  are  about 
enty-three  hundred  beds  in  the  general  hospitals  in  this  city,  with 
ne  two  or  three  hundred  more  which  can  be  had  at  the  City  and 
iters7  Hospitals,  if  required. 

\Iuch  has  been  said  of  the  enormous  expenditures  of  fitting  up  these 
spitals  and  the  great  cost  of  maintaining  the  same.  Representations 
16  w made  t0  the  Medical  Department  at  Washington  to  this 
jet.  We  desire  to  correct  any  such  impressions,  and  will  endeavor  to 
-e  you  a concise  statement  of  facts  and  figures,  that  will  convince  an  v 
laid  mind  of  the  erroneousness  of  such  representations, 
ffie  duty  of  procuring  buildings  for  and  fitting  up  hospitals  devolved 
m the  bamtary  Commission.  Under  the  directions  of  the  medical 
cctor  six  buildings  were  procured,  at  a rent  of  $2,360  per  month 
about  $1  per  month  for  each  bed,  or  cents  per  day  per  bed.  The 
t of  fitting  up  and  preparing  all  these  buildings  for  hospital  pur 
;es,  including  alterations,  erection  of  furnaces,  bath-rooms,  water- 
sets,  heating  and  cooking  stoves,  gas-fixtures,  with  bedsteads,  mat- 
sses,  tables,  and  chairs,  was  about  $28,000,  which  is  31  cents  per 
' lor  one  year  each  bed.  Surely  this  does  not  look  like  extrava- 


j in  other  complaint  is  that  civilians  are  employed  as  nurses  and  at- 
dants,  when  the  regulations  prescribe  that  soldiers  shall  be  em- 
pe<i;  ” aen  these  hospitals  were  first  organized  our  Army  was  form 
h i e volunteers  were  raw  and  undisciplined,  and  needed  to  be 
led  and  made  soldiers  of.  Besides,  our  volunteers  had  offered  their 
uces  tor  the  field,  and  not  for  such  duties  as  are  required  in  the 
jpital,  and  if  forced  to  perform  them,  would  do  so  reluctantly  and 
hertectly,  and  consequently  the  sick  would  be  made  to  suffer.  Gen- 
] r re mon t ordered  that  civilians  should  be  employed  as  nurses, 
cfi  lias  been  done  at  a cost  of  $15  per  month.  The  soldier  employed 
’ !.?  ll0Stlta  7 lncludlll£  extra  pay  and  clothing,  would  cost  $24  per 
lth*  i iaeamonnt  I)ai(I  for  attendance  of  all  kinds,  including  apothe- 
'»on  book-keepers,  stewards,  nurses,  cooks,  and  waiters,  is  about 
t l^Vnont\.  does  not  include  surgeons  and  assistant  sur- 
i VV  S!1?118  employed  as  such,  the  whole  expense  per  annum 
ild  be  $.0,000  less  than  it  would  be  for  similar  hospitals  wholly 
lanized  under  the  Army  Regulations. 

he  entire  expense  per  day,  including  fitting  up  the  hospitals,  rents, 
irons,  and  attendants,  will  not  exceed  33£  cents.  There  were  some 


486 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


expenditures  at  the  House  of  Refuge,  which  were  made  prior  to  t 
appointment  of  the  Sanitary  Commission,  which  were  not  recommend 
bvPthe  medical  director  or  deemed  necessary  by  the  surgeon  in  atten 
ance  that  are  not  included  in  the  above  estimates.  Jj 

We  trust  that  the  present  method  of  employing  nurses  will  becc 
tinned  as  it  is  not  only  more  economical,  but  the  sick  are  better  car 
for  and  attended  to.  Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  pay  for  t 
nurses  and  attendants  employed,  we  would  recommend  that  an  ord 
be  issued  authorizing  the  employment  of  nurses  and  directing  the  p. 

m There  \s6gSre™t  ’ difficulty  for  surgeons  of  regiments  and  regimen 
hospitals  to  procure  the  necessary  medicines  for  the  proper  care  of  t 
sick!  It  is  the  subject  of  universal  complaint  among  them.  The  & 
is  in  the  supply-table,  which  is  entirely  inadequate  to  the  present 
traordin  ary  development  of  the  Army.  Pulmonary  and  bronchial  d 
eases  are  very  prevalent  at  this  season  of  the  year-almost  epidemic 
•md  lar°e  quantities  of  expectorants  are  required,  while  the  supp 
table  for  Regiments  in  the  field  furnishes  scarcely  any.  We  deem 
absolutely  essential  to  the  health  of  the  soldier  that  this  should 
remedied  as  speedily  as  possible.  Could  you  witness  the  suffenu 
which  I to-day  witnessed,  to-morrow’s  sun  would  not  go  down  withcl 

11 1’he  Sanitary  Commission  has  already  had  to  supply  a number 
resriments  with  proper  medicines.  Others  have  had  to  apply 
Governors  of  the  States  from  which  they  came;  all  of  which  is  ma 
festly  wrong  and  injurious  to  the  service.  An  order  from  yourself 
supply  the  regimental  surgeons  such  articles  as  the  Government 

nishes  the  post  and  general  hospitals,  and  .pieupv  We  tJ 
ouantities  as  may  be  necessary,  will  obviate  the  difficulty.  we  “ 
that  an  order  to  this  effect  will  be  issed  at  once,  as  the  necessity  is  m 

PrWe  find  on  examination  that  there  is  great  deficiency  in  the  sup ! 
of  ambulances  to  regiments  in  the  field.  Of  theregimentsexamined  t I 
have  two  ambulances  each;  eight  regiments  one  each,  and fifteen  « 
without  ambulances.  The  necessity  for  supplying  the  deficiency  is  I 


parent  the  allowance  bffing  twelve  ambulances  to  each  regiment. 
P On  Ve  recommendation  of  the.  Sanitary  Commission  General 


Sanitary  Commission  (general  I 
mmit  ordered  that  each  regiment  in  this  division  should  be  suppl 
wfth  twelve  of  Irving’s  patent  cots  for  the  sick.  These  cots  were  mj 
w th  stops  and  serve  the  purpose  of  stretchers.  They  weigh  20  pour, 
and  will  cost  $4.50  each  or  $54  to  supply  a regiment.  Quite  a num^ 
of  regiments  were  supplied  with  them,  but  for 

ns  the  order  was  suspended.  We  would  recommend  that  the  outer 

16  From  a recent  examination  of  the  camps  and  hospitals 
made  by  Dr.  Douglas,  of  the  United  States  Sanitary  Commission, 
find  there  are  at  that  post  1,542  sick  out  of  an 
14,762.  This  includes  the  sick  at  post  and  regimental  hospitals  *■ 

Ca*At  the  various  posts  along  the  line  of  the  mam  stem  of  the  Vm 
Railroad  there  were  found  over  1,300  sick  m hospitals  alone.  , 

were  sick  in  camp  was  not  ascertained,  ^“rgimen^  anS 
strong  to  describe  the  condition  of  many  ot  the  reg 
the  post  hospitals.  They  were  sickening  to  behold.  jn 

We  would  recommend,  as  there  is  now  an  abundance  ( 

general  hospitals,  that  the  very  sjek  and  those  who  aie  likeh 


Chav.  XVIII  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


487 


tinue  so  for  any  length  of  time  shall  he  sent  to  this  city.  There  are 
hospital  cars,  provided  with  beds  and  all  the  necessary  conveniences  for 
the  comfortable  transportation  of  the  very  sick.  An  order  to  this  effect 
would  gladden  the  hearts  and  greatly  ameliorate  the  condition  of  mam- 
sick  and  suffering  soldiers. 

The  source  of  most  of  the  sickness  in  this  division  can  be  traced  to 
the  crowded  condition  of  some  of  the  tents  and  barracks,  especially  the 
Wedge  tent,  which  averages  five  and  a half  persons  to  a tent  of  8 by  if 
Bad  as  this  tent  is,  the  close  and  crowded  barracks  are  even  worse. 
Two  companies  are  crowded  into  a barracks  30  by  60  feet,  11  feet  high. 
The  air  is  most  foul  and  breeds  disease  and  death. 

At  Camp  Benton  the  commander  of  the  post  has  most  promptly  com- 
plied with  the  recommendation  of  Dr.  Warriner,  the  inspector  of  camps 
for  Mie'United  States  Sanitary  Commission,  in  improving  the  ventila- 
tion, but  with  the  number  of  inmates  no  amount  of  ventilation  will 
suffice.  The  regulations  allow  225  square  feet  for  6 men.  At  these 
barracks  there  is  but  60  feet  for  6 men,  which  is  entirely  inadequate. 

The  small-pox  has  made  its  appearance  at  several  posts  and  in  one 
ff  our  hospitals ; every  precaution  has  been  taken  to  prevent  its  spread- 
ing? but?  in  order  to  arrest  and  mitigate  the  horrors  of  this  dreaded  dis- 
ease it  is  necessary  that  some  obligatory  order  be  issued  to  colonels  of 
’egiments,  holding  them  responsible  for  the  .prompt  execution  of  the 
same. 

Among  the  other  duties  which  devolved  upon  the  Sanitary  Comrnis- 
lon  was  the  obtaining  from  the  community  at  large  such  additional 
neans  of  increasing  the  comfort  and  promoting  the  moral  and  social 
welfare  of  the  men  in  camp  and  hospital  as  may  be  needed  and  cannot 
)e  furnished  by  Government  regulations.  To  carry  out  this  object  ap- 
>eals  have  been  made  to  the  community  through  the  press  and  have 
)een  most  generously  responded  to.  The  various  Ladies’  Aid  Societies, 
is  well  as  individuals,  have  showered  their  offerings  upon  us.  From 
Massachusetts  alone  we  have  received  over  150  boxes  of  supplies.  We 
lave  already  distributed  over  18,759  articles,  consisting  of  shirts,  drawers, 
ocks,  comforts,  and  a variety  of  other  articles  of  comfort  and  useful- 
ness, besides  over  1,000  books. 

The  Commission  feel  the  necessity  of  having  another  medical  gentle- 
Lian  on  our  Commission,  and  would  respectfully  recommend  the  appoint- 
nent  of  Dr.  S.  Pollok,  a gentleman  of  acknowledged  ability  and  experi- 
nce  as  a sanitarian. 

JAMES  E.  YE  ATM  AN, 
President  Sanitary  Commission. 


'ol.  E.  A.  Carr: 


Boll  a,  January  4,  1862. 


Colonel  : I have  very  accurate  knowledge  of  Price  on  Sunday,  a 
^eek  before  you  moved.  He  was  in  Springfield  in  force,  artillery,  &c. 
>r  winter  quarters.  I will  try  to  make  it  warm  enough  for  him  if  lie 
tops  there.  Send  back  train  with  escorts  as  far  as  you  can  spare  it. 
our  messenger  of  yesterday,  2.30  p.  m.  from  you,  arrived  here  at  10 
; m-  1 011  ^re  then  very  properly  laying  quiet  during  the  bad  weather, 
here  was  a company  10  miles  east  of  Lebanon,  at  Chesby’s  Mill,  when 
W informant  passed  up  from  Springfield.  Better  look  into  that 
'Oint.  1 have  no  news  of  six  or  seven  companies  which  I ordered  to 
Lebanon  from  this  place  and  Salem.  Suppose  they  are  there  by  this 
one.  I hope  you  will  procure  forage  in  the  country  and  let  me  know 


488  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvn 

your  success  in  this  regard,  as  it  is  an  important  part  of  a difficu 

P^Ihevouclier  brought  by  the  bearer  of  this  would  have  been  pa: 
promptly  if  the  person  who  sold  the  property  had  signed  the  paper.  A 
he  has  had  the  trip  for  nothing,  it  would  be  well  if  you  could  pay  hi 
on  his  presentation  of  the  proper  receipt.  ^ , 

The  weather  continues  very  bad.  I have  ordered  to  be  ready  t 
morrow  my  whole  force  at  a moment’s  warning.  Hope  I may  soc 
receive  a positive  order  to  this  effect. 

Truly,  yours,  SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 

Brian  dier- General. 


Cairo,  January  4,  1862. 

Quartermaster-General  M.  C.  Meigs  : 

General  : The  mortar  and  tug  boats  have  all  arrived  from  Sail 
Louis  and  been  assigned  to  me  by  Quartermaster  Allen.  The  tu 
boats  are  officered  and  manned,  but  in  some  instances  not  proper 
officered.  If  it  is  understood  that  I am  to  have  charge  of  these  boat 
the  question  of  pay  and  rations  requires  to  be  settled.  Will  you  tlier 
fore  please  inform  me  if  I am  to  pay  them?  If  so,  it  seems  that  t 
better  course  will  be  for  the  acting  paymaster  of  my  own  vessel,  tl 
Benton,  to  enter  them  upon  the  books  of  that  gunboat,  and  we  pay  ai 
ration  them  as  we  do  the  crew  of  the  Benton.  . 

As  the  mortar  boats  (thirty-eight  in  number)  have  also  arrived,  it 
necessary  that  a master  superintendent  should  have  charge  oi  thei 
Under  my  directions  I have  appointed  Captain  Constable  for  this  pu 
pose,  a gentleman  who  held  a commission  as  major  in  the  British  La 
India  Company  service,  and  is  familiar  with  the  use  of  mortars,  ai 
comes  to  us  highly  recommended.  I will  pay  this  officer,  whose  ser 
ices  will  be  -highly  valuable  if  the  mortar  boats  are  fitted  out,  at  tJ 
rate  of  $2,000  per  annum.  A , I 

I respectfully  request  instructions  m relation  to  these  tugs  and  me! 
tar  boats,  especially  the  former,  as  the  officers  and  men  are  almo| 

clamorous  for  their  pay  and  subsistence.  . J 

I find  a great  pressure  bearing  upon  me  for  exorbitant  prices  I 
freight  and  for  steamers.  I have  in  one  instance  in  freight  cut  a b 
down  $2,000,  and  another  bill  of  $300  I paid  but  $100,  and  in  bo 
cases  informed  the  parties  that  I should  send  the  bills  to  the  Court 
Claims  at  Saint  Louis  unless  the  deductions  were  made,  which  we 
done,  the  parties  regarding  that  court  something  like  the  court 
chancery.  I believe  that  in  all  cases  the  flotilla  in  finance  has  bet 
comparatively  well  managed. 

A careful  person  should  have  charge  of  the  mortar  boats  m this  m 
during  the  winter  season,  and  I have  therefore  appointed  Captain  Co 
stable  for  this  purpose,  also  with  the  view  of  securing  his  valuab 
services  in  case  the  mortar  boats  are  to  be  equipped. 

The  tug  boats  were  not  in  good  condition  when  they  were  deliver* 
in  Saint  Louis,  and,  as  you  will  see  in  the  report  of  the  board  of  officei 
the  mortar  boats  are  far  from  being  in  good  condition,  as  then;  ma? 
zines  many  of  them,  leak  badly  and  are  otherwise  defective,  oti  < 
may  be  made  to  answer  the  object  of  their  construction. 

I have  the  honor  to  be  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  II.  I (JO IE. 

Flag-Officer. 


iAr.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  489 

fin  closure.] 

■xtraet  from  a letter  from  Theodore  Adams  to  Flag-Officer  A.  11.  Foote  ^ 
dated  Saint  Louis , Aio.,  January  3,  1862. 

I am  informed  by  Captain  Wise  and  Captain  Turnley  that  two  of  the 
st  four  tugs,  since  their  arrival  at  Cairo,  are  disabled  and  in  a leak- 
ig  condition. 

The  tugs  when  received  here  by  Major  Allen  were  in  a complete  and 
nished  condition,  and  since  then  have  been  under  his  control  and  in 
large  of  officers  under  his  appointment  and  pay.  They,  with  the 
ortar  boats,  are  no  longer  under  any  control  of  mine,  and  I cannot 
terefore  do  anything  towards  their  repair  without  orders  from  Major 
lien  or  yourself.  I will  cheerfully  do  anything  either  of  you  may 
quire  at  any  time,  but  cannot  be  responsible  for  any  mishap  to  any 
' the  craft  I have  built  after  they  have  been  taken  from  my  control. 
The  boats  referred  to  have  been  ordered  to  Cairo  by  direct  orders 
om  General  Meigs,  and  were  received  here  by  Major  Allen,  and  taken 
ider  his  control  when  they  left  this  city. 


tapt. 


Boll  A,  January  5,  1862. 


J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Beliable  news  to  Monday  last  40  miles  southwest  of  Springfield, 
rice  is  preparing  to  fight  at  Springfield.  His  re-enforcement  was 
ittery  of  six  guns,  two  of  them  rifled.  His  friends  estimate  his  force 
40,000;  our  estimate  at  20,000.  Our  cavalry  have  driven  in  all  the 
bel  pickets  to  within  17  miles  of  Springfield.  They  ran  in  on  Thurs- 
ty  night  in  great  terror.  I can  hear  of  none  this  side.  Weather  very 
cl.  Have  constant  rain  and  snow,  but  all  right.  Have  written  more 

Hy. 

SAML.  K.  CUBTXS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


ipt.  J.  C.  Kelton: 


Boll  a,  January  5,  1862. 


Sir:  Went  within  8 miles  Springfield  Thursday.  Union  man  had 
en  in  Springfield  day  before,  January  1.  Price  had  received  re 
lorcements  of  three  regiments  and  ten  cannon,  making,  as  there 
lieved,  forty-eight  pieces.  Colonel  Phelps  knows  Union  man  and 
links  this  report  reliable.  Major  Wright’s  force  is  at  Lebanon  ; Col- 
eel  Carr’s  about  20  miles  southeast  of  the  point;  Major  Waring 
urchin  g on  Marshfield.  I want  more  cavalry. 

SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


490 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  X^ 


Saint  Louis,  January  6,  186: 
Hon.  F.  P.  Blair,  Jr.,  Washington : 

Sir:  Yours  of  the  3d  instant  is  just  received.*  Don’t  trouble  yc 
self  about  Orders,  No.  24.  t It  will  be  rigorously  executed  in  good  ti 
There  has  been  no  disposition  to  relax  it  in  the  slightest  degree, 
growl  of  secessionists  don’t  trouble  us  a particle.  I expected  it. 
delay  in  its  execution  has  resulted  in  this  way : The  first  list  was 
fairly  made,  and  one  of  the  board  left  without  revising  it.  A i 
board  was  ordered,  composed  partly  of  citizens,  good  Union  men,  si 
as  Hain,  Patrick,  Greeley,  McPherson,  &c.;  but  they  did  not  have 
nerve  to  stand  up  to  it.  They  backed  down,  and  declined  to  se 
unless  their  names  could  be  concealed.  This  I would  not  consent 
I want  no  secret  boards.  Hence  the  delay.  But  its  effect  will  not 
less  beneficial  when  it  is  understood  to  be  an  act  of  mature  deliberafl 

You  have  no  idea  of  the  character  of  the  material  I have  to  w 
with.  The  German  troops  are  on  the  brink  of  mutiny.  They 
been  tampered  with  by  politicians,  and  made  to  believe  that  if  til 
refuse  to  obey  my  orders  and  demand  the  return  of  Fremont  the  G 
ernment  will  be  compelled  to  yield.  Meetings  to  this  effect  have 
held,  and  high  officers  are  implicated.  They  are  closely  watched,  i 
I have  the  threads  of  the  conspiracy.  Don’t  be  alarmed  at  an  explosi 
I am  prepared  for  it,  and  will  put  it  down.  I have  already  cut  off 
legs,  and  will  soon  get  its  head.  All  I ask  of  my  Washington  friei 
is  to  keep  cool  and  let  me  work  out  my  plans.  I understand  the  pr 
lem,  and  will  solve  it  in  time. 


Yours,  truly, 


H.  W.  HALLEOKj 


Saint  Louis,  January  6,  1862 

Col.  Frkd.  Steele, 

Commanding , c fic.,  Sedalia , Mo.  : 


Colonel  : I have  received  reliable  information  from  Lexington  t| 
Joe  H.  Nichols  and  Frank  Thomas,  released  from  arrest  by  you,  i 
the  most  active  and  dangerous  rebels  in  that  part  of  the  country.  1 
former  was  a member  of  the  secession  band  who  robbed  and  fired  up 
Union  men  in  Lexington,  and  Thomas,  it  is  said,  was  one  of  Joe  Slielbj 
party,  who  robbed  the  steamer  Sunshine.  Nichols,  while  on  his  M 
from  Sedalia  in  the  stage  to  Lexington,  pulled  a secession  flag  from 
pocket,  and  displayed  it  in  every  place  through  which  he  passed. 
over,  the  petition  of  Union  men  which  was  presented  to  Major  Chitt 
den  was  mostly  a forgery,  the  few  Union  men  who  did  actually  sigi 
being  forced  to  do  so  by  the  secession  friends  of  Nichols.  The  evidei 
is  very  strong  that  these  are  both  dangerous  men  and  should  ne 
have  been  released.  Greater  caution  should  be  observed  in  such  m 
ters,  and  hereafter  no  one  will  be  released  without  requiring  of  him ' 
oath  of  allegiance  and  parole  of  honor,  the  violation  of  which  shall 
followed  by  death.  I will  send  you  a blank  form  for  such  oath  a 
parole. 

Very  respectfully,  &c,  w HALIjEOK, 

Major-General 


See  Appendix,  p.  823. 


t See  p.  431 . 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


491 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , January  6,  1862. 

Irig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Palmer, 

Commanding  Officer  at  Otterville  : 

Four  hundred  rebels,  under  Poindexter,  are  seeking  to  make  their  way 
rom  vicinity  of  Renick  across  the  river  at  Glasgow  or  Brunswick, 
lend  messenger  to  Glasgow  and  Fayette,  with  directions  to  our  forces 
3 intercept  them  and  scour  the  country. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Saint  Louis  District, 

No.  1.  J Saint  Louis , Mo.,  January  6,  1862. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  the  headquarters  of  the  Department  of 
le  Missouri,  the  undersigned  enters  upon  the  command  of  the  Saint 
lOuis  District,  which  will  include  the  country  bounded  by  the  Missouri, 
[ississippi,  and  Meramec  rivers,  including  the  line  of  the  rdilroad 
'om  Pacific  to  Rolla  as  far  as  Lindsey’s  Station  and  a line  drawn 
Irough  that  point  from  the  mouth  of  the  Osage  River  to  the  Meramec 
!iver,  except  the  camp  of  instruction  at  Benton  Barracks. 

******* 


SCHUYLER  HAMILTON, 
Brigadier -General , TJ.  S.  Volunteers , 

— 


apt.  J.  C.  Kelton  : 


Rolla,  January  7,  1862. 


My  cavalry  entered  Marshfield,  22  miles  from  Springfield,  yesterday, 
ound  no  rebel  force,  and  fell  back  to  Colonel  Carr’s  camp  at  Widow 
tark’s,  on  Gasconade,  near  main  road  to  Lebanon.  Will  direct  for  few 
ays’  rest  at  Lebanon.  Weather  too  severe  to  operate.  Will  dispense 
ith  hospital,  as  directed  by  the  general.  It  was  to  be  rough  and  plain, 
ad  much  needed.  Real  sick  cannot  go  in  cars,  and  convalescents  will 
)on  be  turned  out  in  the  streets  of  Saint  Louis.  But  for  want  of  room 
ere  I will  send  many  forward. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Mo., 

No.  2.  j Rolla , Mo .,  January  8,  1862. 

This  district  and  my  command  is  modified  so  as  to  conform  to  the 
lodification  presented  in  the  following  extract  from  Orders,  NTo.  14, 
resent  series,  from  headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri : 

The  District  of  Saint  Louis,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  HamiL 
>n,  will  include  the  country  bounded  by  the  Missouri,  Mississippi,  and 
feramec  Rivers  including  the  line  of  the  railroad  from  Pacific  to  Rolla 
* far  as  Lindsey’s  Station  and  a line  drawn  from  that  point  to  the  mouth 
r the  Osage,  with  the  exception  of  the  camp  of  instruction  at  Benton 
arracks. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


492 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVI 


Headquarters  Department  of  tile  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , January  9,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Prentiss,  Palmyra , Mo.: 

General  Schofield  expects  to  encounter  a rebel  force  between  Eeni< 
and  Huntsville  about  noon  on  Saturday.  Send  a force  from  Huds< 
to  the  west  of  Huntsville  to  cut  off  their  retreat. 

H.  W.  HALLLGiX, 

Major -General. 


[January  9,  1862.— For  Halleck  to  McClellan,  in  reference  to  co-o 
eration  with  Buell,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  VII,  p.  539.] 


Boll  A,  January  9, 1862. 

Oapt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain  : The  needless  amount  of  stores  in  this  command  are  beii 
turned  over  to  the  post  quartermaster.  The  amount  transported  aroui 
from  Tipton  via  Springfield  is  surprising.  The  difficulty  of  procuru 
supplies  induced  every  officer  to  hold  fast  all  he  procured,  and  tu 
army  had  thus  become  immovable.  Over  200  wagon  loads  have  alreac 
been  brought  in  and  safely  deposited  in  buildings.  I have  appoints 
an  ordnance  officer  to  look  after  ammunition,  and  I find  large  quantitij 
unprotected  from  moisture  and  in  volume  unnecessary  for  a march 
double  this  command.  Some  of  it  I will  send  to  the  arsenal  and  tl 
rest  will  be  put  in  proper  buildings.  While  stores  are  being  thus  i 
moved  from  the  field,  I am  trying  to  have  distributed  and  equalized  tl 
proper  amount  for  convenient  use,  and  by  this  means  the  mobility 
iuy  command  will  be  vastly  improved.  The  arrest  and  trial  of  office 
bv  courts-martial  embarrass  the  command,  and  I hope  the  eommandii 
general  will  not  object  to  some  apparent  irregularities  in  courts-martia 
designed  to  get  rid  of  endless  quarrels  by  summary  disposition  of  vex 
tious  prosecutions.  The  enemy  is  in  force  at  Springfield,  but  he  ci 
be  and  must  be  driven  to  the  wall.  These  bickerings,  with  corps  change 
among  officers,  employ  too  much  time,  which  they  should  devote  to  tl 

enemy.  , 

My  cavalry  is  overworked,  and  yet  I do  not  like  to  draw  it  m,  Pj 
cause  it  greatly  annoys  the  enemy  in  his  means  for  procuring  supplie, 
I earnestly  desire  to  move  infantry  and  artillery  forward  to  supper 
the  cavalry.  An  effectual  force  against  the  rebels  in  Springfield  worn 
close  them  out  in  Missouri.  Three  more  batteries,  three  regiments  » 
infantry,  and  three  of  cavalry  would  be  desirable  for  that  purpose,  bi 
I would  risk  it  with  less.  Price  could  be  driven  out  of  Springfield  wit 
a much  smaller  force,  but  he  could  find  a plain  a few  miles  out  to  star 
upon,  and  it  would  therefore  require  more  to  induce  a surrender  < 
entire  departure  from  the  State.  As  a means  to  such  an  end  1 mu 
again  recommend  a depot  in  front  or  at  rear  of  Lebanon,  rioin  t < 
point  we  can  go  beyond  Springfield  without  a wagon  train,  and  i 
easy  to  hold  a point  like  Lebanon,  because  it  can  only  be  approach 

through  rough  defiles.  . , . _ v. 

I hope  the  general  will  excuse  suggestions,  which  seem  somewii. 
needless,  since  he  has  the  matter  in  contemplation,  but  my  proximii 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


AP.  XVIII.] 


49  3 


I the  enemy  and  the  obstacles  to  overcome  induce  me  to  present  the 
i'neral  with  whatever  occurs  to  me. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General . 


Mexico,  Mo.,  January  10,  1802. 
iij or- General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

General  : It  is  represented  to  me  by  many  of  the  most  respectable 
: izens  of  this  part  of  the  State,  who  have,  as  they  confess,  sympathized 
ith  the  rebellion,  but  have,  I think,  unquestionably  been  opposed  to 
; such  acts  as  bridge  burning,  &c.,  that  they  now  desire  to  pledge 
•emselves  in  the  most  solemn  manner  that  they  will  hereafter  dis- 
arge  to  the  fullest  extent  their  duty  as  loyal  citizens,  by  discour- 
ing  all  rebellious  organizations  and  by  giving  information  to  the 
hited  States  authorities  of  every  movement  of  the  kind  that  shall 
ime  to  their  knowledge,  provided  they  can  be  secured  in  their  persons 
(1  property  from  molestation  by  United  States  troops, 
ft  appears  to  me  that  by  exercising  a wise  discretion  in  granting  such 
feura-nces  of  protection  to  men  of  well-known  respectability  and  indu- 
ce much  good  may  be  done.  If  you  approve  of  this  proposition  I will 
[try  it  out  in  such  cases  as  I am  perfectly  satisfied  are  worthy  of  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding* 


Mexico,  January  11,  1862. 

agadier-General  Prentiss  : 

General:  I find  that  the  rebels  are  still  attempting  to  keep  up  their 
ganization  in  this  part  of  this  State.  As  you  are  doubtless  aware, 
j-rrill’s  cavalry  routed  Poindexter  on  the  8th.  I am  informed  they 
’re  to  have  attacked  Cobb’s  force,  said  to  be  several  hundred  strong, 

> the  9th  or  10th.  I have  not  heard  the  result.  There  is  also  a con- 
^erable  rebel  force  in  the  vicinity  of  Paris.  I am  satisfied  we  can 
:"P  down  their  organizations  only  by  permanently  occupying  those 
j'tions  of  the  State  which  are  favorable  for  rendezvous  by  post  of 
jantry  and  cavalry  so  near  together  as  to  continually  scour  the  entire 
■ mtry  and  strike  them  the  moment  they  make  the  first  attempt  to 
>i:anize. 

f this  plan  be  adopted  immediately  after  breaking  up  the  bands 
i t now  exist  only  a small  force  will  be  required  at  any  one  point, 
lircely  any  place  will  require  more  than  two  companies  of  infantry 
1 one  of  cavalry,  while  at  most  points  even  a less  force  will  be  sufli- 
ut.  I will  send  a portion  of  General  Henderson’s  command  to  break 
1 the  gang  about  Paris  and  remain  in  that  vicinity.  I can  also  easily 
f e caro  of  the  country  south  and  east  of  this  point. 

think  there  should  be  a force  permanently  in  Randolph  County,  say 
i Huntsville  or  Renick.  If  a few  companies  of  mounted  men  could  be 
led  to  Colonel  Birge’s  command,  he  would  be  quite  strong  enough  for 
purpose.  With  infantry  only  he  can  do  little  more  than  hold  a 
]»le  point,  and  must  be  quite  strong  even  to  do  this,  for  he  cannot 
1 vent  the  enemy  from  concentrating.  I am  satisfied  that  we  cau 


494 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  fCiiAi*.  XV] 


restore  quiet  to  North  Missouri  only  by  occupying  a large  number 
points,  at  least  one  in  every  county,  by  cavalry  as  well  as  by  infant 
In  this  manner  we  can  always  strike  the  rebels  before  they  can  coll< 
in  numbers  sufficient  to  meet  us,  and  by  keeping  our  troops  continual 
in  their  sight  so  demoralize  them  as  to  compel  them  to  give  over  t 
attempt  at  organization.  We  must  at  the  same  time  seize  and  hold 
the  men  of  influence  who  are  aiding  the  rebellion. 

Please  inform  me  whether  you  approve  of  my  suggestions.  I sh 
be  glad  to  co-operate  with  you  in  any  plan  you  may  adopt. 

Yours,  very  respectfully,  ; Mi  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier- General 


Poll  A,  January  11, 1862 

Col.  E.  A.  Carr: 

The  question  as  to  whether  you  shall  fall  back  with  cavalry  or  I me 
forward  other  arms  to  support  you  is  pending  at  headquarters,  Sa 
Louis,  but  you  will,  at  your  own  discretion,  move  back  to  avoid  a 
buscade  or"  superior  force,  which  must  be  avoided  also  by  scouts 
pickets  in  front  of  you.  You  must  still  have  an  excess  of  teams  a 
material  that  might  be  sent  in.  The  train  with  provisions  arriv 
safely,  and  I will  retain  what  cavalry  comes  in  for  service  here,  < 
sirin  o*  to  diminish  rather  than  increase  your  force  at  present,  and  ne< 
ing  cavalry  for  various  duties  here.  To  prevent  trouble,  I will  eitl 
call  in  Major  Wright  or  order  him  to  report  to  you,  as  the  two  sepafc 
commands  conflict  in  plans  and  purposes.  I am  sorry  to  hear  of  dep 
dations  committed  by  our  volunteers,  but  it  would  be  strange  mde 
if  some  crimes  were  not  committed  in  a community  of  over  a thousa 
active  men.  You  must  exert  your  best  judgment  and  restrain  as  far 
possible  the  men  under  your  command. 

I have  very  late  news  from  Price’s  army.  It  is  much  demoraliz 
and  poorly  equipped.  I think,  too,  it  is  melting  away  by  desertions  a 
discharges.  Your  dispatch  (XI)  by  Lieutenant  McPhail  was  the  la 
and  I think  all  have  arrived.  I do  not  usually  send  the  same  mess< 
ger  back,  as  be  and  his  horse  need  rest.  It  is  desirable  to  procure 
you  can  in  the  country.  Those  who  are  stripped  too  closely  can  b 
if  we  pay  them  for  what  we  take,  but  we  should  not  deprive  the  pc 
of  the  necessaries  for  the  families.  The  mills  should  be  required 
run  and  this  flour  should  be  taken  away.  Otherwise,  if  we  fall  ba< 
the  enemy  will  procure  it.  The  weather  continues  too  bad  for  a 
movement,  but  you  must  not  allow  yourself  to  be  surprised. 

Very  truly,  yours,  SAML.  R 

Since  writing  the  foregoing  I have  directed  Wright  to  move  to  Kali 
or  that  vicinity,  to  scout  in County,  and  support  you  on  tt 

angle-  SAML.  K.  OUETIS, 


Headquarters  District  of  Cairo, 

Cairo , January  11,  1862 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Bird’s  Point , Mo. : 

I understand  that  four  of  our  pickets  were  shot  this  morning, 
this  is  so,  and  appearances  indicate  that  the  assassins  were  citiz© 


iAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


495 


ot  regularly  organized  in  the  rebel  army,  the  whole  country  should  be 
leared  out  for  6 miles  around,  and  word  given  that  all  citizens  mak- 
\g  their  appearance  within  those  limits  are  liable  to  be  shot.  To  exe- 
ite  this,  patrols  should  be  sent  out  in  all  directions,  and  bring  into 
imp  at  Bird’s  Point  all  citizens,  together  with  their  subsistence,  and 
iquire  them  to  remain,  under  pain  of  death  and  destruction  of  their 
roperty,  until  properly  relieved.  Let  no  harm  befall  these  people  if 
icy  quietly  submit,  but  bring  them  in,  and  place  them  in  camp  below 
le  breastworks,  and  have  them  properly  guarded.  The  intention  is 
}t  to  make  political  prisoners  of  these  people,  but  to  cut  off  a danger- 
.is  class  of  spies.  This  applies  to  all  classes  and  conditions,  age  and 
x.  If,  however,  women  and  children  prefer  other  protection  than  we 
lord  them,  they  may  be  allowed  to  retire  beyond  the  limits  indicated, 
)t  to  return  until  authorized.  Beport  to  me  as  soon  as  possible  every 
iportant  occurrence  within  your  command. 

U.  S.  GBANT, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding, 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

^°*  ) Saint  Louis , January  11,  1862. 

The  system  of  passports  by  local  provost-marshals  in  this  city  and 
:ate  is  hereby  abolished.  No  passports  will  be  issued  except  in 
aces  in  the  vicinity  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  and  then  by  the  command- 
g officers  of  such  places,  and  only  for  passing  the  lines.  No  passport 
ill  exempt  suspected  parties  from  arrest  outside  of  the  particular  ju- 
sdiction  of  the  officer  by  whose  authority  it  is  issued,  nor  will  per- 
ns without  passports  be  arrested  except  on  well-grounded  suspicion. 
By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck:  * 

J.  C.  KELTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 

— 

Headquarters  District  of  Cairo, 

Cairo , January  12,  1862. 

1 neral  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Bird's  Point , Mo. : 

(The  citizens  brought  in  under  directions  of  yesterday  may  be  put  in 
<ats,  as  suggested  by  you.  They  can  use  the  tents  of  troops  who  do 
•t  go  out  with  you  or  such  surplus  tents  as  may  be  in  the  hands  of 
oops  at  Bird’s  Point.  If  you  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  parties 
ailty  ot  shooting  our  pickets  are  discovered,  inform  me,  and  I will 
uler  a court  or  commission  that  will  act  without  delay. 

U.  S.  GBANT, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Saint  Louis,  January  12,  1862. 
Ig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis,  Bolla: 

General  : In  preparing  your  command  for  the  field  you  will  observe 
• tar  as  possible  the  inclosed  memorandum  with  respect  to  transporta- 
>n.  All  additional  wagons  attached  to  companies  and  regiments 


Not  found. 


496 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVE 


should  be  turned  into  the  general  train.  You  must  be  very  rigid  ii 
this  matter,  as  every  organization  will  claim  double  the  authorized 
amount  of  transportation.  The  Ninth  Iowa  will  be  sent  into  the  field 
with  you  as  soon  as  possible.  It  cannot  be  spared  just  now,  as  mam 
of  the  bridges  would  be  left  unguarded. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Herron  reports  that  many  of  the  Reserve  Co™ 
left  their  stations  aud  refused  to  guard  the  bridges.  It  will  not  do  t< 
leave  this  road  unprotected.  Every  available  man  here  is  under  ordepd 
for  Cairo  and  Paducah.  Orders  from  Washington  required  three  divis 
ions  (24,000  men)  to  be  sent  down  instantly,  which  would  have  stripped 
both  you  and  Pope.  I begged  and  protested  for  time,  in  order  that  yoi 
might  drive  Price  from  the  State.  Orders  and  protests  have  been  re 
peated,  and  the  matter  is  still  undecided.  I have  detailed  one  regu 
ment  from  Carlin,  four  from  Benton  Barracks,  and  two  from  Prentiss 
command.  A part  of  Pope’s  will  be  withdrawn  as  soon  as  the  new  in, 
surrection  north  of  the  Missouri  is  suppressed.  If  the  Government  ml 
sists  upon  sending  more  troops  immediately,  I fear  your  expedition  milsl 
be  given  up  for  the  present.  I really  hope  not.  I expect  to  know  Ip 
to-morrow  or  next  day.  Nearly  all  the  organized  forces  in  Indiana 
and  Illinois  have  been  ordered  to  other  commands.  I have  no  troops 
just  now  to  relieve  the  Second  Iowa.  Will  do  so  as  soon  as  possible# 
I fully  approve  your  plan  as  to  a depot  and  the  immediate  movement  ol 
infantry,  but  I must  wait  further  orders  from  Washington.  If  they  d(fl 
not  come  by  Tuesday  I shall  telegraph  you  to  move.  I will  send  a re; 
serve  of  several  regiments  as  soon  as  possible.  The  Forty-third  lllmfia 
have  been  ordered  here  for  arms,  which  are  just  received.  IheA  will 
be  restored  to  Si  gel’s  division  as  soon  as  properly  armed.  Ibo  Reseivtf 
Corps  should  not  be  taken  into  the  field  ; a part  can  be  used  loi  dejjoj 
at  Rolla,  and  a part  sent  to  Pacific  to  replace  Herron  if  he  can  trust 
them  for  that  purpose.  I have  directed  that  he  replace  his  regiment 
with  them  as  far  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

M ai or -General.  I 


Headquarters  Mo.  State  Guard, 

Camp  at  Springfield,  January  12,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  , , 

Commanding  XI.  S.  Forces  in  the  Western  Department : 

General  : I have  received  information  that,  as  major-general  com 
manding  in  this  department,  you  have  either  ordered  or  allowed  tin 
arrest  of  citizens  in  the  pursuit  of  their  usual  and  peaceful  avocations 
that  men,  officers  and  privates,  belonging  to  this  army  have  been  takei 
prisoners  on  the  Kansas  border  and  conveyed  to  Fort  Leavenworth,  am. 
as  such,  and  for  no  other  established  offense  or  crime,  have  been  shot 
In  some  cases  I have  learned  that  my  discharged  soldiers  have  beei. 
seized  whenever  and  wherever  they  have  shown  tliemselv es,  and  t H 
they  have  been  by  military  coercion  forced  into  a servitude  unknown 
to  international  and  civilized  usages  in  such  cases.  I have  obtains 
information  that  individuals  and  parties  of  men  specially  appoints 
and  instructed  by  me  to  destroy  railroads,  culverts,  and  budges,  * 
tearing  them  up,  burning,  &c.,  have  been  arrested  and  subjected  to  t 
general  court-martial  for  alleged  crimes,  which  all  the  laws  of  wartan 
heretofore  recognized  by  the  civilized  world  have  regarded  as  m 
tinctly  lawful  and  proper.  I have  learned  that  such  persons,  w ei 


IAP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  497 

•ied,  if  convicted  of  the  offense  or  offenses  as  stated,  are  viewed  as 
bwful  subjects  for  capital  punishment. 

These  statements,  brought  to  me  in  various  ways,  I cannot  believe 

> be  correct.  It  is  upon  this  subject  that  I now  propose  to  address 
3u.  It  is  necessary  that  we  understand  each  other  and  have  some 
aiding  knowledge  of  that  character  of  warfare  which  is  to  be  waged 
y our  respective  Governments.  This  understanding  should  be  given  at 
ice.  It  is  desirable  both  by  you  and  me.  Both  armies  desire  it,  and 
le  exigencies  of  the  war  demand  that  some  certain  rules  should  be  the 
asis  of  our  conduct  and  control.  Delay  is  vital.  It  cannot  be  allowed. 
Ye  must  understand  each  other.  Do  you  intend  to  continue  the  arrest 
? citizens  engaged  in  their  ordinary  peaceful  pursuits  and  treat  them 

* traitors  and  rebels ; if  so,  will  you  make  exchanges  with  me  for  such 
$ I may  or  will  make  for  similar  causes  ? Do  you  intend  to  regard 
embers  of  this  army  as  persons  deserving  death  whenever  and  wherever 

Ley  may  be  captured,  or  will  you  extend  the  recognized  rights  of  pris- 
lers  of  war  by  the  code  of  the  civilized  world  ? 

Do  you  regard — and  state  as  such  the  law  governing  your  army — the 
BStruction  of  important  roads,  transportation  facilities,  &c.,  for  mili- 
uy  purposes,  as  the  legal  right  of  a belligerent  power?  Do  you  intend 

> regard  men  whom  I have  specially  dispatched  to  destroy  roads,  burn 
ridges,  tear  up  culverts,  &c.,  as  amenable  to  an  enemy’s  court-martial, 

' will  you  have  them  to  be  tried  as  usual,  by  the  proper  authorities, 
wording  to  the  statutes  of  the  State?  It  is  vastly  important  to  the 
iterests  of  all  parties  concerned  that  these  momentous  issues  should 
3 determined.  No  man  deplores  the  horrprs  of  war  more  than  I do; 
0 one  will  sacrifice  more  to  avert  its  desolating  march.  Each  party 
ust  be  heard.  Each  must  have  a kind  of  common  protection.  I am 
filing  to  afford  this.  It  remains  with  you  to  decide  the  question  with 
lat  frankness  which  attends  your  official  communications.  I await 
3ur  reply. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STEELING  PEICE, 

Major- General,  Commanding  Mo.  8.  G. 

Springfield,  January  14,  1862. 

P.  S. — A facsimile  of  the  above  was  dispatched  to  you  on  the  day 

• its  date.  Kindred  to  the  same  subject-matter  allow  me  to  call  your 
tention  to  an  extended  system  of  spoliation  carried  on  in  many  parts 
: the  State ; I mean  the  firing  of  private  houses,  barns,  mills,  &c.,  as 
so  the  burning  of  towns.  It  does  seem  to  me  that  the  necessities  of 
Bither  party  requires  nor  should  admit  of  such  vandalism,  and  although 
am  loath  to  believe  such  acts  were  perpetrated  by  your  authority,  I 
dve  seen  no  condemnation  of  them  from  yourself  or  the  commanders  of 
ly  posts  within  the  neighborhood  so  desolated.  Do  you  condemn  this 
rstem  or  do  you  intend  to  continue  it,  either  by  express  orders  or 
low  it  to  be  continued  by  your  silence  on  the  subject  ? 1 trust  that 
is  unnecessary  to  urge  upon  you  an  explicit  and  prompt  reply  to  this 
>mmunication  in  all  its  several  points. 

I am,  &c., 

STEELING  PEICE, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

32  r r — yol  vm 


498 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII, 


Rolla,  January  13,  1862 

Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton: 

A slip  comes  in  from  Major  Wright,  dated  12th,  saying  one  of  in 
scouts  has  just  returned  and  reports  5,000  cavalry  moving  this  wa 
from  Springfield.  They  report  they  are  moving  against  us.  He  say 
they  started  yesterday;  that  would  be  Saturday.  Shall  I move  n 
fantry  and  artillery  forward  to  support  cavalry '?  My  cavalry  is  maml 
at  the  Gasconade,  15  miles  this  side  Lebanom^  ^ ^ 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , January  13,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Curtis,  Rolla , Mo. : 

Direct  your  cavalry  to  fall  back.  Support  them  with  your  mfantr 
and  artillery.  Prepare  for  a general  advance  movement.  Will  wm 
you  this  evening.  I am  sick  with  camp  measles,  but  will  write  yo 
fully  to-night,  sending  you  additional  forces^  ^ HALLECK 


Rolla,  January  13,  1862 

Col.  E.  A.  Carr:  . 

Colonel:  I send  you  a copy  of  letter  sent  to  Major  Wright,  who 
hope  has  not  moved  east,  as  I ordered  him  on  Saturday.  Yon  will  mal 
vour  arrangements  to  move  hack  if  necessary,  hut  I hope  it  will  not  l 
necessary.  You  will  see  Major  Wright  is  directed  to  report  to  you  f( 
orders.  My  object  is  to  secure  unity  of  action  and  the  utmost  cautio. 
This  had  weather  will  probably  check  the  rebels,  but  I hope  you  wi 
not  allow  them  to  slip  up  on  you.  I have  started  provisions  yesterdar 
The  train  is  below  or  15  miles  out.  If  further  news  of  the  enemy  r 
quires  great  caution,  you  will  send  back  and  stop  the  provision  trai 
I have  telegraphed  for  permission  to  move  infantry  and  cavalry  ar 
artillery  forward. 

Truly,  yours,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Southwestern  District 


[Tnclosure.] 


Rolla,  January  13,  1862.1 

Maj.  Clark  Wright: 

The  slip  which  you  sent  in  relating  to  the  approach  of  cavalry  mducj 
me  to  change  the  order  relating  to  your  movement.  You  will  scml  u 
your  heavy  artillery  to  the  camp  of  Colonel  Carr  and  all  your  comma, 
except  vour  own  proper  command,  and  report  to  Colonel  Oa 
further  orders.  My  design  is  to  unite  all  your  force  to  secure  unity 
action  and  proper  success.  You  will  see  the  necessity  of  this  and  unt 
with  Colonel  Carr  in  all  necessary  preparation  to  resist  fisK.iult  a 
fall  back  if  necessary.  This  very  bad  weather  will  probablj  check  t 
rebels,  but  we  must  be  ready. 

Yours,  truly,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  Generat 


iap.  xm]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  499 

Saint  Louis,  January  13,  1862. 
rig.  Gen.  Samuel  E.  Cuetis,  Commanding , Eolla : 

General:  Your  telegram  of  this  evening  has  determined  me  to 
[•der  an  advance  without  waiting  any  longer  for  advices  from  Wash- 
igton.  I am  quite  sick  with  camp  measles,  but  do  not  mean  to  let  the 
ablic  service  suffer  on  that  account  if  I can  help  it. 

Your  suggestions  about  officers  in  arrest  are  approved.  You  are 
ithorized  to  suspend  their  arrest  and  order  them  into  the  field.  The 
rart-martial  will  close  its  proceedings  and  adjourn  sine  die.  Fletcher’s 
attery  will  leave  here  for  Eolla  Wednesday  morning.  You  now  have 
?enty-four  pieces.  This  will  give  you  thirty.  When  the  Ninth  Iowa 
ins  you  you  will  have  six  more.  Dodge’s  battery  will  also  be  sent  to 
olla  as  soon  as  General  Schofield  can  spare  the  section  now  with  him. 
hie  Forty-third  Illinois  will  be  sent  to  you  as  soon  as  they  are  better 
•med;  also  the  Second  Iowa  the  moment  I can  relieve  them.  Perhaps 
may  be  able  to  spare  two  other  regiments  in  course  of  the  week.  At 
ly  rate,  your  forces  will  be  superior  to  any  reliable  estimate  I have 
reived  of  Price’s  army.  As  your  advance  will  necessarily  be  slow,  the 
lditional  force  will  reach  you  this  side  of  Springfield  and  will  serve 
} a reserve. 

With  regard  to  routes  three  have  been  proposed — that  by  Lebanon, 
iat  by  Hartville,  and  a middle  road.  Colonel  Phelps  thinks  the  mid- 
e road  the  best;  others  say  not.  You  will  act  from  the  best  informa- 
m you  have  there,  which  is  better  than  I can  get  here. 

Accounts  are  so  contradictory  that  I am  unable  to  advise  you.  Leba- 
)n  is  certainly  the  best  military  line  if  the  road  is  equally  good. 
Distribute  transportation  as  directed  in  my  letter  of  yesterday,  ex- 
pt,  if  you  deem  advisable,  give  a limited  number  of  provision  wagons 
each  brigade  or  division.  This  is  generally  preferable  to  making  the 
'0 vision  train  entirely  separate  from  the  troops.  Ten  days’  provisions 
ill  in  that  case  go  with  each  command. 

Care  should  be  taken  about  having  provisions  cooked  in  the  morning 
r the  day’s  march,  and  also,  when  in  the  vicinity  of  the  enemy,  to 
tve  at  least  two  days’  cooked  provisions  in  the  haversacks.  If  officers 
sglect  this,  the  men  suffer.  Make  marches  at  first  short,  so  that  the 
en  may  be  kept  in  order  and  not  overfatigued. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


>1.  E.  A.  Care: 


Eolla,  January  14,  1862. 


Colonel  : Fall  back  cautiously  with  the  cavalry,  keeping  rear  guard 
xy  strong,  and  a stationary  picket,  with  no  baggage  except  what  they 
n carry  on  their  horses,  in  rear,  as  long  as  you  can  safely.  To  cover  your 
tiring  movement,  I send  out  infantry  and  artillery  to  meet  and  sup- 
•rt  you.  Unless  you  are  pressed  by  the  enemy  in  force  move  slow,  as 
lo  not  contemplate  any  further  movement  than  enough  to  keep  you 
t of  danger  of  superior  force.  I think  the  storm  must  have  checked 
| e enemy,  but  I am  now  authorized  to  move  other  forces,  and  intend  to 
ing  different  arms  in  proper  proximity  to  each  other.  Keep  tfie  com- 
anding  officers  of  infantry  and  artillery  and  myself  advised  of  your 
ovements.  You  perceive  the  counter  move  which  you  make  will  cause 
forward  move  here.  Weather  still  very  cold,  but  clear  and  moderating 


500  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 

a little.  I take  it  for  granted  Major  Wright  is  incorporated  in  your  com 
maud  and  cordially  co-operating  with  yon.  | 

Very  truly,  yours,  SAML.  K.  CUKTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Southwestern  District . 


Kolla,  January  14,  1862. 


Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain  : I am  in  receipt  of  the  general’s  autographic  letter  of  th 
12th  and  his  telegraph  half  past  eleven  of  last  night.  The  excessiv 
cold  weather  has  checked  the  forward  movement  of  the  rebels,  but  tli 
day  is  bright  and  wind  shifting,  so  I look  for  better  weather  and  conse 
auent  danger  to  my  cavalry.  Three  regiments  of  infantry  and  tw. 
batteries  are  about  moving  forward.  I have  at  the  same  time  order© 
the  cavalry  to  fall  back  slowly  and  cautiously  to  meet  the  other  arms 
In  this  way  I shall  keep  matters  in  reach  of  the  full  instructions  wine 
are  promised  in  the  general’s  letter.  . , ~ v ^ t 

In  relation  to  transportation,  I send  my  Special  Orders,  No.  15.  Is  a 
earnestly  labor  to  keep  within  the  general’s  rule  in  this  respect.  I w oul 
consider  the  U.  S.  Reserve  Corps  safe  at  Pacific.  They  are  coming  dow 
and  I think  will  soon  be  all  right.  I would  indulge  a good  many -in  lea e» 
of  absence  to  go  for  five  days  to  visit  their  families.  Those  who  hav 
gone  to  Saint  Louis  without  leave  before  I came  here  should  be  severel 

treated  so  as  to  discourage  such  insubordination. 

I wish  two  or  three  companies  of  Almstedt’s  fort  artillery  could  com 
and  take  charge  of  this  fort,  with  a field  officer  as  commander  of  th 

fort. 

The  train  is  waiting. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  r CUBTIS) 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  January  14,  186^ 

Mai.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army.  Washington:  I 

General  • Advices  received  from  scouts  and  spies  who  have  bee 
in  the  enemy’s  camps  lead  to  the  belief  that  Price’s  pretended  ret* 
was  a ruse  intended  to  deceive  us.  He  fell  back  rapidly  from  Osceo 
to  Snrin "field  giving  out  the  report  that  he  was  intending  to  retir 
winter  quarterf in  Arkansas.  It  was  expected  that  on  receiving  info 
mat  ion  of  this  retreat  we  would  withdraw  the  mass  of^ourfo^. 

,imi  Sedalia  for  operations  against  Ooiumbus.  as  soon  i 
had  been^ done  Price  wJto  return  with  - enforcement  from  Arkang 
„ a march  runidlv  to  Lexington  and  Jefferson  City,  m tne  mean 
Ws  emtssariesPwere  to  destroy  all  railroad  bridges  ud  tdegraph  hne 
so  as  to  prevent  our  sending  troops  against  him.  - i"-n^lirrectjr 

rrhc  time  of  the  burning  of  the  bridges  was  determined  b^  P 
signals,  of  which  we  have  discovered  thousands  scattered  throug 


iap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


501 


mntry.  Fortunately  I was  warned  in  time  to  protect  this  city  and 
le  principal  bridges.  Much  damage,  however,  has  been  done  at  places 
here  it  was  least  expected,  as  near  Quincy,  Palmyra,  Hudson,  Mexico, 
c.,  almost  under  the  noses  of  our  troops.  At  other  places  my  tele- 
;ams  were  received  in  time  to  save  the  bridges.  Evidences  of  this 
an  of  the  enemy  have  been  received  from  so  many  sources  as  to  leave 
3ry  little  doubt  of  its  correctness. 

The  arrangements  made  to  break  up  the  bands  of  bridge-burners  in 
ie  northeastern  counties  of  the  State  have  been  very  successful.  Imm- 
ediately after  the  burning  had  commenced  a small  force  of  cavalry 
arted  in  the  cars  from  Hudson  City.  In  this  way  they  surprised  a 
rge  party  of  secessionists,  killed  8,  took  a number  of  prisoners,  horses, 
c.  On  the  28th  ultimo  General  Prentiss,  with  240  of  Colonel  Glover’s 
ivalry  and  200  of  Colonel  Birge’s  Sharpshooters,  attacked  a body  of 
bels  under  Colonel  Dorsey,  about  900  strong,  at  Mount  Zion,  Boone 
aunty,  and  dispersed  them.  Enemy’s  loss  reported  150  killed  and 
ounded,  35  prisoners,  95  horses,  and  105  guns  captured.  Our  loss  3 
lied  and  11  wounded.  This  disparity  resulted  from  the  long  range 
‘ the  rifles  of  our  sharpshooters. 

Several  other  skirmishes  have  taken  place  and  some  200  prisoners 
ken.  Brigadier- General  Schofield  captured  about  50  in  the  vicinity 
' Mexico.  The  enemy  has  scattered  in  every  direction,  but  as  our 
oops  are  scouring  the  country  thoroughly  I think  many  of  thebridge- 
lrners  will  eventually  be  caught.  Most  of  them  are  from  Price’s  army, 
id  have  returned  home  under  the  pretense  that  they  were  Union  men 
ipressed  into  Price’s  service.  No  reliance  whatever  can  be  placed 
oon  these  pretended  refugees  from  military  impressment. 

A body  of  some  1,800  cavalry  was  sent  some  days  ago  to  make  a 
reed  reconnaissance  in  the  vicinity  of  Springfield  and  to  ascertain 
e position  and  numbers  of  the  enemy  and  so  far  as  possible  his  in- 
nded  movements.  The  commander,  Colonel  Carr,  was  directed  not 
attack  the  enemy  if  in  force,  but  to  cut  off  scouting  parties  and  to 
mg  on  his  rear  if  he  should  be  still  retreating.  A depot  of  supplies 
established  at  Lebanon,  and  the  infantry  and  artillery  at  Bolla  are 
fid  in  readiness  to  move  if  the  enemy  should  manifest  a disposition 
give  battle.  If  it  should  be  found  that  Price’s  and  McCulloch’s 
rces  are  as  strong  as  represented  and  that  they  are  disposed  to  dis- 
ite the  possession  of  Southwest  Missouri  a portion  of  the  troops  at 
idalia  must  also  be  sent  against  them.  If  not,  a part  will  be  with, 
awn  for  service  elsewhere. 

One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  with  which  we  still  have  to  contend  is 
e want  of  arms.  Of  the  11,000  rifled  arms  reported  by  you  some 
Beks  ago  to  have  been  sent  to  me,  the  first  (only  about  1,800)  arrived 
-day.  Where  the  remaining  9,000  are  and  when  they  may  be  ex- 
acted, I am  still  ignorant.  Those  which  have  arrived  will  be  immedi- 
ely  issued  and  two  additional  regiments  put  into  the  field.  Cavalry 
almost  the  only  effective  force  which  can  be  used  in  the  interior 
unties  to  keep  down  insurrections  and  prevent  a renewal  of  bridge 
liming. 

I regret  very  much  that  the  two  regiments  of  Illinois  cavalry  have 
ien  sent  to  Kansas.  There  can  be  no  pressing  necessity  for  their 
rvices  there,  while  here  they  would  have  been  invaluable,  and,  more- 
rer,  would  have  enabled  me  to  send  five  or  six  infantry  regiments  to 
airo  and  Paducah,  to  co-operate  with  General  Buell  by  a demonstra- 
an  in  the  enemy’s  rear.  The  order,  I understand,  was  sent  directly  to 


502 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap.  xvm. 


the  Governor  of  Illinois,  without  giving  me  any  notice.  I am  unwilling 
to  believe  that  this  measure  was  either  advised  or  approved  by  you. 

Another  serious  difficulty  is  the  organization  and  character  of  many  of 
the  troons  heretofore  raised  in  this  State.  Some  of  these  corps  are  not 
only  organized  in  a manner  entirely  contrary  to  law,  but  are  by  no  means 
reliable.  On  the  contrary,  being  mostly  foreigners,  officered  m many 
cases  by  foreign  adventurers  or  perhaps  refugees  from  justice  and  hav- 
ing been  tampered  with  by  political  partisans  for  political  purposes, 
they  constitute  a very  dangerous  element  in  society  as  well  as  in  the 
armv  I have  endeavored  to  remove  the  causes  of  complaint  for  want 
of  pay  and  clothing  as  much  as  possible  by  mustering  them  for  pay 
even  in  their  present  illegal  organizations,  and  I am  supplying  their 
places  as  fast  as  possible  by  other  troops.  The  Body  Guards  Marine 
Corps,  Telegraph  Corps,  Bailroad  Guards,  and  Benton  Cadets  have 
already  been  mustered  out  of  service.  The  Home  Guards  at  Boone- 
ville  and  Jefferson  City  have  been  forcibly  disarmed,  and  a number 
of  other  bodies  of  these  irregular  troops  will  be  discharged  m a few 
days.  Some  of  these  foreign  troops  are  most  excellent  men,  while 
others  are  without  discipline  or  subordination,  and  m the  field  are  little 
better  than  armed  barbarians.  Wherever  they  go  they  convert  all 
Union  men  into  bitter  enemies.  The  accompanying  letter  of  General 
Schofield  is  a fair  specimen  of  what  is  reported  of  them  m other  places. 
Indeed,  strong  Union  men  in  Southwestern  Missouri  (and  among  them 
Colonel  Phelps,  a Member  of  Congress)  have  begged  me  not  to  permit 
General  Sigel’s  command  to  return  to  that  part  of  the  country,  as  they 
robbed  and  plundered  wherever  they  went  friends  and  enemies  alike. 
I shall,  however,  be  obliged  to  employ  his  division,  as  I have  no  other 
forces  to  send  against  Price.  If  I could  withdraw  them  entirely  from 
this  State  and  send  them  to  Cairo  to  operate  in  the  enemy  s country  m 
more  compact  masses,  perhaps  I might  reduce  them  to  better  discipline. 

I nurpose  doing  so  as  soon  as  possible.  _ 

As  a specimen  of  the  kind  of  reliance  which  can  be  placed  upon  some 
of  the  foreign  adventurers  who  have  been  p Laced  m high  positions  m 
our  volunteer  service  I will  mention  the  fact,  which  has  been  reported 
to  me  from  very  reliable  sources,  that  a number  of  officers  held  a meet- 

UlO  Iiurn  ,,  m f in  Q war  With 


ing,  and  agreed  that  if  the  Trent  affair  should  result  in  a war  with 
Great  Britain  they  would  leave  our  service  in  a body  and  go  to  Canada. 

i n 11 gca  xrrU  AUAwnr  fliAV  Ti  I P53.SPU  RTIfl. 


The  officers  and  men  of  these  regiments  go  wherever  they  please,  and 
although  I have  issued  the  most  stringent  orders  on  this  subject,  the 
colonels  will  neither  enforce  discipline  nor  report  their  officers  and  men 

for  trial  by  courts-martial  for  military  offenses  daily  committed.  I he 
1U1  gl-lca  , J „ fiAlrliArs.  but  With  their 


men,  if  properly  officered,  would  make  good  soldiers , 
present  commanders  they  are  little  better  than  an  armed  mob  I do 
not  pretend  to  doubt  their  fighting  qualities,  but  the  y areut *erfrdefi 
cient  in  the  first  quality  of  a good  soldier— discipline.  I hope,  howerei, 
in  time  to  infuse  a little  of  this  essential  element,  without  which  anj 

army  is  worse  than  useless.  , , „ in 

I have  used  my  best  endeavors  to  reform  some  of  the  abuses  here  in 
regard  to  expenditures  and  the  waste  of  public  property  , but  with  sue 
officers  as  I have  to  command  it  is  almost  a hopeless  task. As i soon 
as  one  leak  is  stopped  a new  one  is  discovered  in  another  place.  It  the 
Government  will  commission  such  officers,  the  country  must  pay  tor 
their  incompetency  and  rascality. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  HAlLECK, 

Major-General. 


jhap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  503 

[Inclosuro.] 

Wellsville,  Mo.,  January  2,  1862. 

Col.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Missouri , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  urgently  request  the  immediate  action 
ff  the  commanding  general  upon  a matter  which  I regard  of  vital  im- 
portance. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  Warrenton  I found  a battalion  of  Reserve  Corps 
Cavalry,  under  command  of  Major  Hollan,  the  only  cavalry  at  my 
iisposal.  These  men  had  preceded  me  only  a few  days,  but  they  had 
already  murdered  one  of  the  few  Union  men  in  that  vicinity  and  com- 
mitted numerous  depredations  upon  the  property  of  peaceful  citizens. 
Since  that  time  their  conduct  has  been  absolutely  barbarous — a burn- 
ing disgrace  to  the  army  and  to  the  Union  cause.  In  spite  of  all  my 
efforts  to  the  contrary  they  have  plundered  and  destroyed  the  property 
af  citizens  (many  of  them  the  best  Unibn  men  in  the  State)  to  the 
amount  of  many  thousands  of  dollars.  Their  officers  either  connive  at 
t or  else  have  no  power  to  restrain  their  men.  I cannot  trust  them  out 
af  my  sight  for  a moment,  and  of  course  they  are  of  no  use  to  me  as 
aavalry  so  long  as  this  is  the  case.  I have  succeeded  in  detecting  five 
jf  the  robbers  and  have  them  in  irons  and  have  arrested  the  major 
and  one  of  the  captains  and  placed  them  in  close  confinement. 

I have  placed  Lieutenant  Sheldon,  of  my  staff,  in  command  of  the 
two  companies  in  this  place,  but  I cannot  long  spare  him  from  his 
proper  duties,  and  there  are  still  three  companies  at  other  posts,  and  it 
is  beyond  my  power  to  prevent  their  acts  of  robbery  if  I make  any  use 
ff  them.  No  doubt  there  are  some  good  men  in  this  battalion,  but  as 
i class  they  are  well-mounted  and  well-armed  barbarians. 

I am  told  there  is  at  Benton  Barracks  a considerable  force  of  good 
mounted  men  without  arms.  I therefore  urgently  request  that  a bat- 
talion of  them  be  sent  to  me  without  arms  or  horses,  and  that  I be 
authorized  to  dismount  and  disarm  Major  Hollands  battalion  and  send 
t to  Saint  Louis.  If  something  of  the  kind  is  not  done  soon  there  will 
i)e  very  few  Union  men  in  this  part  of  the  State. 

I will  as  soon  as  possible  forward  charges  against  Major  Hollan, 
Dap  tain  Winkel,  and  the  men  I have  arrested. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 
Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , January  14,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army,  Washington : 

General  : I have  received  a dispatch  from  General  Smith  at  Padu- 
cah, dated  the  11th,  saying  that  he  has  reliable  information  front  Colum- 
bus to  the  10th  that  no  troops  have  left  that  place  for  Bowling  Green 
save  the  two  regiments  reported  two  weeks  ago,  except  part  of  a regi- 
ment of  cavalry  which  has  crossed  into  Missouri. 

The  demonstrations  which  General  Grant  is  now  making  I have  no 
loubt  will  keep  them  in  check  till  preparations  can  be  made  for  opera- 
tions on  the  Tennessee  or  Cumberland.  I sent  three  infantry  regiments 
to  Cairo  yesterday  and  have  two  more  ready  for  to-morrow,  but  the  ice 


504 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVim  \ 


in  the  river  will  probably  prevent.  All  the  cars  on  the  railroad  have! 
been  sent  to  Cincinnati,  to  bring  forward  a regiment  of  cavalry,  destined  6 
as  I am  informed,  for  Fort  Leavenworth.  This  will  probably  delay  the- 1 

IU  Our^cavalry  sentfto  Springfield  found  Price  in  strong  j 

have  been  obliged  to  fall  back  to  Lebanon  and  probably  to  the  tra«- 1 
conade.  I have  ordered  General  Curtis  to  move  for^d1^0allJ^lj 
infantry  and  artillery.  His  force  will  not  be  less  than  12,000.  The  I 
enemy  is  reported  to  have  between  thirty-five  and  forty  guns.  Gen- 
era!  Curtis  has  only  twenty-four,  but  I send  him  six  pieces  to-moirow 
and  will  send  six  more  in  a few  days.  I also  propose  placing  a strong 
reserve  at  Rolla,  which  can  be  sent  forward  if  necessary.  The  weather  I 
is  intensely  cold,  and  the  troops,  supplied  as  they  are  with  verj  m-l 
ferior  clothing,  blankets,  and  tents,  must  suffer  greatly  in  a winter^ 
campaign,  and  yet  I see  no  way  of  avoiding  it.  Unless  lUcc  is  driven  i 
Pom  the  State  insurrections  will  continually  occur  in  all  the  central , 
and  northern  counties,  so  as  to  prevent  the  withdrawal  of  our  troops.  I 


January  15. 

Since  writing  the  above  I have  learned  that  one  of  the  transport 
steamers  got  aground  near  Sulphur  Springs  and  is  fro2*®  m\  ^IC 
troops  are  being  landed  to-day,  and  will  be  sent  forward  by  rai  road 
Nothing  has  been  heard  of  the  other  steamer,  and  it  is  presumed  that 
she  got  through.  All  water  transportation  to  Cairo  must  cease  for  the 

present ^ regpectfullyj  your  obedient  servant, ^ p AT/LROK 

Major-  General . 


Eolla,  January  15,  1862. 


Colonel  Osterhatjs: 

Colonel  : I have  written  Colonel  Carr  to  hold  on  at  Waynesville 
hmless  hard  pressed)  till  you  come  up,  as  I think  we  will  make  a depot 
for  supplies  atthat  place  or  that  vicinity.  The  proximity  of  streams 
and  the  convergency  of  common  roads  must  be  important  elements  m 
considering  the  propriety  of  such  a location,  and  I am  now  favorab  j 
impressed  with  Lebanon.  But  temporarily  you  may  keep  an  encamp- 
ment at  or  near  Waynesville.  Keep  me  advised  of  your  progress.  Dc 
not  hurry  forward,  and  try  to  camp  early,  so  as  to  give  time  for  Prel,ar(, 
ing  the  best  the  men  can  to  contend  with  the  inclement  season  these 
cofd  nights.  General  Halleck  writes  that  your  name  has  been  prej 
sented  for  promotion,  which  I hope  you  may  continue  to  deserve  and 
ultimately  secure. 

I am,  colonel,  very  tru  y,  yours,  gAML,  b.  CURTIS, 

j Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District  Southwest. 


Cairo,  January  15, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  C.  Meigs,  Washington , D.  C. : 

General  : To-day  I had  a trial  of  the  Benton,  to  ascertain  if  hei 
speed  and  power  Avere  sufficient  to  enable  her  to  be  handled  in  the 
strong  cu^entTn  different  parts  of  the  river  with  her  bow  down-streair 


Chap.  XVHL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


50S 


and  also  in  turning  and  maneuvering  in  action,  and  I regret  to  inform 
you  that  her  speed  did  not,  in  the  judgment  of  Commanders  Pennock 
and  Stembel,  who  I appointed  to  make  this  trial,  exceed  2£  knots  per 
hour  by  the  land  in  an  adverse  current  of  3 miles,  making  5J  miles  per 
hour  in  slack- water  5 so  slow  and  unwieldy  in  turning,  and  not  being 
able  to  back  against  the  current,  from  want  *of  power  in  her  engines,, 
that  these  gentlemen  came  to  the  conclusion  that  she  is  altogether  too 
deficient  in  steam  power  to  be  considered  at  all  available  as  a gunboat 
without  a heavier  engine.  Under  these  circumstances  I do  not  feel 
authorized  to  accept  the  Benton  without  having  further  direction  from 
you,  as  the  vessel,  with  her  present  engine,  could  not  be  handled  near 
the  rebel  batteries  at  all  effectively. 

The  Benton  is  so  strong  a boat,  well  plated,  and  with  so  large  a bat- 
tery, that  I concur  most  heartily  with  those  two  gentlemen  in  strongly 
recommending  that  a new  engine  and  boilers  be  placed  in  her  imme- 
diately. 

The  seven  gunboats  built  by  contract  I have  accepted,  after  an  ex- 
amination of  the  vessels  and  contract  by  Commanders  Pennock  and 
Stembel,  and  will  commission  them  to-morrow,  although  some  work  yet 
requires  to  be  done  before  they  are  fully  completed. 

I respectfully  call  your  attention  to  a former  letter,  in  which  I re- 
quested instructions  about  the  mortar  boats,  all  of  which  are  here ; but 
their  magazines  leak  badly,  and  I learn  from  Colonel  Symington  that 
but  one  mortar  and  no  beds  are  now  prepared  in  Pittsburg,  the  mor- 
tars and  beds  which  were  originally  designed  for  these  mortar  boats 
having  been  transferred  to  New  York. 

The  report  of  Commanders  Pennock  and  Stembel  will  be  forwarded 
to-morrow. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer . 

P.  S. — Original  sent  yesterday  by  Mr.  Eads. 

Please  telegraph  me  what  to  do  in  relation  to  and  with  the  Benton., 
I have  to-day  telegraphed  you  for  authority  to  buy  as  teamer  and  fit  her 
up  as  a magazine  boat  for  $18,000,  in  case  we  [go]  down  the  river  any 
distance,  as  the  gunboats  will  hardly  carry  100  rounds,  and  I am  pro- 
curing 300  rounds.  Lieutenant  Sanford,  the  ordnance  officer,  also  con- 
siders this  important.  Will  you  please  telegraph  me  directions  also  in 
reference  to  this  matter  of  the  magazine  boat.  I have  commissioned 
the  gunboats  to-day,  except  the  Benton. 


Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Washington , January  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  Missouri , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  Commanding  General  to  acknowl- 
edge the  receipt  of  the  report  of  the  Board  of  Army  and  Navy  Officers 
ordered  by  you  to  examine  into  the  condition  of  the  gun,  tug,  and 
mortar  boats  destined  for  service  in  the  Western  waters. 

From  the  information  received  from  the  Navy  Department  it  appears 
that  the  efficiency  of  a large  portion  of  the  flotilla  is  destroyed  by  the 
want  of  crews  (gunners).  Efforts  have  been  made  for  some  time  past 
to  ship  the  men  required,  but  these  efforts  have  entirely  failed,  and  at, 


■906 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XVITL 


this  late  hour  it  becomes  necessary  to  resort  to  other  means  to  utilize 
the  great  expense  that  has  been  already  incurred.  The  flotilla,  together 
with  the  naval  offlcers  on  duty  with  it,  is  completely  under  your  orders, 
and  it  is  expected  that  you  will  devise  the  means  of  overcoming  the  i 
obstacles  that  have  presented  themselves.  It  will  be  more  economical, ; 
and  it  seems  quite  proper,  to  use  volunteer  troops  to  supply  the  defi- 
ciencies in  the  gunners,  and  it  is  suggested  that  if  there  is  any  difficulty 
from  a surplus  of  officers  one  remedy  would  be  to  detail  a portion  of , 
the  volunteer  officers  on  other  duty,  while  a portion  of  the  uninstructed 
officers  hired  by  the  Navy  might  also  be  discharged.  . 

Your  early  attention  is  called  to  this  subject,  and  it  is  expected  thati 
some  means  will  be  devised  to  render  the  flotilla  efficient  at  a very 
earlv  day.  The  matter  is  placed  in  your  hands,  and  it  is  thought  that 
a full  interchange  of  views  between  Commodore  Foote  and  yourself 

will  result  in  a solution  of  the  difficulty.  . 

Your  views  as  to  the  best  employment  of  the  flotilla  are  invited. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  L TH0MAS 

Adiutant-  General . 


Saint  Louis,  January  18,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  E.  Curtis,  Commanding,  Bolla: 

General:  Yours  of  the  16th  is  just  received.*  I shall  immediately 
order  the  Ninth  Iowa  to  report  to  you.  I find  it  impossible  to  get  the 
Curtis  Horse  ready  in  time,  and  the  larger  detachments  sent  from  here 
to  Cairo  will  prevent  my  giving  you  any  more  regiments  from  this 
place ; but  I am  determined  to  give  you  force  enough  to  render  it 
certain  that  you  will  drive  Price  from  the  State.  I have  therefore 
ordered  an  entire  division  to  march  from  Otterville  to  join l your  com- 
mand. They  will  either  go  by  Linn  Creek  or  Warsaw;  if  the  former, 
they  will  direct  their  march  on  Lebanon ; if  the  latter,  on  Buffalo, 
wilf  know  by  Monday  which  route  is  deemed  best.  General  Pope  will 
consult  with  officers  who  have  been  over  both,  and  report  their  opinions. 
Maior  Allen  will  send  you  50  teams,  and  50  extra  will  be  sent  from 
Otterville  with  that  division.  The  Pacific  Bailroad  cannot  bring  them1 

W1M^orAllene1xpectet10,000  mittens  in  a few  days.  You  will  be  the 

fllCut° down  ^regimental  transportation  as  much  as  possible.  Get  as 
many  hand-mills  as  you  can  for  grinding  corn.  My  great ; fear  is  that 
the  Pacific  Bailroad  will  break  down,  and  there  may be: * ^£"5.9 
few  days  before  the  company  can  be  reorganized.  They  an greatly 
distressed  for  money  to  pay  their  operatives  and  fear  a stake.  CapUrg 
Sheridan  will  receive  $10,000  from  Major  Allen.  It  is  all  the  money 
we  can  rake  and  scrape  together.  We  hope  to  get  some  from  Wash- 
ington soon  If  necessary,  flx  a fair  schedule  of  prices  for  forage,  &c., 
and  take  it  giving  Union  men  quartermasters’  orders  for  payment. 
Take  Hie  bulLby  the  horns.  I will  back  you  in  such  forced  requisitions 
where  they  become  necessary  for  supplying  the  forces. 

We  must  have  no  failure  in  this  movement  against  Price.  It 

be  the  last. 

Yours,  truly,  H w.  hALLECK, 

l\.Tn\nr.  CrPnPYal. 


Not  found. 


3iulp.  XVm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  507 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , January  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  of  the  Army , Washington : 

General  : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a letter  from  Colonel  Steele, 
3ommanding  at  Sedalia,  in  relation  to  depredations  committed  by 
Jennison’s  men  in  Western  Missouri.  Similar  accounts  are  received  of 
:he  conduct  of  the  First  Kansas  Kegiment  along  the  Missouri  Kiver,  in 
;he  counties  of  La  Fayette  and  Jackson. 

These  men  do  not  belong  to  this  department,  and  have  no  business 
o come  within  the  State.  I have  directed  General  Pope  to  drive  them 
rat,  or,  if  they  resist,  to  disarm  them  and  hold  them  prisoners.  They 
ire  no  better  than  a band  of  robbers  ; they  cross  the  line,  rob,  steal, 
)lunder,  and  burn  whatever  they  can  lay  their  hands  upon.  They  dis- 
grace the  name  and  uniform  of  American  soldiers  and  are  driving  good 
Jnion  men  into  the  ranks  of  the  secession  army.  Their  conduct  within 
he  last  six  months  has  caused  a change  of  20,000  votes  in  this  State, 
f the  Government  countenances  such  acts  by  screening  the  perpe- 
rators  from  justice  and  by  rewarding  with  office  their  leaders  and 
tbettors  it  may  resign  all  hopes  of  a pacification  of  Missouri.  If  Kan- 
as  troops  are  again  permitted  to  come  into  this  State  to  commit  depu- 
tations, the  State  can  be  held  only  by  the  strong  arm  of  military  power, 
ffie  bitter  animosity  created  against  these  troops  is  naturally  trans- 
erred  to  the  Government  which  supports  them  and  in  whose  name 
hey  pretend  to  act. 

I hope  this  matter  will  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Secretary 
f War  and  the  Commanding  General  of  the  Army. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 

[Indorsement.] 

The  Secretary  of  War  has  read  and  considered  the  within  letter  of 
reneral  Halleck,  who,  as  general  in  command  of  his  department,  has 
11  the  requisite  power,  and  whose  duty  it  is  to  exert  that  power  to  pre- 
ent  robbery  and  plunder  within  his  district.  But  the  Secretary  is  not 
ware  of  any  act  of  the  Government  that  warrants  the  hypothesis  that 
; would  “ countenance  such  acts  or  screen  the  perpetrators  from  justice.” 
f General  Halleck  will  specify  anything  of  that  nature  that  has  been 
one  by  the  Government  the  attention  of  the  President  will  be  directed 
) it,  and  he  no  doubt  will  strive  to  remove  any  occasion  for  such  an 
uputation.* 

[Inclosnre.] 

Sedalia,  January  14,  1862. 

ol.  J.  C.  Kelton,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Department  of  the  Missouri: 
Colonel  : J.  W.  Smith,  clerk  in  the  Department  of  the  Interior,  in 
Washington,  is  just  in  from  the  neighborhood  of  Bose  Hill,  and  reports 
lat  Jennison’s  men,  under  Major  Anthony,  are  there,  committing 
epredations  upon  Union  men  and  secessionists  indiscriminately.  They 
are  burned  forty-two  houses  in  that  vicinity  and  robbed  others  of 
aluables  and  driven  off  stock. 

This  indorsement  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


508  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chat.  XVIIL  'j 

Mr.  Smith  says  they  took  his  wife’s  silverware,  furs  &c  He  esti-l 
mates  the  value  of  property  taken  from  loyal  citizens  at  $7,000;  and,  \ 
to  cap  the  climax,  they  shot  to  death  Mr.  Richards,  a good  Union  man  ,i 

without  cause  or  provocation.  . 

He  further  states  the  people,  except  the  strongest  Union  men,  arejl 
eoing  to  Price’s  army  for  protection.  The  force  engaged  in  this  busij 
ness  is  estimated  at  300  or  400.  At  last  accounts  these  banditti  were  | 
about  50  miles  from  here.  On  my  advice  Mr.  Smith  started  for  Kansas! 
to  report  these  circumstances  to  General  Hunter  and  request  him  to, I 
take  measures  for  the  recovery  of  the  stolen  property.  I 

I saw  a letter  from  a lady  this  evening,  which  was  full  of  taunts J 
and  no  doubt  many  people  believe  that  Jennison  is  carrying  out  the  j 

policy  of  our  Government.  . , , , 

1 I would  send  out  all  my  cavalry  to  brin  g in  all  these  marauders,  but  we , 
are  in  the  midst  of  a very  severe  storm,  and  it  is  probable  that  tlieyd 
could  not  be  overtaken  within  the  limits  of  this  State. 

Very  respectfully,  colonel,  your  ob6dl^|^n|TEELB) 

Colonel , Commanding  at  Sedalia . jj 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans.,  January  20,  1862. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Anthony, 

Seventh  Kansas  Regiment,  Leavenworth  City : 

Sib  : lam  instructed  by  the  general  commanding  to  inform  you  that 
he  has  read  with  surprise  your  reports  of  the  4th  and  13th  instanfc 
detailing  (that  of  the  4th)  the  burning  of  the  town  of  Dayton, Mo.,  ind 
(that  of  the  13th)  the  burning  of  the  town  of  Columbus,  in  the  samt 
State  * 

The  general  commanding  finds  no  evidence  in  either  report  of  2 
state  of  facts  sufficient  to  warrant  these  extreme  measures.  Youi 
reports  therefore  are  disapproved  and  held  in  reserve  for  further  con 
sideration  and  action.  _ ,.  , ^ . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  ' 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General.  J 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  January  20,  BoA 


Mai.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-  Chief  of  the  Army,  Washington : 

General  : The  cavalry  sent  to  vicinity  of  Springfield  found  tin 
enemy  in  force  and  were  obliged  to  fall  back  to  Waynesville. 
whole  force  at  Holla  was  ordered  m advance  to  re-enforce  them  an 
attack  Price.  Additional  troops  were  ordered  iroin  here  to  Kolla^O 
creasing  General  Curtis’  army  to  about  12,000.  I have  J“st  ' 

dispatch  informing  me  that  a council  of  Generals  Curtis,  Sigel,  an 
Asboth  had  decided  that  they  required  six  regiments  m addition 
those  ordered.  I can  send  no  more  at  present  from  Saint  Louis,  an. 
consequently  have  ordered  General  Pope  to  dispatch  one  division  iron 


See  pp.  45,  46. 


3hap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONBENCE,  ETC. UNION.  509 

near  Sedalia  to  join  General  Curtis  at  Lebanon.  This  will  make  his 
affective  fprce  over  15,000. 

This  winter  campaign  will  be  a hard  one  on  account  of  the  weather 
md  roads,  but  they  will  either  beat  Price  or  drive  him  from  the  State. 
Of  the  two  divisions  left  at  La  Mine  I purpose  sendiug  one  across 
the  Missouri  at  Bootieville  to  march  through  the  secession  counties  of 
Boward,  Boone,  Callaway,  and  Montgomery  to  Saint  Charles  and  this 
fity  for  transportation  to  Cairo.  They  cannot  be  brought  here  by  rail- 
road, and  the  road  north  of  the  river  is  much  the  best.  Moreover,  their 
presence  in  the  counties  named  is  important  to  break  up  secession  bands 
And  to  assist  the  Union  men  in  organizing  as  State  Militia.  The  condi- 
tion of  ice  in  the  river  is  such  that  I have  been  able  to  send  only  three 
)f  the  five  regiments  ordered  from  here  to  Cairo.  I hope  to  dispatch 
some  more  this  week.  I hear  nothing  of  the  two  regiments  ordered 
'rom  North  Missouri  to  Cairo  more  than  a week  ago.  It  is  very  proba- 
)le  that  they  cannot  cross  the  river  at  Hannibal.  General  Schofield 
lopes  to  be  able  to  spare  me  two  regiments  from  his  command  on  the 
S'ortli  Missouri  Bailroad  in  a week  or  two.  These  will  also  be  sent  to 
lairo. 

I have  received  no  information  in  respect  to  the  general  plan  of  cam- 
>aign,  and  I therefore  feel  much  hesitation  in  recommending  any  line  of 
derations  for  these  and  other  troops  which  I may  be  able  to  withdraw 
rom  Missouri.  Of  course  this  line  must  be  subordinate  to  some  general 
)lan.  I take  it  for  granted,  general,  that  what  has  heretofore  been  done 
las  been  the  result  of  political  policy  rather  than  military  strategy,  and 
hat  the  want  of  success  on  our  part  is  attributable  to  the  politicians 
•ather  than  to  the  generals. 

So  far  it  seems  to  me  the  war  has  been  conducted  upon  what  may  be 
-ailed  pepper-box  strategy — scattering  our  troops  so  as  to  render  them 
nferior  in  numbers  in  any  place  where  they  can  meet  the  enemy.  Oc- 
upying  the  circumference  of  a great  circle,  with  the  enemy  within  that 
ircumference  and  near  the  center,  we  cannot  expect  to  strike  any 
treat  blow,  for  he  can  concentrate  his  forces  on  any  one  point  sooner 
han  we  can  ours.  The  division  of  our  force  upon  so  many  lines  and 
>oints  seems  to  me  a fatal  policy.  I am  aware  that  you,  general,  are 
n no  way  responsible  for  this,  these  movements  having  been  governed 
>y  political  expediency  and  in  many  cases  directed  by  politicians  in 
rder  to  subserve  particular  interests ; but  is  it  not  possible  with  the 
tew  Secretary  of  War  to  introduce  a different  policy  and  to  make  our 
uture  movements  in  accordance  with  military  principles'?  On  this  sup- 
>osition  I venture  to  make  a few  suggestions  in  regard  to  operations  in 
he  West. 

The  idea  of  moving  down  the  Mississippi  by  steam  is,  in  my  opinion, 
mpracticable,  or  at  least  premature.  It  is  not  a proper  line  of  opera- 
ions,  at  least  now.  A much  more  feasible  plan  is  to  move  up  the 
Cumberland  and  Tennessee,  making  Nashville  the  first  objective  point. 
Ckis  would  turn  Columbus  and  force  the  abandonment  of  Bowling 
Ireen.  Columbus  cannot  be  taken  without  an  immense  siege  train 
11  d a terrible  loss  of  life.  I have  thoroughly  studied  its  defenses; 
hey  are  very  strong.  But  it  can  be  turned,  paralyzed,  and  forced  to 
urrender.  This  line  of  the  Cumberland  or  Tennessee  is  the  great 
entral  line  of  the  Western  theater  of  war,  with  the  Ohio  below  the 
aouth  of  Green  Biver  as  the  base  and  two  good  navigable  rivers 
xtending  far  into  the  interior  of  the  theater  of  operations.  But  the 
>lan  should  not  be  attempted  without  a large  force,  not  less  than 
0,000  effective  men. 


510 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


In  connection  with  this  movement  I would  move  a small  column  of, 
sav  10  000  men  from  Ironton  on  Pocahontas  and  Jacksonport  m 
Arkansas  to  cut  the  armies  of  Price  and  McIntosh  from  their  depots  , 
of  supplies  at  these  places.  Price  would  be  thus  compelled  to  fall! 
back  ^>n  Fort  Smith  or  to  advance  to  the  relief  of  these  towns.  In 
either  case  Southwestern  Missouri  would  be  relieved  of  his  presence. 
The  forces  I have  sent  against  him  will  drive  him  out  of  this  State,,  { 
but  they  cannot  pursue  him  into  Arkansas  on  the  line  of  his  retreat,  j 
that  would  be  folly  on  our  part.  I would  also  take  and  hold  New 
Madrid,  so  as  to  cut  off  river  communication  from  the  South  withi 
Columbus.  The  occupation  of  New  Madrid  would  entirely  relieve] 
Tniro  and  almost  the  whole  garrison  could  he  withdrawn  from  that  ! 
pS  This“wouId  require  the  occupation  of  Green  River  with 
only  a small  force.  Johnston  and  Buckner  would  not  venture  to  cross 
that  river  with  a large  army  in  their  rear  on  the  Cumberland.  If  they] 
did,  their  fate  would  be  sealed.  . 

I am  ignorant  of  General  Buell’s  forces  or  plans.  If  he  is  strong 
enough  to  fight  the  enemy  at  Bowling  Green  or  to  turn  that  place  and 
forceShim  to  fall  back  in  the  direction  of  Nashville  the  same  object 
mav  be  accomplished:  but  to  operate  both  on  Green  River  and  on  th< 
Cumberland  with  the  enemy  at  Bowling  Green  is  to  move  on  converg  < 
ing  exterior  lines  with  the  enemy  inside  of  the  angle — always  a most, 
hazardous  operation,  unless  each  of  the  exterior  forces  is  superior  t( 
the  euemy.  Under  any  circumstances  it  is  bad  strategy,  because  it 
reauires  a double  force  to  acomplish  a single  object. 

To  carry  out  the  plan  proposed  would  make  it  necessary  to  suspenci 
all  minor 'operations.  I understand  troops  are  being  concentrated  ai 
Fort  Leavenworth  to  move  on  Western  Arkansas  and  Texas.  Such ■ 
project,  if  it  be  contemplated,  is  contrary  to  every  military  rule.  Troopy 
must  be  sent  to  abase  hundreds  of  miles  from  any  enemy  at  an  ini 
mense  cost  of  transportation.  The  line  of  operation  is  exterior  and 
beyond  relief,  and  the  expense  of  supplies  must  be  enormous.  It  cat 
lead  to  no  possible  military  result,  unless  made  so  large  as  to  cripph 
or  paralyze  any  movement  on  a truly  strategic  line.  It  certainly  is  no 
eT military  operation.  It  may,  however,  be  intended  to  gratify  soin, 
political  partisan.  If  it  be  intended  to  check  Price  s army,  that  can  b< 
much  better  accomplished  by  a line  parallel  to  or  near  to  the  man 
one,  viz,  on  Pocahontas  and  Jacksonport,  the  depots  of  his  supPhes 

The  main  central  line  will  also  require  the  withdrawal  of  all  avm 
able  troops  from  this  State;  also  those  m Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Wis 
consin  and  Ohio,  which  are  armed  and  still  to  be  armed  and  also  th 
transfer  to  that  rente  or  near  it  of  all  the  Kentucky  troops  not  re 
quired  to  secure  the  line  of  Green  Biver. 

° The  force  at  Cairo  and  on  the  Ohio  River  below  of  ^ 

Biver  is  now  about  15,000.  Seven  regiments  have  just  been  ordere< 
there  from  Missouri.  By  the  middle  or  last  of  February  I hope  to  sen* 
about  15  000  more.  If  30,000  or  40,000  can  be  added  from tlm  sourc^ 
indicated  there  will  be  sufficient  for  holding  Cairo,  1 oit  Holt,  . 
Paducah,  and  to  form  the  column  proposed.  f , , | 

could  threaten  Pocahontas  until  a sufficient  lorce  could  be  detache 
from  Curtis’  army  at  Springfield  to  take  and  hold  New  Madr 
Jacksonport.  So  long  as  the  enemy  controls  the  Mississipiu  ^ 
Columbus  it  might  not  be  safe  to  attempt  the  occupation  of 
Madrid  before  moving  up  the  Cumberland  or  Tennessee, XS 
large  force  might  at  any  time  be  thrown  across  the  nver  from  Golun 
bus  to  retake  that  place  if  once  captured  by  us. 


CnAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


511 


These  suggestions  are  hastily  written  out,  but  they  are  the  result  of 
much  anxious  inquiry  and  mature  deliberation.  I am  confident  that 
the  plan,  if  properly  carried  out,  would  produce  important  results.  I 
also  believe  it  to  be  feasible. 

I have  not  designated  any  particular  line  or  lines  of  movement. 
That  must  be  a matter  of  further  study  if  the  general  idea  should  be 
approved.  Perhaps  the  main  column  should  move  from  Smithland. 
between  the  rivers,  by  Dover,  &c.  Perhaps  the  line  east  of  the  Cum- 
berland or  that  west  of  the  Tennessee  would  be  preferable.  These* 
questions,  however,  are  matters  easily  determinable. 

I have  been  sick  for  more  than  a week  with  the  measles,  and  several 
members  of  my  staff  are  unable  to  attend  to  any  duty.  Under  these 
aircumstances  some  delay  must  occur  in  answering  the  communications, 
from  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  January  21,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  E.  Curtis,  Commanding , cfic.,  Holla: 

General  : Yours  of  the  19th  is  received.*  I have  already  informed 
y'uu  that  the  Ninth  Iowa  and  a division  from  General  Pope?s  command, 
lave  been  ordered  to  report  to  you.  This  will  make  your  force  over 
L5,000  men.  Should  the  Benton  Hussars  and  the  Forty-third  Illinois 
96  prepared  in  time  for  the  field  they  may  be  sent  to  your  command, 
[f  not,  they  must  go  elsewhere.  The  Second  Iowa  cannot  be  relieved 
aefore  the  last  of  next  week,  and  it  is  still  uncertain  when  the  Cur- 
ls Horse  will  be  ready  for  the  field.  We  have  neither  horses  nor 
wins  for  them  at  present.  Brigades  and  divisions  must  be  made  up 
iccording  to  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case  and  the  exi- 
gencies of  the  service.  If  I were  to  attempt  to  gratify  the  wishes  of 
>articular  commands  I should  be  obliged  to  transfer  half  the  troops  in 
his  department  at  an  enormous  expense,  at  a time  wdien  the  Quarter- 
naster’s  Department  has  not  a single  cent  to  pay  necessary  expenses, 
t cannot  be  done  and  will  not  be  attempted.  I doubt  very  much 
vhether  I can  send  you  any  more  artillery  than  that  taken  by  the  di- 
dsion  from  Sedalia.  If  possible  I will  send  you  Mann7s  or  Spoofs,  as- 
best  can.  I find  it  utterly  impossible  to  unite  fragments  of  regiments 
(o  as  to  satisfy  either  men  or  officers  and  Governors  of  States. 

I must  call  your  attention  to  certain  irregularities.  Your  dissolution 
>f  the  general  court-martial  was  contrary  to  law.  When  the  officers 
composing  the  court  are  ordered  into  the  field  the  court  ceases  to  act  as 
ucli,  but  it  cannot  be  dissolved  or  the  prisoners  released  except  by 
he  authority  ordering  it. 

Again,  your  Special  Orders,  No.  41,  ordering  men  from  General  Sher- 
.nan’s  command,  is  entirely  irregular.  You  cannot  give  any  orders  to 
roops  at  Benton  Barracks.  You  should  have  made  a requisition  on 
ne  for  the  corporal  and  men  wanted.  These  may  appear  small  mat- 
ers, but  they  create  difficulties  and  annoyances  which  it  takes  much 
>i  my  time  to  arrange.  It  is  just  as  easy  to  follow  the  law  and  regula- 
10ns  as  it  is  to  violate  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


'Not  found. 


.512 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap.  XVUI. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis . January  21,  1802. 


Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope  : 

The  division  to  be  organized 
should  not  exceed  4,000. 

Telegraph  me  which  route  is 
>start. 


and  sent  to  General  Curtis7  command! 

preferable,  and  when  it  will  be  ready  toi 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General.  , 


Otter ville,  January  21,  1862.  ] 
Major-General  HAlleck:  . T. 

widXsfsf  0™^  steo^U^yre^en^wo  battenes^and  faJ 

wagons  would  accompany  division  from  here.  The  dmsion  wii  1 
TPfldv  to  move  anv  day  you  name. 

Advise  me  what  instructions  to  give  to  commandjngoffif^r.^^ 

Brigadier  General,  Commanding.  | 


Chief  Asst.  Quartermaster’s 


Office,  Dist.  of  Cairo, 
Cairo.  January  21,  1862. 


Capt.  Lewis  B.  Parsons,  . . 

Assistant  Quartermaster,  Saint  Louis: 

Captain  : What  does  Government  intend  to  do  1 This  departmen 

« 5S5K. « 

Uoitio-  stained  bv  Government.  I have  written  to  Saint  .Louis  an 
Washington  and  itavails  nothing,  and  if  my  whole  beaH  and  soul  wa 
nnf  in  the  cause  I would  never  write  another  word  on  the  subject,  bn 
let  matters  float  I assure  you;  and  a few  days  will  prove  my  assei 
tion,  that  unless  ^ Government  furnishes  this  department  witti  inn* 
1-ransnortation,  &c.,  the  whole  concern  will  sink  so  low  that  the  di aj 
resurrection  will  only  raise  it.  Laborers  have  not  been  paid  a dune  f 
;S  or  seven  months ; don’t  care  whether  they  work  ^ M 
don’t  take  any  interest  in  anything  Gov^in^ntowes  evmy  ody  an 
everything,  from  small  petty  amounts  to  large.  Liabdities  more  pien. 

than  Confederate  scrip  and  worth  less.  a^X?o  buv^ 

riving  daily.  Nothing  to  supply  them  with,  and  no  to  buyo 

men  to  work.  No  transportation  for  ourselves  or  any  one  else* 

To  tell  you  the  truth  we  are  on  our  last  legs,  and  I have  made 
Pmt  anneal  in  behalf  of  Government  unless  it’s  to  a higher  power,  f 

ttmsws  - w AsrsEas 


way  aiy  SNSSt  Utt  P-M,  .ha.  ' 8 

situation  of  affairs  herel  IT  you  think  not  1 . hope  y 


not  know  the  situation  ot  anairs  uere  . - V’  ” t0nishe 

will  inform  him  at  once,  for  if  he  should  come  here  astoms 

^nd  annoyed  to  find  us  m such  a condition.  The  g 


Chap.  XVIII.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


513 


and  myself  have  done  our  best  to  bring  about  better  results,  but  our 
wants  are  not  supplied  or  even  noticed. 

Eespectfully,  your  friend,  in  haste, 

A.  S.  BAXTEE, 
Assistant  Quartermaster. 

[Indorsements.] 

January  25,  1862. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  Major-General  McClellan  for  his  perusal. 
Unless  the  quartermaster’s  department  here  is  furnished  with  funds 
>oon  it  will  be  impossible  to  organize  the  expedition  from  Cairo*  These 
etters  show  the  condition  of  affairs  not  only  at  Cairo  but  throughout 
;he  department. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 

January  30,  1862. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  for  his  in- 
ormation. 

I know  the  fact  that  in  the  spring  (April  and  May)  there  was  a great 
deficiency  of  funds  at  Cairo.  The  public  interests  require  as  prompt 
action  as  possible  in  this  case. 

GEO.  B.  McCLELLAX, 

Major-  General , Commanding  U.  8.  Army. 


Saint  Louis,  January  22,  1862. 
laj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan: 

Xo  complete  returns  for  December  have  been  received.  Whole  number 
l department  will  probably  amount  to  105,000  on  paper.  Several  ir- 
egular  corps  have  been  mustered  out  since  1st  instant.  More  will  be 
s soon  as  money  is  received  to  pay  them.  Large  percentage  now 
ick. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 


Boll  A,  January  22,  1862. 


Captain  : On  the  receipt  of  the  general’s  letter  of  the  18th,  giving 
e further  assurances  of  ability  and  determination  to  push  this  column 
irough,  I immediately  ordered  Colonels  Carr  and  Osterhaus  to  move 
award  to  Lebanon,  and  ordered  other  troops  to  Waynesville  to  guard 
y stores  there  and  support  the  Lebanon  position.  The  Lebanon  depot 
ill  now  be  the  main  one,  and  I shall  follow  the  general’s  order  to  re- 
ave supplies  peaceably,  if  I can;  forcibly,  if  I must.  The  only  thing 
fear  in  regard  to  the  troops  coming  from  Tipton  is  delay,  but  this  I 
ippose  is  unavoidable.  The  opinion  here  is  that  the  route  by  Linn- 
lle  is  most  certain  of  success.  I shall  be  anxious  to  know  when  they 
art  and  how  they  progress  and  who  commands.  Supplies  being  the 
ain  question  in  moving  armies  in  America,  especially  in  a sparsely- 
ttled  portion,  my  main  efforts  are  devoted  to  that  matter,  and  my 
33  r r — yol  yiii 


514  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  |Ch*p.  xvm. 


teams,  means,  and  men  that  can  aid  in  it  will  he  pressed  with  the 
utmostenergy^,  ^ respectfully,  your  obedmnt^ervant^^ 

Brigadier- General . 


Saint  Louis,  January  22, 1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis, 

Commanding , &e .,  Bolla , Mo. : , 

s A 

Creek  to  DeDanon.  a ^ provisions,  wiU  accompany  the 

SSstsis*—  s= 

“S';;'1™  w>  ■*» 1 “» ”l* 

and  scrape  together  is  wanted  in  another  direction. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  jj^lleCK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  op  the  Missouri, 

^ Saint  Louis , January  22,  1862. 


Mai  Gen.  Georoe  B.  McClellan, 

J General-in-Chief  of  the  Army,  Washington.  I 

arrangement,  and  will  cheerfully  a y ehmihl  he  very  sorry  t< 

« ‘r » » v*  “ £ ^ ° 

W.  HALLBOK. 


Saint  Louis,  January  22,  1862.  | 
General  Sterling  Price,  Commanding,  fc';  receivec 

General:  Your  letter,  dated  frontier  and  at  For 

Leavenworth  a^notCde™  Ty  command.  In  regard  to  them  I respect 


UP.  XVIII.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


515 


illy  refer  you  to  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter,  commanding  Department  of 
Kansas,  headquarters  at  Fort  Leavenworth. 

You  also  complain  that  u individuals  and  parties  of  men  specially 
^pointed  and  instructed  by  you  to  destroy  railroads,  culverts,  and 
ridges,  by  tearing  them  up,  burning,  &c.,  have  been  arrested  and  sub- 
cted  to  a general  court-martial  for  alleged  crimes.”  This  statement 
, in  the  main,  correct.  Where  u individuals  and  parties  of  men” 
olate  the  laws  of  war  they  will  be  tried,  and  if  found  guilty  will  cer- 
inly  be  punished,  whether  acting  under  your  u special  appointment 
id  instructions”  or  not.  You  must  be  aware,  general,  that  no  orders 
? yours  can  save  from  punishment  spies,  marauders,  robbers,  incen- 
aries,  guerrilla  bands,  &c.,  who  violate  the  laws  of  war.  You  cannot 
ve  immunity  to  crime.  But  let  us  fully  understand  each  other  on 
lis  point.  If  you  send  armed  forces,  wearing  the  garb  of  soldiers  and 
ily  organized  and  enrolled  as  legitimate  belligerents,  to  destroy  rail- 
>ads,  bridges,  &c.,  as  a military  act,  we  shall  kill  them,  if  possible,  in 
>en  warfare,  or,  if  we  capture  them,  we  shall  treat  them  as  prisoners 
f war. 

But  it  is  well  understood  that  you  have  sent  numbers  of  your  adher- 
its,  in  the  garb  of  peaceful  citizens  and  under  false  pretenses,  through 
ir  lines  into  Northern  Missouri,  to  rob  and  destroy  the  property  of 
nion  men  and  to  burn  and  destroy  railroad  bridges,  thus  endangering 
le  lives  of  thousands,  and  this,  too,  without  any  military  necessity  or 
)ssible  military  advantage.  Moreover,  peaceful  citizens  of  Missouri, 
lietly  working  on  their  farms,  have  been  instigated  by  your  emis- 
iries  to  take  up  arms  as  insurgents,  and  to  rob  and  plunder  and  to 
>mmit  arson  and  murder.  They  do  not  even  act  under  the  garb  of 
•ldiers,  but  under  false  pretenses  and  in  the  guise  of  peaceful  citizens, 
ou  certainly  will  not  pretend  that  men  guilty  of  such  crimes,  although 
specially  appointed  and  instructed  by  you,”  are  entitled  to  the  rights 
id  immunities  of  ordinary  prisoners  of  war.  If  you  do,  will  you  refer 
e to  a single  authority  on  the  laws  of  war  which  recognizes  such  a 
aim  ? 

You  may  rest  assured,  general,  that  all  prisoners  of  war  not  guilty 
‘ crime  will  be  treated  with  all  proper  consideration  and  kindness, 
ith  the  exception  of  being  properly  confined,  they  will  be  lodged 
id  fed,  and  where  necessary  clothed,  the  same  as  our  own  troops.  1 
a sorry  to  say  that  our  prisoners  who  have  come  from  your  camps 
> not  report  such  treatment  on  your  part.  They  say  that  you  gave 
em  no  rations,  no  clothing,  no  blankets,  but  left  them  to  perish  with 
ant  and  cold.  Moreover,  it  is  believed  that  you  subsist  your  troops 
t robbing  and  plundering  the  non-combatant  Union  inhabitants  of 
e southwestern  counties  of  this  State.  Thousands  of  poor  families 
ive  fled  to  us  for  protection  and  support.  They  say  that  your  troops 
bbed  them  of  their  provisions  and  clothing,  carrying  away  their  shoes 
id  bedding,  and  even  cutting  cloth  from  their  looms,  and  that  you 
ive  driven  women  and  children  from  their  homes  to  starve  and  perish 
the  cold.  I have  not  retaliated  such  conduct  upon  your  adherents 
kre,  as  I have  no  intention  of  waging  such  a barbarous  warfare ; but 
shall,  whenever  I can,  punish  such  crimes,  by  whomsoever  they  may 
J committed. 

I am  daily  expecting  instructions  respecting  an  exchange  of  prison- 
's of  war.  I will  communicate  with  you  on  that  subject  as  soon  as 
ey  are  received. 

Very  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department. 


516  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII] 


Saint  Lotus,  January  23,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis, 

Commanding , &c.:  Rolla , Mo. : 

General:  I am  induced  to  believe,  from  information  received  froi 
snies  iust  from  Springfield,  that  Price  will  not  wait  to  give  battle  eve 
to  8 000  or ToOOOof  our  forces.  I therefore  wish  you  to  move  yor 
command  as  ’soon  as  possible  to  Lebanon  and  in  advance,  withot 
waiting  for  the  division  of  Colonel  Davis.  That  division  should  ncl 
cross  the  Osage  at  Linn  Creek  unless  you  absolutely  require  it. 
however,  will  serve  as  a reserve.  Colonel  Davis  will  be  instructed 
make  preparations  for  crossing,  and  if  you  find  on  moving  from  Lebano 
Swards  Springfield  that  Price  will  wait  to  give  you  battle,  you  ca 
draw  in  this  reserve  by  forced  marches. 


As 


m tins  reserve  uy  iuigcu.  ^ , . i.Q_ 

the  authorities  at  Washington  are  exceedingly  urgent  to  hav 


troops' sent  elsewhere,  I feel  very  unwilling  to  send 
than  may  be  necessary,  while  at  the  same  time  I wmh  you  to  have  a 
tli  at  reallv  are  necessary  to  the  success  of  the  movement;  but  really 
dcTnot  bebeve  that  Prile  will  fight  you  even  withoutDavis’d^v^o 
If  you  find  this  to  be  so,  that  division  can  be  withdrawn  tor  oth( 

service.  , , 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servaut,^  HALLEqK, 

Major-General.  \ 


Saint  Louis,  January  23,  1862.  j 

Brigadier- General  Pope, 

Commanding , &c.,  Otterville , Mo. : I 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  21st  is  received  ^e^al  Curtis 
been  instructed  precisely  as ,you  recommend,  that  is,  notl o or^  1 
onel  Davis’  division  across  the  river  at  Linn  Creek  uriess  his i se  J 
absolutelv  required.  It  will  serve  as  a reserve,  and,  if  necessarfl 
tdl  rteSce  hirn  by  forced  marches.  You  will  so  instruct  Colon, 

D A^soon  as  you  can  make  the  proper  arrangements  I wish  one  divU 
ion  of  your  command  to  cross  the  river  at  lfooneviUe  or  Jeffersoii  j 
and  march  for  Saint  Charles.  Small  garrisons  of  cavalry will  be  lett  . 
Glasgow,  Fayette,  Columbia,  and  Fulton,  to  be  ^“tered  m the  pub 
buildings  You  will  dispose  these  garrisons  so  as  to  bring,  it  Poss 
entire  regiments  to  Saint  Charles.  This  movement  should  be  organii 
and  commenced  at  once.  You  will  either  acopmpany  it  or  : d 
command  of  the  district,  as  you  may  prefer  There >are  six  24  poi 
and  four  6-pounders  at  Jefferson  City.  I think  y • ?nf  Tl 

draw  two  or  three  of  the  24-pounders  for  armmg  the  batten^  at  I 
Mine.  Do  you  hear  anything  of  our  troops  ordered  f o M 

They  ought  to  have  been  at  Lexington  before  this. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  HALLE0K, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Otterville , January  23,  1 


1862. 


Col.  Fred.  Steele,  Commanding  at  Sedalia : 

The  general  commanding  directs  that  you  Hild  as  arg j®  * P 
force  a!  you  can  spare,  not  less  than  five  companies  of  your  force 


IAP.  XVIII.] 


51T 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

?dalia,  who,  when  joined  by  four  companies  from  this  place,  under 
ajor  Torrence,  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  will  proceed  to  the  neighborhood 
‘Lexington,  thence  to  Waverly,  thence  across  to  Arrow  Bock,  and  from 
lence  to  return  directly  to  Sedalia,  so  as  to  make  a thorough  scout  of 
ie  whole  region,  but  not  to  be  absent  over  eight  days,  and  to  report 
gularly  by  messengers  to  Sedalia.  Eeports  reach  the  general  com- 
an ding  from  department  headquarters,  from  Glasgow",  and  from 
runswick  that  the  enemy  is  crossing  in  considerable  numbers  at 
runs  wick  and  Waverly.  Perhaps  it  will  be  best  to  send  a section  of 
•tillery;  the  whole  to  be  under  command  of  some  responsible  officer, 
ithout  reference  to  the  corps  to  which  he  belongs.  The  four  com- 
mies of  Iowa  cavalry  will  report  to  you  at  Sedalia  to-morrow  night. 
You  will  keep  General  Pope  advised  constantly  of  the  movements 
id  operations  of  this  force. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : 


Aide-de-Camp. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Otterville , January  23,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halle ck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
tter  of  the  22d  instant.*  The  Second  Division  marches  to-morrow 
orning  for  Linn  Creek.  I fear  there  is  a mistake  about  fords  near  that 
ace  which  can  be  crossed  at  any  season.  Any  ford  over  3 feet  in 
pth  will  render  the  passage  of  wagons  loaded  with  baggage  or  sup- 
ies  impracticable  without  great  difficulty.  No  doubt  Colonel  Davis 
II  find  means  to  cross,  but  it  will  require  time. 

Before  receiving  your  letter  I had  directed  a scout  to  be  made  in  the 
rection  of  Lexington  and  Waverly.  I have  sent  nine  companies  of 
valry  and  a section  of  artillery  to  go  to  the  neighborhood  of  Lexing- 
n,  thence  to  Waverly,  thence  to  Arrow  Eock,  and  from  the  latter  place 
return  direct  to  Sedalia.  The  expedition  will  be  absent  about  eight 
ys. 

I receive  frequent  letters  from  Glasgow  in  relation  to  posting  troops 
that  place.  Unless  the  system  of  occupying  every  considerable  or 
I considerable  towrn  in  the  State  is  to  be  adopted  I do  not  see  that 
'asgow  has  any  claims  not  advanced  by  Lexington,  Booneville,  &c. 
jlasgow  is  important  in  some  respects  as  a military  position,  but  1 
ink  not  as  much  so  as  Brunswick.  As  neither  place,  however,  is 
thin  the  limits  of  my  command,  I can  only  refer  the  matter  for  your 
nsideration. 

Posting  troops  in  the  towns  has  very  much  the  same  effect  as  issuing 
; gar  and  coffee  to  Dutch  and  Irish  soldiers : what  they  never  felt  the 
int  of  before  immediately  becomes  a necessity,  and  cannot  possibly 
dispensed  with.  Once  station  troops  in  these  towns  and  it  becomes 
arly  impossible  to  get  them  away  for  any  service  without  great  clamor 
>m  the  inhabitants,  who  profit  in  more  ways  than  protection  from  their 
i-esence. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


See  Appendix,  p.  827. 


518 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 

Executive  Office,  Iowa, 

January  23,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , D.  G. : 

Sir  : Inclosed  find  copies  of  certain  papers,  showing  an  unfortunaj 
condition  of  affairs  in  Fremont  County,  the  southwestern  county  in  th: 
State.  I am  fully  satisfied  of  the  correctness  of  the  facts  stated  in  t! 
report  of  Colonel  Nutt,  and  that  the,  if  not  the  only,  way  to  put  dow 
the  feeling  there  that  now  endangers  the  public  peace  is,  as  he  suggest 
to  arrest  the  rebels  who  have  fled  from  Missouri  into  our  State  and  some  < 
these  sympathizers  on  our  side  of  the  line  and  to  also  seize  the  propert 
of  those  men  brought  into  our  State  from  Missouri.  The  secession  fee 
ing  is  strong  in  Eremont  County,  and,  as  the  State  authorities  have  rfl 
power  to  act  in  this  class  of  cases,  I request  that  you  will  give  such  fu| 
power  and  instructions  to  United  States  officers  in  this  State  and  Mil 
souri  as  will  result  in  prompt  and  decided  action.  The  United  Stata 
district  attorney  for  this  State,  Mr.  Gurley,  is,  and  for  some  time  In  j 
been,  in  Washington,  by  reason  of  which  the  marshal,  Mr.  Hoxie, 
deprived  of  his  counsel. 

If  the  marshal  shall  be  directed  to  take  any  action  in  this  matter,  | 
will  be  necessary  either  that  he  be  directed  to  act  without  consultatiol 
with  the  district  attorney  or  that  the  district  attorney  return  to  til 

State.  . I 

Permit  me  again  to  impress  upon  you  that,  m my  judgment,  til 
safety  of  the  people  in  the  county  of  Fremont,  from  a troublesome  boj 
der  warfare,  requires  the  prompt  arrest  of  the  rebels  who  have  fledfroj 
Missouri  and  some  of  their  sympathizers  in  this  State  and  to  seize  tt| 
property  of  rebels  in  this  State. 

VerytrUly’  SAMUEL  J.  KIRKWOOD. 


[Inclosure  Xo.  1.] 

Executive  Office,  Iowa, 

January  8,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  H.  C.  Nutt, 

Aide-de-camp,  <&c.,  Council  Bluffs , Iowa: 

Sir  : I have  just  received  a communication  from  citizens  of  Fremor 
County,  of  which  the  inclosed  is  a copy.*  J 

You  will  immediately  proceed  to  Sidney,  in  said  county,  and  fully  n 
vestigate  the  matters  therein  set  forth.  Consult  Judge  Sears  and  Co 
onel  Hedges,  and  if  you  shall  be  satisfied  the  preservation  of  the  publi 
peace  so  requires,  call  into  the  service  such  ot  the  volunteer  companic 
of  the  county  as  may  be  necessary  to  that  end  and  keep  them  in  sen 
ice  as  long  as  their  services  may  be  required.  If,  in  your  judgment, 
shall  be  necessary  to  call  out  any  military  force,  make  them  call  1m 
upon  the  company  at  Sidney.  = 

Call  for  no  more  troops  than  in  your  best  judgment  will  be  nece 
sary  and  keep  them  in  service  only  so  long  as  may  be  necessary.  1 
this  matter  1 must  trust  to  your  discretion,  and  I will  hold  you  respoi 
sible  for  its  sound  exercise.  Procure  proper  quarters  for  such  troaf 
as  vou  may  call  out  and  make  the  best  arrangements  you  can  lor  the 
subsistence.  You  must  make  all  your  arrangements  as  economical] 

* SubiDclosiure  omitted.  Its  substance  indicated  in  Colonel  Nutt’s  repoit,  Inclosu- 
No.  2. 


519 


SAP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

s possible.  No  extravagant  charges  for  quarters  or  subsistence  will 
e allowed. 

You  will  preserve  the  public  peace  and  protect  the  prisoners  at  all 
azards. 

I desire  full  information  on  the  following  points : 

I.  Have  rebels  or  rebel  sympathizers  from  Missouri  come  into  Fremont 
bounty,  bringing  with  them  their  property,  or  have  such  persons  sent 
heir  property  from  Missouri  into  the  county  ? If  so,  give  the  names  of 
uch  persons,  a description  of  the  property  brought  or  sent,  and  the 
ames  of  the  persons,  if  any,  of  our  own  citizens  who  have  such  prop- 
rty  in  possession. 

II.  Does  the  bringing  or  sending  of  the  property  of  such  persons  into 
he  county  tend  to  endanger  the  public  peace 

III.  I desire  a full  detail  of  all  the  facts  connected  with  the  attack 
n Mr.  Fugitt  and  of  the  capture  of  those  under  arrest  with  the  causes 
f all  the  acts  done,  so  far  as  you  can  ascertain  them. 

IY.  It  has  been  stated  to  me  that  one  or  two  persons,  supposed  to 
.e  of  the  party  that  attacked  Mr.  Fugitt,  were  shot  by  some  of  our  citi- 
ens  near  Hamburg  upon  refusal  to  surrender.  You  will  investigate 
he  facts  of  this  transaction  and  report  to  me  fully  thereon.  I am 
etermined  to  preserve  the  peace  of  our  State  and  to  protect  the  prop- 
rty  of  our  citizens,  but  I am  also  determined  that  our  State  shall  not 
>e  made  an  asylum  for  rebels  who  have  been  compelled  to  flee  from 
heir  own  State  in  consequence  of  their  outrages  on  Union  men  there, 
f affording  such  asylum  is  to  peril  the  peace  of  our  own  people.  I 
m also  determined  that  those  of  our  own  citizens  who  sympathize 
vith  and  protect  these  fleeing  rebels  shall  not  make  the  consequences 
*f  their  own  acts  the  pretext  for  a breach  of  the  public  peace. 

The  peace  must  be  preserved,  and  those  persons  afforded  full  pro- 
motion and  a fair  and  impartial  trial. 

You  will  report  to  me  in  writing  as  soon  as  possible,  and  keep  me 
id  vised  at  intervals  of  the  situation  of  affairs. 

Yery  respectfully, 

SAMUEL  J.  KIRKWOOD. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  January  17,  1862, 

Ion.  Samuel  J.  Kirkwood, 

Governor  of  Iowa , Des  Moines : 

Sir:  I received  your  letter,  dated  January  8,  1862,  inclosing  a com- 
nunication  from  citizens  of  Fremont  County,  and  in  accordance  with 
rour  instructions  I proceeded  on  to  Sidney  on  the  morning  of  the  13th 
nstant,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  said  instructions,  and  have  to 
•eport  my  action  as  follows : 

I found  the  statements  contained  in  the  communication  above  referred 
o to  be  true  in  all  material  points.  I will  answer  the  four  interroga- 
ions  propounded  in  your  letter  in  order : 

1st.  Yes.  Rebels  to  the  number  of  thirty  families,  at  least,  with  a 
arge  amount  of  horses,  mules,  cattle,  hogs,  &c.,  have  left  Missouri, 
;ame  into  Fremont  County,  and  many  of  the  same  class  have  sent  their 
property  who  have  not  come  into  this  State  themselves.  These  per- 
sons have  come  themselves  or  sent  their  property  to  save  the  same 
rom  seizure  by  the  Government  that  they  have  outraged  for  the  past 
rear.  1 was  able  to  find  the  whereabouts  and  names  of  but  a portion 
if  these  persons,  but  such  as  I have  found  I append  below,  and  will 


520 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm 


give  you  further  information  upon  this  point  at  an  early  day.  The 
parties  named  below  are  all  either  rank  secessionists  or  rebel  sympa- 
thizers, and  I will  make  no  distinction  between  them.  It  is  enough  to 
know  that  they  are  “ not  with  us”— are  not  Union  men. 

Mr.  John  Pugh  has  5 horses,  owned  in  Missouri  5 owner’s  name  un- 
known. Mr.  Preeman  has  2 horses;  owner  unknown.  Mr.  Baldwin 
has  2 horses;  owner  unknown.  H.  G.  Bowen  has  15  horses  and  mules, 
owned  by  Nichols  and  Schouler.  Nichols  lives  at  Saint  Stevens,  Nebr.,. 
and  has  furnished  the  rebels  in  North  Missouri  with  arms,  and  is  a 
prominent  rebel.  Milton  McOartners  has  8 or  10  horses  and  mules ; 
owner  unknown.  Mr.  Welty  has  8 or  10  horses  and  mules,  owned  by 
Mr.  Holland,  who  lives  near  Bockport.  The  Heatt  brothers  have  0 
horses,  60  hogs,  and  25  or  30  cattle;  owners’  names  unknown.  They 
had  consulted  Mr.  Cornish  as  to  whether  they  could  lawfully  keep 
stock  which  belonged  to  secessionists  in  Missouri,  for  if  they  could  they 
could  make  d large  amount  of  money  by  so  doing,  as  the  secesh  were 
willing  to  pay  high  prices.  These  men  (Heatt)  have  6 horses,  ownedi 
by  one  Hall,  who  left  Missouri  in  the  night  to  save  his  property.  Mr.  1 
Hollaway  brought  25  horses  and  mules  into  this  State,  and  has  theml 
scattered  around  at  several  places.  Mr.  Davis  has  8 horses,  belonging!! 
to  a man  in  Bockport,  name  unknown;  can  be  found  and  identified,  as 
he  is  well  known  in  Iowa.  Mr.  English  (senator),  some  three  weeks  j 
ago,  went  to  Missouri  and  brought  the  personal  property  of  one  Poin-  < 
dexter,  either  the  officer  in  Price’s  army  or  a brother ; at  all  events  a 
rabid  rebel,  and  it  is  reported  and  believed  in  Sidney  that  Poindexter! 
himself  is  about  McKinsock’s  Grove.  Mr.  English  has  a horse  belong- 1 
ing  to  Poindexter  now  in  his  possession,  but  has  sent  him  away  from 
his  own  farm  to  a brother-in-law’s  for  fear  of  jayhawking. 

The  above  property  has  all  of  it  been  sent  from  Missouri  to  avoid 
seizure  and  confiscation  by  the  Government.  There  have  also  been, 
horses  sent  from  Missouri  lately  by  rebels  who  dared  not  leave  their  > 
goods  in  Fremont  County,  and  one  lot  of  40  went  on,  the  man  saying  he 
was  too  near  home  in  Fremont.  I think  that  there  are  at  the  present 
time  100  to  125  horses  in  Fremont  County,  brought  there  by  rebels  to 
save  them.  Many  place  the  number  much  higher,  but  from  all  my 
information  I place  the  number  asabove. 

In  reply  to  your  second  question,  I will  say  that  by  these  acts  I 
think  the*  public  peace  is  endangered,  and  I find  all  the  Union  men  in 
Fremont  are  very  certain  it  does,  and  say  that  unless  it  is  stopped 
bloodshed  will  be  the  result.  My  reasons  for  thinking  that  it  does  en- 
danger the  public  peace  are  that  there  is  great  danger  of  this  property 
being  pursued  by  jayhawkers  and  others,  which  would  be  almost  cer- , 
tain  to  bring  on  a collision  and  bloodshed.  Second,  the  accession  of 
these  rebels  to  the  number  of  the  same  kind  and  their  sympathizers  in 
Fremont  County  increases  the  bitter  feelings  between  the  two  parties, 
and  which  now  requires  but  a word  to  bring  on  a civil  strife  in  that 
county.  As  a sample,  one  John  Cooper,  of  McKinsock’s  Grove,  has, 
he  says,  25  Missouri  friends  with  him,  and  he  will  keep  them  there  as 
long  as  they  will  stay;  that  they  are  well  armed,  and  will  shoot  the  first 
man  who  tries  to  arrest  any  of  their  number  or  seize  a horse. 

Questions  3 and  4 1 will  answer  together.  On  the  night  of  December 
30  a body  of  armed  men  from  Missouri  and  Nebraska,  under  Capt.’ 
Warren  Price,  who  is  said  to  be  the  leader  of  a band  of  jayhawkers, 
came  to  the  house  of  T.  F.  Fugitt,  between  10  or  12  p.  m.,  for  the  pur- 
pose, as  they  avowed  on  their  way,  of  seizing  some  horses  which  had 
been  taken  from  Missouri  and  owned  by  rebels  in  Missouri.  Several  of 


Jhap.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


521 


the  party  entered  the  house  and  others  went  to  the  barn  for  the  horses. 
Fugitt  got  up  and  ran  into  another  room  and  seized  a double-barreled 
shot-gun  and  instantly  fired  at  the  crowd.  Then,  instead  of  firing  the 
ither  barrel,  he  clubbed  his  gun  and  knocked  down  another.  At  this 
Price  drew  his  revolver  and  fired  four  shots  at  Fugitt,  all  of  which  took 
fifect,  one  in  the  neck,  which  is  a serious  but  not  dangerous  wound. 
Fugitt  is  rapidly  recovering.  The  party  then  left  Fugitt’s  and  went 
o several  other  places  in  the  Grove  and  took  in  all  11  horses.  These 
lap  tain  Price  sent  in  charge  of  two  men  to  Missouri,  but  the  men  lost 
heir  way  and  at  daylight  were  in  sight  of  Sidney.  They  at  once 
•etraced  their  steps  and  tried  to  reach  Missouri  via  Hamburg. 

In  the  mean  time  a party  of  some  40  men  were  in  pursuit  of  the  rob- 
>ers,  and  when  these  two  men  with  11  horses  came  to  Hamburg  they 
vere  hailed  by  C.  McKinsock  and  Giles  Corrlis.  The  men  paid  no  at- 
entionto  the  hail,  when  McKinsock  and  Corrlis  both  fired  their  rifies. 
Jorrlis  killed  his  man  dead,  and  McKinsock  wounded  the  other,  who  was 
aken  prisoner,  and  is  now  in  Fremont  jail.  He  says  that  himself  and 
he  dead  man  were  at.Fugitt’s,  and  that  they  reside  in  Nebraska.  The 
lorses  taken  from  the  prisoner  were  left  at  Hamburg  and  proved  up 
md  taken  away  by  avowed  rebels.  No  Union  man  has  been  molested, 
'is  I could  learn. 

The  news  of  course  spread  like  wild-fire,  and  early  the  next  morning 
he  sheriff  and  county  judge  started  with  a posse  of  100  men  to  arrest 
he  horse  thieves,  and  the  sheriff  said  he  would  follow  them  to  Arkan- 
sas if  he  did  not  get  them.  On  their  way  an  incident  occurred  worthy 
'f  note.  These  100  men  left  Sidney  in  three  parties,  and  it  is  asserted 
hat  when  on  the  road  persons  in  one  party  were  heard  to  hurrah  for 
eft’.  Davis.  The  sheriff  denies  this,  but  I think  it  can  be  proven, 
ltliough  it  was  not  in  the  party  in  which  the  sheriff  was  at  the  imme- 
diate head.  Arriving  at  McKinsock’s  Grove  this  party  stopped,  and 
nother  one  from  the  Grove,  under  the  lead  of  H.  English,  went  into 
lissouri  and  arrested  12  men  and  brought  them  to  the  Grove  to  lynch 
hem,  but  as  there  was  great  doubt  as  to  whether  these  were  the  men 
/lio  were  at  Fugitt’s,  after  keeping  them  at  the  Grove  one  day  they 
rere  given  over  to  the  sheriff,  who  took  them  to  Sidney,  where  they 
’ere  guarded  by  an  armed  force  for  three  days,  when,  upon  a legal  ex- 
mination  before  the  county  judge,  they  were  all  discharged  except  one, 
ho  had  waived  examination  and  given  bail  before,  and  the  wounded 
lan  from  Hamburg,  who  is  now  in  jail. 

The  Missourians  complain  bitterly  of  not  only  the  arrest,  but  of  the 
ion  under  whom  it  was  done  and  under  whom  they  were  placed  as 
risoners.  They  say  that  if  they  could  have  seen  the  face  of  one  single 
nion  man,  eit.ier  among  their  captors  or  guards,  they  would  have 
ttributed  it  to  a mistake  and  said  nothing,  but  now  it  looks  as  if  their 
iihel  enemies  had  run  away  to  fowa  and  sent  rebel  sympathizers  from 
own  and  given  them  Union  men’s  names,  to  be  arrested,  maltreated, 
nd  nearly  lynched. 

There  are  many  men  whom  I have  seen  from  Atchison  County  who 
\y  that  there  is  a large  number  of  Union  men  sworn  to  shoot  Han. 
-nglish  at  sight,  as  they  think  him  to  be  the  leader  of  their  enemies  in 
owa  while  these  prisoners  were  in  the  hands  of  Fremont  authorities, 
ne  military  at  Rockport,  hearing  of  the  manner  of  the  arrest,  started 
\]  rescue  them.  At  the  line  they  left  all  but  20  men,  who  went  to 
iduey  and  demanded  the  release  of  the  prisoners,  which  was  refused, 
ud  there  was  danger  of  violence,  but  upon  the  assurance  of  Union  men 
Jat  the  prisoners  should  have  a fair  trial  and  would  at  once  prove 


522  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [CHAr.  XVIIL 


themselves  innocent  of  the  crime  charged,  they  were  induced  to  return 
home,  which  they  did,  and  on  their  way  arrested  in  Iowa  a young  man 
who  h ad  been  in  Price’s  army  as  a cook.  The  captain  of  Missouri  troops 
claimed  to  have  made  this  and  other  arrests  which  he  made  m Missouri 
the  same  day  by  order  of  the  commanding  officer  at  Saint  Joe.  Ike 
truth  of  this  I do  not  know.  What  became  of  the  prisoners  taken  trom 
Iowa  by  the  Missouri  troops  I was  unable  to  learn. 

In  the  mean  time,  on  Saturday,  January  4,  a report  having  gone  to 
Rockport  that  the  civil  authorities  were  going  to  give  up  the  prisoners  I 
to  the  mob  to  be  lvnched,  some  200  men  from  Atchison  County  and 
thereabouts  started*'  for  the  rescue.  They  crossed  the  line  and  came  to 
Hamburg,  where  they  were  met  by  some  50  Iowa  troops,  who  tore  up 
the  bridge  and  refused,  to  let  them  pass.  Here  again  was  a very  near 
approach  to  open  hostilities  between  Iowa  and  Missouri  citizens,  but  a 
flag  of  truce  passed,  and  upon  mutual  explanation  the  Missouri  men 
went  home : did  not  go  to  Sidney  at  all. 

The  Union  men  of  Missouri  say  that  all  the  party  who  went  into 
Missouri  were  secessionists,  and  that  Iowa  allows  rebels  to  flee  into  her 
State  to  avoid  punishment,  and  then  allows  secessionists  to  come  to 
Missouri  and  arrest  Union  men  without  a shadow  of  law  or  right.  1 
was  able  to  disabuse  them  of  this  idea,  or  at  least  all  I had  a chance  to 


talk  with.  _ . . 

This  feeling  is  particularly  bitter  between  Union  men  m Missouri 
and  the  secesh  sympathizers  in  McKinsock’s  Grove,  who  are  nearly  all 
that  kind,  and  being  so  near  the  line  increases  the  danger  ot  collision. 
An  armed  guard  is  kept  out  now  in  many  neighborhoods  to  warn  them 
of  approach  of  enemies.  I find,  further,  that  many  men  who  have  been 
avowed  rebels  and  hooted  at  all  soldiers  as  Lincoln  thieves  are  now 
very  clamorous  for  armed  protection,  and  now  there  is  organized  a com- 
pany which  has  memorialized  you  for  commissions  and  arms  that  are 

not  safe  to  arm.  , , , . 

The  board  of  supervisors  of  Fremont  are  secesh,  and  they,  at  then 
last  meeting,  passed  a resolution  instructing  their  chairmen,  Mr.  Sipple 
and  Mr.  Cornish,  to  transmit  to  you  what  they  wanted.  They  got  Mr. 
Cornish  in  to  have  some  Union  influence.  The  chairman  of  supervisors 
proposed  a paper  which  did  not  suit  Cornish,  and  he  refused  to  sign  it. 
Sipple  then  proposed  another,  which  he  would  not  show  Cornish,  and 
sent  the  same  to  you.  It  is  supposed  to  be  a request  to  commission, 
arm,  and  call  in  service  their  men  at  McKinsock’s  Grove.  They  are 
not  the  men  to  have  State  arms.  I also  telegraphed  you  not  to  com- 
mission Fremont  militia.  I found  the  infantry  were  all  good  men,  witn 
sound  Union  officers,  but  the  mounted  company  was  formed  by  Judge 
Rector,  and  is  not  sound.  e _ 

One  officer,  Mr.  Bovine,  has  since  his  election  said  that  he  was  a 
secessionist,  and  he  did  not  care  who  knew  it.  We  want  no  such  men 
with  either  arms  or  authority.  I told  Colonel  Hedges  that  it  should 
be  disbanded  and  an  infantry  company  put  in  its  place,  and  told  him 
that  it  was  not  legally  organized,  and  it  is  not,  as  there  has  been  n 
special  authority  granted,  as  is  necessary,  to  organize  any  but  mtantry. 
I presume  you  will  get  the  organization  of  another  infantry  company 
which  will  make  Colonel  Hedges’  regiment  to  a maximum,  when  it 
should  be  commissioned  at  once.  , A 

I did  not  call  out  any  State  troops,  and  will  not,  unless  there  shorn 
be  an  immediate  necessity  for  their  service,  until  I hear  *I°m  } 
again.  My  reasons  are,  1st,  the  immediate  danger  of  collision  I believ  e 


again,  iviy  reasons  are,  rsi,  uie  uumcuidic  ~ 

to  have  passed,  and,  2d,  that  I doubt  the  policy  of  keeping  an  a i 


Chap.  XYIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  523 

force  of  State  troops  in  Fremont  County  unless  for  immediate  use. 
They  should  be  commissioned  and  armed  and  ready  to  go  at  an  hour’s 
notice,  but  I think  should  be  called  into  camp  only  as  a last  resort. 

The  best  way  to  preserve  the  peace  and  remove  the  danger  of  collis- 
ion I believe  to  be  in  sending  a small  force  of  Federal  troops,  say  one 
or  two  companies  of  cavalry,  from  Saint  Joe  or  Leavenworth,  under 
some  prudent,  reliable  Union  officer,  and  clothe  him  with  power  to 
arrest  armed  secessionists  either  in  Missouri  or  Iowa  and  seize  their 
effects,  to  be  sent  at  once  to  headquarters  for  adjudication.  This  will 
avoid  increasing  the  personal  hatred  among  the  two  classes  of  our  own 
citizens,  which  would  be  increased  by  arming  and  calling  out  any  State 
troops  either  from  Iowa  or  Missouri,  and  lessen  the  danger  of  blood- 
shed if  any  arrests  are  to  be  made,  and  the  State  troops  would  have 
no  place  to  send  prisoners  even  if  they  have  authority  to  make  arrests. 
I feel  certain  that  calling  out  any  State  troops  would  bring  on  a collis- 
ion, and  the  aim  is  to  preserve  the  peace  more  than  to  conquer  rebels, 
as  I understand  it. 

I am  sustained  in  this  view  by  all  the  Union  men  in  Fremont  except 
Colonel  Hedges,  who  is  very  anxious  to  drill  his  regiment,  but  I would 
prefer  sending  an  armed  force  in  command  of  some  Federal  officer  who* 
would  have  no  personal  enemies  to  deal  with,  and  I think  the  arrest  of 
a very  few  men,  and  the  seizure  of  the  property  belonging  to  rebels,  who 
have  sent  the  same  to  Iowa  for  safety,  will  not  only  quiet  the  present 
troubles,  but  remove  the  danger  of  a recurrence  in  future. 

If  I have  been  lengthy  in  this,  it  is  because  there  was  a good  deal  of 
ground  to  go  over.  I find  that  in  all  facts  I have  stated  the  Union 
men  from  whom  I receive  my  information  are  supported  by  the  state- 
ments of  the  other  side,  so  far  as  1 had  an  opportunity  to  inquire, 
in  all  material  points.  Many  of  the  facts  in  regard  to  Fugitt’s  case 
and  the  prisoners  arrested  were  received  from  one  who  was  with  the 
sheriff,  and  is  called  a secessionist  by  Union  men.  I refer  to  W.  C. 
Sipple.  He  claims  to  be  a good  Union  man  now.  The  Union  men  from 
whom  I received  most  information  were  Judge  Sears,  Colonel  Hedges* 
Mr.  Cornish,  Mr.  Linkinfitter,  Mr.  Warren,  formerly  sheriff,  and  Squire 
Fanner,  who  lives  at  McKinsock’s  Grove,  all  of  whom  agree  upon  the 
case  as  I have  presented  it. 

Since  my  return  I have  received  your  letter  of  14th  instant.  I will 
proceed  at  once  to  Rockport,  and  on  my  return  report  such  other  facts 
as  I may  come  in  possession  of.  In  the  mean  time  I hope  to  receive  fur- 
ther instructions  in  regard  to  an  armed  force  in  Fremont  County. 

I remain,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

H.  C.  NUTT. 


[Indorsement.] 

Referred  to  the  War  Department,  with  explanation  to  be  made  by 
Colonel  Key  verbally. 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 


Roll  A,  January  24,  1862. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Captain  : The  general’s  letter  of  the22d,  informing  me  of  the  move- 
ment of  Colonel  Davis  yesterday  from  Tipton  and  the  force  he  brings, 
was  duly  and  gladly  received.  My  force  now  occupies  Lebanon,  and 


524 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap,  xyhl 


will  be  preparing  to  feed  our  concentrated  force,  which  mil  be  so  moved 
as  to  come  there  as  soon  as  the  Tipton  force  can  reach  them.  I shall 
send  a messenger  to  the  Osage  to  meet  the  division  and  send  from  that 

point  intelligence  of  matters.  , 

1 I have  trouble  with  pioneer  companies  that  I have  set  to  work  on  the 
road.  I wish  these  companies  had  been  included  in  the  recent  order 


road.  i wisn  luese  cuiupctmo.3  xx^  - * -y — - , . , _ 

concerning  the  U.  S.  Eeserve  Corps,  for  a New  York  paper  has  taken  I 

vuuooimub  U 1 • ' 4-/-.  fin  ilaapptp.rs  wlin  WPTC  t 


concerning  rne  u.  io.  Tteoctvc  A/uqm,  *^x  ^ v ^ ; * i 

up  the  cause  of  Gerster  just  in  time  to  put  the  deserters  who  were 
thrown  out  of  the  U.  S.  Reserve  Corps. [!]  I will,  however  find  little  or  I 
no  difficulty,  if  extra-duty  bills  are  paid  that  are  justly  due  for  work  <| 

d°Bridgesfand  boats  will  be  made  when  it  is  necessary,  for  I have  among  I 
the  volunteers  men  who  can  work  at  every  trade,  and  mud  and  water  j 
can  only  delay  but  never  stop  an  onward  movement.  I shall  go  mysell, 
sending  Captain  Sheridan,  my  chief  quartermaster  and  commissary,  to 
aid  the  supply  business  and  direct  matters  in  front.  The  remainder  of 
the  force  will  be  moved  as  fast  as  necessary,  to  combine  at  Lebanon. 

Since  writing  the  foregoing  I have  received  the  general  s letter  of  ,i 
the  23d,  in  which  he  expresses  the  belief  that  Price  will  not  wait  to 
give  battle,  and  recommending  me  to  press  forward,  without  waiting 
for  Davis’  division,  if  found  expedient,  saying  this  force  must  not 
cross  the  Osage  unless  it  is  absolutely  necessary. 

I had  as  the  general  will  see,  already  anticipated  the  general  s wishes 

so  far  as  occupying  Lebanon  and  pressing  forward  troops  to  commands. 
The  general  will  understand  that  it  is  the  food  that  delays,  and  my  prog- 
ress now  must  depend  on  procuring  or  hauling  supplies.  My  informa- 
tion of  Price  is  by  two  surrendering  parties  ; one  left  Saturday  and  the 
other  Sunday  last.  The  men  who  left  Sunday  are  apparently  intelli- 
gent, communicative,  and  Mrs.  Phelps  writes  may  be  ^peMed  on. 
They  say  Price  and  the  army  supposed  1 had  fallen  back  to  Kolia,  that 
some  efforts  were  going  on  to  recruit;  and  this  is  corroborated  by  the 
fact  that  the  rebel  Capt.  Tom  Craig  that  our  men  killed  in  Lebanon 
Wednesday  had  the  inclosed  card  on  his  person,  and  had  come  to  re- 
emit  at  Lebanon  immediately  after  my  force  retired  from  there. 

One  report  says  that  Rains  had  gone  to  Granby,  with  400  men,  to 
work  the  lead  mines,  and  that  some  cavalry  had  gone  out  of  Spring- 
field  south,  but  this  does  not  look  to  me  like  leaving;  as  he  would,  if  he 
designed  to  retreat,  move  his  artillery  first  and  his  cavalry  last,  as  bad 
roads  retard  his  retreat  with  artillery  as  it  doesmy  advance.  Ial# 
fear  he  may  escape,  but  he  stood  against  Sigel  at  Carthag :e. . He  fought 
you  with  no  very  insignificant  force,  and  it  was  said  lie  would  stand 
against  Fremont  with  his  40,000.  Although  he  has  not  much  force  “ 
and  about  Springfield,  he  has  men  scattered  through  the  country read* 
to  come  at  his  call,  and  I see  no  great  necessity  elsewhere  that  should 
prevent  us  having  at  least  an  equivalent  to  his  probable  force,  when 
our  success  must  depend  on  our  ability  to  procure  and  take  his  thirty- 

five  or  forty-two  pieces  of  artillery.  „ 

My  advanced  posts  are  now  within  35  or  40  miles  of  Springfield 
ready  to  act  if  occasion  shall  offer;  and  I shaU  press  forward  all  this 
force  just  as  fast  as  supplies  can  be  procured  for  them.  When  at  Leba- 
non I am  within  a day  and  night’s  forced  march  of ^Springfield.  Colonel 
Davis’  division,  to  be  available  as  a reserve,  should  be  this  side  of  Osage, 
otherwise  the  distance  is  too  great  for  forced  marches  i fo rce 
the  year.  All  estimates  put  Price’s  force  above  10,000,  while  my  force 
without  Davis  will  not,  I fear,  exceed  8,000  when  I concentrate  all  1 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


525 


can  at  Lebanon.  I will  try  to  squeeze  out  of  tbe  hospitals  all  I can,  and, 
more  or  less,  I will  do  the  best  I can,  but  I think  Colonel  Davis  should 
be  allowed  to  participate  in  the  effort  to  avoid  such  hazards  as  we  have 
before  had  occasion  to  deplore  in  that  ill-fated  region.  With  a fair, 
fresh  force  at  Lebanon,  horses  well  shod,  and  men  confident  of  even 
chances,  I can  see  Price  will  find  it  hard  to  move  his  wagons  and  artil- 
lery out  of  our  way.  Bather  than  a long,  dangerous  retreat,  the  chances 
are  he  will  prefer  a battle ; but  of  this  there  must  be  uncertainty,  as  he 
will  also  feel  disposed  to  increase  his  chances  of  escape  by  falling  back 
to  the  support  of  McIntosh  at  Fayetteville. 

If  deemed  necessary  I can  stop  Colonel  Davis  at  any  moment,  as  I 
shall  feel  it  my  duty  to  do  under  these  instructions  if  his  services  do 
not  appear  necessary,  but  in  the  mean  time  I calculate  on  his  force  as 
most  likely  to  unite  in  the  final  venture. 

With  great  respect,  I remain,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 

Brigadier- General . 


Bolla,  January  24,  1862. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain  : Advance  of  cavalry  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Wright  reoc- 
cupied Lebanon  on  22d.  Some  20  rebels  fled.  Lieutenant  Pratt,  First 
Missouri  Cavalry,  in  pursuit ; killed  Capt.  Tom  Craig  in  running  fight 
and  took  1 prisoner  and  found  some  rebel  pork. 

We  have  taken  several  prisoners  within  last  week,  and  two  or  three 
a day  have  come  in  and  surrendered. 

Price  and  his  generals  quiet  at  Springfield. 

SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 

Brigadier-  General . 


Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

Washington , January  24,  1862. 

Major-General  Hunter,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  Kansas , Fort  Leavenworth: 

General  : By  direction  of  the  General-in-Chief  I have  respectfully 
to  inform  you  that  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Lane,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  has  urged 
upon  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War  an  expedition  to  be  conducted 
by  him  from  Fort  Leavenworth  against  the  region  west  of  Missouri  and 
Kansas  [Arkansas].  The  outlines  of  his  plan  were  stated  by  him  to  be 
in  accordance  with  your  own  views.  The  following  force,  with  supplies 
therefor,  has  been  ordered  to  Kansas  to  operate  under  General  Lane: 
Seven  regiments  cavalry,  three  batteries  artillery,  four  regiments  in- 
fantry, and  he  has  been  authorized  also  to  raise  about  8,000  to  10,000 
Kansas  troops  and  to  organize  4,000  Indians. 

The  General-in-Chief,  in  conveying  to  you  this  information,  desires  it 
to  be  understood  that  a command  independent  of  you  is  not  given  to 
General  Lane,  but  he  is  to  operate  to  all  proper  extent  under  your  super- 
vision and  control,  and  if  you  deem  proper  you  may  yourself  command 
the  expedition  which  may'be  undertaken.  Under  these  circumstances 
the  General  will  not  give  you  a formal  leave  according  to  your  applica- 


526  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIIL 


tion,  but  he  authorizes  you  to  absent  yourself  from  your  commaud  for 
twenty  days,  at  your  own  discretion. 

I am,  sir,  &c., 

’ ’ ’ L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Eolla , January  25,  1862. 

Brig*.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel: 

General:  General  Halleck  has  intelligence  which  makes  him  be- 
lieve Price  will  escape  us,  which  of  course  we  have  great  reason  to  fear. 

I cannot,  however,  see  how  he  can  have  later  intelligence  than  mine, 
since  I see  men  every  day  direct  from  Springfield,  and  have  supposed 
by  mv  backward  movement  of  cavalry  I have  quieted  the  nerves  of  the  i 
-enemy  as  to  an  attack. 

We  must  not,  however,  delay  a moment,  and  I leave  to-morrow  tor 
Lebanon,  with  a view  of  procuring  all  I possibly  can  in  the  way  of  sup- 
plies,  watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  being  ready  for  a final  ii 

^ General  Halleck  thinks  we  best  not  wait  for  Colonel  Davis,  but  allow 
him  to  wait  at  Osage.  We  can  tell  better  when  we  get  in  the  immediate 
presence  of  the  enemy  as  to  the  need  of  that  force,  but  if  occasion  arises 
I wish  you  would  give  the  general  the  benefit  of  your  experience  in  re- 
gard to  the  force  of  Price.  It  always  will  be  underrated  by  our  friends, 
who  are  over-anxious  for  us  to  come  to  their  relief,  and  by  our  enemies, 
who  are  anxious  we  should  not  come  too  strong.  Besides,  his  force  is 
never  in  camp  except  when  a battle  is  anticipated,  when  they  come  m 
from  all  the  hills  and  hollows  of  the  surrounding  country. 

My  object  is  to  have  you  come  on  at  your  earliest  convenience,  and 
move  the  remainder  of  your  forces  at  least  as  far  as  we  can  feed  them 
with  regimental  trains. 

I hope  as  little  as  possible  will  be  made  public  of  our  movement,  as 
the  starting  of  generals  is  more  likely  to  give  the  alarm  to  the  enemy, 
who  I hope  to  keep  ignorant  of  our  purpose  as  long  as  possible  previous 
to  our  concentration  at  Lebanon. 

I hope  Davis  will  not  move  one  way  and  look  the  other.  As  at  pres- 
ent advised  he  should  keep  his  eye  on  a union  with  us  at  Lebanon. 

I am,  general,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ 8 ’ SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Cairo,  January  26,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck,  Commanding : 

Information  came  yesterday,  corroborated  to-day,  thatM.  Jeff.  Thomp- 
son, with  cavalry  variously  estimated  up  to  500,  was  between  Commerce 
and  Price’s  Landing.  I immediately  ordered  detachment  of  ca^  airy 
and  infantry  from  Bird’s  Point  and  Cape  Girardeau  under  instructions 
to  co-operate  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  him  off. 

More  anon. 

The  Fifteenth  Illinois  arrived  and  going  to  Smithland. 

JOHtf  A.  McCLEKNAND, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District  of  Cairo. 


}HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


527 


Headquarters, 
Lebanon , Jio.,  January  26,  1862. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Hdqrs.  Southwestern  List.,  en  route  from  Rolla  to  Lebanon , Jfo.  : 

Sir  : I received  the  general’s  letter  of  the  25th  this  evening.  I am 
:ery  glad  he  is  coming  for  many  reasons. 

I inclose  letter  from  Lieutenant- Colonel  Wright,  giving  his  views.* 
Che  lieutenant-colonel  is  evidently  anxious  for  an  advance  to  Spring- 
ield.  As  I previously  have  remarked,  I do  not  believe  in  taking  that 
)lace  (even  if  we  can)  for  the  purpose  of  giving  it  up  again,  and  if  the 
inemy  has  30,000  in  Arkansas  he  will  send  them  to  keep  the  war  out  of 
hat  State,  without  inquiring  whether  Price’s  appointment  is  confirmed 
>r  not.  Meantime,  with  12,000,  all  that  I can  yet  hear  from  at  the  dis- 
posal of  the  general  (perhaps  less),  and  they  far  behind  and  we  far 
way  from  our  supports,  how  can  we  sustain  ourselves,  even  if  we  can 
ake  Springfield. 

In  case  there  are  forces  from  the  north  or  other  supports,  of  which  I 
m not  informed,  it  will  be  different.  I have  ordered  out  a battalion  of 
avalry  to  take  post  at  Bennett’s  Mill,  12  miles  a little  north  of  west  from 
lere,  and  one  on  or  near  the  Osage  Fork,  11  miles  southeast.  This  will 
ontrol  the  sources  of  supply  and  form  a front  of  23  miles,  by  which  I 
iope  we  can  conceal  our  movements  and  make  the  country  tributary. 

I had  already  sent  a company  to  Bennett’s  Mill,  and  have  reports 
hat  it  can  furnish  15,000  pounds  per  day  and  do  the  custom-work.  I 
m afraid  I have  overestimated  the  capacity  of  the  two  mills,  but  hope, 
dtli  the  aid  of  what  we  can  get  from  the  Osage,  to  fill  out  what  I said. 

send  Colonel  Phelps  to  Osage  Fork  with  a few  of  his  men,  mounted. 
Ie  will  talk  with  the  people  and  start  the  system  of  collecting  sup- 
lies,  and  be  able  to  report  to  the  general  on  Tuesday. 

Colonel  Osterhaus  had  a fine  brigade  drill  to-day,"  but  discipline  is 
till  very  bad.  As  relates  to  plundering,  it  will  be  very  disagreeable 
o the  general  to  use  the  necessary  means  to  stop  it,  but  I hope  he  will 

0 so,  as  I feel  it  a disgrace  to  myself  to  be  connected  with  people  who 
ommit  such  crimes  as  some  of  these. 

1 will  make  the  best  arrangements  I can  to  find  quarters  for  the  gen- 
ral  and  his  staff,  but  they  must  not  expect  the  luxuries  of  Rolla. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  A.  CARR, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


ol.  W.  P.  Carlin, 

Commanding , Ironton , Jfo.  .* 


Saint  Louis,  January  27,  1862. 


Colonel:  Your  letter  of  the  24th  is  received.*  You  will  imrnedi- 
tely  throw  forward  a regiment  of  infantry,  supported  by  cavalry  and 
rtillery,  to  Greenville,  and  also  with  cavalry  threaten  Poplar  Bluff 
nd  Doniphan.  It  is  important  that  these  pillaging  bands  should  be 
roken  up.  Arrest  and  hold  all  persons  in  arms  or  who  give  aid  and 
ssistance,  especially  those  who  are  robbing  and  driving  out  Union 
len. 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 

*Not  found. 


528 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap  XVIIX 


Saint  Louis,  January  27,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding , the.,  Eolla , Mo. : I 

General:  Yours  of  the  24th  is  received.  I am  well  satisfied  thatl 
Price  will  not  stand  if  you  press  on  with  the  forces  under  your  corn-i 
mand  The  Benton  Hussars  and  Forty-third  Illinois  will  be  sent  toj 
you  as  soon  as  they  can  be  armed,  probably  to-morrow  or  the  day  after. 
Davis’  division  should  not  be  required  to  cross  the  Osage  unless  it  im 
absolutely  necessary  for  your  success.  It  is  wanted  elsewhere,  on  the  f 
most  urgent  representations  from  Washington,  and  I have  sent  it  tol 
the  Osage  only  to  make  your  success  absolutely  certain.  It  you  cantl 
dispense  with  it,  as  I really  think  you  can  as  soon  as  you  advance;! 
and  feel  Price,  it  should  be  relieved,  so  as  to  return  to  Jefferson  Oity| 
unless  absolutely  necessary,  to  hold  it  as  a reserve  is  a dead  loss  to  us| 
Think  of  this,  and  if  possible  relieve  it ; if  not,  of  course  you  mustl 


have  it.  1 ,,  J 

There  is  a strong  pressure  on  us  for  troops,  and  all  that  are  not: 
absolutely  necessary  here  must  go  elsewhere.  Pope’s  command  is  en- 
tirely broken  up;  4,000  in  Davis’  reserve  and  6,000  ordered  to  Cairo. 

Push  on  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  end  the  matter  with  Price.  A 
detachment  leaves  Ironton  to  move  in  the  direction  of  Pocahontas,  Ark.y 
as  a diversion.  If  you  move  rapidly  and  energetically  Price  must  fall 
back,  at  least  I think  so;  if  not,  you  can  draw  in  reserves. 

Y°UrS> tlUly’  H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Maior-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  January  27,  1862.  ■ 

Brigadier- General  Pope, 

Commanding , Otterville , Mo. : 

General:  Yours  of  the  24th  is  received.  I approve  all  your  dispo- 
sitions, except  that  I do  not  see  that  any  garrison  is  provided  tor  Lex- 
ington. I think  that  should  be  occupied,  at  least  for  the  present.  1 
had  hoped  that  the  detachment  of  our  troops  in  Kansas  would  arrives 
there  by  the  time  the  Kansas  regiment  left.  General  Denver  assured 
me  that  they  had  been  ordered  back  while  he  was  at  Leavenworth,  but 
I can  hear  nothing  of  them. 

If  General  Curtis  can  dispense  with  Davis’  division  it  will  marcn  to 
Jefferson  City,  and  be  sent  south  if  the  condition  of  the  country  should 
then  admit  of  their  withdrawal.  In  regard  to  yourself,  general,  per- 
haps it  will  be  best  for  you  to  remain  in  charge  of  the  district  till  it  is 
fully  organized,  as  you  can  readily  rejoin  the  division  brought  here  or 
when  it  reaches  its  destination.  You  will  certainly  have  a suitable 
command  if  I can  give  it  to  you. 

Accounts  from  Washington  indicate  that  the  new  furore,  “On  to 
Richmond!”  is  abating.  If  so,  we  will  get  time  to  concentrate  and 
organize  our  forces  for  the  new  campaign. 

T°UrS’  tTOly’  H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Maior- General. 


Saint  Louis,  January  27,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price, 

Commanding , cfc.,  Springfield , Mo. : - j 

General:  A man  calling  himself  L.  Y.  Nichols  came  to  my  head- 


AP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


529 


larters  a (lay  or  two  since  with  a duplicate  of  your  letter  of  the  12th 
stant.  On  being  questioned,  he  admitted  that  he  belonged  to  your 
rvice;  that  he  had  come  in  citizen’s  dress  from  Springfield,  avoiding 
me  of  our  military  posts  and  passing  through  others  in  disguise,  and 
thout  reporting  himself  to  the  commander.  He  said  that  he  had 
>ne  this  by  your  direction.  On  being  asked  for  his  flag  of  truce,  he 
illed  from  his  pocket  a dirty  handkerchief  with  a short  stick  tied  to 
e corner. 

You  must  be  aware,  general,  that  persons  so  sent  through  our  lines 
d past  our  military  posts  to  these  headquarters  are  liable  to  the  pun- 
iment  of  death.  They  are  no  more  nor  less  than  spies,  and  probably 
e sent  by  you  to  this  city  as  such.  I shall  send  Mr.  Nichols  back  to 
ur  camp,  but  if  you  send  any  more  persons  here  in  the  same  way 
ey  will  be  regarded  as  spies  and  tried  and  condemned  as  such.  You 
ist  know,  general,  that  the  laws  and  usages  of  war  require  that  a 
arer  of  a flag  of  truce  should  report  at  the  nearest  post  and  should 
t pass  the  outer  line  of  sentinels  without  permission.  He  should 
t even  approach  within  gun-shot  of  a sentinel  without  displaying  his 
g and  receiving  a signal  to  advance.  If  he  have  dispatches,  he 
ould  send  for  an  officer  to  receive  and  receipt  for  them,  which  officer 
ould  direct  the  flag  of  truce  to  immediately  leave  our  lines.  Answers 
such  dispatches  should  immediately  be  sent  to  you  by  us  in  the 
me  way. 

In  a postscript  to  the  copy  of  your  letter  of  the  12th  instant,  just 
reived,  you  call  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  a band  of  men  are 
iring  private  houses,  barns,  mills,  &c.”  I presume  you  refer  to  a 
nd  of  outlaws  on  the  Kansas  frontier.  They  do  not  belong  to  my 
mmand,  and  they  entered  this  department  without  ray  authority. 
) soon  as  I heard  of  their  depredations  I ordered  General  Pope  to 
her  drive  them  out  of  the  State  or  to  disarm  and  confine  them.  Be 
sured,  general,  that  no  acts  of  wanton  spoliation,  such  as  “firing 
ivate  houses,  barns,  mills,  &c.,”  and  “burning  and  destroying  rail- 
id  bridges,  &c.,w  will  be  countenanced  by  me.  On  the  contrary,  I 
opose  to  punish  with  the  utmost  severity  every  act  of  wanton  destruc- 
m of  property,  public  or  private,  and  every  act  of  pillage,  marauding, 
ibery,  and  theft  committed  in  this  department,  no  matter  under  whose 
thority  or  orders  the  guilty  parties  may  have  acted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General . 


Leavenworth,  January  27,  1862. 
m.  John  Oovode,  Souse  of  Representatives : 

Arrived  last  night.  Before  communicating  with  General  Hunter  he 
ued  this  order: 

seral  Orders,  > Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

No.  11.  5 Fort  Leavenworth , Kans.,  January  27,  1862. 

■ In  the  expedition  about  to  go  south  from  this  department,  called  in  the  news- 
j>ers  General  Lane’s  Expedition,  it  is  the  intention  of  the  major-general  commanding 
department  to  command  in  person,  unless  otherwise  expressly  ordered  by  the  Gov- 
’ ment. 

• Transportation  not  having  been  supplied,  we  must  go  without  it.  All  tents, 
chests,  chairs,  camp-tables,  camp-stools,  &c.,  must  be  at  once  stored  or  aban- 
1 !«d.  The  general-commanding  takes  in  his  valise  one  shirt,  one  pair  drawers,  one 
r socks,  and  one  handkerchief,  and  no  officer  or  soldier  will  carry  more.  The  sur- 

34  R R— VOL  VIII 


530 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIt 


Dins  room  in  the  knapsack  must  he  reserved  for  ammunition  and  provisions.  Ever  m 
officer  and  soldier  will  orny  bisown  dotting  i^dbedffing  teigadier-ge, 

3 The  Until  their  arrival  it  & necessai# 

ffiately 'repOTt  the  da^^nfwhich1  he  was<rcn^tered*hito  the  service  | 

Major-General , Commanding.  *1 


See  the  President,  Secretary  of  War,  and  General  McClellan,  an.- 
answer  wliat  I shall  do.  j jj.  LANE.  I 


Executive  Office,  Iowa, 

January  27,  1862. 


Hon.  Wm.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , D.  G.: 

Str  • I inclose  herewith  copies  of  a letter  from  myself  to  Colonel  Nut 
dated  January  14, 1862,  and  his  reply,  dated  January  concer. : 

ino-  the  same^subject  touching  which  I wrote  you  on  the  23d  m staid 
I am  strengthened  in  the  opinion  there  expressed,  that  some  of  tl^ 
rebels  escaped  from  Missouri  and  some  of  their  aiders  and  abettors  ,j 
our  State  should  be  arrested  by  military  authority,  a,nd  that  the  H 
ertv  brought  into  our  State  to  escape  the  officers  of  the  United  Stat 
in  Missouri  should  be  taken  possession  of  and  legally  dealt  with.  I 
am  also  satisfied  this  should  be  done  by  United  States  officers,  su 
ported  by  United  States  troops.  The  secession  . feeing  is,  as  a 
credibly  informed  and  fully  believe,  very  strong  in  Fremont  Count) 
The  Union  men  there  and  in  Missouri  are  greatly  exasperated  tU 
rebels  from  Missouri  who  have  been  compelled  to  fly  from  that  bta 
because  of* these  outrages  on  Union  men 

protection  in  this  State,  and  I am  well  satisfied  that  it  these  peon 
cannot  be  dealt  with  in  some  way  legally,  the  jayhawkers  will  take  tJ 
matter  in  their  own  hands  and  a small  border  war  will  ensu  • 

T have  sent  copies  of  the  correspondence  between  Colonel  Nutt  a 
myself  toGeneralHalleck,  with  the  request  to  lay 'them  before  t 
Governor  of  Missouri,  as  I do  not  know  where  to  address  him. 

Please  consult  the  Iowa  delegation  in  Congress  on  this  subject,  ai 
permit  me  to  suggest  that  prompt  and  decided  action  will  have  a 

cidedly  beneficial  influence.  -nvii+ort 

If  arrests  be  made,  the  officer  should  be  supported  by  United  Stat 

troops. 

Very  respectfully,  SAMUEL  J.  KIKKWOOD. 


[Inolosuro  No.  1.] 


Executive  Office,  Iowa, 

January  14,  1862. 


Lieut.  Col.  H.  C.  Nutt, 

Aide-de-camp,  &c,,  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa : , 

Sir-  Since  writing  you  a few  days  since  in  regard  to  the  diflicu 
in  Fremont  County8 1 have  learned  that  troops . from  M=i  h 

been  to  Sidney  and  demanded  the  surrender  mtothmr  hands  M * 
persons  arrested  on  suspicion  of  having  assaulted  Mi.  rug  , 
authorities  in  charge  of  the  prisoners  very  properly  refused  to  surrem 


iap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


531 


iemj  that  the  Missouri  troops,  on  their  return,  arrested  in  this  State 
ad  took  with  them  to  Missouri  one  or  more  citizens  of  this  State,  and 
lat  such  a state  of  feeling  exists  in  Fremont  County  and  in  Atchison 
ounty,  Mo.,  that  there  is  imminent  danger  of  collision  between  people. 
In  addition  to  the  duties  required  by  my  former  order,  you  will  pro- 
ved as  soon  as  possible  to  Atchison  County,  and  call  upon  the  person 
ho  may  be  in  command  of  the  State  or  United  States  troops  there, 
ou  will  exhibit  to  him  my  former  letter  of  instructions  to  you  and  this 
tter.  A system  of  reprisals  between  the  States  must  not  be  allowed  to 
row  up.  Our  people  must  not  enter  Missouri,  as  was  done  a few  days 
nee,  arrest  persons  and  bring  them  to  this  State  for  trial,  and  people 
om  Missouri  must  not  demand  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  the  civil 
ithorities  of  this  State  or  arrest  persons  in  this  State  and  carry  them 
> Missouri  for  trial.  Such  state  of  things  can  produce  but  one  result, 
ad  that  is  a border  war. 

If  the  person  arrested  by  the  men  from  Iowa,  and  who  has  not  been 
ischarged,  is  not  in  the  hands  of  the  civil  authorities,  I would  at  once 
'der  his  discharge.  If  the  man  or  men  arrested  by  the  returning  Mis- 
>uri  troops  are  not  in  the  hands  of  the  civil  authorities  of  Missouri, 
du  are  instructed  to  ask  his  or  their  discharge. 

Men  in  Iowa  who  have  violated  the  laws  of  Missouri  in  that  State 
in  be  reached  in  this  State  by  requisition  from  the  Governor  of  Mis- 
)uri.  All  men  may  rest  assured  the  authorities  of  Iowa  will  not  make 
,ieir  State  an  asylum  for  rebels  and  traitors,  and  that  all  such  will  be 
Vomptly  surrendered  when  legally  applied  for.  The  action  of  Iowa 
is  thus  far,  I think,  given  the  loyal  men  of  Missouri  no  ground  to 
Dubt  the  good  faith  of  her  authorities. 

You  will  present  these  views  plainly,  but  kindly,  to  the  officer  in  com- 
pel in  Atchison  County  and  to  other  loyal  citizens  there,  and  com- 
unicate  as  freely  with  them  as  you  can  in  conversation.  Inform  all 
lat  jayhawking  expeditions  into  our  State  cannot  be  permitted  under 
ie  claim  of  taking  the  property  of  rebels.  The  evil  result  of  such 
airse  must  be  apparent.  All  information  showing  that  such  persons 
*e  in  our  State  and  in  regard  to  their  property  will  be  placed  at  once 
the  hands  of  the  United  States  officers  for  legal  action,  and  they  can 
tus  be  legally  dealt  with.  Nothing  herein  contained  is  intended  to 
►untermand  anything  contained  in  my  former  letter.  You  may  show 
)th  letters  in  Sidney,  so  that  all  may  know  what  I intend.  As  soon 
1 1 receive  your  report  I will  write  to  Governor  Gamble.  Your  early 
tention  to  these  matters  and  your  speedy  report  is  expected. 

Very  respectfully, 

SAMUEL  J.  KIRKWOOD. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Council  Bluffs,  January  24,  1862. 

on.  Samuel  J.  Kirkwood, 

Governor  of  Iowa , J)es  Moines : 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  letter  of  instructions,  dated  January  14, 
62, 1 went  to  Atchison  County,  Mo.,  last  Monday,  and  have  spent 
veral  days  there,  and  will  now  give  you  such  additional  particulars 
1 1 gained  while  there.  I found  the  prisoner  who  had  been  arrested 
r the  Missouri  troops  in  Iowa  released  on  parole.  He  is  a H unga- 
in of  more  than  ordinary  intelligence.  I saw  him,  and  learned  he  had 
ien  in  Price’s  army,  having  been  induced  to  go  there  by  wealthy 
bels,  who  agreed  to  support  his  family  whilst  he  was  away.  He  says 


532 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [Chap.  XVIlf 


he  soon  saw  he  was  on  the  wrong  side.  When  General  Fremont  s proc 
lamation  of  amnesty  was  issued  he  left  for  home,  but  fearing  violenc 
from  the  loyal  Germans  in  Eoekport,  went  to  Iowa.  He  sajs  he  wa 
alad  to  be  arrested,  as  he  can  now  be  with  his  family  and  be  protectee 
by  troops  I told  him  if  he  desired  I could  have  him  released  and  h 
could  return  to  Iowa  with  me,  which  he  declined.  I afterwards  learne, 
from  the  officer  in  command  he  had  orders  for  Ins  release  from  Sam 
Toseob.  upon  taking  the  oath.  He  is  now  at  liberty. 

I also  saw  the  officer  in  command  of  the  State  troops,  and  had  aver 
free  and  plain  conversation  with  him  and  other  loyal  men  m regard  t 
the  invasion  of  Iowa.  I do  not  think  these  troops  have  done  much  t 
stop  iayhawking,  but  have  not  taken  sides  with  them.  These  troop 
have  now  gone  below  to  be  mustered  out,  as  they  are  six-months  men 
Whether  they  will  be  replaced  by  Federal  troops  I did  not  learn. 

On  mv  way  to  Missouri  I found  at  Sidney  an  intense  exc.temenl 
There  was  said  to  be  a reliable  report  that  the  jayhawkers  had  met  o 
Sunday  near  Sidney  Landing,  and  had  agreed  upon  Monday  or  Tuei 
lav  ffight  as  the  time  to  “ clean  out”  McKinsock’s  Grove.  I was  me 
hv  petition  signed  by  nearly  every  one  along  the  line,  calling  to! 
tomedfate  help  A messenger  had  been  sent  for  me,  and  the  prom 
“Union  men  were  in  council  at  Judge  Sears’  to  decide  what  shoul 
be  done.  I told  them  I was  there  on  my  way  to  Missouri,  and  if  I sai 
or  heard  anything  to  justify  me,  I would  return  at  once.  I was  11 
doubt  ^regard  tothese  reports,  Lnd  would  call  out  the  militia  only  ^ 
a last  resort  to  repel  invasion  or  preserve  the  I 

On  mv  way  to  Eoekport  I became  satisfied  that  the  danger  was  na 
so  imminent  as  had  been  represented,  and  I learned  from  those  that  I 
thought  knew  that  there  was  no  armed  force  m Atchison  County  4 
least*  As  soon  as  I had  completed  my  business  at  Eoekport  I procurej 
conveyance  an^  took  with  me  a good  loyal  farmer  and  proceeded  t 
visit  several  of  the  men  who  had  been  arrested  and  taken  to  I°wa. 
saw  four  of  these  men  who  were  arrested  by  English  and  his  party,  op 
of  them  William  Lewis,  a man  who  is  called  by  the  secessionists  c 
Fremont  County  a jayhawker.  I am  satisfied,  from  all  I can  learn,  h 
has  been  and  perhaps  still  is  cognizant  of  all  the  movements  of  tb 
Swkers!  but  I am  equally  well  satisfied  he  never  goes  with  the 
and  was  not  at  Fugitt’s,  but  I think  he  knew  they  were  going  to  Fj 
gitt’s.  He  is  the  leader  and  controlling  spirit  among  the  loyal  men  j 
Northern  Missouri.  He  is  a man  of  wealth,  a little  hard  and  rough,  p i 
^ Kn+  ia  lnvol  He  savs  boldly  a jayhawker  is  a better  man  tha> 
S2SKi.K  MS.  U&  English  .nd  the  lead,,.  . 

kiI Sarong  iuterview  with  this  man.  He  says  he  has  been  outra J 
by  men  from  Iowa  and  says  he  shall  have  his  revenge  I to Id  hr 
rglninlv  what  were  vour  views  and  that  no  invasion  of  Iowa  would  q 
permitted  for  any  luirpose,  but  that  any  one  who  had  violated  the  law 
of  M ssouri  could  be  reached  in  Iowa  in  a legal  manner.  He  seerne 
pleased  and  said  if  the  authorities  of  Iowa  would  act  in  that  spnit 
was  aU  he  and  his  friends  desired.  He  seemed  to  be  well  aware  of  t 
result  of  the  invading  of  either  State,  but  such  men  lie  said  mustj 
reached  and  the  jayhawkers  were  the  only  ones  who  had  reach< 

SSi rebels  St  ?e°ft  m!sso“ uri  SS,  amltat  yc 

Sd“d’S,“f  “ that  lie  would  li»  MHuenc.  to  nrov.nt  Ka 


ixv.  XYIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  533 

is  jayhawkers  or  any  others  from  invading  Iowa.  He  further  inti- 
lated  that  many  of  these  jayhawkers  have  gone  south  to  join  General 
ane.  He  says  four  or  five  of  these  kidnapers  must  he  punished, 
ad  if  civil  law  will  do  it  it  will  suit  him,  but  if  not,  he  knows  what 
ill.  He  told  me  that  he  would  at  once  take  the  legal  steps  to  reach 
aese  men,  and  that  no  further  invasion  of  Iowa  should  take  place  in 
ae  mean  time  if  he  could  prevent  it.  I was  satisfied  while  there  that 
e was  in  earnest,  and  could  and  would  do  as  he  agreed,  and  on  my 
‘turn  to  Sidney  Judge  Sears  says  he  can  and  will  make  his  word  good 
i every  respect,  and  I am  satisfied  there  will  be  no  more  jayhawking 
i Iowa  for  the  present. 

0.  McKinsock,  who  shot  the  man  at  Hamburg,  went  through  Missouri 
> Bloody  Island,  in  the  Missouri  Biver.  This  island  is  claimed  by 
)wa,  Nebraska,  and  Missouri,  and  by  the  United  States.  He  was 
;en  to  go  there ; was  followed,  taken,  and  brought  to  Sidney  Landing, 
i Missouri,  where  he  was  arrested  by  a civil  officer  for  kidnaping 
id  taken  to  Bockport,  and  bound  over  in  $2,000  to  appear  for  trial, 
id  released.  I found  all  the  loyal  men  in  Missouri  particularly  bitter 
gainst  English,  and  say  he  shall  smart  for  the  treatment  he  gave 
icse  men  he  arrested.  He  cannot  go  4 miles  in  Missouri  by  day- 
ght  a live  man,  I don’t  believe. 

On  my  return  to  Sidney  I found  Colonel  Hedges  and  Captain  Har- 
3y  very  anxious  that  I should  call  out  the  militia  for  thirty  days  at 
ast  for  drill.  Captain  Harvey  very  plainly  told  me  he  had  no  fear 
■ immediate  invasion,  but  that  they  might  be  needed  in  future,  and 
ere  very  much  in  need  of  drill.  He  says  the  military  companies 
lere  have  labored  under  many  adverse  circumstances  ; men  had  been 
Doted  at  for  joining  companies  and  injured  in  their  business,  and 
>mething  was  needed  to  infuse  proper  spirit  in  the  men.  I told  him 
tat  it  would  be  very  expensive;  I suggested  it  would  be  poor  patriot- 
m that  needed  $13  a month  to  keep  it  up,  but  that  I would  state  the 
ise  to  you  fairly,  and  leave  the  responsibility  with  you. 

In  conclusion,  I thiftk  immediate  danger  of  trouble  in  Fremont  County 
is  passed,  but  I still  think  there  should  be  some  Federal  troops  sent 
ire,  more  to  arrest  secessionists  and  secession  property  that  has  made 
>wa  an  asylum  than  to  protect  us  from  invasion,  but  the  officers 
aced  in  command  should  be  No.  1 in  every  respect.  An  inefficient  or 
liprovident  officer  would  do  much  harm,  but  one  of  the  right  kind,  by 
aking  a few  arrests  of  men  and  property,  would  in  my  opinion  not 
lly  end  the  present  difficulty,  but  prevent  forever  its  recurrence. 
Judge  Baldwin  has  shown  me  your  dispatches,  and  we  have  consulted 
lly  in  regard  to  the  best  course  to  pursue.  He  has  promised  to  write 
>u  to-day.  I will  present  our  views  briefly  for  your  commendation, 
id  then,  if  you  think  best,  I will  go  to  Saint  Joe  and  do  the  best  I can. 
'fie  troops  at  Saint  Joe  are  to  my  knowledge  much  demoralized,  and 
me  that  I know  to  be  there  are  fit  for  this  service.  1 refer  only  to  the 
xteenth  Illinois,  Colonel  Smith,  who  is  in  command  there,  and  were 
to  go  there  he  would  send  some  of  his  own  regiment  and  I could  not 
)ject.  I think  the  best  plan  is  for  you  to  write  General  Halleek  at 
lint  Louis,  get  cavalry — one  company  will  do — and  stipulate  for  a su- 
mor  man  to  take  charge  of  them;  give  this  officer  full  power  to  arrest 
en  and  property,  to  be  immediately  sent  to  headquarters  at  Saint  Joe 
’ Leavenworth  for  trial.  This  takes  the  matter  from  the  border,  and 
ill  prove  a wholesome  lesson  for  those  who  are  not  arrested.  If  you 
ill  think  best  I will  go  to  Saint  Joe,  Leavenworth,  or  Saint  Louis,  as 
m may  direct,  and  see  what  can  be  done. 


534  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 


Awaiting  farther  orders,  I remain,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedi 
ent  servant,  ^ ^IJTT. 


Fort  Leavenworth,  January  28,  1862. 


To  our  Great  Father , the  President  of  the  United  States: 


Father  : We  are  told  by  our  friends  that  there  is  some  doubt  as  t 
whether  the  great  war  chief,  General  Lane,  will  command  the  expedi 

tion  to  our  country.  . x , , . , ~ 

Our  object  in  having  this  letter  sent  to  you  is  to  beg  that  Genera 
Lane  be  placed  in  command  of  that  expedition,  as  we  believe  no  war  - 
rior can  place  us  in  possession  of  our  country  again  as  effectually  as  hi 
can.  Our  people  have  heard  of  General  Lane  many  seasons  ago.  ihe 
have  heard  how  with  but  a handful  of  warriors  he  beat  back  the  enem 
when  they  were  as  numerous  as  the  leaves  of  the  forest  and  restorer 

peace  and  quiet  to  Kansas.  I 

Our  people  have  been  told  that  he  would  come  with  an  army  to  ro 
store  them  to  their  homes  and  to  avenge  the  great  wrongs  they  hav 
suffered. 

It  has  made  their  hearts  glad  to  hear  it. 

Our  people  have  suffered  a great  deal.  They  have  been  driven  froi 
their  homes  in  the  dead  of  winter  when  the  earth  was  clothed  wit 
white.  Many  of  them  have  frozen  to  death.  All  of  them  have  los 

all  they  possessed.  . _ ^ J 

There  are  now  6,000  women  and  children  m Southern  Kansas  withon 
tents,  but  scantily  clothed,  and  exposed  to  all  the  horrors  of  a sever 

Our  agents  have  done  and  are  now  doing  all  they  can  to  relieve  u: 
but  we  leave  comfortable  homes  in  our  own  country  and  we  wish  t 

be  restored  to  them.  , , _ . , T i • d 

General  Lane  is  our  friend.  His  heart  is  big  for  the  Indian.  11 
will  do  more  for  us  than  any  one  else.  The  hearts  of  our  people  wi 
be  sad  if  he  does  not  come.  They  will  follow  him  wherever  he  direct; 
They  will  sweep  the  rebels  before  them  like  a terrible  fire  on  the  dr 

HT/HTlP  I 

We  beg  our  Great  Father  and  our  great  war  chief,  General  M< 
Clellan.  that  they  will  listen  to  the  prayers  of  their  children. 

HO-PO-EITH-LE-YO-HO-LA,  his  + mark, 

Head  Chief  of  the  Creek  Nation. 
A-LUK-TUS-TE-KU-KE , his  + mark, 

Head  Chief  of  the  Seminole  Nation. 


Attest 


GEO.  A.  CUTLEK, 

United  States  Agent  for  the  Creek  Indians. 


[Indorsement.] 


Executive  Mansion,  February  4,  1862. 
Major-General  McClellan  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : The  President  directs  me  to  send  you  the  inclose( 

with  his  respectful  salutations.  tt  a ^ 

JOHH  HAY, 

Assistant  Private  Secretary. 


ap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


535. 


Cairo,  January  28,  1862. 
iiartermaster-General  M.  C.  Meigs,  U.  S.  A. : 

General  : Since  forwarding  my  report  to  you  that  I had  accepted 
e seven  gunboats  built  by  contract  by  Mr.  Eads,  in  which  was  con- 
ined  a report  of  Commanders  Pennock  and  Stembel  that  the  engines 
the  Benton  were  so  much  wanting  in  power  that  I did  not  feel  au- 
orized  to  accept  her— in  fact  I concurred  in  their  report  and  sugges- 
)ns  to  place  a new  engine  in  her — I have,  however,  since  then,  on  con- 
Ration  with  several  practical  men  and  in  view  of  our  pressing  want 
the  Benton,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  by  raising  the  wheel  of  that 
;ssel  18  inches,  widening  her  buckets,  and  giving  12  inches  more  to  her 
dder  at  the  water’s  surface,  she  will  handle  sufficiently  well  to  answer 
Lr  purpose.  All  this  can  be  done  in  less  than  three  weeks  after  I get 
ithority  to  do  it  and  for  less  than  $2,000,  including  a new  donkey 
igine. 

I have  telegraphed  twice  for  permission  to  accept  the  Benton,  but  as 
e wires  have  been  out  of  order  or  for  some  other  cause  I have  had  no 
iswer. 

Will  you  please  answer  by  telegram  immediately  on  receiving  this, 
we  are  waiting  to  make  a demonstration. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-  Officer. 


pecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  Central  Missouri, 

No.  18.  f Otterville , January  29,  1862. 

The  following  movements  of  troops  will  be  made  in  this  district : 

I.  The  Iowa  Fifth,  the  Illinois  Forty-seventh,  five  companies  of  the 
hio  Thirty-ninth,  and  the  Eleventh  Ohio  Battery  will  march  from 
yracuse  and  La  Mine  to  Booneville,  Mo.,  where  Col.  W.  H.  Worthing- 
n will  assume  the  command  and  make  immediate  arrangements  to 
oss  the  Missouri  Biver  with  his  whole  force. 

II.  The  Nebraska  First,  the  Ohio  Twenty-seventh,  the  three  com- 
mies of  Fourth  Regular  Cavalry,  the  companies  of  Regular  infantry, 
id  one  of  the  batteries  of  the  Missouri  Light  Artillery  at  Sedalia,  to 
i designated  by  Colonel  Steele,  Eighth  Iowa  Volunteers,  will  take  up 
e line  of  march  immediately  for  Jefferson  City,  and  will  be  joined  at 
nithton  by  the  Forty-second  Illinois  and  the  battery  of  Missouri  Light 
rtillery  stationed  at  that  place.  This  column,  under  command  of 
ilonel  Thayer,  First  Nebraska,  will  proceed  by  the  direct  road  to  Jef- 
rson  City,  where  they  Avill  receive  further  orders. 

III.  The  nine  companies  of  Merrill’s  Horse  will  immediately  proceed, 
ider  command  of  the  senior  officer  of  that  regiment  present,  to  Boone- 
lle,  Mo.,  and  cross  the  Missouri  River. 

IV.  The  Eighth  Iowa  Regiment,  one  battery  of  Missouri  Light  Artil- 
ry,  to  be  designated  by  Colonel  Steele,  and  the  four  companies  of  the 
irst  Iowa  Cavalry,  under  Major  Torrence,  will  constitute  the  garrison 
> Sedalia,  to  be  commanded  by  the  senior  officer  present  for  duty. 

V.  The  Seventh  Missouri  Regiment,  one  company  of  the  First  Iowa 
avalry,  to  be  designated  by  Captain  Leffingwell,  and  one  battery  of 
issouri  Light  Artillery,  to  be  designated  by  the  major  commanding 
} Ija  Mine,  will  proceed  as  soon  as  practicable  to  Lexington,  Mo.,  and 
ke  post  at  that  place. 

VI.  The  commanders  of  the  moving  columns  and  of  the  garrison  at 
sdalia  will  receive  written  instructions  from  these  headouarters. 


• 536  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVUl| 

VII.  Ten  days7  rations  (two  days’  cooked)  will  be  carried  with  cacli! 
column,  and  a supply  train  of  25  wagons  will  accompany  the  columns 
to  Booneville  and  Jefferson  City,  and  a train  of  10  wagons  the  command 
of  Colonel  Stevenson  to  Lexington.  The  garrison  at  Lexington  wil. 
draw  its  supplies  from  Sedalia,  The  chief  quartermaster  and  chiei 
commissary  of  the  district  will  see  that  these  trains  are  furnished,  loaded  i 
with  supplies,  and  sent  to  join  their  respective  columns. 

The  train  for  the  column  marching  on  Jefferson  City  will  join  it  ai 
Tipton  and  be  loaded  with  supplies  at  Jefferson  City.  The  train  fo] 
the  command  which  crosses  at  Booneville  will  be  loaded  at  Tipton  ant 
sent  to  that  place  under  escort  of  a company  of  Merrill’s  Horse,  wind  I 
Colonel  Steele  will  send  to  Tipton  immediately  for  that  purpose.  Two 
sevenths  of  salt  meat  only  will  be  taken  $ the  remainder  of  the  mea 
ration  will  be  fresh  beef  on  the  hoof,  to  be  turned  over  to  the  actmd 
commissaries  of  the  respective  columns.  A supply  train  will  also  b< 
sent  with  the  nine  companies  of  Merrill’s  Horse,  which  train,  as  sooi : 
as  its  supplies  are  delivered  at  the  points  specified  in  written  instruc 
tions  to  the  commanding  officer  of  this  cavalry,  will  return  to  Tipton 

VIII.  The  chief  quartermaster  of  the  district  will  take  immediate 
measures  to  have  all  quartermaster’s  stores  at  Sedalia  and  OttervillJ 
not  needed  for  the  garrisons  of  these  posts  to  be  removed  to  Jeffersoi 
City,  and  will  instruct  the  depot  quartermaster  at  that  place  to  receipi 
for  and  take  charge  of  them. 

The  only  wagons  left  in  this  district  along  the  line  of  railroad  wil 
be  a small  supply  train  of  25  wagons  at  Tipton  and  the  regimenta 
trains.  Such  number  of  ox-wagons  as  may  be  necessary  to  keep  tin 
post  at  La  Mine  supplied  with  forage  will  be  left  at  Otterville. 

IX.  Captain  Brown,  assistant  quartermaster  at  Sedalia,  after  send 
ing  the  quartermaster’s  stores  not  absolutely  needed  for  that  post  hi 
Jefferson  City,  as  directed,  will  repair  to  Otterville,  and  relieve  Capt 
J.  A.  Swain,  acting  quartermaster,  who  upon  being  relieved  will  repor 

to  these  headquarters.  . _ , 

The  post  quartermaster  at  Sedalia  will  be  designated  by  the  com 
mander  of  the  post  and  will  receipt  to  Captain  Brown  for  all  quarter 
master’s  stores  at  that  place. 

X.  The  commissaries  of  subsistence  at  Sedalia,  La  Mine,  lip  ton,  an< 
California  will  draw  their  supplies  from  the  depot  at  Jefferson  City 
the  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence  at  Sedalia  keeping  store 
enough  on  hand  to  supply  the  garrison  of  Lexington. 

XI.  The  commanding  officer  at  La  Mine  will,  as  soon  as  the  mov€ 
ments  of  the  troops  are  completed,  designate  some  artillery  officer  tt 
take  charge  of  the  ordnance  stores  now  in  the  hands  of  the  quarter 
master  at  Otterville,  and  have  them  deposited  and  cared  for  m th 
magazine  to  be  built  at  La  Mine  Cantonment. 

XII.  The  companies  of  Merrill’s  Horse  designated  in  the  letter  o 
instructions  to  the  commanding  officer  of  that  regiment  will  draw  sup 
lilies  from  Tipton  for  the  present,  and  the  assistant  commissary  Q 
subsistence  at  that  post  will  accordingly  keep  on  hand  the  necessar, 
subsistence  stores  for  500  men  for  fifteen  days,  exclusive  of  the  gam 

son  at  that  post.  , 

XIII.  The  sick  of  the  regiments  thus  put  in  motion  will  be  sent  t 
Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  in  charge  of  a medical  officer,  to  be  designated  by  th 
division  surgeon  at  these  headquarters,  who  will  specify  and  nav 
detailed  such  hospital  attendants  as  may  be  necessary  to  accompan. 

them.  . T • 

The  division  surgeon  will  notify  the  medical  director  in  baint  Dow 


AP.  XVIIL ] CORRESPONDENCE.  ETC. UNIOl.  537 

ro  days  in  advance  of  the  time  the  sick  will  arrive  in  Saint  Louis  and 
eir  number. 

Commanders  of  regiments  will  be  held  accountable  that  a separate 
;scriptive  roll  be  furnished  to  each  sick  man  thus  sent.  The  men  too 
k to  be  moved  will  be  taken  charge  of  by  the  post  surgeons,  who 
11  send  them  forward  to  Saint  Louis  as  soon  as  they  are  able  to 
ivel. 

By  order  of  General  Pope  : 

[SPEED  BUTLER,] 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Otterville , January  30,  1862. 

► the  Commanding  Officer  of  Merrill’s  Horse: 

You  will  cross  the  river  at  Booneville  and  march  to  Glasgow  with 
ur  whole  command.  It  is  reported  that  young  Price  and  Colonel 
ckson  are  recruiting  in  that  neighborhood.  As  soon  as  you  are 
tisfied  that  you  have  broken  up  all  such  parties  in  vicinity  of  Glas- 
sy you  will  establish  five  companies  of  your  command  in  comfortable 
uter  quarters  at  that  place,  using  such  public  buildings,  store-houses, 
d stables  as  are  best  adapted  for  that  purpose.  Your  other  four  com- 
nies  you  will  in  like  manner  post  at  Fayette.  A train  of  wagons 
11  be  at  Booneville  on  the  5th  of  February,  on  which  day  you  will 
ve  at  least  one  company  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  to  receive 
d escort  the  train  to  Glasgow. 

You  will  establish  your  headquarters  at  Glasgow,  Fayette  being  con- 
lered  an  outpost  of  your  command.  The  train  will  carry  you  sup- 
ies  for  one  month.  You  will  move  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Glasgow, 
the  presence  of  forces  is  much  needed  there. 

I send  you  a note  for  Colonel  Worthington  at  Booneville,  so  that 
u may  have  no  delay  in  crossing  the  river. 

JM).  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Cairo,  III.,  January  30,  1862. 

P.  Sanford,  U.  S.  K: 

Sir:  You  will  immediately  proceed  to  Cincinnati  and  examine 
oroughly  several  steamers,  with  a view  of  purchasing  one  large  or 
bher  two  small  steamers  for  the  mortar  boats  and  gunboats.  These 
iamers  must  be  less  than  four  years  old,  of  great  strength,  of  good 
gines,  and  not  less  than  1,000  tons  burden,  and  not  to  exceed  in  cost 
5,000  for  each  vessel. 

You  will  also  have  these  steamers  fitted  for  the  purpose  of  carrying 
imunition,  provisions,  and  the  men  to  be  attached  to  the  mortar 
ats.  This  must  be  done  at  as  little  expense  as  will  prepare  them  to 
swer  the  object  of  their  purchase. 

You  will  also  select  for  each  of  these  steamers  one  first  master,  one 
lirth  master,  two  pilots  to  be  paid  as  first  masters,  one  carpenter  at 
0 per  month,  oue  chief  engineer,  who  will  furnish  three  assistants  and 
n the  engine,  including  his  own  pay,  for  $275  per  month.  You  will 
50  direct  the  first  master  to  procure  twelve  firemen  at  $215  per  month, 
ok  and  steward  at  $20  per  month,  three  cabin  boys  at  $14  per  month. 
)u  will  also  select  twenty  flat-boat  pilots  at  $90  per  month  for  each 
°t»  and  four  fiat-boat  men  for  each  boat,  independently  of  the  pilot, 
$18  per  month. 


538 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T. 


[Chap.  XVIItB 


In  the  selection  of  these  steamers,  manning  and  equipping  them  foj 
service,  great  judgment  and  economy  will  be  necessary;  but  you  hav* 
a safe  guide  from  the  information  we  have  of  the  character  of  the  vei 
sels  and  the  rate  or  amount  for  which  in  these  times  of  trade  depreaj 
sion  they  can  be  purchased.  The  steamers  themselves  must  be  read® 
to  leave  for  Cairo  in  ten  days  after  you  have  selected  and  taken  posse! 

Si(You  are  hereby  authorized  to  sign  a document  stating  that  my  a£ 
proval  of  the  sale  will  be  given  on  the  delivery  of  the  steamers  to  yoi| 
I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ FOOTE  1 


Procure  a chain  of  1J  inch  and  90  fathoms  in  length,  and  one  anchu 
of  1,800  to  2,000  pounds.  Obtain  from  Haggerty  600  hammocks _and  60 1 
bags;  latter  6 inches  longer  and  4 inches  less  m diameter  than  the  las 


Executive  Mansion,  I 
Washington , January  31,  1862.  I 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : I 

My  Dear  Sir  : It  is  my  wish  that  the  expedition  commonly  calle j 
the  “Lane  Expedition”  shall  he  as  much  as  has  been  promised  at  tt 
Adjutant-General’s  Office  under  the  supervision  of  General  McOlellal 
and  not  any  more.  I have  not  intended  and  do  not  now  intend  that  . 
shall  he  a great,  exhausting  affair , but  a snug,  sober  column  of  10,000  <■ 
15  000.  General  Lane  has  been  told  by  me  many  times  that  he  is  undi 
the  command  of  General  Hunter,  and  assented  to  it  as  often  as  tol 
It  was  the  distinct  agreement  between  him  and  me  when  I appointe 
him  that  he  was  to  be  under  Hunter. 

Yours,  truly , A LINCOLN. 


Hdqrs.  South-western  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , iHo.,  January  31,  lbo2. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- G ener al : ; 

Captain  : Nothing  of  great  importance  has  transpired  since  my  la; 

dispatches  sent  from  Wet  Glaze.  . . 

My  messenger  sent  to  Colonel  Davis  arrived,  giving  accurate  intel 
gence  of  the  progress  of  that  division.  It  seems  the  colonel  did  n. 
leave  Tipton  till  the  26th,  and  the  roads  so  much  delayed  him  as  j 
make  but  10  miles  in  two  days.  He  hoped,  however,  to  arrive  at  Lir 
Creek  last  night,  which  at  this  stage  of  weather  and  roads  is  probab, 
better  than  can  be  expected. 

It  is  very  cold;  about  4 inches  of  snow  on  the  ground;  so  the  era. 
will  not  form  hard  enough  to  bear  the  teams,  while  it  forms  aternh 
resistance  to  wheeling.  Some  teams  will  probably  have  to  stop,  0 
generally  they  will  work  forward  slowly.  , , , 9(.  m. 

There  is  a steamboat  and  flat-boat  at  Lmn  Greek,  guarde  „ ^ 
on  this  side,  which  I sent,  and  some  on  the  other  side,  sent  by  Colon, 
Davis;  but  I trust  they  will  form  a junction  on  the  other  side,  lor  n 
messenger  met  a small  band  of  rebels  5 miles  this  side  of  Linn  Creek,  ai 
heard  of  500  being  at  Warsaw,  40  miles  off,  threatening  to  retard  t 

A picket  southeast  from  Springfield  has  been  drawn  in  by  theenem; 


AP.  XVIII.] 


539 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

was  supported  by  artillery.  This  does  not  look  like  running  away, 

; the  picket  was  on  one  of  the  roads  I apprehend  he  would  take  to 
) off  on.  I have  ordered  a strong  picket  of  cavalry  to  stand  12  miles 
rward,  and  I am  trying  to  increase  my  means  of  gaining  intelligence 
om  the  enemy,  which  is  now  very  meager.  The  wheat  is  in  stacks 
id  corn  on  the  stalks.  To  make  it  available  is  no  small  matter  and  a 
•eat  tax  on  cavalry. 

I wish  we  had  some  of  that  surplus  of  which  we  hear  so  much  and 
e so  little.  My  men  are  in  good  health  and  spirits. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri  for  January,  1862. 


Commands. 


1.  G.  M.  Dodge’s  brigade 

L P.  J.  Osterhaus’  brigade 

L E.  A.  Carr’s  cavalry  brigade. . . 

ig.  Gen.  F.  Sigel’s  brigade 

igadier-General  Asboth’s  brigade 

st  of  Rolla,  Col.  J.  B.  Wyman 

attached 

i Total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  pres- 

ent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

86 

1,  625 

1,863 

79 

1,915 

2, 200 

71 

1,  435 

1,506 

50 

1, 100  . 

1,558 

53 

1,  363 

1,  685 

30 

913 

1, 069 

67 

1,265 

1,  843 

436 

9,  616 

11,  724 

'ganization  of  the  troops  in  the  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri , Brig . 
Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis  commanding , January  31,  1862. 


First  Brigade.* 

Fourth  Brigade. 

Col.  Grenville  M.  Dodge. 

Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel. 

h Illinois. 

25th  Illinois. 

h Iowa. 

44th  Illinois. 

h Missouri. 

9t  Iowa  Battery. 

Fifth  Brigade. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  Asboth. 

Col.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus. 

2d  Missouri. 

b Illinois. 

15th  Missouri. 

1st  Flying  Battery. 

1 Missouri. 

2d  Ohio  Battery. 

h Missouri, 
h Missouri. 

Unattached. 

tteries  A and  B t 

Third  Brigade  (cavalry). 

13th  Illinois. 

9th  Iowa. 

Col.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 

4th  Missouri  (battalion). 

Bowen’s  cavalry  (battalion). 

Illinois. 

Phelps’  Missouri  Volunteers. 

Dubuque  battery. 

i Missouri  (battalion), 
i Missouri. 

* The  brigades  are  not  numbered  in  the  original  return, 
t Wellley’s  and  Hoffmann’s  batteries. 


540 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  \Cnxv.  XYnii 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  1,  1862.  f 

Capt.  J.  0.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : My  forward  pickets  are  now  located  37  miles  from  Spring 
field,  and  my  scouts  will  continually  approach  much  nearer.  Om 
arrived  during  last  night,  giving  news  direct  from  Springfield.  AL 
was  quiet  there : Price  still  occupying  Mr.  Graves’  house,  and  no  signs^ 
of  running  away.  This  was  Thursday  last,  day  before  yesterday.  1 
I am  in  receipt  of  the  general’s  letter  of  the  27  th,  expressing  the  belie 
that  Price  will  not  fight,  but  retreat,  and  urging  the  return  of  Davis 
division  before  his  crossing  the  Osage  at  Linn  Creek. 

I cannot  go  on  the  presumption  that  an  enemy  that  has  heretoion 
so  successfully  fought  and  held  Springfield  will  not  fight  for  it  now 
although  I think  also,  in  the  fear  of  a superior  force,  he  may  retreat.  I 
I have  now  in  this  vicinity  about  6,000  men,  and  I am  sorry  to  heai 
that  my  orders  to  move  all  forward  from  Bolla  has  not  started  th< 
remainder  of  General  Asboth’s  and  Sigel’s  divisions  before  yesterday 
Other  forces  which  the  general  had  ordered  had  not  yet  arrived  a 
that  point.  At  present,  therefore,  the  Davis  division  is  nearer,  and  i 
he  crosses  the  Osage  he  may  arrive  before  the  Bolla  force.  He  thinks 
it  will  take  two  days  to  cross  it  now ; I think  at  least  three,  it,  then 
he  stays  on  the  north  side,  he  is  less  accessible  than  at  Bolla.  As  noT 
situated,  I cannot  decide  that  his  force  is  not  “absolutely  necessary o 
but  on  the  contrary  I think  it  is.  As  fast  as  my  force  and  supplier 
will  permit  I shall  press  closer  on  the  enemy ; but  I cannot  draw  my^ 
self  into  a general  battle  till  I get  more  force,  and  for  active  recon 
naissance  and  supply  gathering  I am  overworking  the  1,366  cavalry 

which  is  all  I have  in  my  command.  , „ ^ I 

The  supply  trains  that  started  about  the  24th  from  Bolla  are  not 
beginning  to  arrive,  and  as  fast  as  unloaded  many  will  return  to  kei] 
forward  other  troops.  They  are  getting  on  quite  as  well  as  I expectet 
during  the  worst  of  weather.  I wish  the  Bolla  troops  had  started,  a 
ordered,  about  the  6th;  they  would  have  got  to  this  point  by  this  turn 
I find  the  men’s  shoes  so  miserable,  they  have  worn  them  entirei, 
out  in  six  days’  marching.  Some  of  my  force,  too,  are  so  improviden 
I have  to  constantly  order  and  watch  these  items  of  necessity  to  kee] 
them  fit  to  move,  it  is  peculiar  to  our  service  that  officers  seem  to  D 
satisfied  when  they  publish  without  enforcing  the  execution  ot  orders. 

These  little  things  had  been  especially  and  carefully  itemized  by  m 
in  a printed  order,  and  yet  shoes,  cartridges,  haversacks,  and  litti 
necessaries  are  every  day  found  wanting.  . 

But  in  the  main  my  force  is  in  good  health  and  spirits,  and  1 trus 
the  general  will  find  them  giving  a good  account  of  themselves,  t ue. 
contend  with  mud,  water,  and  snow  and  ice  manfully,  and  1 trust  tnej 
will  not  falter  in  the  face  of  a more  active  foe. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  r 

Briaadier- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  1,  1802. 

General  Franz  Sigel,  Commanding  Third  Division : 

General:  Yours  of  the  20th,  informing  me  of  your  return  to  Bolh 
and  that  of  the  29th,  connected  with  the  report  of  General  Asbot 


541 


it.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

acerning  the  road,  deferring  your  movement  till  the  31st  ultimo,  are 
ly  received. 

The  roads  are  indeed  very  bad,  but  they  are  worse  for  the  enemy 
an  for  us  if  he  attempts  to  retreat.  I hope  the  teams  will  keep 
>ving  forward  and  the  troops  can  easily  keep  up.  Trains  are  arriv- 
y quite  as  well  as  I expected.  I am  very  glad  to  have  the  troops 
me  by  different  routes,  if  they  can,  but  my  fear  of  high  water  induces 
> to  rely  mainly  on  the  north  route.  By  coming  on  different  routes 
3 enemy  will  not  so  readily  count  and  determine  our  force  and  the 
ids  are  not  so  much  injured  by  wheels. 

The  men  should  help  the  teams  out  of  difficulty  when  necessary, 
d all  must  understand  that  the  elements  are  to  be  considered  serious 
stacles,  which  we  have  to  encounter  and  overcome  in  this  campaign. 
Your  approach  will  now  be  better,  since  the  hard  freezing  of  the  last 
o nights  must  have  dried  up  the  mud  and  to  some  extent  made  it 
Id.  We  must,  however,  soon  expect  another  thaw,  and  constant 
d roads  will  be  the  rule  and  a change  for  the  better  a rare  excep- 
m. 


I am,  general,  very  truly,  yours, 


SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 


Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


sneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  Kansas, 

Ko.  14.  / Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  February  1,  1862. 

I.  Col.  G.  W.  Deitzler,  commanding  First  Kansas  Regiment,  who  so 
bly  distinguished  himself  in  the  battle  of  Wilson’s  Creek,  fought  last 
igust,  is  hereby  appointed  acting  brigadier-general. 

II.  On  his  arrival  at  Fort  Scott  he  will  assume  command  of  his 
igade,  embracing  the  First,  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Kansas  Regiments,  and 
ch  other  troops  as  may  hereafter  be  assigned  to  him. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPIKE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  2,  1862. 

C.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- G ener al : 

Captain  : Although  I get  very  accurate  reports  of  the  location  of 
e enemy,  it  is  not  easy  to  estimate  his  force.  Colonel  Wright,  whose 
3n  were  in  and  out,  according  to  his  account,  estimates  the  force 
)in  10,000  to  15,000.  Colonel  Phelps,  who  reported  to  me  yesterday, 
timates  it  at  from  20,000  to  25,000,  and  both  these  men  have  similar 
portunities  of  judging.  His  available  force,  in  my  judgment,  is 
,000. 

Of  course  I interrogate  scouts,  deserters,  and  all  kinds  of  witnesses. 
Price  has  called  for  fifteen-day  volunteers.  A large  train,  80  or  90 
igons,  reached  him  with  supplies  from  the  south  last  week.  A large 
t of  mules,  which  were  a few  miles  out,  have  been  drawn  in ; yet 
?ice  and  all  are  quiet  in  Springfield.  This  is  a summary  of  my  latest 
ws  from  the  front.  My  trains  and  troops  are  coming  forward  slowly. 
The  stormy  weather  continues  and  waters  have  been  high.  Some 
isitation  and  delay  in  starting  from  Rolla  has  occurred,  but  at  last 


542  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 

advices  ail  were  about  starting,  and  I am  urging  them  not  to  stop  fo 
storms.  Colonel  Davis  was  expected  to  reach  Linn  Creek  to-day,  am 
mv  officers  that  best  understand  the  enemy  unhesitatingly  expres 
their  conviction  that  this  force  is  absolutely  necessary.  I therefor 
suppose  he  is  crossing,  as  my  picket  held  the  ferry-boats  safe  till  hi 
advance  arrived  there.  The  Ninth  Iowa  has  gotten  over  the  worst  o 
the  road,  haviug  been  out  in  the  worst  of  the  weather.  The  storm 
continue,  but  our  men  and  animals  so  far  bear  up  with  great  fortitud 
and  success.  Delay  is  inevitable,  but  it  will  be  as  little  as  possibk 
While  I shall  urge  great  energy  and  perseverance,  I try  to  avon 
breaking  down  teams  and  overworking  animals ; and  so  tar  1 hav 
heard  of  no  accidents  or  losses  of  any  moment.  The  safe  arrival  c 
quartermaster’s  funds  will  enable  Captain  Sheridan  to  accelerate  hi 
supply  business,  which  is  still  the  great  matter  of  anxiety  with  me. 

I remain,  &c.,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Rolla,  February  2,  1862. 


General  H.  W.  Halleck: 

No  forces  at  Salem.  General  Curtis  ordered  them  all  away.  I hav 
only  my  own  regiment  to  hold  this  post.  One  thousand  sick  lett  D<| 
hind  for  me  to  take  care  of.  j B WYMAy 

Colonel , Commanding  Post.  > 


General  Orders, 
No.  28. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 


Saint  Louis , February  2,  1862. 


Several  companies  of  the  Fourth  Regiment  of  Missouri  Volunteer* 
lately  called  the  Third  IT.  S.  Reserve  Corps,  having  shown  themselv 
mutinous  and  disobedient  of  orders,  have  been  disarmed  and  placed  i 
confinement  at  Benton  Barracks.  The  privates  and  non-commissione 
officers  of  these  companies  will  be  sent  under  a suitable  guard  to  Can 
to  work  on  the  fortifications  at  that  place  until  lurther  ordeis.  It 
commanding  officer  of  that  post  will  see  that  these  companies  are  mac 
to  work  faithfully  on  the  fortifications,  and  will  report  to  these  hea 
quarters  the  names  of  any  who,  by  their  repentance  and  obedience  t 
orders  and  discipline,  deserve  pardon  and  restoration  to  military  ran 

£LXKl.  p03p0(3t|«  • j 

The  officers  of  these  companies  have  not  joined  in  this  mutinous  der 
onstration,  but  they  have  failed  or  neglected  to  enforce  order,  obed 
ence,  and  military  discipline.  They  will  therefore  be  mustered  out 

service  and  discharged.  . . -jiiinc  i 

The  major-general  commanding  this  department  is  always  willing 
listen  to  complaints  and  ready  to  redress  well-founded  grievances  ; b 

at  the  same  time  he  is  determined  to  enforce  discipline  and  obedjjm 
to  orders,  and  any  companies,  regiments,  or  corps  which  shall  h erea 
ter  disobey  orders  or  exhibit  a mutinous  disposition  w*Jlbe  . 
in  a most  summary  manner.  The  Rules  and  Articles  of  War  l p 
to  mutiny  will  be  rigorously  enforced. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : ^ ^ McLEAN 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


aj>.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


543 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  3,  1862. 

>1.  Jefferson  0.  Davis, 

Commanding  Division: 

Colonel  : I was  glad  to  receive  your  note  of  to-day,  informing  me 
your  progress. 

Your  former  dispatch  was  destroyed  by  my  messenger  for  prudential 
asons,  having  been  in  danger  of  detention  by  bands  through  which 
e messenger  passed. 

I fully  appreciated  the  efforts  and  energies  you  must  have  exerted  to 
oceed  thus  far.  Other  troops  are  about  the  same  distance  behind  me 
other  routes. 

The  enemy,  at  the  very  latest  advices,  was  still  awaiting  our  coming, 
lope  he  will  not  have  to  wait  many  days  longer,  but  the  roads  are  a 
eat  hinderance  to  our  progress. 

I am.  colonel,  &c., 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  5,  1862. 

ig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel  : 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  last  evening*  from  the  California  House 
is  quite  a surprise.  You  are  getting  on  finely. 

Colonel  Davis’  force  must  be  one  or  two  days  behind  yours  in  time ; 
there  is  no  need  of  great  haste  to-day. 

You  are  beyond  the  danger  of  high  water,  and  I feel  sure  in  that  re- 
rd  as  to  all  the  force.  It  was  a subject  of  some  anxiety. 

The  enemy  is  still  in  Springfield.  McIntosh,  successor  to  McCulloch, 
rived  there  last  Saturday. 

I presume  he  and  Price  will  consent  to  a union  of  their  forces,  which 
) must  prevent,  if  possible. 

Truly,  yours, 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon,  February  5,  1862. 

q>t.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : In  my  last  I stated  that  McBride  had  reached  Springfield, 
should  have  been  McIntosh.  He  arrived  on  Saturday  with  some  force, 
t as  to  numbers  my  information  is  too  vague  to  be  worth  naming. 
3lntosh  commands  the  Confederate  force  in  North' western  Arkansas, 
rich  is  variously  estimated  at  from  5,000  to  25,000.  Generals  Sigei 
i d Asboth  are  this  side  of  Waynesville,  and  I have  such  arrange- 
i rots  for  crossing  the  Gasconade  as  render  their  arrival  to-morrow 
1 ite  certain. 


* Not  found. 


544 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVni 


Colonel  Davis  expected  to  complete  his  crossing  last  night,  so  as  t 

resume  his  march  this  morning.  . , , 

Some  horseshoeing  and  overhauling  of  stores  may  he  required  her<| 
which  will  be  hurried  on  as  fast  as  possible.  , . , . ,| 

Colonel  Osterhaus  will  move  forward  6 or  8 miles  with  his  bngadj 


t0Fo r" a change,  we  have  a little  sunshine  this  morning. 


I remain,  &c., 


SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  \ HIdqrs.  District  Central  Missouri,  I 
NTo.  29.  ? ) Ottermlle , February  5,  1862. 1 

A column,  to  consist  of  the  Fourteenth  and  Fifteenth  Illinois,  th, 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana,  and  Powell’s  battery  of  Missouri  bight  Artil 
lerv  all  under  command  of  Col.  A.  P.  Hovey,  Twenty-fourth  Indiana 
will  march  from  this  camp  for  Jefferson  City  on  Friday  morning,  th 
7th  instant,  at  8 o’clock.  Rations  for  eight  days  (two  cooked  and  ca. 
ried  in  the  haversacks  and  six  in  the  regimental  wagons)  will  be  ca 
ried  with  the  command.  A supply  train  of  25  wagons  will  accompan 
the  command,  empty  as  far  as  Jefferson  City,  where  they  will  be  loadei 
with  subsistence.  Fresh  beef  will  be  taken  on  the  hoof  from  Tipton  fc 

tWEvery  preparation  will  be  made  so  as  to  assure  the  march  of  the  co 

umn  at  the  time  specified.  , T „ 

The  major  of  the  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery  on  duty  at  La  Min 

Cantonment  will  report  in  person  to  these  headquarters. 

Written  instructions  will  be  furnished  to  the  commanding  officer  < 
the  forces  ordered  to  march. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : SPEED  BUTLER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Saint  Louis,  February  6,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  E.  Curtis, 

Commanding , &c .,  Lebanon , Mo. : 

General  : Yours  of  the  2d  is  just  received.  I am  glad  to  hear  yo 
are  eetting  on  so  well.  I knew  what  a winter  campaign  would  be  an 
advised  delay,  but  the  administration  have  “On  to  Richmond  feve 

anAcMc™s'from>  General  Pope  state  that  Davis  had  got  all  his  force 
acrossthe  S eon  the  4th!  so  he  will  soon  be  with  you  I was  sor 
to  lose  him,  but  if  necessary  you  must  have  him,  of  course '•  Afi 
greatly  pressed  for  troops,  and  am  raking  and  scraping  all  I can  fin 

t0TheCXJnionflag  is  again  flying  in  Tennessee  and  we  are  bombardm 
Fort  Henry.  Beauregard,  it  is  said,  arrived  there  last  night  at 

I leave  Price  to  you.  I have  J ohnston,  Polk,  Bea^egard,  and  Hart  ^ 
to  deal  with.  My  movement  up  the  Tennessee  forced  the  enei  ) 
detach  10,000  men  yesterday,  and  if  General  Buell  moves  or 


Chap.  XVIII.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  545 

the  same  time  they  must  abandon  that  place  and  fall  back  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Nashville. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  6,  1862. 

€apt.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I send  forward  29  prisoners,  including  2 captains  and  1 
-quartermaster,  taken  at  different  times  and  places  in  this  vicinity. 

A small  party  went  into  Marshfield  and  secured  3,000  pounds  of  flour 
belonging  to  the  rebels. 

Generals  Sigel  and  Asboth  have  crossed  the  Gasconade  and  are 
within  14  miles. 

No  further  news  from  Colonel  Davis.  A picket  12  miles  northwest, 
at  Bennett’s  Mill,  was  menaced  last  night,  and  I sent  out  more  force. 
No  news  from  it  this  morning. 

Reports  come  in  that  Price  is  intrenching  himself  10  miles  this  side 
of  Springfield.  Doubtful. 

| Yery  respectfully,  &c., 

SAME.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Division,  Southwestern  Dist.  Mo., 

Camp  Vernon,  February  6,  1862. 

General  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding  S.  W.  Dist.,  Department  of  the  Mo. : 

General  : In  connection  with  my  report  of  yesterday,  numbered 
397,*  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  I have  arrived  with  my  whole 
command,  and  am  now  encamped  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  town  of 
Lebanon,  on  the  hills  north  of  the  Waynesville  road. 

Despite  the  overladen  wagons  and  hardly  practicable  roads  and  the 
many  river  crossings,  I occupied  but  six  days  from  the  time  of  my 
departure  from  Rolla  to  that  of  my  arrival  here.  At  the  Little  Piney 
uud  Roubidoux  Rivers  I was  obliged  to  construct  bridges  for  the  in- 
fantry. At  the  Big  Piney  I had  to  unload  the  commissary  train  and 
bring  the  infantry  over  by  wagons.  At  the  Gasconade  they  were 
transported  in  a ferry-boat  of  your  providing. 

The  cavalry,  artillery,  and  trains  everywhere  forded  the  rivers,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Big  Piney,  where  I considered  it  proper  to  transfer 
the  ammunition  to  regulation  wagons. 

My  force  consists  of  the  remainder  of  the  Fourth  Division,  which  I 
had  the  honor  of  commanding  for  the  last  five  months,  viz : The  First 
Brigade  of  Acting  Brigadier-General  Albert,  now  temporarily  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Joliat,  comprising  the  Fifteenth  Missouri  Infantry, 
the  First  Flying  Battery,  and  Company  A of  the  Fourth  Missouri  Cav- 
alry, and  the  Second  Brigade  of  Acting  Brigadier-General  Carr,  tem- 
porarily commanded  by  Colonel  Schaefer,  comprising  the  Second  Mis- 
souri Yolunteers,  Second  Ohio  Battery,  and  a company  of  the  Third 
Illinois  Cavalry. 


35  R R — VOL  VIII 


Not  found. 


546 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap  XVIin 


The  balance  of  the  two  cavalry  regiments  preceded  the  division  upon 
a cavalry  expedition  under  Acting  Brigadier-General  Carr. 

The  First  and  Second  U.  S.  Reserve  Corps  were  left  behind  by  your 
orders  to  guard  the  railroad  beyond  Rolla,  and  two  pioneer  companies, 
under  Captains  Gerster  and  Krausnick,  are  building,  under  directions- 
of  Lieutenant  Hoeppner,  the  bridge  across  the  Gasconade  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Little  Piney  River.  . 

To  restore  the  division  if  not  to  its  original  strength,  as  promised  by 
Generals  Fremont  and  Hunter,  at  least  to  that  numerical  force  with 
which  I conducted  it  from  Springfield  to  Rolla,  I would  respectfully  ask 
that  the  cavalry  here  and  near  Lebanon  be  returned  to  it  and  the  two 
Reserve  Corps  infantry  regiments  replaced  by  others,  and  that  Captain 
Gerster’s  pioneer  company  be  restored  to  the  division,  to  repair  roads 
and  construct  bridges  when  required. 

I left  Rolla  with  85  regulation  teams,  7 two-horse  teams,  5 ambulances,, 
and  2 apothecary  wagons.  Twenty-seven  regulation  teams  wTere  loaded 
with  commissary  supplies.  The  balance  of  the  teams  are  apportioned 
to  the  respective  commands  in  accordance  with  their  numerical  strength. 

As  Captain  McKay,  late  quartermaster  of  the  Fourth  Division,  was 
ordered  to  transfer  more  than  70  six-mule  and  four-horse  Government 
teams  to  the  post  quartermaster  at  Rolla  at  the  beginning  of  January,. 
25  of  the  teams  used  on  the  march  were  ordered  by  the  post  quarter- 
master at  Rolla  from  General  Sigel’s  Third  Division,  and  10  were  given, 
in  accordance  with  your  orders,  by  Colonel  Wyman  from  his  regiment, 
under  my  obligation  to  return  them,  and  in  this  relation  I would  beg 
also  your  orders. 

For  the  troops  with  me  I am  still  provided  with  five  days  rations, 
but  have  no  forage,  and  my  acting  quartermaster,  Captain  Bensberg, 
was  directed  by  the  post  commissary,  Captain  Winslow,  to  collect  forage 
for  himself. 

The  health  of  the  troops  is  remarkably  good  and  they  are  ready  to- 
march  to-morrow,  but  I have  lost  several  horses  and  mules  by  over- 
exertion  and  cold,  and  shall  have  to  replace  them. 

In  closing,  I beg  to  mention  the  zeal,  activity,  and  indefatigable  ex- 
ertions of  both  commanders  of  my  batteries,  Captain  Elbert,  of  the 
First  Flying  Battery,  and  First  Lieutenant  Chapman,  in  command  of 
the  Second  Ohio  Battery.  They  worked  day  and  night,  and  it  is  to- 
heir  merit  that  the  batteries  are  here. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ASBOTH, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Fourth  Division. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , February  6,  1862. 

Hon.  Thomas  L.  Price,  Hon.  James  S.  Rollins, 

Representatives  from  Missouri: 

Gentlemen:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  last 
evening  of  your  letter  of  that  date*  respecting  the  outrages  alleged  to 
have  been  committed  against  Union  men  in  Missouri  by  a force  under 

Colonel  Jennison.  . , 

Your  communication  will  be  submitted  to  the  President  without 
delay,  and  I beg  you  to  be  assured  that  no  effort  on  the  part  of  the 


* Not  found. 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


547 


xovernment  will  be  spared  to  protect  the  Union  men  and  loyal  citi- 
zens of  Missouri  from  all  illegal  force  and  lawless  violence,  come  fronr 
rhat  quarter  it  may. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War.. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  8,  1862’. 

Japt.  J.  C.  Kelton:  ’ 

Captain  : Most  of  my  force  has  arrived.  The  Benton  Hussars  (cav- 
lry)  at  last  accounts  were  at  Rolla  and  I suppose  they  are  en  route . 
Ee  Forty-third  Illinois,  promised  in  the  general's  letter,  and  the  Curtis 
lorse  I have  given  up,  although  by  following  and  supporting  my  line 
f communication  they  will  probably  be  very  useful.  Colonel  Davis 
ent  the  steamboat  from  Linn  Creek  down  to  Jefferson  City  with  a 
equest  that  General  McKean  would  send  a boat  load  of  commissary 
tores  back  to  Linn  Creek. 


There  are  Home  Guards  enough  to  hold  that  place,  and  supplies 
'ould  be  much  more  accessible  to  this  place  or  Springfield  if  located 
here;  meantime  the  supplies  of  the  country  are  coming  in,  so  that 
ivers  and  bad  roads  are  not  going  to  starve  us  back.  Although  each 
i vision  has  a terrible  narrative  of  trying  events  of  “ flood  and  field" 
n their  way,  our  stock  have  not  broken  down  and  we  have  lost 
othing. 

Some  dysentery  has  broken  out.  I was  right  sick  yesterday  myself, 
ut  I am  well  to-day,  and  the  general  health  and  spirits  of  the  troops 
3ntinue  good.  I am  busy  overhauling  matters— shoeing  horses  and 
lules— expecting  to  resume  the  forward  march  as  early  as  Monday, 
fc  has  again  turned  cold  and  the  roads  are  frozen  quite  solid. 

The  enemy  was  quiet  at  Springfield  at  last  accounts;  probably  re- 
viving some  re-enforcements  from  their  call  for  volunteers  for  twenty 
ays,  but  not  many. 

I remain,  &c., 


SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


War  Department,  February  8,  1862. 
ajor-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis: 

\ Your  energy  and  ability  receive  the  strongest  commendation  of  this 
epartment.  You  have  my  perfect  confidence  and  may  rely  upon  the 
most  support  in  your  undertakings.  The  pressure  of  my  engage- 
ents  here  prevented  me  from  writing,  but  I shall  do  so  fully  in  a day 
• two. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  Kansas, 

No.  17.  j Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  February  8,  1862. 

I.  The  civil  authorities  of  Kansas  being  manifestly  unable  to  pre- 
we  the  peace  and  give  due  security  to  life  and  property,  and  having 
various  instances  notified  the  general  commanding  of  their  inability 


548 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVITl! 


to  uphold  the  laws  unassisted  by  the  military  arm,  and  the  crime  o;  I 
armed  depredations  or  jayhawking  having  reached  a height  dangerous 
to  the  peace  and  property  of  the  whole  State  and  seriously  compromis 
ine  the  Union  cause  in  the  border  counties  of  Missouri : Now,  there! 
fore,  martial  law  is  declared  throughout  the  State  of  Kansas  and  wil 

be  enforced  with  vigor.  . . „ ...  I 

II  It  is  not  intended  by  this  declaration  to  interfere  with  or  super 
sede  the  action  of  the  civil  authorities  in  cases  of  the  ordinary  nature 
with  which  said  civil  authorities  may  be  competent  to  deal,  but  it  in 
the  resolve  of  the  general  commanding  that  the  crime  of  jayhawkinj 
shall  be  put  down  with  a strong  hand  and  by  summary  process,  anc 
for  this  purpose  the  trial  of  all  prisoners  charged  with  armed  depreda 
tions  against  property  or  assaults  upon  life  will  be  conducted  befori 
the  military  commissions  provided  for  in  General  Orders,  No.  12,  of  thu 
department,  current  series,  and  the  interference  of  the  civil  authon 
ties  in  such  cases  is  prohibited. 

III.  A suitable  provost-marshal,  with  the  necessary  officers  and  lorce  i 
will  immediately  be  appointed  to  carry  out  the  terms  of  this  order. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hunter:  ^ & HALPINE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  9,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Jefferson  City: 

If  troops  have  crossed  the  river,  send  any  regiments  that  remain  or 
this  side  by  railroad.  They  are  greatly  wanted  on  the  Tennessee 
Telegraph,  and  I will  send  you  as  much  transportation  as  possible. 

° 7 H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major - General. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Lebanon , February  9,  1862. 

CSapt.  J.  0.  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : Paymasters  arrived  last  night  and  may  delay  my  move 
ment  till  Tuesday.  Shall  consult  my  officers  as  to  the  propriety  o 
moving  when  some  are  paid  and  some  not.  . 

The  fiouring-mill  of  this  place  was  stopped  yesterday  by  the  breaking 
a cog-wheel.  To  avoid  scarcity  of  flour,  1 immediately  gave  an  ordei 
to  reduce  the  flour  ration  4 ounces ; also  that  of  salt  pork  12  ounces 
and  in  lieu  of  this  and  other  reductions  ordered  double  rations  ol  Irest 
beef  and  pork,  meat  being  abundant  in  the  country. 

I also  ordered  forward  cavalry  to  occupy  Marshfield  and  start  th 
mill  in  that  place  to  grinding  for  us.  I will  inclose  a copy  of  my  orde 
in  relation  to  the  change  of  ration,  which  seems  to  me  necessary  t< 
avoid  possible  necessities  and  consequent  occasion  for  irregular  foi  aging 

We  have  just  heard  of  the  taking  of  Fort  Henry,  on  the  Tennessee 
Hiver,  by  our  troops,  and  rejoice  at  the  news  of  another  victory  m the 
Department  of  the  Missouri. 

The  telegraph  wires  reached  Waynesville  yesterday. 

I remain,  very  truly,  your  obedient  R CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General . 


hap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  549 

rin closure  No.  1.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Mo., 

No.  75.  j Lebanon , Mo.,  February  7,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  tenders  to  the  troops  in  this  command  his 
learty  commendation  for  the  energy  and  endurance  manifested  on  the 
aarch  to  this  place. 

You  have  moved  during  the  coldest  and  most  stormy  period  of  a 
old  winter,  and  so  far  brought  your  trains  and  equipments  through 
now,  mud,  floods,  and  frost  without  his  hearing  of  a murmur  and  with- 
ut  the  loss  of  property  or  men. 

But  the  success  of  this  winter  campaign  now  requires  a further  draught 
n the  patience  and  fortitude  of  this  army.  We  must  strip  for  a forced 
larch  and  final  conflict. 

Six  days’  light  rations  and  necessary  covering  must  be  condensed  in 
special  train,  to  be  ready  for  the  occasion.  This  ration  must  be  hard 
read,  flour,  hominy,  rice,  desiccated  potatoes,  and  mixed  vegetables, 
ugar,  coffee,  and  salt.  Pinole  (ground  parched  corn  and  sugar)  ought 
o be  procured. 

The  commissary  will  provide  on  the  way  whatever  extra  rations  of 
'•esh  pork  and  beef  the  soldiers  may  need,  so  as  to  save  these  trans- 
iorted  rations. 

The  rations  can  only  be  cooked  of  nights,  and  some  beef  should  be 
irked  (dried  over  a slow  fire)  to  carry  in  the  haversack,  to  be  eaten 
dth  pinole.  If  officers  and  men  will  carry  out  this  order  in  good  faith 
hey  will  avoid  danger  of  suffering  and  greatly  enhance  the  efficiency 
f our  force. 

The  camp  equipment,  most  of  the  cooking  utensils,  change  of  cloth- 
i g,  and  most  of  the  tents,  trunks,  and  boxes  must  all  be  left  with  the 
imainder  of  the  regimental  wagons,  which,  with  full  supplies  of  pro- 
isions,  will  be  pressed  forward  by  the  quartermaster  as  fast  as  circum- 
kances  will  allow. 

On  the  forced  march  the  commanding  general  will  limit  himself  to 
lese  restrictions  of  food  and  clothing. 

The  teams  for  this  train  for  the  forced  march  should  be  selected  and 
ich  wagon  not  loaded  over  2,000. 

Thus  arranged,  the  trains  will  be  separated  and  inspected  by  regi- 
tental  officers,  and  the  number  for  each  properly  reported  through  com- 
landers  of  divisions  to  these  headquarters  as  soon  as  completed. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Curtis : 

T.  I.  McKENNY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

pecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Hist,  of  Mo., 

No.  78.  1 Lebanon , Mo.,  February  8,  1862. 

During  the  present  winter  campaign  the  difficulty  of  procuring  flour 
id  the  abundance  of  fresh  meat  in  the  country  justifies,  in  the  opinion 
the  commanding  general,  a reduction  of  the  flour  ration  4 ounces 
id  in  the  salt  meat  ration  12  ounces,  and  in  lieu  of  this  reduction  and 
ich  other  articles  as  the  men  do  not  need  or  cannot  procure  double 
ilions  of  fresh  beef  and  pork  will  be  furnished  by  the  commissary 
apartment. 

A pound  of  corn  meal  costs  about  one-fifth  of  a pound  of  flour,  and 


550 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVnil 


when  meal  can  be  procured  and  the  troops  desire  it  the  commissary 
will  issue  3 pounds  in  lieu  of  a ration  of  flour. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Curtis  : ^ £ Mf,KENNT) 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  80. 


Lebanon,  Mo., 
February  9, 1802. 


For  the  purpose  of  reorganizing  and  properly  arranging  the  force  ii 
the  District  of  Southwestern  Missouri  the  following  assignment  o 

troops  is  prescribed : ■ _ . 

I.  The  Benton  Hussars  are  attached  to  what  has  formerly  been  knowi 

as  the  Third  Division,  and  this  division  will  hereafter  be  denominatec 
the  First  Division.  . 

II.  The  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalry,  Colonel  Waring  commanding,!1 
attached  to  the  division  heretofore  denominated  the  Fourth  Division 
Colonel  Schaefer  is  appointed  commander  of  the  First  Brigade  of  th< 
division,  and  Brigadier-General  Asboth  commanding  division. 

III.  The  two  divisions  thus  designated  are  placed  under  the  genera 

command  of  Brigadier- General  Sigel.  . . , , 

IV.  The  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Ellis,  is  assigned  t( 
the  division  of  Col.  Jefferson  C.  Davis,  which  will  be  designated  as  th< 


Third  Division.  , ^ , , 

V.  The  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  the  Ninth  Iowa,  and  Dubuque  Batterj 
will  constitute  a brigade,  to  be  commanded  by  Col.  William  Vandever 
the  brigade  now  commanded  by  Colonel  Dodge  and  the  brigade  thus 
organized  under  Colonel  Vandever  will  constitute  the  Fourth  Division 
to  be  commanded  by  Colonel  Carr.  . 

VI  The  remaining  troops  of  this  command,  the  Thirteenth  Illinois 
commanded  by  Colonel  Wyman,  Colonel  Phelps’  regiment,  Bowen* 
battalion,  the  Curtis  Horse,  and  other  troops  not  here  designated  wfl 
report  to  these  headquarters  until  otherwise  ordered. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  B.  Curtis : ^ j McKENNY> 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders, 


No.  81 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Mo., 

Lebanon , February  9,  1862. 

The  troops  of  this  command  will  resume  their  march  forward  to-mor 
row  morning  as  early  as  commanders  of  divisions  can  complete  then 

^Phe* First  and  Second  Divisions,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier 
General  Sigel,  will  proceed  by  the  usual  road  leading  to  Springfield  a* 
far  as  the  forks  west  of  Tindall’s  farm,  1£  miles  west  of  Faulkner’s  Hill 
when  he  will  take  the  left-hand  road,  proceeding  to  Marshfield.  j 
The  Third  Division,  Colonel  Davis  commanding,  will  proceed  Iron 
his  present  camp,  intersecting  Springfield  road  at  Benton  and  Hug 
hart’s,  thence  following  the  Springfield  road  to  Ozark  to  Saint  Luke 

diverging  from  that  vicinity  so  as  to  arrive  at  Pleasant  Prairie,  noru 

of  Marshfield.  , 

The  Fourth  Division,  Colonel  Carr  commanding,  will  proceed  to  tut 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  551 

}ft  by  way  of  Jericho,  leaving  Woodburn  to  the  left  and  taking  posi- 
on  on  the  left  of  Marshfield. 

All  the  commands  will  try  so  to  arrange  their  marches  as  to  arrive 
1 the  vicinity  of  Marshfield  Tuesday  at  4 o’clock.  The  men  should 
ave  one  day’s  rations  in  their  haversacks  and  six  days’  rations  as  pre- 
bribed in  my  order,  No.  75. 

The  quartermaster  and  commissary  will  exert  their  utmost  to  pro- 
are  supplies  of  forage  for  their  animals  at  each  encampment,  especial 
ttention  being  given  to  the  trains  of  the  batteries. 

The  double  rations  of  fresh  beef  and  pork  is  also  specially  directed  to 
e procured  by  the  proper  commissary  of  division  or  regiments  if  the 
rrangements  of  contractors  do  not  seem  certain  and  adequate. 

Special  attention  is  also  again  directed  to  Order,  No.  3,  concerning 
ilfering  and  plundering.  There  is  no  need  of  this  when  the  proper  offi- 
brs  are  thus  empowered  and  expected  to  secure  all  requisite  supplies. 
Each  division  will  provide  proper  advance  guards  and  flankers,  but 
eing  in  three  parallel  lines,  instruct  their  scouts  so  as  to  avoid  attacks 
f their  own  friends. 

Commanders  of  divisions  will  report  to  these  headquarters  as  often 
3 convenient,  headquarters  being  movable  on  the  central  line. 

By  ©rder  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis : 

T.  I.  McKENNY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Executive  Mansion, 
Washington , February  10,  1862. 
[ajor-General  Hunter  and  Brigadier-General  Lane, 

Leavenworth , Kans.  : 

My  wish  has  been  and  is  to  avail  the  Government  of  the  services  of 
oth  General  Hunter  and  General  Lane,  and,  so  far  as  possible,  to  per- 
mally  oblige  both.  General  Hunter  is  the  senior  officer  and  must 
)mmand  when  they  serve  together ; though  in  so  far  as  he  can,  con- 
stently  with  the  public  service  and  his  own  honor,  oblige  General 
ane,  he  will  also  oblige  me.  If  they  cannot  come  to  an  amicable  un- 
Brstanding,  General  Lane  must  report  to  General  Hunter  for  duty, 
icording  to  the  rules,  or  decline  the  service. 

A.  LINCOLN. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Marshfield , February  10,  1862. 


apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 


Captain  : The  Iowa  cavalry  are  not  needed  at  Rolla $ they  are  needed 
are.  I wish  the  general  would  allow  them  to  come  forward.  Yan 
'orn  is  moving  up  to  join  Price.  Shall  try  to  prevent  junction.  My 
ffiimns  are  arriving  here.  Let  the  cavalry  re-enforce  me.  Yan  Dorn 
as  promised  30,000  or  40,000  at  Springfield  very  soon.  Expects  to  be 
lere  with  10,000  by  the  15th.  These  are  the  hopes  and  expectations 
* the  enemy.  I move  on  to  attack  in  detail. 


SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General. 


552 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 


Saint  Louis,  February  11,  1862. 

Major-General  McClellan  : 

Colonel  Foster  lias  captured  in  Chariton,  North  Missouri,  19  rebels 
18  horses,  and  142  kegs  of  powder. 

’ H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis3  February  11,  1862 

Col.  W.  P.  Carlin,  Pilot  Knob , Mo. : 

What  additional  forces  do  you  require  to  occupy  Doniphan  and  t( 
capture  Pocahontas  ? When  can  you  move  ? I have  two  regiments 
of  cavalry  ready  to  send  you  if  you  can  say  so.  Colonel  Callender  is 
preparing  the  light  artillery  you  asked  for.  What  more  will  you  wanl 
for  such  an  expedition?  * 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Pilot  Knob,  February  11,  1862. 


General  Halleck: 


Your  dispatch  received.  I require  one  regiment  of  infantry  ant 
one  of  cavalry  more  than  I now  have  to  occupy  Doniphan  and  capture 
Pocahontas.  Two  companies  of  artillery  and  two  of  cavalry  car 
occupy  this  post  while  I am  on  the  expedition.  I can  use  the  two  reg 
iments  of  cavalry  with  advantage,  but  want  at  least  one  regimen! 
more  of  infantry.  I will  also  require  transportation  for  all  the  addi 
tional  force,  say  60  wagons  and  teams  more  than  I have.  I want  the 
light  artillery  and  horses  and  a supply  of  ammunition  for  the  guns 
The  roads  are  improving  rapidlv.  I wish  to  undertake  expedition. 

W.  P.  CARLIN. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , February  11,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I would  respectfully  submit  to  you  the  following  extracts  taker 
from  the  report  of  Maj.  A.  Baird,  assistant  inspector-general,  TJ.  S 
Army,  on  the  inspection  of  the  Kansas  troops,  viz : 

If  the  practice  of  seizing  and  confiscating  the  private  property  of  rebels,  which  i- 
now  extensively  carried  on  by  the  troops  known  as  Lane’s  brigade,  is  to  be  continued: 
how  may  it  be  managed  so  as  to  prevent  the  troops  being  demoralized  and  the  Lov 

erament  defrauded?  . , , 

The  practice  has  become  so  fixed  and  general  that  I am  convinced  that  orders  arrest- 
ing  it  would  not  be  obeyed,  and  that  the  only  way  of  putting  a stop  to  it  would  be  tc 


remove  the  Kansas  troops  to  some  other  field  of  action. 


The  fact  that  the  property  of  citizens  seized  and  confiscated  by  the 
troops  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  is  substantiated  bj 
both  official  and  reliable  private  evidence,  and  from  the  frequent  repe 
tition  of  these  acts  the  commanding  officers  in  Kansas  appear  to  hav( 
assumed  its  legality.  The  authority  under  which  it  is  done  is  unknowx 
to  me,  further  than  such  destruction  of  private  property  as  is  unavoid 
able  from  a state  of  war,  conducted  according  to  the  established  usage* 


hap.  XYin.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  55& 

f civilized  nations.  I would  therefore  request  the  policy  of  the  Gov- 
rnment  for  my  guidance  in  dealing  with  questions  of  this  nature. 

To  what  extent  can  the  right  of  confiscation  legally  be  carried,  and 
>y  what  tribunal,  civil  or  military,  are  the  questions  that  will  naturally 
rise  to  be  decided,  that  the  innocent  will  not  suffer  while  punishing 
he  guilty,  and  that  the  dignity  and  justice  of  the  Government  may 
iot  be  atthe  mercy  of  individuals  governed  by  cupidity  or  revenge  t 
?his  question  has  assumed  such  proportions  that  it  will  require  vigor- 
ous means  and  well-defined  authority  to  suppress  or  direct  its  applica- 
ion. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General , Commanding .. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  11,  1862.. 
Irig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Jefferson  City : 

A train  leaves  to-night  to  bring  down  one  regiment  to-morrow ; an- 
ther must  be  ready  for  Thursday,  and  the  Third  Battery  for  Satur- 
tay.  No  delay  must  occur ; they  must  be  ready  to  start  immediately^ 
Ve  have  stirring  times  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  and  want  everyr 
aan  we  can  get. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  February  12,  1862 — 3 p.  m. 
daj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan: 

It  is  reported  that  Yan  Dorn,  with  a large  force,  is  marching  from 
<\)rt  Smith  to  re-enforce  Price,  and  that  General  Frost  is  moving  from 
>ocahontas  in  the  same  direction.  I shall  immediately  move  the  forces 
1 Ironton  to  Doniphan,  to  either  force  Frost  to  return,  or  attack  and 
lestroy  the  depot  at  Pocahontas.  Please  answer  about  Ohio  battery 
nd  other  troops  ordered  from  this  department  to  Kansas.  Can  I user 
hem  ¥ I greatly  need  them  at  this  moment. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Camp  at  Pearson's  Creek , February  12,  1862.. 

|3apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Captain:  I received  the  generaPs  approving  letter  of  the  6th  at 
darshfield  this  morning,  just  as  I started  on  this  weary  day’s  march, 
t relieved  me  from  anxiety  in  regard  to  the  Davis  division  and  flushed, 
ne  with  new  hope  in  the  coming  crisis. 

Mjr  advance  was  fired  on  at  10.30  a.  m.  by  scouts.  One  of  the  rebels 
?as  wounded,  probably  mortally.  As  we  advanced  the  enemy  occa- 
sionally appeared  in  force  and  was  fired  on  by  my  mountain  howitzers 
ind  pursued.  One  of  our  men  is  wounded,  x>robably  mortally,  and  one 
>r  two  are  missing  at  last  accounts. 

Price  was  still  very  quiet  in  Springfield  at  10  a.  m.  to-day.  Frost’s- 


554 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 


battery  and  a train  of  supplies  arrived  yesterday.  General  Yan  Dorr 
was  expected,  but  bad  not  yet  arrived,  and  I do  not  therefore  believe  ■ 
bis  force  is  very  near,  for  I think  at  such  a time  he  would  most  likely  3 
come  a few  days  before  his  force.  Price  must  therefore  rely  on  lib 
present  resources,  variously  estimated  at  from  10,000  to  30,000,  witl  - 
about  forty -two  pieces  of  cannon.  I 

I send  you  abstract  of  my  effective  force  here,  which  foots  up  as  fol 
lows : 

Infantry 

•Cavalry ai 

12,  09! , 


Artillery  (including  four  mountain  howitzers),  fifty  pieces. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


February  13,  1862 — 3 a.  m.  J 

As  I finished  the  foregoing  a brisk  firing  was  heard  in  front,  when 
the  enemy  in  small  force  had  attacked  pickets,  forming  across  the  roac 
and  in  the  thick  brush  adjacent.  I ordered  up  two  pieces  of  artillery 
and  fired  three  rounds,  scattering  them,  anti  inducing  me  to  advanct 
my  pickets  to  Hancock’s,  on  the  edge  of  prairie.  After  that  all  quie 
during  the  remainder  of  the  night.  The  Fourth  Division  is  now  moving 
forward.  The  morning  is  bright  and  the  men  move  out  again  in  gooc 

SpmtS'  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Missouri, 
No.  84.  ] Marshfield , Mo .,  February  12,  18( 


1862. 


I.  The  First,  Second,  and  Fourth  Divisions  of  this  command  wil 
move  forward  at  7 o’clock  to-morrow  morning  by  the  direct  road,  anc 
camping  near  the  head  of  Pearson’s  Creek,  9 miles  this  side  of  Spring 
held. 

II.  The  Third  Division,  commanded  by  General  Davis,  will  move  lor 
ward  at  6 a.  m.,  following  the  road  by  Leslie’s  store  and  camping  neai 
Piper’s  farm,  about  8 miles  this  side  of  Springfield. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  E.  Curtis : ■ 

T.  I.  McKEKNY, 
Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Saint  Louis,  February  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Kansas , Fort  Leavenworth , Fans. : 

General  : Your  very  kind  letter  of  the  8th  is  this  moment  received.* 
I must  write  you  a very  hasty  answer  to-day.  You  are  entirely  mis 
taken  about  my  having  received  any  information,  official  or  unofficial 
from  Washington  about  the  “great  jayhawking  expedition.”  Fot  a 
word  or  hint  has  been  communicated  to  me.  Orders  were  sent  by  Gen 
•era!  Thomas  direct  to  various  regiments  in  this  department  to  inline 


Not  found. 


555 


hap.  XVIH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

iately  repair  to  Fort  Leavenworth  and  report  to  General  Hunter  as  a 
art  of  General  Lane’s  expedition,  ^o  notice  of  such  orders  was  given 
3 me.  To  put  a stop  to  these  irregularities  I issued  General  Orders, 
To.  8,  and  protested  both  to  General  Thomas  and  General  McClellan 
gainst  such  an  irregular  and  unmilitary  proceeding.  No  reply.  I 
topped  some  of  the  troops  on  their  way,  and  reported  that  they  could 
ot  move  till  some  order  was  sent  to  me.  No  reply. 

I am  satisfied  that  there  have  been  many  of  such  orders  issued 
irectly  by  the  President  and  Secretary  Cameron  without  consulting 
ieneral  McClellan,  and  for  that  reason  no  reply  could  be  given  without 
xposing  the  plans  of  the  great  jayhawker  and  the  imposition  of  him- 
elf  and  Cameron  on  the  President.  Perhaps  this  is  the  key  to  the 
ilence  of  the  authorities  at  Washington.  I know  nothing  on  the  sub- 
let except  what  I see  in  the  newspapers. 

In  regard  to  my  own  plans,  they  are  very  simple.  I have  sent  some 
6,000  or  17,000  men,  under  General  Curtis,  against  Price  at  Spring- 
eld.  He  has  been  re-enforced  by  McIntosh,  and  it  is  said  that  Yan 
)orn  and  Frost  are  also  marching  to  his  relief.  If  it  would  be  possi- 
le  for  you  to  move  a cavalry  force  rapidly  by  Fort  Scott  to  threaten 
‘rice’s  right  flank  it  would  have  a most  excellent  effect.  This  possibly 
as  the  original  intention  of  Lane’s  expedition,  but  I protested  to 
Washington  against  any  of  his  jayhawkers  coming  into  this  depart- 
lent,  and  saying  positively  that  I would  arrest  and  disarm  every  one 
could  catch. 

The  remainder  of  all  my  available  force  will  be  sent  to  the  lines  of 
he  Cumberland  and  Tennessee.  Who  will  take  the  immediate  com- 
land  there  is  not  yet  determined. 

Yours,  in  haste, 

H.  W.  HALLECK. 


February  13 — 7 p.  m. 
laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Hallece:,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Lane  had  no  authority  to  give  any  orders.  Countermand  all  that 
id  not  come  from  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army.  But  three  Wis- 
onsin  regiments  of  infantry  were  authorized  for  Kansas ; all  other  troops 
>r  there'  were  cavalry.  In  your  discretion  suspend  movement  of  any 
roops  en  route  or  under  orders  for  Kansas  and  report  the  fact  to  me. 
low  many  batteries  have  you  and  how  many  more  do  you  need?  I am 
nxious  about  Fort  Donelson.  Will  send  600  sailors  for  gunboats  in 
le  next  week. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General. 


tEneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  37.  j Saint  Louis , February  14,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  District 
f West  Tennessee  and  Brig.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman  to  the  command  of 
he  District  of  Cairo. 

II.  Commanders  of  districts,  divisions,  brigades,  and  posts,  in  the 
>tate  of  Missouri,  are  directed  to  have  an  immediate  inspection  of  all 
heir  troops,  for  the  discovery  of  stolen  and  contraband  property  and 


556  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AN®  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvmf 

fugitive  slaves.  General  Orders,  No.  3,  series  of  1861,  will  be  strict!  - 
enforced,  and  any  officer  who  has  permitted  it  to  be  violated  by  hi; 
command  will  be  arrested  and  tried  for  neglect  of  duty  and  disobe'di 
ence  of  orders. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  39.  ) . Saint  Louis , February  14,  1862.  I 

I.  Information  having  been  received  that  certain  judicial  officers  in 
trusted  with  the  administration  of  the  criminal  laws  and  ordinances  ii 
this  department  have  misunderstood  the  objects  and  purposes  of  th< 
establishment  of  martial  law  in  this  city  of  Saint  Louis,  and  in  conse 
quence  of  such  misunderstanding  have  failed  to  enforce  all  those  lawi 
and  ordinances ; and  as  crimes  and  misdemeanors  should  at  all  times  tx 
strictly  suppressed,  it  is  hereby  enjoined  upon  all  such  civil  officers 
whether  as  judges,  attorneys,  sheriffs,  marshals,  coroners,  clerks,  jus 
tices  of  the  peace,  presiding  officers  of  police  courts,  constables,  o] 
members  of  the  police,  to  strictly  enforce  all  criminal  laws  and  ordi 
nances,  to  have  arrested,  tried,  and  punished  in  the  courts  establishec 
in  the  State,  and  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  laws  of  the  State 
all  persons  guilty  of  any  violation  of  such  laws  and  ordinances,  in  tht 
same  manner  as  if  martial  law  had  not  been  declared  to  exist. 

II.  And  it  is  especially  enjoined  upon  the  judge  of  the  Saint  Louif 
criminal  court  to  have  a full  complement  of  grand  jurors  at  every  sk 
ting  of  the  court,  to  strictly  charge  said  grand  jurors  to  diligently  in 
quire  into  ail  crimes  and  misdemeanors  under  the  laws  of  the  Staff 
that  may  come  to  their  knowledge,  and  present  for  trial  such  offender* 
known  to  them.  And  the  assistant  circuit  attorney  for  this  county  k 
particularly  required  to  faithfully  aid  and  assist  the  said  grand  jurors 
and  officers  of  said  court  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties,  and  to  strictly 
perform  all  charges  devolving  upon  him  by  the  laws  of  the  State. 

III.  By  the  establishment  of  martial  law  in  the  city  of  Saint  Louis 
it  is  not  designed  to  interfere  with  or  suspend  the  operation  of  the  laws 
and  ordinances  of  the  State  or  city  with  reference  to  crimes  and  misde 
meanors  nor  the  remedies  and  process  of  the  civil  courts,  except  sc 
far  as  the  interests  of  the  Government  imperatively  require.  The  civil 
authorities  who  attempt  to  interfere  with  the  execution  of  military 
orders  emanating  from  these  headquarters  will  be  punished  for  military 
offense,  but  in  all  other  cases  it  is  their  duty  to  enforce  the  laws  and 
punish  crimes  and  misdemeanors. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Saint  Louis,  February  15,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  E.  Curtis,  Springfield , Mo. : 

Be  careful  in  your  pursuit  of  Price.  Don’t  separate  or  diyide  your 
forces.  Keep  them  together  and  well  in  hand.  Sigel’s  detour  lost  the 
battle  of  Wilson’s  Creek.  Don’t  let  him  lead  you  into  the  same  error. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


a at.  XVIEL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


557 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

February  15,  1862. 

daj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

General  : Major-General  McClellan  directs  me  to  say  that  within 
he  past  three  weeks  4,000  revolvers  have  been  sent  to  you  at  Saint 
jouis,  together  with  about  25,000  Prussian  muskets,  2,000  single-bar 
eled  pistols,  5,000  sabers,  and  some  other  arms,  of  which  you  have  had 
totice.  Three  thousand  French  rifled  muskets  and  3,000  sabers  have 
>een  sent  to  the  Governor  of  Illinois,  and  5,000  Springfield  rifles  are 
irdered  to  you  as  fast  as  they  are  manufactured.  Other  good  arms  of 
11  kinds  will  be  sent  to  you  as  fast  as  they  are  manufactured. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  Y.  COLBURN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


tENeral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  41.  S Saint  Louis , February  15,  1862. 

I.  At  the  request  of  the  Acting  Governor  of  Missouri,  it  is  hereby 
>rdered  that  at  all  future  elections  in  this  State,  whether  for  State, 
nunicipal,  county,  or  town  officers,  every  voter  will  be  required  to  take 
he  oath  of  allegiance  prescribed  in  article  six  of  the  ordinance  of  the 
Convention  dated  October  16,  1861.  Officers  of  the  polls  will  see  to 
he  execution  of  this  order.  If  they  receive  votes  of  persons  not  taking 
he  oath,  they  will  be  arrested  and  tried  for  military  offense  and  the 
•lection  will  be  declared  null  and  void. 

II.  It  was  not  intended  by  General  Orders,  No.  39,  current  series,  to 
;ast  any  reflection  upon  the  loyalty  and  good  intentions  of  the  civil 
ifficers  named  therein,  but  simply  to  point  out  their  duties  during  the 
>xistence  of  martial  law  in  this  city  and  State. 

******* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ieneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Saint  Louis  District, 

No.  4.  ) Saint  Louis , Mo.,  February  15,  1862. 

In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  140,  current  series,  head- 
luarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  I hereby  assume  command  of  the 
listrict  of  Saint  Louis. 

* * * * * * 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 
Brigadier -General , Volunteers. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  Kansas, 

No.  100.  j Fort  Leavenworth , Kans.,  February  15,  1862. 

Col.  Charles  Doubleday,  commanding  Second  Ohio  Cavalry,  is  hereby 
appointed  acting  brigadier-general,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected 
accordingly. 

His  brigade  will  consist  of  the  Second  Ohio  Cavalry,  Twelfth  Wis- 


558  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVinl 

consin  Regiment  of  Volunteers,  Ninth  Regiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers  i 
and  such  other  troops  as  may  hereafter  he  assigned  to  him. 

The  commanding  officers  of  the  Ninth  and  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Regi 
ments  will  report  to  Actg.  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  Doubleday  by  letter. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Springfield,  February  16, 1862.  i 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Captain  : My  advance  of  cavalry  overtook  and  attacked  rear  guar< 
of  enemy  at  Little  York.  Three  rebels  killed.  More  straggling  prisoner: 
are  being  taken  than  I know  what  to  do  with.  Fifteen  wagon  loads  oj| 
supplies  captured  at  Little  York.  I move  forward  this  moruing,  witl 
most  of  my  force  on  short  rations.  Price’s  order  for  retreat  is  dated 
February  13,  and  directs  that  the  troops  of  his  command  shall  prepan 
immediately  to  move  at  a moment’s  warning.  * 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General. 


Flat  Creek,  near  Chariton, 

February  16,  1862. 


Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton: 

This  is  a strong  defile.  The  enemy  made  a stand  across  it  and  estab 
lished  batteries,  which  attacked  my  advance  of  cavalry  at  3 yesterday 
My  mountain  howitzers  responded  to  their  fire  till  other  artillery  cann 
xip  when  we  drove  them  from  their  intrenchments  and  they  resumec 
their  flight.  By  this  time  it  was  dark,  and  my  troops  bivouacked  anc 
rested  till  4 this  morning,  when  the  movement  forward  again  com 
menced. 

The  First  and  Second  Divisions,  under  General  Sigel,  are  coming  bj 
a different  route,  and  will  join  me  here  early  this  morning. 

We  continually  take  cattle,  prisoners,  wagons,  and  arms,  which  thej 


leave  in  their  flight. 


SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brig  a dier- General. 


Headquarters, 

Post  Bolla , February  16,  1862. 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : The  telegraph  of  General  Halleck  last  night  is  at  hand 
I had  an  interview  with  Major  Wood  this  morning,  and  find  he  has  re 
ceived  sabers  sufficient  to  arm  his  command,  and  also  has  made  requisi 
tion  for  carbines,  which  is  being  filled  by  Colonel  Callender  as  fast  as- 
possible.  This  will  make  him  effective.  I am  satisfied  from  presen 
appearances  that  I shall  be  obliged  to  keep  at  least  half  of  his  force  a 
or  near  Salem  to  support  Major  Drake.  The  counties  of  Dent,  Texas 
Shannon,  and  Howell  are  infested  with  three  or  four  bands  of  outlaws 
who  are  stealing  and  destroying  all  the  Union  property  they  can  lm 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  55$ 

ould  attack  Salem  and  this  post  if  they  dared,  and  will  try  and  tear 
p the  railroad  track  unless  closely  watched. 

I am  still  of  the  opinion  there  should  he  more  force  at  this  post,  par- 
ieularly  a battalion  of  cavalry  and  one  company  (100  men),  with  two 
ood  officers  to  man  the  post  and  finish  it  up.  A battery  of  four  guns,, 
ell  manned,  would  be  the  best  to  take  possession  of  the  fort,  as  they 
ould  be  used  both  in  the  field  and  fort.  There  is  an  immense  amount 
f Government  property  here  which  I do  not  want  the  rebels  to  get  or 
estroy,  and  do  not  intend  they  shall  while  I command  here. 

I have  sent  Major  Wood  with  200  of  his  best  mounted  and  armed 
ten  to  the  support  of  Major  Drake  at  Salem;  with  the  orders  to  exter- 
tinate  or  drive  out  of  the  State  any  marauding  rebels  they  can  find. 

I am,  captain,  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  B.  WYMAN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post „ 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis . February  17,  1862. 
rigadier-General  Cullum,  Cairo , III. : 

Stop  every  man  that  comes  to  you  for  the  Tennessee  or  Cumberland*. 
11  you  do  not  want  send  to  Commerce.  Report  as  to  the  character  of 
ommerce  as  a depot  for  advance  against  New  Madrid. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General 


Sugar  Creek  Crossing, 

Six  Miles  from  Arkansas  Line , in  Arkansas , Feb.  18,  1862. 
apt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

The  general’s  dispatch  of  the  14th  is  received.  We  rejoice  again  at 
le  success  of  our  comrades  in  the  East. 

The  enemy  was  re-enforced  yesterday  by  the  troops  of  McCulloch,, 
id  made  another  stand  at  this  place.  His  batteries  opened  fire  upon 
s and  were  very  soon  replied  to  by  mine.  After  a few  rounds  of  shot 
id  shell  I ordered  a cavalry  charge,  which  drove  them  from  the  high 
ounds  they  occupied,  with  the  loss  of  many  killed  and  wounded  and 
uttered.  M/fioss  is  13  killed  and  15  to  20  wounded.  Among  the 
tter  are  Major  Bowen,  of  my  escort,  in  the  wrist;  my  assistant 
ljutant-general,  Captain  McKenny,  severely  but  not  dangerously;, 
iptain  Switzler,  not  dangerously. 

My  advance  camped  at  the  battle  ground.  General  SigePs  command 
1 miles  back  and  will  reach  me  this  morning.  Have  sent  forward 
valry  to  annoy  and  explore.  Cross  Hollow  is  their  next  point,  12 
iles  ahead.  I shall  await  the  arrival  of  the  First  and  Second  Divis- 
ns,  as  this  is  their  great  boasted  trap  for  the  Federal  army.  Hopes 
so  the  Third  Iowa  will  arrive  to-day. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- Genera  ?,  Commanding. 


.560 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYHL, 
Saint  Louis,  February  18,  1862.  , 

Major-General  McClellan  : . n , 

The  flaff  of  the  Union  is  floating  in  Arkansas.  General  Curtis  hag 
driven  Price  from  Missouri,  and  is  several  miles  across  the  Arkansd 
Une,  cutting  up  Price’s  rear  and  hourly  capturing  prisoners  and  stores, 
The  Army  of  the  Southwest  is  doing  its  duty  “w^HALLECK, 

Maior- General,  1 


Special  Orders, 
No.  90. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  Dist.  of  Mo., 
Sugar  Creek , Ark.,  February  18,  1862. 

The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  announce  to  the  soldiers  # 
thte  district  tidings  of  success,  which  he  has  received  through  Major 
TTalleck.  bv  our  comrades  elsewhere. 

Our  gunboats  have  triumphantly  penetrated  Florence,  Ala.  A grea 
victorv  hM  been  won  by  the  Army  and  Navy  in  taking  Roanoke  Is 
and  in  North  Carolina,  where  300  of  the  enemy  were  killed,  , 

satisfaction  to  tits  fg*. 
this  command  for  their  courage,  fidelity,  and  endurance  manifested  uj 

thYouahavem'oved  in  the  most  inclement  weather,  over  the  worst o 
roads  making  extraordinary  long  marches,  subsisting  mainly  on  m 
^?S?Lnd  for  the  past  six  days  you  ^ve  beon  under  the  fl. 

fippiricr  enemy.  You  have  driven  him  out  of  Missouri,  restore 
the  Union  fllg  to  the  virgin  soil  of  Arkansas,  and  triumphed  in  tw 
contests  the  last  with  a portion  of  the  combined  forces  of  Price  a ' 
McCulloch in  their  stronghold,  and  I trust  you  will  receive  the  graft 

the  cravings  of  actual  hunger , J 
peaceable  citizens  through  whose  country  we  have  passed  should  foj 
<rive  some  acts  of  spoliation  which  are  incident  to ^ war  under  s 
pressing  circumstances,  but  the  commanding  general  will  again  ca 
the  attention  of  his  officers  and  men  to  his  General  Orders,  No.  3,  a, 
•express  h?s  hopes  that  soldiers  that  have  done  themselves  much  hone 
will  not  soil  it  by  acts  of  folly,  cruelty,  or  dissipation. 

Let  us  show  the  people  every  where  that  our  tents  and  k5?P»a  * ^ 
not  disgraced  with  plunder,  and  that  the  old  flag  o 
only  emblem  of  power,  peace,  and  safety  to  society,  and  the  on  y 

as  the  emblem’ of  civil  .ad  relipou.  libert.y,  "“jit 

country  that  peace  and  prosperity  which  have  so  long  distinguished 

among  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis:  ^ ^ mcKENNY, 

Ac,tina  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters 


Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  20,  1862. 


iBrigadier-General  Cullum,  Cairo , III. : 

Commerce  is  selected  as  the  depot  for  General  Pope  s cornman 


p.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  561 

1 immediately  go  there  to  receive  his  troops  which  yon  do  not  re- 
re  for  the  defense  of  Cairo. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major - General . 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Sugar  Greek  Hollow , Ark.,  February  20, 1862. 

pt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  r 

Japtain  : I move  to  Osage  Springs  to-day  in  order  to  get  nearer  to 
Cross  Hollow.  I will  then  he  7 miles  west  of  the  enemy  and  on 
ter  ground  for  artillery  and  cavalry.  McCulloch  has  joined  Price 
l Yan  Dorn  is  expected  to-day.  Infantry  and  cavalry  re-enforce- 
ats  are  also  reported.  I made  some  progress  in  my  reconnaissance 
terday,  but  not  yet  enough  to  satisfy  me  as  to  the  best  approaches, 
mst  attack  him  soon  or  he  will  assume  the  offensive. 

SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  44.  ) Saint  Louis , February  20,  1862. 

. In  consideration  of  the  recent  victories  won  by  the  Federal  forces, 
■ of  the  rapidly-increasing  loyalty  of  citizens  of  Missouri,  who  for  a 
e forgot  their  duty  to  their  flag  and  country,  the  sentences  of  John 
Tompkins,  William  J.  Forshey,  John  Patton,  Thomas  M.  Smith, 
ven  Stott,  George  H.  Cunningham,  Eichard  B.  Chowder,  and 
>rge  M.  Pulliam,  heretofore  condemned  to  death,  are  provisionally 
igated  to  close  confinement  in  the  military  prison  at  Alton.  If  rebel 
is  again  destroy  railroads  and  telegraph  lines,  and  thus  render  it 
essary  for  us  to  make  severe  examples,  the  original  sentences  against 
se  men  will  be  carried  into  execution. 

[.  No  further  assessments  will  be  levied  or  collected  from  any  one 
) will  now  take  the  prescribed  oath  of  allegiance. 

[I.  Boards  or  commissions  will  be  appointed  to  examine  the  cases 
Tisoners  of  war  who  apply  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  on 
r recommendation  orders  will  be  issued  from  these  headquarters  for 
r release. 

y command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


^ebruary  21,  1862.— For  Halleck  to  McClellan  and  McClellan  to 
leek,  in  reference  to  operations  in  Arkansas,  Kentucky,  and  Ten- 
*ee,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  YII,  pp.  645-647.] 


Camp  Halleck,  Ark.,  February  22,  1862. 

t.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

y flank  movements  command  Cross  Hollow.  The  enemy  evacuated, 
my  cavalry  drove  the  pickets  and  camped  on  the  ground.  All  the 
36  r r — vol  VIII 


562  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV]| 

trails  have  now  been  taken.  I shall  camp  here  till  my  commissaj 
train  comes  up,  my  left  resting  on  Cross  Hollow  and  my  right  on  til 
Snj  from  road  to  road  6 miles.  I mil  send  my  cavafl 
forwardtoteke  Fayetteville,  which  is  only  10  miles  from  their  fr| 
pickets  The  Arkansas  hills  echo  the  shouts  of  my  troops,  who  rejog,, 
h the  glorious  news  from  Fort  Donelson.  ^ r ommg) 

Briaadier- General 


Camp  Halleck:,  Abk.,  February  22,  1862- 


Oapt.  FT.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

McCulloch  and  Price  expect  to  unite  their  entire  force  and  has 
fallen  back  for  that  purpose.  I need  800  artillery  horses  and  400  m 
sets  of  artillery  harness,  to  shift  some  poor,  broken-down  stock  fr  i 
the  artillery  to  other  service ; also  10,000  pairs  of  pants.  I should  ay 
be  re  eifK  if  I am  to  cope  with  the  enemy,  as  follows  : Four  gel 
batteries  complete ; 3,000  cavalry,  well  equipped,  and  7,000  infant. 
With  such  an  ^cession  of  force  I could  hold  against  all  probable  fo  . 

°T,SJS  b.™  been  impelled  ..  J 

S’—” S' bnebbe  people  of  Mimoi 
immediatelyabandon  the  idea  of  continuing  the  effort  to  make  Missol 

* spared,  and  could  d. 

crnf+i/a  +v,fi  rliffienltv  in  Missouri.  The  roads  on  this  sidoi 
Snringfle  d fgo  d Md  sugar™  alt,  and  coffee  are  all  the  rations  t« 
should  be  b auled  through.  The  best  point  for  their  team  embarkat. 

18  My  ?orceei?skestimated  by  the  enemy  at  from  20,000 and  I J 
hold  a defi  nite  hostile  attitude,  sending  out  my  cavalry  in  force  to  I 

41  (Loss ' Hollow  was  an  extensive  cantonment.  The  buildings  w- 
better  than  ours  at  Benton  Barracks. 

gether  with  stores  of  provisions  and  arms,  which  m “f8*® 
not  carrv  away.  Long  rows  of  brick  chimneys  show  where  tbe°arral 
werHicely  arranged8  His  sick  and  wounded  who  were  left  My- 
flank  movement  induced  the  sudden  evacuation.  Considerable  he 
not  burn  and  we  are  using  it.  Most  of  our  provisions  for  the  last  > 
days  have  been  taken  from  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  SAML.  B.  CURTIS, 

Briaadier-  Genera 


Hdqrs. 


Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Gamp  Halleck , Ark.,  February  22,  18b, 

Brigadier-General  Asboth, 

Commanding  Cavalry: 

General  : You  are  to  assume  command  of  all  M 

lery  force  which  has  been  or  may  be  ordered  to  report d* . you  aM 
Town  to-morrow  morning,  with  a view  of  making  a formids 

force  against  the  enemy.  You  will,  if  not  obstructed  by  to 


A.P.  XYIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


563 


rce,  proceed  as  far  as  Fayetteville  and  take  that  place  ; but  you  will 
oid  any  serious  engagement  wirh  tlie  enemy.  You  will,  in  taking 
e town,  try  to  get  position  on  high  commanding  ground,  and  send  in 
udicious  officer  to  reconnoiter  the  premises  and  take  and  bring  away 
gs,  arms,  and  other  military  articles  if  occasion  offers. 

You  will  not  allow  private  houses  to  be  entered  unless  it  may  be 
eviously  ascertained  or  reasonably  believed  arms,  spies,  or  force  be 
□cealed  within.  If  you  can  find  any  of  the  leading  citizens  ask  one 
two  of  them  to  come  with  you,  as  it  is  my  earnest  desire  to  prevent 
mage  to  private  property.  You  will  especially  place  a guard  over 
3 printing-office  while  our  troops  are  there,  and  inform  the  owners,  if 
3y  can  be  found,  that  I desire  the  use  of  the  press  to  publish  orders, 
lich  are  intended  to  prevent  my  troops  from  doing  mischief. 

Restrain  your  troops  from  acts  of  cruelty  and  folly,  and  avoid  sur- 
ise  or  ambuscade.  If  you  hear  of  suitable  roads,  make  a detour  to 
3 right  and  return  to  these  headquarters  at  your  earliest  con  Veni- 
ce. 

I am,  general,  &c., 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  22,  1862. 

ig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Commanding  Army  of  Southwest , Arlcansas: 

STou  will  not  advance  any  troops  farther  south  than  Fayetteville, 
cupy  with  artillery  and  infantry  one  or  more  of  the  most  important 
sses.  The  main  force  should  encamp  at  Bentonville  or  some  point 
supporting  distance  of  the  passes  occupied,  which  passes  should  be 
11  secured  by  intrencliments,  abatis,  &c.  The  advanced  post,  say 
yetteville,  should  be  occupied  with  cavalry  and  some  light  artillery, 
icli  can  move  with  it.  Notify  me  promptly  of  your  proposed  dis- 
fitions.  I will  soon  turn  Price  and  relieve  you  of  his  presence. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  46.  ) Saint  Louis , Mo.y  February  22,  1862. 

. The  m^jor-general  commanding  the  department  desires  to  impress 
)n  all  officers  the  importance  of  preserving  good  order  and  discipline 
ong  their  troops  as  the  armies  of  the  West  advance  into  Tennessee 
1 other  Southern  States.  Let  us  show  to  our  fellow-citizens  of  these 
ites  that  we  come  merely  to  crush  out  rebellion  and  to  restore  to 
m peace  and  the  benefits  of  the  Constitution  and  the  Union,  of 
ich  they  have  been  deprived  by  selfish  and  unprincipled  leaders. 
~y  have  been  tohl  that  we  come  to  oppress  and  to  plunder.  By  our 
a we  will  undeceive  them.  We  will  prove  to  them  that  we  come  to 
tore,  not  to  violate,  the  Constitution  and  laws.  In  restoring  to  them 
glorious  flag  of  the  Union  we  will  assure  them  that  they  shall  enjoy 
ler  its  folds  the  same  protection  of  life  and  property  as  in  former 
s-  Soldiers,  let  no  excesses  on  your  part  tarnish  the  glory  of  our 


564 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


II  Orders  heretofore  issued  in  this  department  in  regard  to  pillaging . 
marauding;  ^)he  destruction  of  private  property,  and  the  stealing  an 
concealment  of  slaves  must  be  strictly  enforced.  It  does  not  belong  1 
the  inilitarv  to  decide  upon  the  relation  of  master  and  slave.  Sue  j 
question?  must  b^settled  by  the  civil  courts.  No  fugitive  slave  wil 
therefore,  be  admitted  within  our  lines  or  camps,  except  when  specials 

ordered  bv  the  general  commanding.  . J 

III.  Women  and  children,  merchants,  farmers,  mechanics,  and  a> 
nersons  not  in  arms  are  regarded  as  non-combatants,  and  are  not  to  II 
molested  either  in  their  persons  or  property.  If,  however,  they  aid  ar 
assist  the  enemv  they  become  belligerents,  and  will  be  treated  as  sue 
K they  violate  the  laws  of  war,  they  will  be  made  to  suffer  the  penJ 

tieiv* Military0 stores  and  public  property  of  the  enemy  must  be  su 
rendered,  and  any  attempt  to  conceal  such  property,  by  fraudule  j, 
transfers  or  otherwise,  will  be  punished,  but  no  private  ProP^ty  ^ 
be  touched,  unless  by  the  orders  of  the  general  commanding.  Wherevl 
it  becomes  necessary  to  levy  forced  contributions  for  the  supply  ail 
subsistence  of  our  troops,  such  levies  will  be  made  as  light  as  possibl 
and  be  so  distributed  as  to  produce  no  distress  among  the  people.  A 
property  so  taken  must  be  receipted  and  duly  accounted  for,  as  here! 

fore  duected-rders  wil]  be  read  at  the  head  of  every  regiment,  and  i 
officers  are  commanded  to  strictly  enforce  them. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck:  ^ ^ McLEAN 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Commerce,  Mo.,  February  23,  1862,: 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  W.  Cullum,  Cairo:  I 

I arrived  here  last  night  with  140  men  of  the  Forty -seventh  Hhno, 

having  given  orders  to  the  Fifty -ninth  Indiana  and  the  three  comb 

nies  of  the  Forty-sixth  Indiana,  together  with  the  Forty-seventh  1 
nois,  to  follow  me  immediately.  These  regiments  an^  °°“Paaie®  j 
on  board  steamers  War  Eagle,  Atlantic,  and  New  Golden  State,  aJ 
ready  to  push  out  when  I left.  None  of  them  have  r®ac^e^®r®’  a. 
I presume  they  neglected  to  obey  their  orders.  I am  here  with  a va 
smaU  force,  and  I dislike  to  land  the  stores,  &c.,  for  tear®facc,de; 
until  I have  a force  sufficient  to  make  them  secure.  Will  you  ple« 
order  the  boats  to  leave  at  once  for  this  place. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  sej^gt,p0pE 

Urinn  flier  - General.  Commanding 


Special  Orders, 
No.  35. 


Headquarters  Army  in  the  Fi®ld, 

Commerce , February  23,  loo- 


The  Thirty-fourth,  Forty-third,  Fovtj-sixt] h,  F< 3rty-seventii,  and  Fi 
ninth  Indiana  Regiments  will  constitute  the  First  Brigade  of 
ond  Division  of  this  army,  and  will  be  commanded  by  Col.  J.  R. 
Forty-seventh  Indiana  Regiment. 


p-  XVIII.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  565 


>rig.  Gen.  John  M.  Palmer  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  this  divis- 
, the  Second  Brigade  of  which  will  be  hereafter  designated, 
be  brigade  under  Colonel  Slack  will  prepare  to  move  forward  to  the 
n of  Benton  to-morrow  morning.  Capt.  J.  A.  Swain,  assistant  quar- 
naster,  has  been  instructed  to  make  up  the  transportation  of  this 
gade  for  temporary  purposes  to  50  wagons.  Such  baggage  and  sup- 
s as  are  needed  for  immediate  use  will  be  transported  with  the 
^ade  5 the  remainder  of  its  baggage  and  supplies  will  be  forwarded 
lenton  after  the  brigade  is  in  position  at  that  place. 
iach  commander  of  a regiment  will  detail  a commissioned  officer, 
ti  a sufficient  guard,  to  remain  behind  in  charge  of  the  regimental 
gage  and  supplies  which  cannot  be  transported  with  the  brigade, 
least  three  days’  rations  will  be  carried  with  the  brigade, 
he  brigade  commander  will  establish  his  command  in  camp  in  the 
^hborhood  of  the  town  of  Benton,  and  will  be  held  strictly  account- 
i to  these  headquarters  that  his  force  is  in  camp,  his  grand  guards, 
:ets,  outposts,  and  police  guards  are  mounted  strictly  in  accordance 
i Army  Begulationsj  that  his  forces  discharge  their  duties  in  all 
>ects  according  to  military  requirements  $ that  proper  vigilance  is 
uved,  and  all  the  usual  precautions  common  to  a force  in  presence 
n enemy  are  carefully  and  closely  attended  to. 
y order  of  General  Pope : 


SPEED  BUTLEE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  24,  1862. 
f.  Gen.  G.  W.  Cullum,  Cairo , III,: 

md  troops  to  General  Pope  till  his  command  amounts  to  10,000, 
infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry  being  in  due  proportion.  I cannot 
rtam  what  he  has  got  or  what  he  is  doing.  Why  don’t  he  report 
'ape  Girardeau  ? * 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major- General, 


Commerce,  Mo.,  February  24,  1862. 

>r-General  Halleck: 

iere  are  now  here  nine  regiments  of  infantry,  one  battery  Elev- 
Ohio,  and  six  companies  of  the  First  U.  S.  Infantry,  about  6,500 

accordance  with  my  understanding  with  General  Cullum  am 
pmg  every  boat  coming  down  the  river  and  unloading  the  troops, 
avalry  yet  here. 

3ccupied  Benton  to-day  with  one  brigade  of  four  regiments.  I 
brigade  the  troops  as  fast  as  they  arrive  and  establish  them  by 
nons  at  points  here  and  Benton. 

all  troops  designed  for  this  command  can  be  thrown  here  in  three 
1 could  march  on  7th.  They  come  in  slowly.  I took  off  six  com- 
es ol  the  First  Infantry  from  the  Meteor  and  Sunshine. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


566 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVni 


General  Orders,  J 

The  undersigned,  having  been  instructed  by  the  general  commandiu* 
the  department  to  assume  the  command  of  the  army  assembling  at  th 

^rr^^^^-nbeaddres^J 

chief  of  the  staff  department  to  which  the  communication  relates . 
Mai.  Speed  Butler,  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Noyes,  aide-de-camp. 

Mai.  0.  A.  Morgan,  aide-de-camp. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Marshall,  aide-de-camp. 

Maj.  J.  M.  Corse,  inspector-general. 

Capt  J.  W.  Taylor,  chief  quartermaster. 

Cant.  J.  A.  Swain,  assistant  quartermaster. 

t sint  T W Mott,  acting  assistant  quartermaster.  . J 

The  cinef^ Commissary  afd  medical  director  will  be  announced  ml 

few  days.  JNO  POPE, 

Tiriaadier- General*  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Southwestern  District  of  Missouri, 

Camp  Halleck , Ark.,  February  24,  1862fl 

Cant.  N.  H.  McLean,  . _ . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Captain:  I send  by  one  of  my  aides,  Major  Schaeffer,  the  last  nej 

ssatrst  aw®  ./{S 

.« B.nto.vil,.  uj 

JJ’i  S plinfSd  position  of  tto  rebels;  >-  » " g 
nr<lpr  to  nrotect  and  carry  on  the  lead  mines  in  Granby,  l ais 
a large  secession  flag,  taken  from  the  court-house  at  Bentonville. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  February  25,  1802 — 11  a.  m 


Brigadier-General  Pope,  Commerce: 

All  troops  at  Cape  Girardeau,  except  one  battery  and  one  comps 

guard  and  working  part...  “"'-“Jr.Sta  » 


jEi rsst^Jsssrsi 


least  1U,UUU  ill  a,  1«'V  uajo.  — • V.TvoonatP  rGl.U  lbllkS 
?CStt5  Number  them  * 

state  the  hour.  Two  batteries  go  down  o t g . ^ jjALLECK, 

Major- Genera 


J*.  XV m.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  567 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  25,  1862—1  p.  m. 
tjor-General  McClellan,  Washington : 

Price’s  army  has  been  driven  from  his  strong  post  at  Cross  Hollow, 
e enemy  left  his  sick  and  wounded  and  such  of  his  stores  as  he 
lid  not  destroy.  He  burned  the  extensive  barracks  at  that  place,  to 
went  our  troops  from  occupying  them.  General  Curtis  says : “Most 
our  provisions  for  the  last  ten  days  have  been  taken  from  the  enemy.” 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General . 


ecial  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 

No.  37.  ( Commerce , Mo .,  February  25,  1862. 

Che  Twenty-sixth  and  Forty-seventh  Illinois  Eegiments  and  the 
‘tli  Iowa,  with  another  regiment  hereafter  to  be  designated,  will 
m the  Second  Brigade  of  the  Second  Division,  to  be  commanded  by 
l.  William  H.  Worthington,  of  Fifth  Iowa  Volunteers. 

Chis  brigade  will  march  to-morrow  morning  as  early  as  practicable  to 
nton,  and  there  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Palmer,  commanding 
\ Second  Division. 

Suck  of  the  sick  of  this  brigade  as  are  likely  to  be  unfit  for  duty  for 
ae  time  and  cannot  be  cared  for  in  their  regiments  will  be  shipped 
Saint  Louis  by  the  first  steamer. 

Commanders  of  regiments  will  in  no  case  send  off  any  sick  man  with- 
; bis  descriptive  papers, 
ly  order  of  General  Pope : 

SPEED  BUTLER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


ecial  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 

No.  38.  j Commerce , February  25,  1862. 

Che  Twenty-seventh,  Thirty-ninth,  and  Sixty-third  Regiments  Ohio 
lunteers,  with  another  regiment  to  be  hereafter  designated,  will 
istitute  the  First  Brigade  of  the  First  Division  of  this  army,  to  be 
amanded  by  Col.  John  Groesbeck,  Thirty-ninth  Ohio  Volunteers. 

Che  regiments  designated  will  therefore  immediately  report  through 
ir  colonels  to  Colonel  Groesbeck. 
ly  order  of  General  Pope: 

SPEED  BUTLER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Southwest, 

Camp  Halleck , Ark.,  February  26,  1862. 

[)t.  N.  H.  McLean: 

am  in  receipt  of  the  general’s  telegraphic  order  of  the  22d,  and 
ill  conform  to  its  directions  as  far  as  possible.  I am  camped  so  as  to 
t my  left  flank  on  Cross  Hollow  and  the  White  River  Mountains,  and 
1 right  on  Osage  Springs,  5 miles  due  west  from  the  Hollow.  Sugar 
*ek  Hollow  (12  miles)  is  stronger,  and  on  using  up  my  forage  here 
iay  fall  back  with  my  main  force  to  Sugar  Creek.  Fayetteville  is  too 


568 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVHJ 


far  from  me  and  too  near  the  enemy  for  a regular  outpost,  as  it  is  2 
miles  out,  and  the  stand  of  the  enemy  at  Boston  Mountains  is  only  2 
miles  in  advance  of  Fayetteville,  with  strong  pickets  much  nearer.  I 
will  be  within  my  circle  of  frequent  reconnaissances,  and  Elm  Springs 
some  10  miles  in  front,  will  be  my  outpicket.  Further  knowledge  J 
the  country  may  induce  modifications.  It  is  said  Van  Dorn  will  mov 
a force  bv  Boaring  Biver  to  cut  off  my  line  of  communication.  It  i 
also  said  he  has  joined  the  main  army  at  Boston  Mountains  and  arreste 
McCulloch.  All  accounts  agree  in  saying  the  main  army  is  distracte 
with  internal  feuds  among  their  forces. 

Bespectfully,  yours,  SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 

Brigadier ■ General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  February  26,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis:  I 

Pants  will  be  sent,  but  cannot  now  send  more  troops  or  Worses.  A 
you  are  not  to  move  again  at  present,  you  must  wait.  D r^  ^ 
vourrear  guards  and  garrison;  neither  your  rear  nor  flanks  are  e. 
nosed  Our  cavalry  has  cleared  out  all  Southern  Missouri,  and  Huntc 
Fs  advancing  to  support  your  right  flank.  Price’s  army  will  be  cod 

pletely  turned  very  soon.  H w HALLECK, 

Major  * General. 


General  Orders,  | 

I.  The  public  press  has  given  circulation  to  the  following  corr 
spondence : 


Yesterday  (February  8)  several  companies  of  our  cavalry,  with  ““Xv  al 


SSuTKlimgJ  — ISyC^  Uufo“murdere 

2 missing  and  1 wounded.  They  found  5 b , w.  P.  KELLOGG, 


General  E.  A.  Paine,  Commanding,  Cairo. 


Colonel,  Commanding. 


Cairo,  February  8. 

Colonel  Kellogg,  Commanding,  Cape  Girardeau: 

Hang  one  of  the  rebel  cavalry  for  each  Union  man  murdered,  and  after  this* 
for  each.  Continue  to  scout,  capture,  and  kill.  E A PAINE, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


General  Paine,  in  explanation  of  the  foregoing,  says  that .at  the  tui 
he  received  the  dispatch  of  Colonel  Kellogg  he  supposed  tbey  caug 
FhYXl  cavalry  inPthe  act.  The i major-general l command  mg  akes  tl 
earliest  opportunity  to  publish  his  disapproval  ^‘Tr-i t sUonld 
contrary  to  the  rules  of  civilized  war,  anc  . ' , Betaliati< 

adopted  the  whole  country  would  be  covered  witti  blood.  Betaha 
has  its  limits,  and  the  innocent  should  not  be  made  to  sutter  to 
of  others  over  whom  they  have  no  control.  . , . . 

II.  Again,  by  whom  was  this  official  correspondence  furms 


iai*.  XYIH.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  569 

ress,  in  violation  of  the  Army  Regulations  and  repeated  general  or- 
3rs  I The  imputation  must  rest  upon  the  two  officers  concerned  until 
Ley  account  for  the  publication. 

III.  Information  is  almost  daily  furnished  to  the  public  press  re- 
acting army  movements  which  should  be  known  only  to  the  general 
ving  the  orders  and  to  the  officer  receiving  them,  knowledge  thus 
veil  to  the  enemy  may  sometimes  cost  us  the  lives  of  thousands, 
oreover,  the  contents  of  official  letters,  which  should  have  been 
iow n only  to  the  writer  and  to  those  superior  in  rank,  have  been  pub- 
shed,  together  with  ex-parte  statements  and  misrepresentations.  The 
w and  Army  Regulations  afford  a remedy  for  all  personal  grievances, 
) matter  by  whom  they  have  been  caused,  and  when  military  officers 
irry  their  complaints  to  newspapers  the  inference  is  that  they  are 
itliout  foundation.  Hereafter  any  officer  who  publishes,  without 
oper  authority,  any  information  respecting  the  movements  of  our 
mies,  even  of  battles  won  or  any  official  papers,  will  be  arrested  and 
ied  by  a court-martial,  and  the  Secretary  of  War  has  directed  that 
te  whole  edition  of  the  newspaper  publishing  such  information  be 
ized  and  destroyed. 

IV.  It  ‘is  officially  represented  to  the  commanding  general  that  cer- 
in  parties  in  this  city  and  elsewhere  have  been  negotiating  with 
>mpanies  and  regiments  originally,  perhaps,  irregularly  organized, 

• obtain  for  a certain  price  their  disbandment  or  discharge,  and  en- 
gaging expressions  of  dissatisfaction  and  mutinous  conduct  as  a 
eans  to  accomplish  that  end.  An  investigation  of  this  matter  will 
3 made  immediately,  and  the  provost-marshal- general  will  arrest 
lilty  parties  and  coniine  them  in  the  military  prison  until  they  can 
) tried  and  punished  as  prescribed  by  the  Rules  and  Articles  of 
rar. 

By  command  of  Major  General  Halleck: 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


pecial  Orders,  \ Headquarters  Army  in  the  Eield, 

No.  42a.  | Commerce , Ufo.,  February  26  [28],  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  is  assigned  to  the 
>mmand  of  the  First  Division  of  this  army. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : 

SPEED  BUTLER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Cairo,  III.,  February  27,  1862. 

eneral  Halleck: 

Pope  has  fourteen  pieces  of  artillery.  Should  have  two  batteries 
ore.  Will  they  reach  him  from  Saint  Louis  to-morrow  ? If  not,  must 
>are  some  from  here.  He  wants  Steele  with  a force  to  cover  his  flank 
L Oak  Grove. 

G.  W.  CULLUM, 

Brigadier-  General. 


570 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVUL 

Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 

Commerce , February  27,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

I march  to-morrow  morning  with  a force  about  10,000  strong  and 
will  be  in  front  of  New  Madrid  on  Sunday  evening  or  Monday  morn- 
ing Have  requested  General  Oullum  to  advance  strong  force,  under 
Steele  as  far  as  Oak  Grove,  to  cover  my  flank  and  serve  as  a reserve 
in  case  of  need.  Most  of  the  regimental  baggage  left  here  for  want 
of  transportation.  Hope  wagons  will  be  sent  here  to  bring  it  forward. 
Would  suggest  movement  of  gun  and  mortar  boats  toward  Columbus 
on  Sunday,  to  operate  until  I have  occupied  New  Madrid. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 


Saint  Louis,  February  27,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Cullum  : 

General  Pope  should  be  flanked  as  he  desires,  but  General  Steele 

must  be  sent  here,  as  he  is  ordered.  A _ _ 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  27,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope,  Commerce , Mo.: 

Wagons  and  everything  else  are  being  sent  to  you  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible • also  re-enforcements.  Move  on  as  fast  as  possible  $ a reserve 
will  sustain  you.  You  have  10,000.  If  necessary  I will  sustain  you 
with  five,  ten,  fifteen,  or  even  twenty  thousand.  The  object  must  be 

accomplished  if  it  requires  50,000  men.  __  A , T 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


evacu- 
ating Mud  Town,  Ark.,  poisoned  the  provisions  which  they  were  obliged 
to  abandon,  and  that  42  officers  and  men  of  one  of  our  regiments  were 
poisoned  by  eating  these  provisions.  One  brave  officer  and  several 
men  have  died  and  others  have  suffered  terribly  from  this  barbarous 
act — an  act  condemned  by  every  civilized  nation,  ancient  and  modem. 

We  cannot  retaliate  by  adopting  the  same  barbarous  mode  of  war 
fare,  nor  can  we  retaliate  by  punishing  the  innocent  for  the  acts  oi  the 
guilty.  The  laws  of  war  forbid  this.  But  the  same  code  authorizes  us 
to  retaliate  upon  the  guilty  parties.  Any  person  guilty  oi  such  acts, 
when  captured,  will  not  be  treated  as  ordinary  prisoners  ot  war:  tne\ 
will  not  be  shot,  but  will  suffer  the  ignominious  punishment  oi  being 
hung  as  felons.  Moreover,  all  officers  are  in  a measure  responsible  tor 
the  acts  of  the  troops  under  their  command.  Officers  oi  troops  guiltj 
of  such  acts,  although  not  themselves  the  advisers  or  abettors  of  crime, 
will  therefore,  when  captured,  be  put  in  irons,  and  conveyed  as  cnmi 


General  Orders, 
No.  49. 


Hdqrs  Dept,  of  the  Missouri. 
Saint  Louis , Mo.,  February  27, 


infnrmatinn  has  been  received  that  the  rebel  troops. 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


571 


als  to  these  headquarters.  The  laws  of  war  make  it  their  duty  to  pre- 
en t such  barbarities  $ if  they  neglect  that  duty  they  must  suffer  the 
onsequences. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

NT.  H.  McLEAN,  # 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ieneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 

No.  17.  j Commerce , Mo.,  February  27,  1862. 

The  following  movements  of  this  army  will  be  make : 

The  First  Division,  under  Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  will  march 
rom  this  place  at  8 o’clock  to-morrow  morning,  the  28th  instant,  and 
ncamp  in  the  neighborhood  of  Colonel  Hunter’s  to-morrow  night.  On 
he  succeeding  day,  the  1st  instant,  the  division  will  occupy  Sikeston, 
rhere  further  instructions  will  be  given  by  the  general  commanding 
his  army  in  person. 

The  Second  Division,  under  Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Palmer,  will  march  on 
Saturday  morning,  the  1st  instant,  and  encamp  5 or  6 miles  north  of 
hkeston,  where  further  instructions  will  be  received. 

Under  no  consideration  will  any  ambulances  or  wagons  be  permitted 
o move  in  the  columns,  except  such  as  are  needed  to  carry  the  neces- 
ary  ammunition. 

Division  trains  of  the  several  divisions  will  move  in  the  rear  of  their 
espective  divisions  in  the  order  in  which  the  brigades  are  posted  in 
he  column.  A sufficient  rear  guard  will  march  in  front  of  the  trains, 
pith  orders  to  prohibit  any  officer  or  soldier  from  passing  to  the  rear 
f the  column,  and  regimental  quartermasters  will  be  held  responsible 
hat  no  one  be  permitted  to  ride  in  the  wagons  except  with  a written 
ertificate  of  the  surgeon  that  he  should  do  so. 

Bear  guards  of  not  less  than  three  companies  of  infantry  will  be 
laced  in  the  rear  of  the  division  trains,  and  mounted  patrols  will  be 
:ept  out  upon  the  flanks  to  prevent  any  straggling  from  the  ranks, 
vith  positive  instructions  to  shoot  down  any  person  belonging  to  the 
rmy  engaged  in  depredation  or  outrages  upon  the  people  of  the 
ountry. 

It  is  enjoined  upon  division,  brigade,  and  regimental  commanders  to 
jive  their  personal  attention  to  the  march  of  their  respective  com- 
aands,  to  see  that  they  are  kept  well  closed,  and  no  straggling  what- 
ver  from  the  ranks  be  permitted. 

The  utmost  attention  to  the  posting  of  all  necessary  guards  will  be 
•iven  by  the  commanders  above  designated  and  the  utmost  vigilance 
>e  observed. 

It  is  enjoined  upon  division  and  brigade  commanders  to  be  careful 
o move  at  the  hours  and  to  the  places  designated ; without  such  exact- 
less  it  is  impossible  to  move  so  large  a force  without  confusion  and 
lifficulty.  The  headquarters  of  the  army  will  be  in  Sikeston  on  Sat- 
urday night,  the  1st  instant,  and  will  habitually  accompany  the  leading 
livision. 

The  artillery  not  attached  for  temporary  service  with  divisions  will 
)e  massed  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Henry  Hescock,  First  Mis- 
souri Light  Artillery,  and  will  habitually  march  between  the  First  and 
Second  Divisions.  The  officer  commanding  it  will  report  for  orders  to 
:hc  general  commanding  as  soon  every  day  as  his  command  arrives  at 
sts  place  of  encampment.  The  parole  and  countersign  will  be  furnished 


572  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVHL 

to  division  commanders  for  ten  days  from  these  headquarters,  and 
under  no  circumstances  will  any  other  be  used.  When  detachments 
are  made  from  either  of  these  divisions,  the  division  commander  will 
furnish  the  parole  and  countersign  to  the  commanding  officer  if  the 
detophment  is  to  be  absent  more  than  twenty-four  hours. 

The  general  commanding  takes  occasion  to  notify  the  army  under 
his  command  that  they  are  marching  to  meet  the  enemy  within  a few 
days,  and  he  exhorts  them,  by  all  their  hopes  of  distinction  and  success, 
to  be  prompt  and  attentive  to  their  duties  and  careful  to  comply  exactly 
and  cheerfully  with  every  detail  of  service  and  with  every  order  for 
this  movement. 

This  order,  immediately  on  its  receipt  by  the  division  commanders, 
will  be  published  to  their  commands. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : 

J SPEED  BUTLER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  > Headquarters  Army  in  the  Eield, 

N0.  41.  ] Commerce , February  27,  1862. 

The  First  Division  of  the  Army  in  the  Field  will  be  constituted  as 


1U11U  wo.  . 

First  Brigade,  Col.  John  Groesbeck  commanding:  Twenty-seventh 
Begiment  Ohio  Volunteers,  Colonel  Fuller;  Thirty-ninth  Pegiment 
Ohio  Volunteers,  Colonel  Groesbeck;  Forty -third  Regiment  Ohio  Vol- 
unteers, Colonel  Smith. 

Second  Brigade,  Col.  J.  B.  Plummer,  Eleventh  Missouri  Volunteers, 
commanding : Eleventh  Missouri  Volunteers,  Col.  J.  B.  Plummer; 
Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers,  Colonel  Loomis;  Sixty-third  Ohio 
Volunteers,  Colonel  Sprague. 

Eleventh  Ohio  Battery,  Battalion  First  U.  S.  Infantry,  Seventh  Illi- 
nois Cavalry,  two  companies  Engineer  Regiment  are  for  the  present 
assigned  for  duty  with  this  division. 

Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the 


division. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : 


SPEED  BUTLER, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Commerce,  February  28,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

My  whole  command  is  on  the  march.  I join  it  to-morrow  night  at 
Sikeston.  Further  instructions  will  reach  me  here  to-day.  I would 
be  glad  to  know  when  the  demonstration  on  Columbus  and  the  move- 
ment of  Steele  to  Oak  Grove  will  be  made.  Steele  ought  to  move  cer- 
tainly to-morrow  morning  or  sooner.  Enemy  re-enforcing  Hew  Madrid 
from*  Randolph.  I will  be  upon  them  before  they  can  make  much 
preparation.  Have  only  eighteen  pieces  of  artillery,  of  small  caliber. 
Hope  to  meet  more  from  Cairo.  Please  order  forward  wagons,  &c. 

JHO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


3 hap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


573 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  28,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Sherman,  Paducah: 

Send  Ohio  regiments  as  fast  as  armed  to  General  Pope’s  command,  to 
land  at  Bird’s  Point  or  Commerce,  as  General  Cullum  may  direct.  Also 
ill  available  field  artillery.  No  danger  now  of  an  attack  on  Paducah. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 

No.  42.  j Commerce , .Mo.,  February  28,  1862. 

Col.  Gordon  Granger,  Second  Michigan  Cavalry,  is  assigned  to  the 
iommand  of  all  the  cavalry  of  this  army,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  re- 
jected accordingly. 

All  reports  and  returns  will  be  made  through  him. 

By  order  of  General  Pope  : 

SPEED  BUTLEE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


leneral  Halleck: 


Cairo,  February  28,  1862. 


General  Paine,  just  from  Bertrand,  reports  that  Jeff.  Thompson  passed 
lorth  through  Sikeston  with  250  cavalry  and  six  pieces  of  artillery  this 
aoming  at  daylight.  He  is  in  a trap,  Pope’s  advance  guard  being  at 
lenton,  and  Colonel  Morgan,  with  750  infantry  and  60  cavalry,  reached 
hkeston  at  daylight  this  morning  in  Thompson’s  rear.  Four  hundred 
afantry  and  600  cavalry  will  re-enforce  Morgan  to-night.  Eepairing 
ailroad  rapidly. 

G.  W.  CULLUM, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  February  28,  1862. 
JoL  George  W.  Deitzler, 

Acting  Brigadier- General,  Fort  Scott , Kans.: 

Sir  : Immediately  on  receipt  of  your  express  dispatch,  dated  26th 
istant  and  received  but  an  hour  since  (12  m.),  I have  directed  the 
oncentration  by  forced  marches  of  the  following  troops  at  Fort  Scott, 
rhere  they  will  report  for  duty. 

Colonel  Doubleday’s  brigade,  consisting  of  Second  Ohio  Cavalry, 
hnth  and  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  also  First  Kansas,  now  at 
iawrence,  forming  portion  of  your  own  brigade. 

The  orders  to  these  regiments  to  move  by  forced  marches  were  per- 
mptory,  of  which  copies  will  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible,  and  should 
ny  of  the  regiments  fail  to  report  within  due  time  you  will  not  fail  to 
old  the  commanding  officers  to  their  strict  military  responsibility. 

Should  you  require  the  services  of  Colonel  Jennison’s  brigade  (he 
unking  you),  you  will  use  your  discretion  in  sending  for  him  if  you 
hink  it  necessary. 

1 will  endeavor  to  send  you  a field  battery  at  the  earliest  possible 
loment,  as  I am  organizing  it  now. 


574  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIeI 

You  will  report  tlie  concentration  of  these  troops  under  your  com! 
mand  and  prepare  to  take  the  field  immediately. 

You  will  also  employ  some  good  Indian  scouts,  acquainted  with  th 
country  south  of  you,  in  the  direction  of  General  Curtis’  command,  an* 
obtain  all  the  information  from  them  you  can,  which  will  be  transmitter 
to  these  headquarters  by  express.  _ A , .3 

I have  telegraphed  these  proceedings  to  General  Hunter,  who  is  11 
communication  by  telegraph  with  department  headquarters. 

I have  also  telegraphed  the  substance  of  your  communication  and  th 
re-enforcements  sent  you  to  headquarters  Department  of  the  Missour 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant 

CHAS.  G.  HALPIiSE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General.  « 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  28,  1862.  } 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Fayetteville , Arlc. : 

Carry  out  the  general  instructions  of  the  22d.  Vary  the  details  a 
circumstances  may  require.  General  Hunter  will  soon  move  with  o, 00 
men  on  your  right  flank.  All  you  have  to  do  now  is  to  hold  your  pos 
tion  and  keep  the  enemy  south  of  Boston  Mountains.  I will  turn  thei 
in  a few  weeks  and  cut  off  their  supplies.  I have  kept  Colonel  Wyma: 

at  Rolla.  It  will  not  do  yet  to  weaken  that  post 

H.  YV.  HALL/li/U lv, 

Maior-  General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Division, 

Camp  Hallech , Cross  Hollow , February  28,  1862. 

Capt.  T.  I.  McKenny, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : Colonel  Dodge  came  in  this  morning  with  all  the  men  an 
teams  he  had  at  the  Eagle  Mills;  he  regretted  very  much  to  leave  then 
and  says  the  inhabitants  begged  him  to  stay.  Blackburn,  the  ownei 
is  very  fearful  that  the  mills  will  be  burned. 

The  Texans  camped  not  far  from  the  mills,  both  going  and  returning 
They  report  about  the  same  that  our  own  people  do,  viz,  that  the 
burned  4 wagons  and  got  about  40  horses.  They  sent  word  to  Colon* 
Dodge  that  if  he  did  not  leave  the  mills  by  12  m.  yesterday  they  worn 
come  and  hang  every  d— d Yankee  there.  Dodge,  however,  was  nc 
quite  ready  to  leave  and  the  Texans  thought  better  of  it. 

Dodge  says  that  there  are  but  two  passages  through  the  country  rroi 
Huntsville  towards  Crossville,  one  by  Blackburn’s  and  the  other  h 
Van  Winkle’s,  3 miles  off.  He  says  the  whole  country  can  be  controue 
by  a picket  at  the  mills,  supported  by  a regiment  at  White  Five 

Crossing  I 

I have  just  returned  from  a reconnaissance  as  far  as  the  crossing  c 
White  River,  7 miles  from  here,  from  which  place  I sent  my  aide  direc 
to  Sugar  Creek  (Trott’s),  said  to  be  5 to  10  miles  from  there.  He  iia 

not  returned.  ,,  , 

Colonel  Vandever  has  returned  from  reconnoitermg  the  road  iroi 
Camp  Benjamin  towards  Sugar  Creek.  It  comes  into  the  Telegrap 


Jhap.  xvin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  575 

'oad  about  half  way  from  here  to  the  battle  ground,  making  it  a dis- 
tance of  about  7 miles  from  Camp  Benjamin  to  that  place. 

Owing  to  the  scarcity  of  the  water  and  its  bad  quality,  caused  by  its 
oeing  constantly  disturbed  and  the  changes  contemplated  by  the  gen- 
eral, I would  respectfully  recommend  that  he  permit  me  to  move  my 
*,ainp  to  the  vicinity  of  the  mills,  near  the  rebel  camp,  leaving  one  regi- 
nent  and  two  or  more  pieces  here  and  sending  one  regiment  and  two 
)ieces  to  White  River  Crossing,  and  retaking  possession  of  the  Eagle 
dills.  The  mills  near  the  rebel  camp  have  been  turned  over  to  General 
hgel,  though  it  seems  to  me  that  there  are  as  many  mills  on  his  side 
is  on  ours,  now  that  the  Eagle  Mills  are  abandoned/ 

Forage  also  is  becoming  very  scarce,  and  we  have  now  to  send  over 
0 miles  for  it. 

With  the  approbation  of  the  general  I propose  to  send  Colonel  Van- 
lever  on  a reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of  Huntsville.  He  is  very 
mxious  to  go,  and  wishes  to  take  500  infantry,  two  pieces,  and  200 
avalry.  Colonel  Dodge  says  that  the  mountains  are  so  precipitous 
hat  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  flank  us  and  that  the  enemy  has 
lothing  but  cavalry  in  that  direction,  and  to  prevent  him  from  harass- 
ng  us  we  must  worry  him.  Unless  the  general  objects,  Colonel  Van- 
lever  will  start  to-morrow  morning. 

Both  Colonel  Dodge  and  Colonel  Vandever  agree  with  me  in  the 
>roject  of  moving  camp,  except  they  do  not  wish  to  leave  so  strong  a 
orce  here.  We  would  be  glad  to  have  the  general  move  his  head- 
[uarters  nearer  to  us. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  A.  CARR, 

Colonel , Commanding  Division . 

P.  S. — As  Dodge  left  the  mills,  a fire,  which  he  thought  a signal,  was 
ighted  on  a hill.  I send  some  letters  which  got  into  my  camp  to-day. 
'wo  of  my  men  killed  one  Texan  and  wounded  another  day  before 
esterday. 


Jefferson  City,  February  28, 1862. 

lajor-General  Halleok  : 

Rebel  recruits  cut  off  from  joining  Price,  reported  1,000  strong,  are 
ommitting  depredations  on  left  bank  of  Osage,  near  Osceola. 

THOS.  J.  McKEAK, 

Brigadier-  General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , February  28,  1862. 

•rig.  Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Jefferson  City: 

Take  such  forces  as  you  require  and  capture  the  rebels  at  Osceola, 
ou  have  them  fast  between  you  and  Curtis.  Don’t  let  them  dodge 
ou.  Move  rapidly  and  promptly. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


576  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvul 


War  Department, 
Washington , D.  <7.,  February  28,  1862. 


Hon.  Hannibal  Hamlin, 

President  of  the  Senate  : 

Sie  • I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  copies  of  two  letters,  on 
from  the  office  of  the  Adjutant-General  to  the  Surgeon-General  ordei 
ine  medical  supplies  and  blanks,  and  the  other  from  the  Adjutant-Gei 
eral  to  General  Hunter,  in  relation  to  his  command  over  the  troops  fo 
General  Lane’s  expedition,*  which  contain  all  the  information  bearm 
on  the  resolution  of  the  Senate  of  the  4th  instant  calling  for  informs 
tion  in  relation  to  the  military  command  in  Kansas  m possession  (I 
this  Department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient^ervant,  ^ STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War.  i 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 

Washington , D.  (7.,  December  31,  1861. 

Surg.  Gen.  0.  A.  Finley,  U.  S.  A.,  Washington : 

Sie  • I have  respectfully  to  inform  you  that  four  regiments  of  infantr; 
seven  regiments  of  cavalry,  three  batteries  of  artillery,  besides  Kansa 
troops,  from  8,000  to  10,000,  and  about  4,000  Indians,  forming  an  a* 
gregate  of  about  27,000  troops,  are  ordered  to  be  concentrated  ne* 
Fort  Leavenworth,  for  whom  medical  supplies,  blanks,  &c.,  will  be  rc. 
quired  at  an  early  day. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  K D.  TOWNSEND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Cairo,  February  28,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  M.  C.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster -General,  Washington , D.  u.: 

Sir  : I have  received  from  the  army  about  600  soldiers;  some  of  thei 
volunteers  and  some  detailed  or  drafted  for  the  gunboat  service,  x 
regular  list  of  them  has  been  sent,  but  a bundle  of  descriptive  list 
with  a statement  of  their  accounts,  have  been  heaped  together. 

The  soldiers  are  very  much  dissatisfied,  as  they  were  not  paid  up  fl 
the  army  to  the  date  of  their  transfer,  which  I desired  to  be  done. 

I have  therefore  directed  the  several  commanders  of  the  gunboats  t 
have  these  men  put  on  the  muster  roll  of  their  vessels  as  seamen,  pa 
ing  them  at  the  rate  of  $18  per  month,  without  any  reference  to  the 
army  accounts,  which  I hope  will  meet  with  your  approval  At  t 
same  time  it  is  desirable  that  these  men  should  be  paid  up  to  the  tin 
they  volunteered  for  this  service. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ FOOTE 

Flag-Officer , Commanding  Naval  Forces  Western  Waters. 


See  Thomas  to  Hunter,  January  24,  p.  525. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


577 


ap.  x yiii.  ] 


ipt. 


Headquarters  Camp  Haeleck, 

March  1,  1862. 

N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 


Tlie  enemy’s  cavalry  is  crowding  my  flanks  and  attacking  my  lor 
ing  parties.  A lieutenant  and  6 men  of  Carlin’s  battery  were  cap- 
red  about  9 miles  west  of  me  by  Texan  Rangers  yesterday,  although 
had  two  cavalry  patrols  as  far  forward  as  Fayetteville.  My  cavalry 
ems  weary  and  worn  down.  I need  1,000  cavalry  horses  and  double 
\f  cavalry  force.  The  quartermasters  should  constantly  furnish  a 
pply  for  natural  depletion  of  stock  in  the  field,  which  is  estimated 
1 per  cent,  per  month.  Foraging  here  needs  cavalry  protection.  The 
lin  force  of  enemy  is  at  last  stated.  I have  lost  no  train.  My  ex- 
ess  comes  in  regularly,  but  rebel  bands  are  numerous  in  the  country. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Camp  Halleck , Ark.,  March  1,  1862. 

1 have  received  a private  communication  from  an  intelligent  writer, 
iitizen  of  Arkansas,  who  says : 

Ve,  as  citizens,  have  left  our  homes  and  firesides  for  the  purpose,  as  we  supposed,  of 
/iug  to  defend  ourselves  against  a brutal  soldiery,  that  would  lay  waste  our  humble 
nes  and  outrage  the  chastity  of  our  wives  and  daughters  and  place  our  own  lives 
; eopardy.  We  have  organized  what  is  called  Home  Guard  companies,  partly  of  Union 
n and  partly  of  Southern  men,  all  of  whom  are  anxious  to  return  to  their  homes, 
are  happy  to  find  you  and  your  men  are  not  composed  of  that  class  of  persons  com- 
ply called  jayhawkers,  who  do  not  regard  the  rights  of  citizens  and  property,  but 
line  the  war  to  its  “legitimate  object.” 

The  falsehoods  circulated  concerning  us  have  driven  thousands  from 
hr  homes,  and  I take  the  liberty  of  responding  publicly  to  the  senti- 
nts  expressed  by  the  writer,  because  these  falsehoods  have  involved 
s whole  community  in  the  troubles  which  he  seeks  to  mitigate. 

The  only  legitimate  object  of  the  war  is  peace,  and  the  writer  only 
3s  me  justice  when  he  says  I adhere  to  this  legitimate  object.  Peace- 
e citizens  shall  be  protected  as  far  as  possible.  I act  under  strict 
lers  of  Major-General  Halleck.  The  flight  of  our  foes  from  their 
nps,  and  the  imitation  of  their  conduct  by  the  citizens,  in  fleeing  from 
;ir  homes,  leaving  their  effects  abandoned  as  it  were  for  their  victors, 
i much  embarrassed  me  in  my  efforts  to  preserve  discipline  in  my  com 
nd,  as  these  circumstances  offered  extraordinary  temptations, 
the  burning  of  farms  and  fields  of  grain  in  Missouri  and  extensive 
Tacks  and  valuable  mills  in  Arkansas  by  the  enemy  has  induced 
no  resentments  on  the  part  of  my  troops,  which  I have  severely  pun- 
ed.  Necessary  supplies  for  my  command  could  not  keep  up  with  my 
>id  movements,  and  peaceable  citizens  not  being  at  home  to  sell  them 
my  quartermasters,  I am  compelled  to  take  them  without  purchase4, 
'king  settlement  difficult  and  doubtful,  occasioning  irregularities 
1 ich  I have  labored  to  counteract.  If  peaceably-disposed  citizens  will 
y at  home  or  return  home  and  check  the  clandestine,  stealthy  war- 
'C  that  is  carried  on  under  the  cover  and  cloak  of  peaceable  citizens, 

1 ch  of  the  havoc  of  war  will  be  avoided  and  many  poor  families  can 
'protected  from  distress  and  misery.  I have  followed  the  war-path 
37  r r — VOL  viii 


578  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chai\  XV 


through  the  entire  State  of  Missouri ; have  seen  the  havoc  aud  devasta  t 
tion  surrounding  it,  and  I deplore  the  prospect  of  these  disasters  mth  , 

V1  Armed^me^in  the&  garb  of  citizens  are  concealed  by  citizens,  am 
the  unfortunate  condition  of  Missouri  will  be  transferred  to  ArkansaJ 
if  vou  allow  this  complicity  of  yourselves  m the  struggle.  It  > ou  d 
not  discriminate  by  requiring  soldiers  to  wear  some  distinctive  badgJ 

vnii  11111st  not  complain  if  we  cannot  discriminate.  . J 

T1  lere  is  no  honor,  no  glory,  no  good  that  can  be  gained  by  taking  up  ai  iru  i 
in  this  wav  to  defend  vour  homes,  for  we  do  not  wish  to  molest  them  u 
vou  are  neaceably  disposed.  We  only  wish  to  put  down  rebellion  In 
making  war  against  those  in  arms,  their  aiders,  and  abettoKj.  AtecomJ 
to  vindicate  the  Constitution,  to  preserve  and 

e-ions  liberty  under  a flag  that  was  embalmed  in  the  blood  ot  our  rove 
fuZiaiV ^fathers  Under  that  flag  we  have  lived  in  peace  and  pros 
neritv  until  the  flag  of  rebellion  involved  us  in  the  horrors  ot  civil  wai 
Pwi  have  restored  the  Stars  and  Stripes  to  Northwestern  Arkansal 
i r,™  o-iad  to  find  many  who  rejoice  to  see  the  emblem  oi  ten 
former  glory  and  hope  for  a restoration  of  the  Peace  and  happiness  the! 
li ‘i  vp  onioved  under  its  folds.  A surrender  to  such  a flag  is  onlj  a r| 
turn  to  your  natural  allegiance,  and  is  more  honorable > than  to  persij 
in  ‘i  rebellion  that  surrenders  to  the  national  power  at  loit  1 

and"  Donelson,  at  Nashville  and  Roanoke,  and  thoughout  the  mol 
powerful  Southern  States.  Why  then  shall  ^he  West  be  | 

prolong  a struggle  which  the  States  ot  Maryland,  Yirgmia,  Kentuck. 
North  Carolina,  and  Tennessee  cannot  successfully  maintMn?  |i 
Disband  your  companies ; surrender  y0ur  arms;  for  m all  mstanc| 
where  men  in  arms  have  voluntarily  surrendered  and  token  the oath 
allegiance  to  our  common  country  they  have  been  discharged.  £ 
prisoners  have,  to  my  knowledge,  been  shot  or  hung  orcruellj  tieatej 

byiknow  of  no  instance  where  my  troops  have  treated  females  wij 
v iolence  and  I have  not  heard  of  a complaint  ot  the  kmc . 1 

the  troops  kindness,  protection,  and  support  for 
1 shall  to  the  best  of  my  ability  maintain  our  counti  j s g . 
sas  and  continue  to  make  relentless  war  on  its  foes,  but  shall  lejoio 
see  the  restoration  of  peace  in  all  the  States  and  Territories  of  W 
country;  that  peace  which  we  formerly  enjoyed  and  earnestly  dedr 
and  I implore  for  each  and  all  of  us  that  ultimate,  eternal  pea  , <j 
the  world  cannot  give  or  take  away.77 

1 have  the  honor  to  he,  very  respectfuUy, ^obedient  |ervant, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest. 


Saint  Louis,  March 


1.  1862. 


Brig  Gen.  Fred.  Steele,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.: 

General:  You  will  immediately  proceed  to  Pilot  Knob  and  to 
i ^r.11  fiio  in  Southeastern  Missouri  west  ot  the 

Pinncts  River  Add  Sl  troops  ^11  be  immediately  assigned,  soj 
SKor  Command  to  iron,  4,000  to  5 (.00  men  Your  hrst  o 6 

will  be  to  drive  back  or  capture  the  enemy£  *Xb  a s a n l destroy  r 
near  the  Arkansas  line;  then  proceed  to  locahontas  ami  aesn 
enemy’s  stores  not  required  for  your  own  use;  then  go  tc  < 


AP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


579 


r the  same  purpose.  It  is  reported  here  that  the  enemy  has  stores  at 
atesville.  If  so,  you  will  send  a party  to  that  place  to  destroy  them. 
‘ you  succeed  in  accomplishing  these  objects  and  the  country  is  open 
•r  farther  advance  south,  proceed  to  Helena,  occupy  and  fortify  that 
ace,  so  as  to  cut  off  steamboat  communication  with  Memphis/  It  is 
’obable,  however,  that  by  that  time  I shall  have  succeeded  in  turning 
emphis  by  the  east  bank  of  the  river. 

On  an  expedition  of  this  kind  you  can  carry  with  you  but  very  few 
ipplies  except  small  stores.  For  forage  meat,  and  flour  you  must 
‘pend  upon  the  country  passed  over.  The  quartermaster  will  be 
pplied  with  money  to  pay  for  these.  When  the  money  is  exhausted 
' wiP  give  certificates.  If  the  people  will  not  sell  at  reasonable 
ices  or  if  you  have  no  money  to  pay,  you  will  make  forcible  requisi- 
>ns.  It  is  reported  that  the  country  is  well  supplied  with  cane,  which 
11  serve  as  forage  for  your  animals.  Moreover,  it  is  believed  that 
u may  partly  supply  yourself  from  enemy’s  stores  at  Pocahontas, 
cksonport,  and  Batesville.  The  success  of  your  expedition  will 
pend  in  a great  measure  upon  the  rapidity  of  your  movements. 
)ur  train  will  therefore  be  made  up  partly  of  wagons  and  partly  of 
ck-mules.  Extra  pack-saddles  should  be  taken  with  you,  for  use  in 
se  you  are  obliged  to  abandon  your  wagons.  It  will"  be  necessary 
r you  to  move  with  great  caution  and  to  keep  your  forces  well  in 
nd  and  together.  The  militia  force  at  Pilot  Knob  will  be  left  to 
ard  that  depot. 

I have  marked  in  red  on  the  map  sent  herewith*  the  probable  route, 
derived  from  the  best  information  I can  obtain  here.  You  will  get 

tter  from  your  own  guides,  and  can  vary  from  it  wherever  you  deem 
st.  Possibly  you  may  be  able  to  get  steam  transportation  from 
cksonport  to  near  Lawrenceville,  and  cross  over  from  that  point  to 
dena.  The  land  route,  however,  appears  to  me  the  preferable  one. 
e route  marked  between  the  Saint  Francis  and  White  Bivers  is  said 
be  a dry,  sandy  ridge,  with  no  streams  to  cross,  but  with  plenty  of 
od  water  and  an  abundance  of  canes  on  each  side  for  forage. 

[f  y°u  find  the  enemy  in  too  large  force  to  attack  at  any  place,  you 

II  fall  back  for  re-enforcements.  If  Columbus  and  Bandolph  should 
evacuated  and  the  enemy  makes  his  stand  at  Memphis,  we  can  land 
orce  above  that  city  and  re-enforce  you  by  Mount  Vernon. 

Keep  the  objects  of  your  expedition  a profound  secret.  Do  not 
nmunicate  it  even  to  officers  of  your  staff.  Give  it  out  at  first  that 
i are  to  move  on  New  Madrid,  and  after  you  pass  that  place  that 
cahontas  is  to  be  the  only  object,  and  so  on  as  you  advance.  Be 
eful  in  selecting  your  guides,  and  make  inquiries  about  roads  in 
ay  direction,  so  as  to  deceive  them.  The  object  of  expeditions 
cn  leaks  out  through  guides.  Moreover,  they  are  frequently  spies, 

0 are  with  you  for  a time,  and  then  escape  to  the  enemy  with  valu- 
e information.  Watch  your  guides  very  closely  and  permit  none 
escape. 

teep  me  informed  of  all  your  movements  by  sending  messengers  to 
jirest  telegraph  station.  The  line  will  soon  be  extended  to  Saint 
mcisville.  In  your  dispatches  merely  state  what  you  have  done 

1 what  the  enemy  is  doing,  but  not  a word  as  to  what  you  intend  to 
lest  they  fall  into  the  enemy’s  hands.  In  these  dispatches  you  will 
1 Pitman’s  Ferry  “ Harper’s,”  Pocahontas  “ Virginia  City,”  Jack- 
Mport  “Nashville,”  Batesville  “ Saint  Louis,”  and  Helena  “Salem.” 


Not  found. 


580  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIC.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH| 


This  expedition,  if  fully  successful,  will  be  one  of  the  most  importai  i 
of  the8 whole  campaign.  It  will  require  all  your  activity,  energy,  tact, 
and  perseverance,  and  very  likely  will  test  the  lighting  qualities  , 

your  command.  , , . , . 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  jjALLECK, 

Major-General.  4 


SiKESTON,  March  1,  1862.  J 

Maior-General  Halleck:  I 

A portion  of  our  advance  guard,  consistmgofsixcompaTnesSeveni 
Illinois  Cavalry,  encountered  reconnoitermg  force  of  the  enemy  o mil 
south  of  this  place  this  afternoon.  After  a short  skirmish  the  eneni 
lied  precipitately  towards  New  Madrid,  leaving  in  our  possession  thr| 
pieces  of  rifled  artillery.  One  captain,  one  lieutenant,  and  severalpl 
vates  were  taken  prisoners.  From  the  prisoners  I learn  tha.t  New  M 
rid  is  occupied  by  four  brigades  of  infantry,  numbering  about  10,OCJ 
900  'cavalrv,  and  four  batteries  of  field  artillery.  Another  brigade 
expected  to-night.  The  prisoners  also  state  that  the  enemy^sjj 
idly  evacuating  Columbus  and  occupying  Island  No.  10.  Alycommaij 
is  all  well  up  to  this  point  and  well  in  hand.  I shall  push  forwal 
to-morrow,  and  unless  the  enemy  is  more  re-enforced  than  is  now  ej 
pected  I think  we  are  more  than  a match  for  him.  If  consistent  wi 
vour  arrangements,  I would  be  glad  if  a considerable  force  could 
advanced  from  Bird’s  Point  as  far  as  Oak  Grove,  so  as  to  assure  r 

communications.  JUO  POPE, 

Briaadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 

Siheston , March  1,  1862. 

General  G.  W.  Cullum:  I 

I reached  here  to-night  with  my  command.  This  afternoon,  about 
o’clock,  a portion  of  my  advanced  guard,  consisting  of  six  companiMj 
Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  encountered  reconnoitermg  party  of  the  enei 
about  3 miles  south  of  this  place.  This  party  had  been  drawn  up 
engage  a company  of  the  First  Illinois  Cavalry  and  a portion  of  t 
Tenth  Illinois  Infantry.  These  troops,  being  so  much  exhausted 
long  pursuit  of  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  Benton,  ga\e  place  tot 
six  Companies  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  which  charged  the  ( 
emv  and  completely  routed  him.  The  enemy  had  occupied  a narr< 
causeway  pursued  bv  the  road,  with  three  pieces  of  rifled  artillery 
small  caliber.  This  battery  was  carried  handsomely  by  the  charge 
the  Seventh  Illinois,  and  has  fallen  into  our  possession.  The 
fled  precipitately  towards  New  Madrid,  and  was  pursued  to  within 
miles* of  that  town.  One  captain,  one  lieutenant,  and  sei  eral  I.riTO 
were  captured.  The  pieces  of  artillery  are  of  small  caliber,  Drew 
loading, beautifully  rifled,  and  handsomely  mounted  on  fonr  whco 
drawn  by  two  horses  each.  They  have  an  ingenious  repeating  «1 1 
ratus  at  the  breech,  and  were  undoubtedly  made  foi  sei  1 - . , 

swampy,  low  region.  From  the  prisoners  I learn  that  New  Alai  i 
obupiS  by  four  brigades  of  infantry,  numbering  about  10,006,  . 


u . XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  581 

valry,  and  four  batteries  of  field  artillery;  another  brigade  is  ex- 
ited to-night.  The  prisoners  also  state  that  the  enemy  is  rapidly 
acuatiug  Columbus  and  occupying  Island  No.  10.  My  command  is  all 
to  this  point  and  well  in  hand.  I shall  push  forward  to-morrow, 
d,  unless  the  enemy  is  more  re-enforced  than  is  now  expected,  I 
ink  we  are  more  than  a match  for  him.  If  consistent  with  your  ar- 
igements,  I would  be  glad  if  a considerable  force  could  be  advanced 
>m  Bird’s  Point  as  far  as  Oak  Grove,  so  as  to  assure  my  communica- 
ns.  I was  surprised  on  my  arrival  here,  in  view  of  your  letter  of  the 
th,  to  find  that  all  the  force  sent  forward  by  you  from  Bird’s  Point 
ve  returned,  for  reasons  which  I am  unable  to  understand. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Cairo,  March  1,  1862. 

bjor-General  Halleok  : 

Morgan’s  regiment  and  two  companies  First  Illinois  Cavalry  pushed 
rth,  pursuing  Jeff.  Thompson,  who  is  fleeing  towards  Indian  Eiver. 
ptured  three  rebel  guns.  Met  General  Hamilton’s  advance  cavalry, 
1 whole  in  pursuit  of  enemy.  Light  visible  all  the  evening  in  direc 
n of  Columbus. 

G.  W.  CULLUM, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  March  1,  1862. 

ouel  Carlin,  Pilot  Knob : 

'ush  forward  another  regiment  on  Greenville  and  cavalry  to  Saint 
incisville.  Jeff.  Thompson  is  between  Sikeston  and  Benton;  we 
upy  both  places.  His  only  avenue  of  escape  is  by  Bloomfield. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  1,  1862. 

gadier-General  Cullum,  Cairo: 

ransportation  is  going  down  the  river  for  General  Pope  as  rapidly 
we  can  collect  it.  If  he  can  reach  the  river  a little  above  New 
lrid  and  out  of  the  reach  of  their  guns,  he  may  cut  off  all  re-en- 
\ aments  from  Columbus.  Consult  Commodore  Foote,  and  with  Pope 
a day  for  the  attack  on  New  Madrid  and  a mortar  bombardment  of 
umbus.  My  idea  of  the  demonstration  on  Columbus  is  to  anchor 
mortar  boats  near  the  bank  on  the  Belmont  side,  so  as  to  be  covered, 
use  the  gunboats  mainly  to  defend  them.  The  gunboats  should 
1 uiuch  exposed,  but  should  reserve  themselves  for  the  real  attack, 
end  copy  of  this  to  General  Pope. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


582 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [C»Ar.  XVl| 


Headquarters  of  the  Missouri  State  Militia,  J 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  March  1,  1862.1 

Gen.  T.  J.  McKean,  Commanding , &c. : . . , 

General  • I have  received  information  from  officers  recruiting  f| 
the  State  service  that  the  rebels  are  gathering  m considerable  for*  1 
Johnson  and  Henry  counties,  particularly  about  Clinton,  producing! 
re"gn  of  terror  and  rendering  it  impossible  for  the  militia  to  organize  t 
their  own  defense.  I have  no  troops  under  my  command  nvhich  Iff 
dispose  of  for  the  purpose  of  giving  the  protection  necessary  in  thol 
counties  nor  would  I desire  to  order  a movement  of  troops  m your  dj 
trict  if  I had  them  ready  for  service,  my  policy  being  to  direct  mijitl 
companies  to  report  for  duty  to  the  district  commander  as  soon  as  tin 

alI  hop^'bf  abte  te  ^ace  uiMcr  your  command  several  battalions 
militiadn  a very  short  time.  Meanwhile,  if  you  can  use  any  forcel 
vour  disposal  in  giving  the  protection  which  seems  so  much  needed » 
Johnson  and  Henry  counties,  I have  no  doubt  the  organization  of  I 
State  troops  will  be  much  facilitated.  I have  addressed  a letter  to  t* 
commanding  officer  at  Sedalia  on  the  subject,  having  been  in  torn  I 
that  you  were  absent  from  your  headquarters.  I presume,  howen 
he  wdl  not  feel  at  liberty  to- act  without  your  orders;  lienee  I tioub 

^Wilfyodlfedi'kiml1,1  general , as  to  inform  me  what  you  can  do  in  ti 
matter, yand  greatly  oblige,  very  respectfully,  your  o^dien^servl  . 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Missouri  Militia- 


March  3,  1862—11.30  a.  m 


Saint  Louis, 

Mai.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan: 

Tt  is  officiallv  reported  that  General  Jeff.  Thompson,  with  a large  par 
of cavMrv Tndartillery,  came  north  from  New  Madrid.  Our  forces  i 
vanced  from  Bird’s  Point  and  cut  his  force  at  Sikeston.  He  was  p 
lued Into  the  swamps  by  the  cavalry  of  General  Hamilton  and  Ooto 
Morgan’s  brigade,  and  three  pieces  of  artillery  captured.  General  Pc 
mirsued  the  other  detachment  south,  capturing  three  more  artille 
1 captain,  1 lieutenant,  and  a number  of  privates.  gALi/ECK, 

Major - General 


Camp  Two  Miles  North  of  New^Madeid,^ 


Major-General  Halleck  : PllRy 

Arrived  before  this  place  with  my  whole  torce  at  1 p.  m. 
skirmishers  of  two  divisions  into  the  t°wn,  and  o^ipecU  wbw  « 1 
of  it  immediately.  There  is  only  a small  squaie  earth  redo  u t 
thiq  T)hme  The  river  is  high  ami  level  with  the  banks— -so  nig  , 
the8 gunboatsTof  wldcli  there  are  six,  sweep  the  ground  tor  a mil 
front  of  the  town.  I think  the  enemy’s  whole  force  does  mdexc 
5 000  men,  all  of  whom  are  kept  carefully  out  ot  si^ht.  ' 
the  work  by  much  loss  and  without  the  result  desired,  as  the  gu  ^b  ^ 
owing  to  the  extraordinary  high  water,  could  dm  e us  out 


Uhap.  XVIII.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


583 


[ ought  to  have  siege  guns,  but  in  the  absence  of  them  I shall  to-mor- 
row night  line  the  river  banks  above  the  town  with  narrow  rifle  pits 
ind  sink  four  pieces  of  rifled  and  Parrott  batteries  of  single  pieces 
letween  the  pits.  In  this  way  I think  we  can  hold  our  own  along  the 
shores  against  the  gunboats  and  absolutely  close  the  river  to  transports. 

I shall  to-morrow  occupy  strong  position  with  my  command,  so  as 
x>  support  the  rifle-pit  batteries.  I do  not  know  if  this  will  succeed, 
mt,  it  seems  the  best  I can  do  without  heavy  artillery.  The  river  is  so 
ligh  that  the  hulls  of  the  gunboats  are  plainly  visible,  and  their  guns 
ook  over  the  bank,  with  a sweep  at  least  a mile  and  a half.  Stopped 
10  small -arms  of  any  kind  at  Commerce,  and  shall  order  them  to  Cairo 
f any  are  there.  My  regiments  all  came  armed.  If  the  gunboats  leave 
lere  I take  the  works. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  3,  1862. 

Irigadier-General  Sherman  and  Brigadier- General  Cullum, 

Cairo  : 

Re-enforce  General  Pope  at  once  with  all  available  forces  from  Bird’s 
kiint,  Cairo,  and  Paducah.  There  is  now  no  danger  of  an  attack  upon 
ither  of  these  places.  Move  a force  on  Oak  Grove,  to  protect  Pope’s 
tank.  I am  sending  down  everything  I can  collect  here.  Re-enforce 
>ope  with  everything  you  can  find.  There  must  be  no  failure  in  his 
aovement.  Attack  Columbus  as  soon  as  possible.  Say  to  Commodore 
k)ote  that  time  now  is  everything. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Camp  Halleck,  Ark.,  March  3,  1862. 

apt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Nothing  important  here.  The  main  force  of  the  enemy  is  still  in 
Boston  Mountains,  gathering  re-enforcements,  as  he  says,  to  march 
gainst  me.  Since  my  last  I have  learned  that  he  burned  the  mills 
nd  cotton  factories  at  Cane  Hill  and  a large  mill  9 miles  south  of 
ayetteville. 

Respectfully, 

SAME.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadi  er- Genera  l . 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Camp  Hallech , March  3,  1862. 
rig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  Commanding  Division: 

General  : Yours  of  this  morning  is  duly  received.*  I shall  remaiu 
Bre  Cross  Hollow  till  you  move  around  to  Sugar  Creek,  when  we 
ust  intrench  ourselves.  I hope  your  movement  will  secure  a thor- 
Jgh  knowledge  of  the  country  and  roads  passing  around  our  Sugar 


Not  found. 


584 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Oiur.  srai 


Creek  statiou.  The  Third  Iowa  reconnoitered  within  5 miles  of  Fajl 
etteville  to-day  : there  was  no  sign  of  any  movement ; hut  the  peopl«l 
sneak  of  continued  augmentation  of  the  enemy’s  forces. 

1 The  mill  run  by  Colonel  Dodge— Blackman’s  Mill,  16  miles  southeaj 
of  this  place— was  burned  last  night  by  the  rebels,  and  they  also  burne] 

considerable  forage  in  that  region.  , , 

Other  matters  of  interest  will  be  communicated  when  we  meet 
Sugar  Creek,  which  must  be  soon,  as  I desire  our  camp  to  be  arrangi 
in  view  of  some  defenses. 

I am,  general,  &c.,  SAML.  E.  CUETIS, 

Briaadier-  General , Commanding. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  March  3,  1862.  ij 


To  the  Police  Commissioners, 

Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Gentlemen  : The  city  policemen  are  in  the  habit  of  arresting  negro(j 
a as  runaways,”  and  frequently  arrest,  or  attempt  to  arrest,  the  serj 
ants  of  the  army  officers,  who  are  put  to  the  trouble  of  obtaining  ordel 
to  prevent  their  servants  from  being  taken  from  them  on  the  very  ej 
of  their  leaving  the  city.  This  is  exceedingly  annoying  to  officers  undj 
marching  orders.  They  do  not  desire  to  be  considered  as  resisting  an 
civil  process.  It  is  not  their  intention  nor  the  intention  of  the  militai 
authorities  to  interfere  with  or  prevent  the  owner  of  a slave  from  pd 
suing  his  legal  remedies  to  recover  his  slave,  but  I have  to  request  tk, 
hereafter  the  city  police  be  confined  in  their  arrests  of  negroes  as  ru» 
awavs  ” strictly  to  such  negroes  as  may  be  m a legal  manner  claim® 
by  liis  or  her  owner.  Negroes  must  be  arrested  as  runaways  J 
fugitives  from  labor  by  a writ  issued  from  a court  having  junsdictic 
of  the  case.  This  is  necessary  in  order  that  the  slave  may  have  tli 
opportunity  to  plead  the  act  of  Congress  of  July,  loo-i. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  gentlei^^^r  obed.erd  ^vaut, 

Provost-Marshal-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) 
No.  52.  f 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  3,  1862. , 

I In  order  that  commerce  may  follow,  with  the  post-office,  close  upj 
the*  advance  southward  of  the  Armies  of  the  Union,  the  following  reg 
hitions  are  established  for  the  present  conduct  of  the  restored  inti 
course  between  tbe  loyal  sections  of  the  Department  of  the  M.ssou 
and  the  country  on  the  Tennessee  and  Cumberlaiid  Eiveis . 

1 st  Steamboats  and  other  water  craft  running  in  the  trade  and  tia 
of  those  rivers  to  or  from  the  port  of  Saint  Louis,  or.  any  other  pc 
within  tlds  military  department,  must,  in  addition  to  the , customs 
registration  and  enrollment  required  by  the  revenue  laws  of  theUntw 
States  take  out  the  special  license  for  this  renewed  intercourse  win 
is  nc>w  provided  in  the  regulations  established  in  January  last  for  t! 
trade  and  transportation  ot  the  Mississippi  Kn  er. 

Sn,-l,  sneeial  license  must  be  issued  by  tL 


Xl  Such 'special  license  must  be  issued  by  the  superintendent 
transportation  in  the  city  of  Saint  Louis,  but  can  be  applied f or  U > •> 
surveyor  of  customs  within  this  department,  whose  certificate  that  , 
the  requisite  conditions  have  been  complied  with  by  the  app 


ii.  XVUI.1  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  585 

ist  accompany  the  application  when  forwarded  to  the  superintendent 
nesaid. 

3d.  Boats  engaging  in  this  trade  and  transportation  under  such 
ense  are,  of  course,  subject  to  the  revenue  laws  of  the  United 
ates,  and  must  comply  fully  and  faithfully  with  the  regulations  and 
structions  of  the  Treasury  Department,  now  in  force  or  which  may 
reafter  be  adopted,  for  the  control  of  the  commercial  and  personal 
ercourse  of  the  sections  under  view. 

II.  To  render  uniform  the  customs  now  in  a measure  governing  the 
ide  and  travel  of  the  interior  and  to  subserve  the  ends  of  order  and 
v it  is  further  directed — 

1st.  That  the  permit  system,  made  necessary  by  the  persistent  efforts 
persons  in  the  loyal  States  who  sympathize  with  those  engaged  in 
3 rebellion,  and  by  peddlers  and  corrupt  traffickers,  many  of  whom 
ve  come  from  disloyal  States  and  sections  expressly  for  this  purpose, 
smuggle  goods,  medicines,  and  other  supplies  through  to  the  insur 
tionists,  shall  be  enforced  on  the  Tennessee  and  the  Cumberland  as 
s on  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi. 

Jd.  That  the  examination  and  sealing  of  baggage  of  travelers,  in- 
duced mainly  by  reason  of  the  frequent  and  illegal  conveyance  of 
pkages  of  letters  to  and  fro  between  the  North  and  the  South  after  the 
hellion  had  destroyed  the  postal  facilities  of  the  latter  section,  be  ex- 
ded  by  the  custom-house  officers  so  as  to  embrace  the  country  on  the 
nnessee  and  Cumberland  Rivers $ and 

d.  That  water  craft,  railroad  cars,  and  all  ordinary  wheeled  vehicles 
until  otherwise  ordered,  prohibited  from  conveying  into  the  country 
the  Tennessee  and  Cumberland  baggage  not  sealed  and  merchan- 
e not  covered  by  custom-house  permits  or  shipped  by  military  au- 

•nty. 

II.  These  orders  are  issued  only  as  a measure  of  safety,  to  guard 
unst  illegal  or  improper  intercourse  and  exchanges  of  commodities, 
l are  not  intended  to  impose  additional  expenses  or  burdens  of  any 
d upon  trade,  or  to  impede  or  in  any  manner  interfere  with  the 
!3dom  of  legitimate  and  proper  transportation  or  travel.  Conse- 
pntly — 

st.  No  cl  targe  will  be  made  by  the  superintendent  of  transportation 
the  special  license  required  to  be  taken  out  for  the  time  being, 
d.  Blank  forms  will  be  supplied  to  the  several  surveyors  of  customs 
inn  this  department  for  use  without  cost  to  parties  making  applica- 
i for  license ; and, 

d.  The  surveyors  aforesaid  will  use  liberally,  though  cautiously,  the 
action  with  which  they  are  intrusted  in  the  issue  of  permits  to  cover 
jds,  wares,  and  merchandise  going  forward  for  commerce  or  family 

ply. 

V.  Surveyors  and  other  officers  of  the  customs,  if  resisted  in  the 
q>er  discharge  of  their  duties,  will  call  for  aid  upon  the  commander 
Ihe  nearest  military  post  or  encampment,  and  at  places  where  there 
1 uo  custom-house  officers  or  agents  such  commanders  are  authorized 
1 required  to  exercise  all  necessary  precautions  to  prevent  the  trans- 
1 81011  of  letters  and  other  mail  matter  by  any  other  than  the  regu- 
•y-established  post-office  channels  and  agencies,  or  the  transporta- 
1 of  merchandise  or  supplies  of  any  description  not  covered  by  a cus- 
i- house  permit  or  going  under  the  sanction  of  military  authority, 
y command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


586 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS. 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV: 


General  Orders, 


\ Hdqrs.  Department  or  the  Missouri, 
iTo  53  ) Saint  Louis , March  3,  1862, 

I With  a view  to  the  present  safe  keeping  of  property  arrested^ 
its  wav  to  States,  places,  or  persons  in  insurrection  against  the  Unit 
States  Government,  or  taken  in  situations  and  under  circums tarn 
such  as  justify  a reasonable  suspicion  that  it  is  destined  ultimately 
be  forwarded  to  such  States,  place,  or  persons,  and  with  the  lurtl 
view  of  accounting  for  the  same  at  a proper  time  and  m a satistach 


aeeuiuitiug  iwi  uuv  — x- - ~ r- — — ,, 

it  is  hereby  directed  that  all  persons,  military  as  well  as  ci 

^ „ . . . , i t \ IvIioBnnn 


making  arrests  as  aforesaid,  within  the  Department  of  the  Missouri 
goods,  wares,  and  merchandise,  of  whatever  description,  at  once  fc 
an  inventory  of  the  same,  and  forward  it  without  delay  to  this  city 
duplicate,  one  copy  being  addressed  to  these  headquarters,  the  othe 
wf  D.  Gallagher,  special  agent  of  the  Treasury  Department,  that 
such  arrests  may  be  made  of  one  common  record.  . 

II.  Parties  making  such  arrests  will  be  particular  to  specify  m th 
return  by  whom  each  arrest  is  made,  at  what  place,  upon  what  daj  , 8 
under  what  circumstances ; also  with  whom  the  articles  so  arrested 
deposited.  And  such  parties  will  he  careful  to  deposit  with  safe 
responsible  persons,  taking  receipts  specifying  the  articles  deposit 
and  they  will  make  every  deposit  subject  to  the  order  of  the  Uni 
States  marshal  for  the  judicial  district  in  which  the  arrest  is madi. 

III.  When  it  becomes  necessary  or  advisable  to  appropriate  to  nj 
tary  uses  any  part  or  parts  of  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  arresl 
as  aforesaid,  in  addition  to  the  inventory  directed  in  the  first  sectio 
separate  list  should  be  forwarded,  also  in  duplicate,  accurately  descl 
ing  the  articles  so  appropriated,  naming  the  company  regime  t 
whose  uses  taken,  and  specifying  the  place  and  person  with  whom 

residue  is  deposited.  „ , . Af  thl 

IV.  Military  officers  who  have  made  arrests  of  the  nature  th 

described  in  the  first  section,  in  either  the  Department  of  the  A esl 
the  Department  of  the  Missouri,  at  any  time  since  the  organizarioj 
the  former  or  its  modification  into  the  latter,  will,  as  fa  - , 

report  at  their  earliest  convenience,  as  directed  m that  and  the  su  J 
quent  sections. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : ^ ^ McLEAN, 

Assistant  A djutant- Genera 


General  Orders, 
No.  54. 


! 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouri, 
Saint  Louis , March  3,  18a 


The  board  of  assessment  in  the  city  of  Saint  Louis  for  the  beneffi 
suffering  families  driven  by  the  enemy  from  Southwestern  M s^ 

having  completed  its  labors,  and  rendered  its  final  lepoit  is  her 
dissolved.  * * 


By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : ^ McLEAN 

A ssistant  A djutant-  G encro 


General  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Missouei, 
55#  ] Saint  Louis , March  3,  low 

On  the  recommendation  of  the  Governor  and  several  ot  the  jut 


HAP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  587 

f this  State,  it  is  directed  that  all  licensed  attorneys,  counselors,  and 
roctors  be  required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  prescribed  in  the 
ixth  section  of  the  ordinance  of  the  State  Convention  passed  October 
6,  1861.  The  judges  of  all  State  courts  will  refuse  to  permit  any  one 
) practice  in  their  courts  who  refuses  or  neglects  to  take  such  oath. 
By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


iajor-General  Halleck  : 


Cairo,  March  4,  1862. 


Have  just  received  copy  of  Pope’s  dispatch  to  you  of  yesterday.  He 
itimates  enemy’s  force  at  New  Madrid  at  5,000.  Gave'orders  late  last 
ght  to  have  strong  re-enforcements  sent  here  to  General  Pope.  Five 
giments  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  have  left  to-day.  More  going, 
eneral  Paine,  who  I sent  out  to-day  to  hurry  forward  troops  and  push 
ilroad  to  Sikeston,  brings  rumor  of  New  Madrid  being  evacuated  and 
oops  going  to  Point  Pleasant  and  Island  No.  10. 

Is  it  your  wish  to  evacuate  Columbus  ? It  is  too  large  to  be  held  by 
smaller  force  than  present  garrison.  You  have  presented  me  with  an 
ephant  by  way  of  aides,  who  have  no  military  information.  I am  quite 
lwell.  Will  it  be  possible  to  let  Sherman  take  my  place  for  a week 
id  allow  me  to  visit  Saint  Louis  to  wind  up  my  affairs  ? 

G.  W.  CULLUM, 
Brigadier-  Gen  eral . 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Near  New  Madrid , March  4,  1862. 
ajor-General  Halleck  : r 

Upon  examination  of  ground  north  of  the  bayou  where  I had  intended 
establish  batteries  and  rifle  pits,  I find  that  during  the  night  the  river 
se  so  rapidly  as  to  overflow  the  whole  of  it.  It  is  somewhat  lower 
an  the  ground  south  of  the  bayou  and  is  now  untenable.  I send  to- 
ight  at  dark  a column  of  2,500  infantry,  with  artillery  and  cavalry,  to 
>int  Pleasant,  9 miles  below,  to  effect  the  same  purpose.  This  oper- 
ion  must  of  necessity  take  off  some  of  the  gunboats  from  here,  in 
dch  case  I will  carry  the  intrenchments.  I find  on  close  reconnais- 
nce  that  there  are  intrenchments  hastily  constructed  within  the  town 
>m  the  mouth  of  the  bayou  half  a mile  above.  There  are  about  four 
pments  of  infantry  and  some  field  artillery  now  in  it,  and  the  gun- 
ats  anchored  so  that  their  guns  look  into  every  part  of  the  intrench- 
mts  at  very  short  distances.  I will  interrupt  the  navigation  at  Point 
easant,  and  if  the  opportunity  presents  I will  carry  their  works.  I 
not  know  what  re-enforcements  can  be  thrown  here  from  Island  No. 
v probably  not  enough  to  endanger  us  if  the  island  is  threatened  by 
3 gunboats.  It  I had  troops  it  would  be  easy  to  interrupt  entirely 
3 navigation  of  the  river  by  transports  by  establishing  a large  central 
ce  south  of  this  place  and  having  small' movable  columns  of  500  men 
u two  pieces  of  artillery  each  to  be  posted  just  outside  of  range  of 
rtnboats  habitually  and  to  move  in  on  the  river  whenever  a steamer 
18sed  and  sink  her.  Half  a dozen  or  a dozen  points  on  the  river 
'thin  25  miles  could  stop  navigation  or  compel  at  least  seven  or  eight 


588 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XTIU 


zunboats  to  watch  that  extent  of  river  line.  By  having  a strong  ora 
fral  force  within  supporting  distance  of  these  small  columns,  and  upo 
which  tlfeywould  retreat  if  menaced  by  the  landing  of  forces  above  c 
Llow  them  the  operation  would  be  safe.  It  would,  however,  requn 
SO  000  men' effectually  to  put  it  in  operation.  While  the  enemy  ca 
hold  New  Madrid  by  means  of  gunboats  (as  can  be  done  with  this  hig 
stoze  of  water  on  the  river),  it  would  be  easy  to  land  troops  and  threa to 
on  ^communication  s,  if  not  endanger  our  whole  force,  if  itwere  separate) 
into  small  detachments.  I will,  if  l’ossibte,  maintain  Dmblocliado, 
Point  Pleasant  until  the  heavy  artillery  can  be  sent.  I can,  as  1 hai 
informed  you,  carry  the  works  here,  but  it  would  be  done  with  heav| 
loss  while*  the  river  is  so  high  that  the  guns  of  the  boats i look  over 
bank  and  with  our  artillery  it  would  be  nearly  impossible  to  hold  the 
without  o-reat  loss  I presume  you  are  thoroughly  informed  concermna 
island  No.  10;  but  from  what  I know  it  will  be  easy  for  tl 
o-unboats  to  shell  the  troops  out  of  the  island  altogether  and  pass  dow 
to  this  place.  If  not  able  completely  to  stop  the  navigation  of  the  nve| 
I will  at  least  make  it  very  dangerous  from  to-morrow. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding,  i 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  March  4,  18b^.  I 

Brigadier-General  Cullum  and  Flag-Officer  Foote,  Cairo: 

TTie  mm  and  mortar  boats  should  not  wait  for  repairs,  but  make  8 
immediate  demonstration  on  Island  No.  10,  ^d,  if  possible  assist  Ge. 
oral  Pone  at  New  Madrid.  This  is  of  vital  importance,  and  theie  shorn 

Cno  delay  I have  much  better  information  than  you  have  of  the  co 

dition  of  affairs,  and,  where  possible,  my  mstnictmns^stemkU.e  ffii  ye| 

Major-  General.  | 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

^ Saint  Louis , March  4,  1862. 


Brigadier-General  Sherman, 


Columbus : 


All  available  force  at  Columbus,  Cairo  Fort  Holt,  Birdjs  Point, 
Paducah  should  re-enforce  Pope.  It  he  takes  New  Madnd,  then  sei 
everything  up  the  Tennessee  to  Maj.  Gen.  ^ ^ pi^pLECK, 

M ajo  r-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 
Camp  Halleck,  Ark March  4, 


1862. 


Gapt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I am  in  receipt  of  the  general’s  dispatch  of  th®  28th^  ^id 

delay  of  Wyman’s  regiment  for  many  reasons.  The  enemy 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


589 


AP.  XVIII.] 


> receiving  large  re-enforcements.  A little  would  help  me.  They 
irned  Blackman’s  Mill,  a fine  one,  16  miles  southeast  of  me,  night 
fore  last,  and  were  burning  all  the  forage  in  that  region.  Have 
nt  a force  to  rout  them,  with  directions  to  go  as  fay  as  Huntsville  if 
perior  force  does  not  check  me.  The  Indian  regiments  have  joined 
e enemy  at  Boston  Mountains.  The  only  strong  point  to  intrench  is 
Lgar  Creek,  and  Cross  Timber,  beyond  this.  Cross  Hollow  is  easily 
rned  by  an  open  campaign  country  a little  west  of  the  crossing. 
Sugar  Creek  Hollow  extends  for  miles,  a gorge,  with  rough,  precipi- 
ce sides,  the  road  crossing  it  at  nearly  right  angles.  I shall  keep  an 
tpost  here  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Bentonville,  with  pickets  and  patrols 
fll  farther  south.  Forage  is  becoming  scarce  by  the  consumption  of 
7 troops  and  the  burning  by  the  enemy.  Nothing  could  be  more 
urious  to  the  country  than  this  burning  of  mills,  and  the  people  are 
lignant.  Shall  be  on  the  alert,  holding  as  securely  as  possible, 
all  expect  Hunter  on  my  right  soon,  and  hope  also  to  hear  of  the 
aeral  on  the  Arkansas.  I shall  not  report  in  detail  on  my  move- 
nts from  Lebanon  here  for  prudential  reasons. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Camp  Halleck , Ark.,  March  4,  1862. 

1.  Clark  Wright: 

jloLONEL:  You  were  sent  to  re-enforce  Captain  Montgomery  at 
etsville,  and  drive  the  enemy  that  assailed  him.  You  are  not  to 
nmand  at  Oassville.  Take  care  of  the  enemy  in  the  vicinity  of 
etsville,  and  see  that  the  trains  are  not  interrupted.  If  you  have 
j'uts  with  you  who  know  the  country  in  front  send  them  here,  where 
in  much  nearer  the  foe. 

There  is  a great  set  of  rogues  about  Keetsville,  and  I hope  you  will 
i 1 and  arrest  and  send  back  the  most  of  them.  March  and  follow  up 
K force  that  offers  to  come  within  20  miles  of  the  road.  The  parties 
> small,  as  that  was  that  attacked  Captain  Montgomery. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 
Brigadier -General , Commanding . 


|neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 
tfo.  17.  f Camp  2 miles  north  of  New  Madrid , Mar.  4, 1862. 

. The  following  organization  of  this  army  is  hereby  announced  as  a 
fiporary  arrangement: 


FIRST  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  D.  S.  Stanley,  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  Groesbeck. 

' i Ohio. 

3 1 Ohio. 


Second  Brigade. 


43d  Ohio. 
63d  Ohio. 


590 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  lClIA1''  XVI 

SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamilton,  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Colonel  Worthington. 

59tli  Indiana. 

5th  Iowa. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  B.  Plummer. 

26th  Illinois. 

47th  Illinois. 

11th  Missouri. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Palmer,  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

34th  Indiana. 

43d  Indiana. 


Second  Brigade. 

46th  Indiana. 

47th  Indiana. 


II.  All  the  cavalry  is  brigaded  under  Ool.  Gordon  Granger,  excel 

the  three  companies  Fourth  Regular  Cavalry.  I 

III.  The  artillery  will  be  under  the  command  of ‘Major aB 
the  First  Regular  Infantry  is  detailed  as  a support  to  the  artillery. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : SPEED  BUTLER,  I 

a ooisin/n.t.  A Mutant-  General, 


General  Orders, 
No.  18. 


Hdqes.  Army  op  the  Mississippi, 
Camp  near  New  Madrid , March  4,  I80J.I 

I.  In'  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  162, from  the ^quar* 
of  the  department,  the  undersigned  assumes  the  command  ot  th  s <U 

trTi;  The  following  officers  will  for  the  present  constitute  the  staff ' 
the  general  commanding : . 

Maj.  Speed  Butler,  assistant  adjutant- general. 

Mai.  C.  A.  Morgan,  aide-de-camp. 

Capt.  Louis  H.  Marshall,  aide-de-camp. 

Mai.  J.  M.  Corse,  inspector-general.  I 

Capt.  J.  W.  Taylor,  chief  quartermaster. 
t a Swdn.  chief  assistant  commii 


Oapt.  J.  A.‘ Swain,  chief  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence. 
Lieut.  J.  W.  Mott,  acting  assistant  quartermaster.^  popE) 

Brigadier- General , Commanding-1 

Speed  Butler, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Cairo,  March  5,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck:  . nffir 

In  reference  to  my  telegram  of  yesterday,  referring  to  Flag-Umc 
Foote  not  going  to  attack  Island  No.  10  and  New 

gested,  he,  with  his  officers,  were  fully  is  either 

would  decline  going  into  pilot-houses,  as  the  iron  plating 


J>.  XVIII.] 


591 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

in  a condition  rendering  them  unsafe,  from  injury  received  at  Forts 
mry  and  Donelson.  Also  that  the  machinery  and  hull  of  the  vesr 
s are  not  in  a condition  to  attack  forts  and  batteries.  That  the  re- 
t would  be  not  only  doubtful  but  almost  a certainty,  provided  the 
>els  made  the  resistance  which  they  have  done  thus  far  in  every  at- 
;k.  If  my  telegram*  of  yesterday  has  been  published,  please  give 
j s equal  publicity. 

G.  W.  CULLIJM, 

Brigadier-  General . 


neral  Cullum: 


Saint  Louis,  March  5,  1862. 


was  in  hopes  that  you  could  remain  till  the  result  of  Pope’s  expe- 
ion  and  Foote’s  demonstration  was  determined.  Only  a small  gar- 
in  at  Columbus  will  be  required,  and  none  at  Fort  Holt  or  Bird’s 
nt  and  Paducah,  except  to  guard  stores.  All  other  troops  should 
ready  for  the  field.  If  necessary,  re-enforce  Pope  and  send  him 
?e  guns ) they  can  be  transported  with  oxen.  General  Sherman 
es  your  place  for  the  present  at  Cairo.  He  will  take  the  field  as 
u as  I can  find  a successor.  Show  him  this. 


H.  W.  HALLEOK. 


I ^ Cairo,  March  5,  1862. 

!|or-General  Hallecic: 

An  better  to-day,  but  far  from  well.  Will  stay  for  the  present,  as 
} very  important  that  Sherman  should  go  to  Paducah  to  get  his 
>ps  ready  for  the  field.  P ope  has  18,000,  including  troops  sent  from 
3.  He'  says  the  enemy  is  but  5,000.  I do  not  therefore,  think  he  re- 
-es  further  re-enforcements,  and  will  send  no  more  without  your 
ers  till  the  railroad  to  Sikeston  is  finished.  It  will  be  impossible  to 
the  siege  guns  to  New  Madrid.  Two  hundred  men  at  work  on  rail- 
1.  Find  more  repairs  to  make  than  anticipated. 

G.  W.  CULLIJM, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis.  March  5,  1862. 
erals  Sherman  and  Cullum,  Cairo : 

Pope  has  18,000  men,  they  are  sufficient.  Send  all  others  up  the 
nessee  to  Savannah,  to  report  to  Maj.  Gen.  C.  F.  Smith.  I have 
i duly  notified  by  Secretary  of  War  of  his  promotion.  Orders  were 
ed  some  days  ago  for  building  telegraph  lines  from  Bird’s  Point  to 

t Knob. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Mississippi  District,  . 

Near  New  Madrid , March  5,  1862. 

or-General  Halleck: 


v great  labor  succeeded  in  making  road  through  swamp  to  Point 
isant  out  of  range  of  gunboats,  and  occupied  that  place  to-night  at 

* See  Series  I,  Vol.  VII,  p.  436. 


592 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap  xvn 


Sarlr  Bv  morning  the  rifle  pits  and  sunk  batteries  will  be  complefi 
e^dki  thin  “by  12  o’clock  to-morrow  I shall  know  whether  they  can  t 
_ . . oo'ainst  the  gunboats.  I am  confident  of  the  result,  as  gui 
d artmeryBof  the  gunboats  are  unsheltered  and  cannot  approac 
^rithin  rifle  range.  If  successful,  everything  is  ours  except  the  gm 
wts  No  transports  will  be  able  to  pass  my  battery.  Three  thousan 
men  institute  force  sent  to  Point  Pleasant,  and  IwiU  maintain  thj 
•fion  oo-ainst  any  land  force  whatever.  I have  lined  the  route  wit 
Sry,  sf that  no  movement,  either  by  land  or  water,  can  be  ma< 
from  above  without  my  knowledge.  j^O  POPE, 

Brigadier- General  I 


Headquarters  Army  ^ the  Southwest 

Camp  Hailed',  Ark.,  March  5,  1862.1 

Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  Commanding  Division:  I 

Ant-rat  • One  of  my  spies  fell  in  with  some  rebels  who  sto  e ol 

•>»  fo«..  „ sJ 

- -tpo..  .itk  . .mail  <■»«».  O 

stfnd  mPist  be  at  Su|ar  Creek,  where  I hope  to  join  you  to-morrow. 
Respectfully,  yours,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Briaadier-  General , Commanding. \ 


Headquarters  Army  of  th.e  7s°Y7hTEkTi 

Camp  Hailed , Arfc.,  March  5,  1862 

Brie  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  Commanding  Division:  J 

SSiSli 

course  Schaefer  should  move  immediate  y.  gAML_  R CURTIS, 

Rrum/Tier- Genera l.  Commanding | 


Headquarters  Third  Division,  ! 
Sugar  Creeh,  Arlc.,  March  5,  1W 

Oeneral  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  Commanding: 

Colonel , Commandini 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


593 


HAP.  XVIII.] 


Saint  Louis,  March  5,  1862. 

COMMANDING  OFFICER,  Eolla , Mo.  : 

Colonel  Wood’s  cavalry,  with  Major  Drake’s  detachment  at  Salem, 
ill  proceed  to  Houston  and  Marshfield,  scouring  the  counties  in  the 
mthwest  and  breaking  up  any  rebel  bands  he  can  find.  Another 
igiment  of  cavalry  will  be  s'ent  from  here  in  a few  days  for  Eolla  and 
alem. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  March  6,  1862. 

eneral  Cullum: 

There  is  something  wrong  about  the  telegraph.  Yours  of  yesterday 
1 1 regard  to  re-enforcements  to  Pope  is  just  received.  They  might 
>main  at  Sikeston  as  a reserve,  subject  to  Pope’s  orders. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  6,  1862. 

eneral  Cullum: 

Colonel  Plummer,  who  was  sent  with  3,000  men  to  occupy  Point 
leasant  last  night,  has  not  yet  been  able  to  effect  a lodgment  on  the 
inks  for  his  rifle  pits  and  batteries  on  account  of  finding  two  gun- 
>ats  at  that  place.  A third  has  joined  them  since  from  below.  Plum- 
er’s  sharpshooters  occupy  the  town,  and  were  attempting,  when  I 
st  heard,  to  drive  the  artillerymen  of  the  gunboats  from  their  pieces, 
ow  they  will  succeed  I cannot  yet  tell.  I made  a strong  demonstra- 
on  upon  the  works  here  this  afternoon,  driving  in  the  enemy’s  skir- 
ishers  and  his  whole  force  below  the  bank  and  down  upon  the  water, 
le  enemy’s  loss  was  about  25  killed ; ours  1 killed  and  4 wounded, 
lere  are  now  here  and  at  Point  Pleasant  eight  gunboats,  which  we 
nnot  take  of  course,  and  which  render  the  town  here  untenable, 

I en  if  in  eur  possession.  I hope  to  see  our  gunboats  in  a day  or  two, 
i which  case  everything  here  will  fall  into  our  hands.  I hope  Plum- 
tar  by  to-morrow  morniug  will  effect  his  lodgment.  Meantime  the 
! actice  here  is  excellent  for  the  troops.  I give  them  a smart  skirmish 
ery  day.  The  importance  of  making  a lodgment  at  Point  Pleasant 
btead  of  this  place  will  be  apparent  to  you  when  you  examine  the 
culiar  bend  of  the  river  and  the  position  of  Island  Ko.  10.  It  is  only 
miles  across  by  land  from  the  island  to  a point  on  the  river  below 
d nearly  opposite  to  Point  Pleasant,  to  which  boats  can  come  up  and 
ike  off  the  garrison  without  being  molested  by  us  at  New  Madrid.  I 
! all  use  all  possible  exertions.  Will  you  communicate  the  substance 
i this  letter  to  General  Halleck  $ 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Cairo,  March  6,  1862. 

• ajor-General  Halleck: 

Pope  writes  that  extreme  high  water  cuts  off  all  communication  from 
38  r r — vol  vm 


594 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  1C"A1-  XVLI 


him  except  by  Sikeston.  Will  send  General  Paine  to  morrow  to  dim 
the  five  infantry  regiments  which  left  here  yesterday  to  move  over  tk 
trestll  to  Sikeston  and  join  General  Pope  immediately,  carrying  foil 
davs’  rations  in  haversacks,  though  Pope  does  not  ask  for  re-enfom 
mints  Have  directed  Paine  to  employ  the  largest  possible  force  t 
push  forward  the  railroad.  Telegraph  any  orders  immediately , as  1 am.; 

leaves  early  in  morning.  G w CULLUM, 

Brigadier- General,  o 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri,  I 

Saint  Louts,  March  6,  1862. 1 

Mai.  Charles  G.  Halpine,  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans.: 

Yours  of  the  28th  ultimo  just  received*  I think  it  very  importail 
that  the  Kansas  troops  should  advance  rapidly  south  and  support  Geil 
oral  Curtis’  right  flank.  He  will  not  cross  the  Poston  Mountains,  hi 
hold  hifpreS  position  in  rear  of  Fayetteville.  The  two  forces  ed 
therefore' cooperate  against  any  Indian  movement.  IfPnce  has  fallej 
back  on  Fort  Smith  he  will  soon  be  starved  out.  Curtis  force  is  aboil 

22>000-  H.  W.  HALLECK,  j 

Major-General . 


Lebanon,  March  6, 1862.  . 

Major-General  Halleck:  mj 

Three  hundred  rebels  are  herded  3 miles  south  of  Vera  Cruz.  Th 
have  run  off  cattle  from  within  12  miles  of  here  Captain  Bowman  w 
at  Hartville  yesterday  with  25  men.  I have  « « « Vera  On 
to-night,  and  I send  50  more  to-morrow  to  re-enforce  them. 

Shall  I continue  these  long  reaches  with  my  small  garuson  . 
safe  to  let  them  collect  within  40  miles  of  me? 


GEO.  E.  WARING, 

T • J.  7 A/M  />/ 


GENERAL  ORDERS,  } HDQRS. 

mm^^^well^mthose  on'ttie'ciimberlamd^nd  Tenness^ee'Kivers^r^GS 

where  ^reexpec  ted  to  respect  permits  issued  by  the  surveyor  of  4H 
of  the  ports  on  the  Ohio  River  and  bearing  his  official  signature  ai 
seal.  Military  officers  commanding  posts  or  encampments  where  the 
are  no  such  custom-house  officers  or  agents,  or  acting  temporary  y 
concert  with  such  officers  or  agents,  will  in  like  .manner <^ecttho8* 
mils.  Sealed  baggage,  while  the  seals  remain  unbroken,  will  al 

resnected  bv  both  classes  of  officers. 

II  Good!  wares,  or  merchandise  in  transitu , thus  covered  by  1 
mits  and  baggage  thus  sealed,  will  be  allowed  to  go  forward  to  tb 
respective  places  of  destination  without  further  examination, 
there  Osgood  and  satisfactory  reason  for  ^ “o?^U?or1n 
local  information  obtained  from  reliable  sources.  And  when,  lor 
reason,  any  detention  takes  place,  the  fact  should  be  immediately  co 


*Not  found. 


SAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


595 


lunicated  to  the  surveyor  whose  permit  covers  the  merchandise  or 
hose  seal  is  affixed  to  the  baggage  so  arrested,  and  also  to  the  spe- 
al  agent  of  the  Treasury  Department  in  this  city. 

III.  Until  further  orders  the  transportation  of  this  department  is  not 
len  to  munitions  of  war,  except  under  special  regulations  with  the 
llitary  authorities.  And  whisky,  for  the  time  being,  is  prohibited  in 
ie  resumed  commerce  of  the  Cumberland  and  the  Tennessee 
By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri 

Saint  Louis , March  7,  1862. 

’igadier-General  Cullum,  Cairo: 

1 1di<1/10t  Commodore  Foote  to  attack  Island  No.  10  with  his 
nboats.  On  the  contrary,  I directed  that  they  should  not  be  exposed 

S Mteries-  AIi  they  were  to  be  used  for  was  to  protect  the 
>rtar  boats  fiom  sharpshooters  and  field  batteries.  I believe  that  a 
r ho.urs  bombardment  with  mortar  boats  would  have  caused  the 
emy  to  evacuate.  If  not,  it  would  have  served  as  a demonstration  and 
:onnaissance.  If  my  instructions  had  been  obeyed  in  the  bombard- 
fflt  of  Columbus  we  should  have  saved  much  of  the  enemy’s  guns  and 
iperty.  I repeat,  I do  not  want  the  gunboats  to  fight  till  they  are 

Is  Commodore  Foote  declines  to  co-operate,  General  Pope’s  army 
be  immediately  withdrawn,  except  so  much  as  may  be  necessary  to 
ure  the  road  against  any  advance  of  the  enemy.  I will  telegraph 
1 orders,  to  be  immediately  forwarded  from  Cairo.  Provide  trans- 
'tation  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  send  them  up  the  Tennessee 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 


Saint  Louis,  March  7,  1862. 

neral  Pope,  in  the  Field: 

ifter  securing  the  roads,  so  as  to  prevent  the  enemy’s  advance  north, 

^PoUt^rl  y0U1>  rTalmnv-g  J?r0es  t0  8ikest°n,  and  thence  to 
cl  s Point  or  Commerce,  for  embarkation.  They  will  proceed  ud  the 
1 messee  to  re-enforce  General  C.  F.  Smith.  1 Up  tne 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Cairo,  III,  March  7,  1862. 
or- General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

unent^t' Sf/8*  ’“l  ,P1“mn;er  went  Wednesday  night  to  make 
ovec  h v tn  w fif  “ ’ but  bud  not  yet  effected  his  object,  being 
on  enem  v’t  (l,?  f gnnbo:!ts-  P°pe  made  strong  demonstra 
:>w  bank  J t'nf  ? sk™lshcrs  and  wl,ole force  to  water 

1 weumled;  enemy’s,  25  killed 


important  will  be  done  till  our  gunboats  brush  away  the  enemy.* 


596 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVH 


Only  two  transports  here.  Twenty  boats  at  least  required  from  Sail 

Louis,  as  none  came  down  Ohio. 

Cavalry  went  within  3 miles  of  Sikeston  to-day^  CULLTJM; 

Brigadier-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  March  7,  1862.1 


General  Samuel  R.  Curtis:  I 

Newspaper  correspondents  speak  of  Si  gel’s  division  being  separahr 
from  yon.  Keep  your  forces  together  and  in  hand.  Don  t let  t j 
enemy  fight  you  hi  detail.  Throw  out  your  cavalry  carefully,  111 
fingers  to  the' hand,  so  that  they  can  be  drawn  in  on  the  main 
Hold  your  position  till  I can  turn  the  enemy^  ^ HALLECK, 

Major- General.  9 


War  Department,  March  7,  1862.1 

Major-General  Halleck:,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.: 

Please  send  to  me  the  limits  of  a military  department  that  wool 
place  all  the  Western  operations  you  deem  expedient  under  your  con 

mand-  EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Cairo,  March  8,  1862.J 

Major-General  Halleck: 

Sent  first  telegram  to  Pope  at  10,  and  at  2 a special  messenger  wr 
your  last  instructions.  Have  urged  Foote  again  and -again  1 to ’ g' » d 
with  gun  and  mortar  boats,  but  cannot  induce  him  to  move  beta 
Wednesday.  Will  have  railroad  so  far  completed  to-morrow  as 
send  the  whole  re-enforcements  to  Pope,  unless^you  direc^otherwij 

Briaadier-  General 


Headquarters  District  of  the sno 

New  Madrid , March  8,  1862 

Brigadier-General  Oullum: 

The  forces  under  Colonel  Plummer  at  Point  Pleasant  have  m< 

good  their  lodgment,  and  the  gunboate,  after  repeated  eftorts,  h^ 

failed  to  make  any  impression  upou  them.  Two  1,,T  "1Kl^.1t  , 
and  two  13-pounder  English  rifled  guns  are  now  m position  at  that  ph 
and  to  transport  vessels  the  river  is  effectually  ohised.  l o ttemp 
to  pass  up  last  night,  but  were  driven  back,  one  of  them  bad.y  #r 
pled.  Supplies  for  the  enemy  are  now  completely  cut  ofl  h»m 
liart  of  Missouri  or  from  below.  They  can  get  none  in  the  nai 
space  to  which  they  are  circumscribed.  I made  another  strong  i 
Tation  Imre  yesterday,  forcing  my  skirmishers  nto  the , inidd  e of 
town  and  driving  the  enemy’s  infantry  down  to  the  shore.  l ie  t o 
are  in  fine  spirits  and  are  improving  wonderfullj.  The  cnenn 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  597 

nforcing  heavily  from  above,  two  large  steamboats  having  arrived  in 
ie  course  of  the  night  heavily  loaded  with  troops. 

Please  hurry  forward  the  five  infantry  regiments  as  rapidly  as  possi- 
le,  as  I must  assure  Plummer’s  position  against  any  attack  whatever, 
thank  you  heartily  for  your  friendly  congratulations  upon  mv  pro- 
totion.  ^ J ^ 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


ajor-General  Halleck: 
Pope’s  messenger  just  in. 


Cairo,  March  8,  1862. 


mboats 
flow. 


Lodgment  at  Point  Pleasant  made  where 
cannot  dislodge  them.  River  closed  to  transports  from 

G.  W.  CULLUM, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Cairo,  III.,  March  8,  1862. 

ajor-General  Halleck: 

Commodore  Foote  says  it  is  impossible  for  fleet  to  be  ready  before 
ednesday,  and  I hope  General  Pope  can  maintain  position  until  then. 
Can  you  arrange  to  meet  General  Buell  in  Louisville  on  Monday  ? 
you  leave  Saint  Louis  Sunday  evening  by  way  of  Mitchell’s  you  can 
aeh  Louisville  on  Monday  morning.  General  Buell  can, reach  Louis- 
LLe  Sunday  night  or  Monday  morning.  It  seems  to  me  important 
at  an  interview  should  take  place,  and  thus  fully  understand  the 
>rk  before  both.  Please  answer. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  8,  1862. 

[omas  A.  Scott, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War , Cairo , III. : 

Two  additional  gunboats  (unarmored  will  do)  should  be  sent  up  the 
nnessee.  I have  just  received  General  Pope’s  dispatch  of  the  5th, 
zing  that  he  occupied  Point  Pleasant  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  and 
f < If  s<h  perhaps  he  had  better  hold  on  and  not  withdraw 
i lorces.  I am  anxiously  waiting  for  further  information. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

..  m Saint  Louis , March  8,  1862. 

igadier-General  Cullum,  Cairo , Til. : 

have  this  moment  received  General  Pope’s  dispatch  of  the  5th. 
mg  that  he  had  taken  and  could  hold  Point  Pleasant.  This  may 
'inge  the  programme  and  it  may  be  advisable  for  him  to  remain. 


598 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVinj 


Send  messengers  to  him  and  get  latest  news  as  soon  as  possible  an, 
telegraph.  His  last  dispatch  was  three  days  m reaching  here.  Th 
retrograde  movement  of  his  forces  should  not  be  made  till  furthe 

advices.  H w HALLeCK, 

Major-General,  ijj 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  ^iss°uri*  qao  I 

Saint  Loms , March  8,  1862.  | 

Mai.  Charles  G.  H alpine, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans. : 

The  Indians  have  joined  Price  in  Boston  Mountains.  The  KanssJ 
troops  should  move  without  delay  to  support  the  right  flank  of ^eragl 
Curtis,  in  Arkansas.  It  will  have  an  important  effect  upon  the  can 

Pa‘Sn-  H.  W.  HALLECK,  j 

Major-General.  I 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  SoYJhtTEoTi  I 
Gamp  Ealleck , Arh.,  March  8,  1862.  J 

Brig.  Gen.  Franz  Sigkel, 

Commanding  Division : 

General:  Tours,  saying  you  are  camped  at  the  f°r?® ' ^ J 

the  Cross  Timber  Hollow,  asking  me  to  send  other  detachments  at 

y°I  regreTexceedingly^ that  so  much  force  separated  from  this  positioj 
and  Colonels  Schaefer  and  Greusel  and  General  Asboth  must  accod 
to  me  for  neglecting  my  instructions  not  to  go  down  the  hill.  1 ha 
already  ordered  the  provision  wagons  to  follow  you.  I have  orderedl 
tnils  to  collect  and  bury  the  dead,  and  intend  to  camp  on  the  batq 
ground,  which  cannot  be  abandoned,  to-night.  The  enemy  retreafj 
the  Bentonville  road,  passing  near  me,  and  I certainly  need  all  the  fo. 
I have  to  maintain  my  position.  A cavalry  pursuit  is  all . we > can  id 
available  against  an  enemy  who  we  know  by  experience  will  run  4 
night  to  avoid  embarrassment. 

I am,  general,  &c.,  SAML.  B.  CUKTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Few  Madrid , March  9,  1862. 


Col.  J.  B.  Plummer: 

The  commanding  general  directs  me  to  say  to  you  that  he  has  receiv 

your  letter  this  morning,  and  is  much  gratified  at  rTn  v vonr  tents  ai 
lishing  and  maintaining  your  position.  He  sends  to-day  your  tents  a 
baggage,  with  10,000  rations  of  coffee.  Six  of  your  wagons 
turned  to  Sikeston  for  the  knapsacks  of  your  re^ment  and.  wiBjc 
you  as  soon  as  practicable.  The  general  directs  that  you  send  to  « 
post  Lieutenant  Gaw,  of  the  Engineers.  He  also  suggests  that  you 


iap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  599 

ells,  as  this  command  has  succeeded  in  getting  pure  water  in  that 

ay. 

I am,  colonel,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  A.  MORGAN, 
Major  and  Aide-de-camp. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 


meral  Cullum 


New  Madrid , March  9,  1862. 


I send  Gol.  J.  W.  Bissell,  Engineer  Eegiment,  to  Cairo,  to  see  you  in 
lation  to  the  siege  guns.  If  we  can  get  them  here  matters  will  soon 
settled.  Colonel  Bissell  can  get  as  many  as  are  necessary  to  me  in 
ree  days.  Of  course  I prefer  such  as  are  mounted  on  carriages,  but 
should  prefer  the  rifled  32s  if  they  could  be  had.  One  or  two  shell 
ns  of  large  caliber  will  be  very  useful. 

I have  the  honor  to  request  that  four  Parrott  guns,  24-pounders,  now 
Saint  Louis  Arsenal,  and  belonging  to  the  Missouri  Light  Artillery, 
sent  here  at  once.  If  I had  had  these  guns  I should  not  have  been 
layed  here  as  I have  been,  and  if  you  can  get  these  four  and  any 
ler  field  guns  of  large  caliber  for  me  our  operations  on  the  river  will 
greatly  advantaged  both  here  and  elsewhere.  I hope  you  will  use 
ur  influence  in  the  matter.  Eequisitions  for  ammunition  for  the  field 
tteries  have  been  sent  to  Saint  Louis,  which  I hope  will  be  hastened 
•ward  to  us.  No  further  news  from  below. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  9,  1862. 


neral  Cullum  : 


Che  occupation  of  Point  Pleasant  has  been  entirely  successful.  A 
ge  quantity  of  stores  and  supplies  have  fallen  into  our  hands  and  the 
t$sage  of  transports  up  and  down  the  river  entirely  prevented.  I will 
i much  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  send  the  siege  guns,  with  a full  sup- 
i of  ammunition,  forward  to  Sikeston  as  soon  as  possible.  When 
* y arrive  and  are  placed  in  position  we  will  be  able  to  drive  off  the 
; iboats,  and  it  will  then  require  but  a short  time  for  us  to  carry  the 
i renchments. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  9,  1862. 

)ear  Plummer  : First  let  me  congratulate  you  upon  your  confirma- 
’ i by  the  Senate  as  brigadier- general.  The  news  has  just  reached 
1 e.  I have  sent  urgently  for  the  siege  guns,  and  will  send  you  some 
-soon  as  they  reach  here;  also  two  regiments  of  infantry.  You  must 


600 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 


. if  ^ossiMe  If  necessary,  I will  transfer  my  whole  force  to  Poin 

Pleasant. 1 Fire  away  with  your  artillery  at  transports,  but  do  not  wash 
ammunition  especially  artillery  ammunition,  on  the  gunboats.  I thml 
the  battery  on  the  opposite  shore  can  do  you  no  harm,  btrengthen  you 
camp  byevery  possible  means.  Surround  it  with  rifle  pits,  and  pu 
ev™ry  possible  obstruction  in  the  way  of  an  enemy.  You  may  rely  upo 
every  assistance  I can  give. 

Respectfully  and  truly,  yours,  JNQ  pOPE) 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Cairo,  III.,  March  9, 1862. 

Mai  or- General  Hallbck,  Saint  Louis,  Mo. : 

Just  received  dispatch  from  Pope.  Rebel  gunboats  after  repeate 
efforts  failed  to  disturb  Plummer  m a lodgment  at  Point  1 leasan 
“aMporte  attempted  to  pass  up  Friday  night,  but  were  prevenl 
and  one  badlv  crippled  by  Plummer’s  two  Parrott  and  one  13-pounde 

Ttriaadier- General.  I 


Jefferson  City,  March  9, 1862. 

Capt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

The  expedition  sent  against  rebels  returned  to„®eda^ 
with  some  40  prisoners  captured  under  arms  in  Bates  County,  soul 

ammunition,  arms,  &c.  THOS.  J.  McKEAN, 


WARRENTON,  March  9,  1862. 

GeThearebels  have  taken  Troy,  Lincoln  County,  and  robbed  Union  jJ 
and  ^orn  the  clerks  of  courts  and  taken  their  property.  They  a 

abCaptainS Warrens  has  left  with  his  command  for  Wellsville.  I 
could  be  stopped  if  so  ordered.  ^ 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Cairo,  March  9,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  M.  C.  Meigs,  ^ n . 

Quartermaster -General , Washington,  JJ.  C.. 
My  Dear  General  : Your  letter  referring  to 
diers  $18  per  month  was  received  this  evemn 


the  payment  of  s' 
g,  and  as  Assists 


AP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  601 

;3cretary  Scott  is  here,  who  fully  understands  the  peculiarities  and 
abarrassments  of  our  condition,  I asked  him  if  he  would  explain  it, 
id  have  given  him  your  letter  for  that  purpose. 

Situated  as  we  are  here,  and  having  at  times  received  men  from 
lint  Louis  who  were  discharged  from  the  Army  after  shipping  in  the 
itilla,  I naturally,  even  if  not  properly,  applied  the  same  rule  or  rate 
pay  as  to  them.  It  would  be  difficult,  indeed,  to  go  on  with  the 
itilla,  or  even  to  keep  the  men,  if  we  made  a difference  in  persons 
jrforming  the  same  duty  now.  It  would  lead  to  a stampede  among 
em  if  we  attempt  to  reduce  their  pay ; and  if  it  is  to  be  charged 
gainst  me  by  the  Government,  I must  see  the  flotilla  is  not  ren- 
ted ineffective,  or  keep  up  the  rate  of  pay  which  I have  instituted, 
ill  the  loss  of  half  or  all  my  pay  would  in  itself  be  a slight  consid- 
ation  to  the  mental  agony  and  physical  exhaustion  which  I have  suf- 
red  for  the  last  six  months.  No  results,  however  successful,  would 
all  compensate  me  for  what  I have  suffered  in  the  progress  of  our 
)rk.  Although  results  which  can  tend  to  vindicate  our  right  to  re- 
in all  the  States  m the  Union  would  be  cheaply  purchased  at  my  sac- 
ice,  and  that  of  dozens  like  me,  with  a wounded  foot  keeping  me  on 
latches,  in  great  pain,  leads  me  to  say  that  whenever  the  Department 
| disposed  to  send  any  officer  in  my  place  I will  willingly  surrender 
If  position  to  him. 

The  changing  of  crews,  for  want  of  men,  from  disabled  to  sound 
sips,  with  other  difficulties,  have  rendered  it  impossible  to  keep  the 
tancial  as  well  as  all  other  departments  of  the  flotilla  in  that  strict 
d correct  form  that  in  a regular  service,  belonging  exclusively  to 
ker  War  or  Navy  Departments,  would  do $ still,  I write  rather  to  ex- 
am why  I consult  Secretary  Scott,  and  trust  that  you  will  appre- 
ite  my  motives. 

We  move  on  Island  No.  10  and  New  Madrid’  on  Wednesday,  and  ex- 
ct  a fight  at  both  places.  I have  sent  Captain  Wise  to  stop  repairs 
the  Essex  till  the  estimates  are  sent  to  you  for  approval. 

I am  required  to  send  Lieutenant  Wise  a telegram  daily,  which  is 
id  to  the  President,  all  of  which  I presume  you  understand,  which, 

► th  my  absence  and  great  pressure  of  business,  has  prevented  my 
iting  to  you  much  of  late. 

In  a great  hurry,  I am,  respectfully  and  trulv,  yours, 

* A.  H.  FOOTE. 


■ecial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

No.  108.  j Pea  Ridge , Arh.?  March  9,  1862. 

I.  Brigadier-General  Sigel  will  forthwith  move  his  entire  command 
: the  Bentonville  road  west  of  the  field  where  Colonel  Osterhaus  met 
:3  enemy  with  our  left  wing,  leaving  a picket  at  his  present  camping 
jDund.  On  arriving  at  that  point  further  instructions  will  be  iin- 
[rted. 

II.  Brigadier-General  Asboth,  Colonel  Schaefer,  of  the  Second  Mis- 
i iri  Volunteers,  and  Colonel  Greusel,  of  the  Thirty-sixth  Illinois,. 
* fl  report  in  person  at  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Curtis : 

T.  I.  McKENNY, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


602 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  zvn 


m. 


Headquarters  Department  op  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  March  10,  1862 — 7 p 

Major-General  McClellan,  Washington : 

Reserves  intended  to  support  General  Curtis  will  now  be  drawn  il 
as  rapidly  as  possible  and  sent  to  the  Tennessee.  I propose  goib 
there  in  a few  da  vs.  That  is  now  the  great  strategic  line  of  the  M es 
ern  campaign,  and  I am  snrprised  that  General  Buell  should  hesitaJ 
to  re-enforce  me.  He  was  too  late  at  Fort  Donelson,  as  Hunter  h< 
been  in  Arkansas.  I am  obliged  to  make  my  calculations  mdependei 
of  both.  Believe  me,  general,  you  make  a serious  mistake  m bavin 
three  independent  commands  in  the  West.  There  never  will  and  nevi 
can  be  anv  co-operation  at  the  critical  moment;  all  military  lnstoi 
proves  it.  ‘ You  will  regret  your  decision  against  me  on  this  point.  Yoil 
friendship  for  individuals  has  influenced  your  judgment.  Be  it  so.  I 
shall  soon  fight  a greatbattle  on  the  Tennessee,  unsupported,  as  it  =,eeml 
but  if  successful,  it  will  settle  the  campaign  in  the 

Major-General.  # 


Cairo,  March  10,  1862.  j 

Major-General  Haeleck:  I 

Pone  calling  loudly  for  siege  guns,  which  I am  just  ready  to  send  a 
I received  your  telegram  to  send  them  up  Tennessee.  Telegraph  ill 
mediately  whether  to  send  them  to  Kew  Madrid  or-Tenne^^ 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri 

Saint  Louis , March  10,  1862.  | 

Brigadier-General  Cullum,  Cairo , III . ' 

Send  all  siege  guns  to  Pope  he  wants.  I understand  you  have  six- 
enough  for  both  lines.  Why  can’t  Commodore  Foote  move  to-moriw 
It  is  all-important.  By  delay  he  spoils  all  my  plans.  Persuade  h 
go  see  Scott,  and  have  him  assist  you.  & w I1ALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Cairo,  March  10,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck  : , A 

Dispatch  from  Pope  just  in.  Persistent  efforts  of  ?™boats  to  d 
lodge  Plummer,  but  don’t  succeed  Has  lodgment  in i rifle .pits  at  Poi 
Pleasant  for  his  four  guns  and  thousand  men.  Immense  quantity 
supplies  fell  into  Plummer’s  hands.  Transport  mashed  by  gun 
Sd  Point  Pleasant  yesterday.  Reliable  information  tha^l.6,0 
<x)ming  from  Memphis  to  re-enfoice  Island  ilo.  10.  } -ucinrlo’ 

t^m  heavy  -uns  opposite,  but  Pope  thinks  Plummer  cannot  be  dislodg 
by  them  and  16,000  men.  If  possible  will  send  siege  wi 

without  waiting  for  horses  and  harness.  Can’t  coax  Foote  to  stir  wi 

gunboats  before  Wednesday.  ^ CULLUM. 


kP.  XVIII  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


603 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  10,  1862. 


iomas  A.  Scott, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War , Cairo  : 

Flotilla  should  go  down  the  river  as  far  as  possible  without  engaging 
y batteries  below  Point  Pleasant.  Forts  Eandolph  and  Pillow  will 
turned.  No  use  to  engage  them $ but  I want  the  navigation  of  the 
er  as  far  down  as  possible.  General  Curtis  has  just  gained  a great 
story  on  Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Our  loss  1,000.  I now  hope  soon  to  be 
le  to  go  to  the  Tennessee. . 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


jneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

No.  59.  ( Saint  Louis , March  10,  1862. 

. The  attention  of  all  officers  is  called  to  the  Army  Regulations  and 
lers  relating  to  uniforms.  Officers  wearing  gray  or  mixed  uniforms 
overcoats  in  the  field  will  be  arrested  and  tried  for  disobedience  of 
Lers  and  neglect  of  duty. 

I.  Commanders  of  divisions,  brigades,  and  regiments  will  see  that 
men  under  their  command  wear  any  gray  or  mixed  clothing.  Where 
icles  of  these  proscribed  colors  have  heretofore  been  duly  issued 
y will  be  immediately  turned  into  the  Quartermaster’s  Department 
1 others  of  the  proper  color  issued  in  their  place,  without  any  ex- 
ise  to  the  soldier. 

ly  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

N.  H.  MCLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


3Cial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

52.  j Camp  near  New  Madrid , March  10,  1862. 
he  following  disposition  of  troops  will  be  made  in  this  district: 

'he  Twenty-second  Illinois  Volunteers,  now  at  Bird’s  Point,  will  be 
bributed  as  follows:  Four  companies  at  Charleston,  two  at  Bertrand, 
four  at  Sikeston,  where  the  headquarters  of  the  regiment  will  be 
?iblished. 

>ne  company  of  the  First  Illinois  Cavalry  will  take  post  at  Sikeston, 
other  at  Charleston,  the  major  in  command  fixing  his  headquarters 
Charleston. 

he  commanding  officer  at  Bird’s  Point  will  attend  carefully  to  the 
: irity  of  the  railroad  from  that  point  to  Charleston,  keeping  such 
i essary  patrols  moving  backward  and  forward  on  the  road  as  will 
sufficient  to  insure  its  safety. 

he  garrison  at  Bird’s  Point  at  present  will  consist  of  the  Eighteenth 
souri  \ olunteers,  and  will  be  re-enforced  by  four  companies  of  the 
mty-second  Missouri  Volunteers,  now  at  Commerce,  as  soon  as  the 
J°t  can  be  broken  up  at  that  place.  The  depot  at  Commerce  will  be 
mediately  broken  up  by  the  officers  in  charge  and  all  the  stores 
f lsferred  to  Bird’s  Point,  where  the  staff  officers  now  on  duty  at 
amerce  will  immediately  take  post,  and  put  themselves  in  com- 
ucation  with  the  chief  of  their  respective  departments  at  these 
<uquarters.  The  brigade  surgeon  at  Commerce  will  take  immediate 


604 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvml 


steps  to  have  the  sick  in  his  charge  removed,  if  possible,  to  Sainl 
Louis:  if  not,  to  Cairo  or  Bird’s  Point,  and  so  soon  as  this  is  done  th  j 
four  companies  of  the  Twenty-second  Missouri  Volunteers  will  repai  | 
to  Bird’s  Point  and  report  to  the  commanding  officer  for  duty.  Colone 
Poster,  of  this  regiment,  will  report  in  person  to  the  assistant  adjutant® 
general  at  Saint  Louis,  to  superintend  the  reorganization  and  filling 

UPAn  ^troops' Tn 'this  military  district,  excepting  those  named  above 
and  the  garrison  at  Cape  Girardeau,  will  repair  without  delay  t 

these  headquarters.  . . » j 

All  transportation  whatever  within  this  district  will  be  brought  fin 
ward  by  the  forces  en  route  for  this  place.  A proper  staff  officer  wi] 
be  sent  from  these  headquarters  to  direct  and  superintend  the  moffl 
ments. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : SPEED  BUTLER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Lebanon,  March  11,  1862.  | 

Major-General  Halleck:  J 

My  patrol,  under  command  of  Captains  Warfel,  Ludlow,  and  Heiden. 
has  returned.  They  struck  the  nucleus  of  the  force  which  Price  j, 
organizing  in  the  southern  counties  under  the  avowed  name  of  guerri  i 
force  of  the  Fifth  and  Seventh  Military  Districts,  kdled  13,  wounded 
and  took  over  20  prisoners;  only  two  escaped.  The  commander  of  tu 
district  guerrillas,  General  E.  Campbell,  was  taken  with  his  wntte 
authority  from  Price  to  raise  guerrilla  bands.  He  is  now  m my  hand: 
This  is  the  body  which  attacked  my  patrol  on  Friday.  The  engage 
ment  was  2 miles  from  the  Montreal.  We  lost  none  m this  engag- 
ment.  One  killed  and  5 wounded  on  Fnday.^  r WAEIKO) 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , March  11,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  McKean,  Jefferson  City,  Mo.:  i 

It  is  reported  that  secessionists  are  committing  great  outrages  aboi 
Clinton.  A regiment  of  cavalry  should  be  sent  to  Olmton  and  Osceoli 
and  perhaps  farther  south,  to  break  up  these  bands  I ™1* 
another  expedition  from  Rolla  through  Lebanon,  Buftalo,  Bolivar, 

to  co-operate.  jj  w.  HALLECK,  ! 

Major-General 


Headquarters  Mississippi  District, 

New  Madrid,  March  11,  1862. 

General  Cullum: 

1 received  last  night  your  letter  of  yesterday  morning.  on  1 
doubtless  seen  Colonel  Bissell  since.  I am  anxious  to  get  the  sie 
guns  as  soon  as  possible.  With  them  I can  settle  matters  without 


(AP.  XVIII. j CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  605 

d of  the  gunboats  from  Cairo.  The  enemy,  finding  he  could  make 
) impression  on  the  force  at  Point  Pleasant,  has  withdrawn  his  bat- 
ries  from  the  opposite  shore  and  ceased  to  pass  up  and  down  the 
iver. 

Transports  are  only  able  to  pass  when  masked  closely  by  at  least 
yo  gunboats  for  each  steamer,  and  then  only  by  passing  close  to  the 
;>posite  shore.  He  is  landing  troops  4 miles  below  Point  Pleasant, 
i the  opposite  shore,  and  marching  them  across  the  neck  of  land  and 
ten  recrossing  to  Island  No.  10.  In  this  way  considerable  re-enforce- 
ients  have  been  thrown  on  to  the  island  within  a day  or  two.  From 
.e  island  this  place  has  also  been  considerably  re-enforced,  until  the 
lemy’s  force  here  cannot  be  much  short  of  11,000  men.  As  soon  as 
can  drive  off  the  gunboats  all  the  forces  there  will  be  taken. 

I am  very  anxious  (for  service  on  the  river)  to  have  larger  field  guns, 
le  20-pounder  Parrotts  are  exactly  the  gun  we  want,  and  by  ha  ving 
veral  batteries  of  them  our  efficiency  would  be  a thousand  times 
creased.  Our  smaller  guns  have  not  range  enough  to  cover  the 
hole  breadth  of  the  river  with  certainty.  With  enough  of  the  20- 
rnnder  Parrotts  we  can  pass  below  and  mask  every  work  the  enemy 
n erect  or  has  erected  on  the  river.  I am  sure  you  will  aid  me  in 
e matter.  I send  an  open  order  for  the  disposition  of  troops  within 
is  district.  General  Paine,  for  some  singular  reason,  has  sent  frag- 
pnts  of  regiments  here,  detailing  two  companies  from  one,  four  from 
nther,  &c.,  where  one  single  regiment  taken  together  would  have 
en  sufficient,  and  have  given  us  full  regiments  here.  I have  endeav- 
ed,  in  the  order  inclosed,  to  correct  this,  but  before  having  it  executed 
bmit  it  to  you,  that  I may  not  interfere  with  arrangements  of  yours, 
wish  the  whole  affair  at  Commerce  broken  up.  The  sick  ought  to  be 
mt  somewhere  to  be  taken  care  of.  I need  staff  officers,  especially 
1 idical  officers,  more  than  I can  tell. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Telegraph  the  following  order  to  Major-General  Halleck,  at  Saint 
>uis,  Mo.: 

Iesident\s  War  Order,  ) Executive  Mansion, 

No.  3.  j Washington,  March  11,  1862. 

fajor-General  McClellan  having  personally  taken  the  field  at  the  head  of  the  Army 
the  Potomac,  until  otherwise  ordered  he  is  relieved  from  the  command  of  the  other 
itary  departments,  he  retaining  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Potomac. 
yrd&'ed  further,  That  the  two  departments  now  under  the  respective  commands  of 
aerals  Halleck  and  Hunter,  together  with  so  much  of  that  under  General  Buell  as 
» west  of  a north  and  south  line  indefinitely  drawn  through  Knoxville,  Term.,  be 
: isolidated  and  designated  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  and  that  until  other- 
»*e  ordered  Major-General  Halleck  have  command  of  said  department. 
h'dered  also,  That  the  country  west  of  the  Department  of  the  Potomac  and  east  of 
: Department  of  the  Mississippi  be  a military  department,  to  be  called  the  Mountain 
ipartment,  and  that  the  same  be  commanded  by  Major-General  Fremont.  That  all 
' commanders  of  departments,  after  the  receipt  of  this  order  by  them  respectively, 
ort  severally  and  directly  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  that  prompt,  full,  and  fre- 
' mt  reports  will  be  expected  of  all  and  each  of  them. 

ABRAHAM  LINCOLN. 

*y  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-General. 


606  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIUfl 


Major-General  Hunter, 
lieved  from  His  command 
place  some  other  officer 
of  this  by  telegram. 


whose  date  is  senior  to  yours,  has  been  re  j 
and  the  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  yoi  . 
at  Fort  Leavenworth.  Acknowledge  receipj 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant- General.  I 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  12,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Paine, 

Commanding  Fourth  Division : 

General:  I have  directed  Colonel  Elliott  to  report  to  yon  at  daj 
light  to-morrow  morning  with  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  and  also  i 
battery  of  four  pieces,  now  encamped  with  General  Hamilton  s divisior 
I desire  yon  to  hold  your  division  in  readiness  to  march  at  daylight  tc 
morrow  morning,  with  one  day’s  cooked  rations,  full  supply  ol  ammun 
tion,  and  everything  in  complete  order  for  fighting.  As  soon  as  yo 
perceive  Hamilton’s  division  (on  your  right)  m motion,  you  will  marc, 
vour  division  to  the  road  leading  into  New  Madrid,  through  the  cente 
of  our  lines,  and  down  that  road  until  you  are  barely  out  of  range  & 
the  enemy’s  gunboats.  You  will  there  remain  until  further  order* 
You  will  be  careful  to  keep  your  pickets  on  the  bayou  road  as  far  to 
wards  the  enemy  as  possible,  that  our  left  may  not  be  turned  withou 
due  warning.  Form  your  command  in  columns  of  division,  doubled  o 
the  center,  on  each  side  of  the  road  leading  into  New  Madrid,  and  kee 
them  well  in  hand,  so  that  you  can  advance  against  the  enemy  at  tb 
shortest  notice,  being  careful  always  to  march  well  to  the  rear,  so  as  t 
be  quite  out  of  range,  and  not  to  draw  the  enemy’s  fire.  I wish  you,  a 
hour  after  dark  to-night,  to  re-enforce  the  lower  pickets  along  tb 
bavou  with  four  companies  of  sharpshooters,  and  direct  them  to  let 
their  way  in  towards  the  town  and  drive  in  the  enemy’s  pickets,  so  a 
to  distract  his  attention  from  the  work  on  the  battery  on  our  ngb 
They  had  best  keep  up  the  enemy’s  alarm  on  our  left  m this  way  tn 
greater  part  of  the  night.  Orders  will  be  sent  to  you  in  time  for  lui 
ther  movements. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JJNU#  x Ur  Jljj 

Brigadier- General.  Commanding. 


Saint  Louis,  March  12,  1862. 


Flag-Officer  Foote,  Cairo : 

You  will  not  make  an  attack  on  Island  No.  10  until  further  order 
I wish  to  wait  until  General  Pope  gets  his  heavy  guns  m position  t 


cut  off  the  enemy’s  retreat. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Cairo,  III.,  March  12,  1862. 
Lieut.  H.  A.  Wise,  U.  S.  N.,  or  Assistant  Secretary  Fox : 

I send  you  copy  of  my  telegram  forwarded  at  noon  this  day  ft 
General  H.  W.  Halleck : 


iap.  XYIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


607 


* re?'?y3t?,in10v®  ?Yltb  seven  gunboats  and  ten  mortar  boats  upon  Island  No.  10 

id  New  Madrid,  but  the  troops  and  transports  are  not  here,  and  I consider  it  unsafe 
move  without  troops  to  occupy  No.  10  if  we  capture  it,  as  we  cannot  take  prisoners 
ith  gunboats.  Hence,  should  we  pass  No.  10,  after  its  capture  the  rebels  on  the  Ten- 
issee  side  would  return  and  man  their  batteries,  and  thus  shut  up  the  river  in  our 
ar,  as  we  should  be  short  of  coal  and  tow-boats  to  get  back  to  reattack  No.  10  or  the 
iposite  shore. 

Can  we  proceed  below,  leaving  these  places  unoccupied,  without  endangering  Colum- 
is,  where  I believe,  no  guns  have  been  mounted  to  sweep  and  protect  the  river  be- 
w from  the  eleven  gunboats  of  the  rebels  ? 

I wait  your  repiy  after  these  suggestions,  which  the  exigencies  of  the  service  lead 
a thus  fully  to  express. 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer . 


Headquarters,  District  North  Mo.  R.  R., 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  March  12,  1862. 

tptain  Warrens, 


Fifth  Missouri  Cavalry , Warrenton , Mo. : 


Captain  : An  order  has  been  sent  you  through  Colonel  Morsey  to 
oceed  with  two  companies  to  Troy,  in  Lincoln  County,  and  occupy 
at  place. 

I want  you  to  use  your  utmost  exertions  to  ferret  out  and  bring  to 
stice  the  insurgents  and  jayhawkers  in  that  region. 

The  general  order,  a copy  of  which  is  inclosed,*  will  be  your  general 
ide  m the  discharge  of  your  duty.  You  will  observe  that  a certain 
id  of  property  only  is  to  be  seized  and  that  only  from  a particular 
bss  of  persons.  Even  this  to  be  restored  if  the  owner  voluntarily 
^es  himself  up  and  is  found  to  be  such  a one  as  should  be  released 
bond  and  oath. 

[t  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  you  prevent  your  men  frmn  com- 
i ttmg  depredations  upon  private  property.  The  object  is  not  so  much 
punish  the  rebels  for  what  they  have  done  as  to  prevent  them  from 
ng  injury  in  the  future. 

Chis  is  to  be  done  by  putting  the  incorrigible  out  of  the  way,  either 
death  or  imprisonment,  and  by  securing  the  good  conduct  of  others 
ough  the  obligation  of  a bond  and  oath,  while  many  may  be  reclaimed 
justice  mingled  with  kindness. 

t is  reported  that  there  is  an  extensive  organization  in  Lincoln  and 
oimng  counties  of  men  who  are  determined  to  continue  their  insur- 
it  operations,  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  plunder  and  revenge, 
none  of  these  escape  you,  and  be  careful  not  to  release  improper 
sons  on  any  conditions. 

hope  to  hear  the  best  reports  from  your  command. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier-  General . 


neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Missouri, 

_ °*  61-  f Saint  Louis , March  12,  1862. 

Official  notice  having  been  received  that  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
adopted  regulations  for  commercial  intercourse  with  States  here- 

* Not  found. 


608 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVrn 


V°By*contoiand  of  Mojor-Coneral  Holleck . ^ & McLEAN, 

a ocietnnt  A diutant- General,  j 


Special  Orders, 
No.  Ill 


Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Southwest,  I 
Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  12,  1862. 1 

I The  First  Division  will  move  forward  and  take  position  as  nesl 

nxi  s^arssaffirai-  t»™,  ».a  J 

leave  to  H 

their  health.  ^ T)  p.  -• 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  S.  K.  Cu  . T j McKENNY, 

i Minn  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department^™  Mississippi, 


£»  wSt  Pto-od  Vr&’^U^TirXSSSsd 
SESS'* ’bo*...  idij  X ! 

M a a nr-  General. 


Cairo,  III.,  March  13, 


1862 


Maior-General  Halleck  : . A T . 

Your  instructions  to  attack  Island  No.  10  ^.^^','1,',  the  followi 
move  for  tliat  purpose  to-morrow  mommg.  ®t  aeivo  wiU  le 

telegram  to  the i Ni ^ ^ ® ®Pa^e  ^I^nboats  within  short  range 
me  to  be  cautious,  and.  not  Dimg  g attacks  down  the  rive 
the  enemy’s  batteries.  Generally,  m all  our  attecks  aown  ^ 

will  bear  in  mind  the  effect  on  this  Pla£?  . , General  Stronf 

a serious  disaster  to  the  gunboats  would  mv< live.  Gene. -ai^, 
telegraphing  Paducah  for  transports,  as  there  are 


AF.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


609 


V.  Fox  or  Lieut.  H.  A.  Wise,  Washington: 

The  iron-clad,  boats  cannot  be  held  when  anchored  by  stern  in  this  current,  on  ac- 
unt  of  the  recess  between  the  fan-tails  forming  the  stern  yawing  them  about,  and  as 
0 sterns  of  the  boats  are  not  plated,  and  have  but  two  32-pounders  astern,  you  will 

> our  difficulty  of  fighting  down-stream  effectually.  Neither  is  there  power  enough 
any  of  them  to  back  up-stream.  We  must  therefore  tie  up  to  shore  the  best  way 

> can  and  help  the  mortar  boats.  I have  long  since  expressed  to  General  Meigs  my 
prehensions  about  these  boats’  defects.  Don’t  have  any  gunboats  for  rivers  built 
th  wheels  amidships.  The  drift-wood  would  choke  the  wheel,  even  if  it  had  a pow- 
ul  engine.  I felt  it  my  duty  to  state  these  difficulties,  which  could  not  be  obviated 
ten  I came  here,  as  the  vessels  were  modeled  and  partly  built. 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-  Officer , Commanding  Flotilla . 


General  Cullum: 


Headquarters  Mississippi  District, 

‘Near  New  Madrid , March  13,  1862. 


[ established  last  night  the  heavy  guns  in  position  and  opened  at 
plight.  At  this  hour  (2  o’clock  p.  in.)  the  gunboats  are  still  hold- 
k on,  though  several  of  them  are  injured.  Our  loss  has  been  1 officer 
led  and  6 men  wounded.  The  heavy  guns  are  established  within 
p yards  of  the  enemy’s  lower  redoubt,  and  I shall,  under  the  cir- 
tnstances,  be  obliged  to  work  on  towards  the  river  by  trenches,  so 
to  establish  the  heavy  battery  directly  on  the  bank.  This  will  re- 
ire  a day  or  two.  The  enemy  will  not  be  able  to  dislodge  us  from 
r present  position  nor  from  any  other,  as  they  depend  and  must 
I pend  altogether  on  the  gunboats.  There  are  now  nine  gunboats 
ire,  and  it  is  apparent  that  the  enemy  means  to  make  a stand  here 
long  as  possible.  I will  commence  to-night  to  push  approaches  to- 
rds  the  river  and  move  forward  the  battery  as  soon  as  I can.  The 
?my  continues  to  re-enforce  from  above,  but  I think  not  heavily.  If 
> gun  and  mortar  boats  were  here  to  drive  off  the  gunboats  of  the 
uny,  we  could  easily  deal  with  his  land  forces.  The  20-pounder  Par- 
ts will  help  us  greatly.  We  must  also  have  more  24-pounder  and 
ich  howitzer  ammunition  as  soon  as  possible.  Also  two  or  three 
re  heavy  guns,  if  possible.  The  troops  are  in  fine  spirits  and  ex- 
it wonderful  gallantry. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Pilot  Knob,  March  13,  1862. 

iaeral  Halleck: 

lolonel  Carlin  writes  me  from  Fives’  Station  that  the  rebels  are  3,000 
Ang  at  Pitman’s  Ferry  and  have  about  2,000  more  near  at  hand, 
f.  Thompson  is  at  Pocahontas.  The  water  is  so  high  that  the  troops 
mot  cross  from  Greenville  at  present.  I hear  nothing  of  the  Thir- 
< nth  Illinois  Cavalry  yet. 

FKED’K  STEELE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

39  R r — VOL  VIII 


610 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T,  LChav.  XVU 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  13,  18o2.  q 


Brig.  Gen.  Fred.  Steele,  Pilot  Knob : 

You  wiU  not  advance  so  as  to  endanger  your  command.  You  wl 
soon  be  re-enforced,  either  from  General  Pope 

Major-General  I 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mtssour1,  _ 

Saint  Louis,  March  13,  1802, 


Major-General  Pope  : _ . . . 

Tt  is  reported  that  the  enemy  has  about  5,000  men  at  Pitman  sFer 
and  Pocahontas  Can  yon  spare  the  two  regiments  of  Michigan  cal 
airy!  If  so,  send  them  to  re  enforce  General  Steele,  who  is  now  I 
Greenville,  moving  on  Martinsburg,  with  a detachment  at  Poplar  B u 
It  is  slid  that  with  slight  repairs  the  road  from  Sikeston  by  Bloomfie, 
and  Saint  Francisville  will  be  practicable.  ^n^erEALLE0]^ 

Major- Generali 


Near  New  Madrid,  March  13,  1802. 


Major-General  Halleck  : J 

Your  dispatch  of  this  date  received.  The  enemy  have  been  so  large 
re-enforced  as  to  be  very  nearly  equal  in  numbers  to  myself.  e 
quite  so  in  the  absence  of  one  brigade  of  four  regiments  at  Point  I let 
ant  The  large  detachment  required  to  work  m and  guard  the  trencM 
makes  my  security  depend  upon  the  cavalry  force  here.  Theunaccom 
able  delay  of  our  gunboats  has  forced  me  to  establish  batteries  ai 
push  regular  approaches  to  the  bank  of  the  river  so  that  1 can  estabh 
the  heavy  guns  necessary  to  drive  oft  the  gunboats.  The  details 
such  work  and  of  the  guards  for  the  trenches  are  so  large  necessa  i 
that,  I fear  to  detach  any  portion  of  this  force,  especially  the  cavalr 
It  is  evident  that  the  enemy  design  to  defend  this  place  desperate 
Their  whole  force,  except  gunners,  has  been  sent  here  from  IsJ 

^°f  !!  very  sorry,  and,  as  you  know,  not  disposed  to  be  overcautaot 
but  I should  regard  it  as  very  unsafe  to  detach  a man  from  this  pi  1 
I have  called  forward  everything  I had  in  the  district  except  the  gu 
necessary  for  the  railroad.  JNO  pGpE 

Brigadier- General 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Near  Bentonmllc , March  13,  lw- 

COMMANDINGr  OFFICER  U.  S.  FORCES, 

Bn  route  for  Kansas  : 

Sir:  1 have  routed  the  combined  forces  of  Van  Dorn,  Price,! 
Oulloch,  and  Pike  in  a three  days  encounter  at  Pea . Kidg : • 
vance  of  cavalry  is  at  Bentouville.  Ihere  is  a good . P Creek 

miles  west  of  Bentouville.  Also  at  any  point  on  Little  Sugar  Creel, 


IAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


611 


I desire  to  secure  an  early  junction  of  our  forces,  if  your  orders  are 
insistent  with  such  a movement. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  &c., 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  13,  1862. 

ajor-General  Curtis, 

In  the  Field , via  Springfield : 

The  Department  of  Kansas  having  been  added  to  this,  ypu  will  as- 
ime  command  of  all  Kansas  troops  in  your  vicinity. 

You  will  see  that  they  are  kept  under  discipline  and  will  punish  any 
tempt  at  jayhawking. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  13,  1862. 

ajor-General  Curtis, 

In  the  Field , Arkansas  : 

Be  careful  to  keep  your  main  force  together  and  well  in  hand.  Ascer- 
in  the  enemy’s  movements  by  throwing  out  cavalry.  Be  careful  of 
in  Dorn.  He  is  a vigilant  and  energetic  officer,  and  will  be  certain 
i;  strike  any  exposed  point.  Keep  me  well  advised  of  the  enemy’s 
ovements,  as  I must  be  prepared  for  him  on  other  points.  This  is 
i portant. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


sneral  Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi, 

1*  i Saint  Louis , March  13,  1862. 

1.  In  compliance  with  the  orders  of  the  President  of  the  United  States 
.3  undersigned  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  the 
| ssissippi,  which  includes  the  present  Department  of  Kansas  and  the 
ssouri  and  the  Department  of  the  Ohio  and  country  west  of  a north 
d south  line  drawn  through  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  east  of  the  western 
undaries  of  the  States  of  Missouri  and  Arkansas.  Headquarters  of 
3 Department  of  the  Mississippi  will  remain,  until  further  orders,  at 
' int  Louis,  Mo. 

[I.  Commanding  officers  not  in  the  Department  of  the  Missouri  will 
mediately  report  to  these  headquarters  the  strength  and  positions  of 
‘ir  several  commands. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


ineral  Orders,  1 Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi, 

N°-  2.  { Saint  Louis , March  13,  1862. 

/•  Martial  law  has  never  been  legally  declared  in  Missouri,  except  in 
3 city  of  Saint  Louis  and  on  and  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  rail. 


612 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYllI 


Toads  and  telegraph  lines ; and  even  m these  localities  military  oflicei 
are  specially  directed  not  to  interfere  with  the  lawful  process  of  an 
loyal  civil  court.  It  is  believed  that  the  time  will  soon  come  when  th 
rebellion  in  Missouri  may  be  considered  as  terminated,  and  when  eve 
the  partial  and  temporary  military  restraint  which  has  been  exercise 
in  particular  places  may  be  entirely  withdrawn.  By  none  is  this  moi 
desired  than  by  the  general  commanding.  . j 

II  ii  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  m all  places  subject  1 
the  incursions  of  the  enemy  or  to  the  depredations  of  insurgents  an 
guerrilla  bands,  the  military  are  authorized,  without  any  formal  dedal 
ation  of  martial  law,  to  adopt  such  measures  as  may  be  necessary  i 
restore  the  authority  of  the  Government  and  to  punish  all  violatioi 
of  the  laws  of  war.  This  power  will  be  exercised  only  where  the  pea<j 
of  the  country  and  the  success  of  the  Union  cause  absolutely  reqvure  ij 

III  Evidence  has  been  received  at  these  headquarters  that  Mai 
Gen.  Sterling  Price  has  issued  commissions  or  licenses,  to  certain  bad 
dits  in  this  State,  authorizing  them  to  raise  “guerrilla  forces,”  for  tt 
purpose  of  plunder  and  marauding.  General  Price  ought  to  know  th, 
such  a course  is  contrary  to  the  rules  of  civilized  warfare,  and  th, 
every  man  who  enlists  in  such  an  organization  forfeits  his  life  and  b 
comes  an  outlaw.  All  persons  are  hereby  warned  that  if  they  join  an 
guerrilla,  band  they  will  not,  if  captured,  be  treated  as  ordinary  pn 
oners  of  war,  but  will  be  hung  as  robbers  and  murderers.  Their  liyl 
shall  atone  for  the  barbarity  of  their  general. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

A distant  A diutant-  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  54.  f 


War  Dept.,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Washington , March  13,  1862. 


4 Brie:  Gen.  J.  W.  Denver  is  relieved  from  duty  in  the  Departmei 
of  the  Mountain,  and  will  report  in  person  to  Major-General  Hallec 
commanding  Department  of  the  Mississippi. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : ^ THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Near  New  Madrid,  March  13  (via  Cairo , 14),  1862. 


Major-General  Halleck: 

Cannot  more  and  larger  size  artillery  be  sent  me;  also  ammum  i 
for  the  24-pounders  and  8-inch  howitzers  1 There  is  none  a*  Cairo,  a 
only  100  rounds  were  sent ; also  the  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  at  J< 

^Hine^iinboats  are  here,  carrying  over  fifty  heavy  g>mhi^esi,les* 
heavy  guns  in  the  intrenchments.  Unless  our  gunboats  are  sent  he 
at  once,  more  and  heavier  artillery  ought  to  be  sent  me.  I have 
little  ammunition  for  those  I have.  POPE 

Brigadier- General. 


hap.  XYin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  613 

Headquarters  Mississippi  District, 

Near  New  Madrid , March  14,  1862. 

laj  or- General  Halle  ck  : 

To  my  utter  amazement  the  enemy  hurriedly  evacuated  the  place  last 
ight,  leaving  everything.  They  were  landed  in  the  woods  opposite 
ad  dispersed.  They  have  been  landing  troops  here  ever  since  we  ar- 
ived,  and  I am  sure  almost  that  they  have  withdrawn  all  their  troops 
■om  Island  No.  10.  I can  send  you  the  cavalry  for  Steele,  hut  would 
refer  to  send  other  regiments.  Please  inform  me  as  to  your  wishes 
bout  my  further  operations.  I shall  reconnoiter  Island  No.  10  to-day. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Cairo,  March  14,  1862. 

[aj.  Gen.  John  Pope,  New  Madrid: 

I congratulate  you  and  your  command  on  the  success  which  has 
[•owned  your  toils  and  exposures.  You  have  given  the  final  blow  to 
le  rebellion  in  Missouri  and  proved  yourselves  worthy  members  of  the 
rave  Army  of  the  West. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


New  Madrid,  March  14,  1862. 

[ajor-General  Halleck: 

New  Madrid  is  in  our  possession.  Our  lines  were  drawn  closely 
round  the  works  all  day  yesterday  under  furious  cannonading  from 
ine  gunboats  and  from  heavy  batteries  on  land.  Last  night  the  place 
as  hurriedly  evacuated  under  cover  of  the  furious  storm  which  raged 
1 night.  All  of  their  artillery  (field  batteries  and  siege  guns),  an 
nmense  quantity  of  military  stores,  all  their  tents,  wagons,  mules,  &c., 
ave  fallen  into  our  hands.  The  enemy  carried  off  nothing  except  his 
en,  who  were  landed  immediately  opposite  on  the  wide  bottom  and 
ispersed.  Hamilton’s  division  is  now  entering  this  place. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Mississippi  District, 

New  Madrid,  March  14,  1862. 


ajor-General  Halleck  : 


Our  success  has  been  even  greater  than  I reported.  Twenty-five  pieces 
’heavy  artillery,  24-pounders  and  rifled  32s,  two  batteries  of  field  ar- 
llery,  an  immense  quantity  of  mixed  ammunition,  several  thousand 
and  of  small-anns,  with  hundreds  of  boxes  of  musket  cartridges,  300 
ules  and  horses,  tents  for  an  army  of  12,000  men,  and  an  immense 
nantity  of  other  valuable  property  of  not  less  value  than  a million  of 
idlars,  have  fallen  into  our  hands.  The  men  only  escaped,  but  the 
lemy’s  whole  force  is  demoralized  and  dispersed  in  the  swamp  on  the 
i>posite  side  of  the  river.  The  enemy  abandoned  the  works  so  hur- 
edly  as  to  leave  all  the  baggage  of  officers  and  knapsacks  of  men,  their 
sad  unburied,  their  suppers  on  the  tables,  and  the  candles  burning  in 


614 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  xVND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVUi 


the  tents.  The  furious  thunder- storm  which  raged  all  night  enablecl 
them  to  get  across  the  river  without  being  discovered. 

Our  heavy  battery  was  established  during  the  night  of  the  12tl 
within  800  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  opened  at  daylight  on  th(  I 
13th,  just  thirty-four  hours  after  the  guns  were  delivered  to  us  at  Cairo! 

During  the  whole  day  yesterday  our  lines  were  drawn  closer  and  closei 
around  their  works  under  the  furious  fire  of  sixty  pieces  of  artillery  I 
The  fear  of  an  assault  upon  their  works  at  daylight  induced  them  to  flet 
precipitately  during  the  night.  Many  prisoners  have  been  taken  anci 
the  colors  of  several  Arkansas  regiments.  I believe  that  there  arenc 
troops  at  Island  No.  10,  but  shall  know  certainly  during  the  night.  Oui 
forces  behaved  admirably.  Our  loss  has  been  about  50  killed  anci 
wounded.  Commodore  Hollins  was  in  command  of  the  fleet,  and  Gen 
erals  McCown,  Stewart,  and  Gantt  of  the  land  forces.  The  gunboat* 
went  down  the  river.  I have  twenty-five  heavy  guns  in  the  two  work*  i 
of  the  enemy,  which  command  every  foot  of  the  river. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . i 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  14,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington: 

After  several  days’  skirmishing  and  a number  of  attempts  by  th( 
enemy’s  gunboats  to  dislodge  General  Pope’s  batteries  at  Point  Pleasanl 
the  enemy  has  evacuated  his  fort  and  intrenchments  at  New  Madrid 
leaving  all  his  artillery,  field  batteries,  tents,  wagons,  mules,  &c.,  am 
an  immense  quantity  of  military  stores.  Brig.  Gen.  Schuyler  Hamiltor 
has  occupied  the  place.  This  was  the  last  stronghold  of  the  enemy  u 
this  State.  There  is  no  rebel  flag  now  flying  in  Missouri. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-  General . 


Fort  Leavenworth,  March  14, 1862. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department : 

Colonel  Deitzler,  First  Kansas,  left  in  command  of  department,  ha* 
5,000  available  troops  at  and  around  Fort  Scott,  with  one  battery  ol 
artillery:  last  heard  from  preparing  to  re-enforce  General  Curtis— prob 
ably  not  yet  left.  Has  200  wagons  for  regimental  and  commissary 
purposes ; 135,000  complete  rations.  ^ A 

Jennison  at  Humboldt,  three  days’  march  from  Fort  Scott.  Eighth 
Kansas  distributed  as  provost  guard  for  the  State.  Second  Kansas 
Cavalry,  twelve  companies,  now  being  organized,  armed,  and  equipped 
near  Lawrence.  Colorado  Volunteers,  600  strong,  gone  to  re-entorcc 
Colonel  Canby.  These,  with  post  garrisons,  aggregate  1,500,  making 
proximate  department  aggregate  only  8,000  available  troops,  roi 
Scott  within  twenty-two  hours’  communication  daily  by  express,  day 
hawkers  murdering  and  pillaging  in  Jackson  County  and  border;  con 
sequently  all  Fourth  Kansas,  six  companies,  sent  to  Independence  am 

Westport,  Mo.,  to  day.  ^T.T„ 

1 ’ ’ CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


iap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  615 

Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth , March  14,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi , Saint  Louis , Mo.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor,  in  reply  to  your  telegram,  received  late 
st  evening,  requesting  to  be  furnished  immediately  with  a correct 
atement  of  the  number  and  position  of  troops  in  this  department,  to 
ansmit  herewith  copy  of  General  Orders,  No.  26,  of  this  department, 
(organizing  the  Kansas  troops,  now  in  process  of  being  carried  out; 
id  further  to  state  that  the  only  regiments  in  Kansas  at  present  in 
Fective  condition  for  active  service  are  the  First  and  Eighth  Kansas, 
ie  former  at  Fort  Scott,  the  latter  distributed  through  the  dis- 
irbed  counties  of  the  State  as  provost  guard.  The  Seventh  Kansas 
ennison’s),  with  a field  piece  and  mountain  howitzer,  at  Humboldt, 
) miles  from  Fort  Scott;  and  the  Ninth,  Twelfth,  and  Thirteenth 
Wisconsin  Regiments  (infantry)  and  Second  Ohio  Cavalry  and  Rabb’s 
idiana  Battery  of  six  rifled  pieces,  all  at  Fort  Scott  or  now  moving 
>uth  from  there,  under  command  of  Col.  George  W.  Deitzler,  left  by 
eneral  Hunter  in  command  of  the  department,  to  whom  your  com  mu- 
cations  announcing  the  position  of  General  Curtis  were  duly  for- 
arded  by  express  immediately  on  their  arrival. 

Of  the  regiments  at  Fort  Scott  the  following,  from  last  report,  is  the 
Fective  strength  for  the  field,  there  being  much  sickness  now  in  this 
apartment : First  Kansas  Infantry,  600 ; Ninth  Wisconsin  Infantry, 
>0;  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  750 ; Thirteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry, 
)0;  Second  Ohio  Cavalry,  850—140  men  having  been  detailed  from 
iis  regiment  to  form  a battery  now  being  organized  at  this  post 
ider  command  of  Lieut.  George  S.  Hollister,  Seventh  U.  S.  Infantry, 
hich  battery  is  not  completed  yet,  owing  to  the  non-arrival  of  car- 
ages,  caissons,  and  equipments  for  the  guns;  and  Rabb’s  Indiana  Bat- 
ry  complete. 

The  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry  (Jennison’s)  have  830  men  in  effective 
mdition  at  Humboldt,  and  the  Eighth  Kansas  Infantry,  until  recently 
>mmanded  by  Major  Wessells,  of  the  regular  service,  and  distributed 
irough  the  State  to  protect  its  peace,  is  a full  regiment,  1,000  strong, 
id  in  good  condition. 

Believing  that,  owing  to  various  causes,  the  condition  and  resources 
‘ this  department  have  been  misrepresented  and  grossly  exaggerated 
yT  the  press  and  in  public  speeches,  I would  most  respectfully  submit 
ie  following  statement  as  to  the  condition  of  the  other  Kansas  troops  : 
Nothing  could  exceed  the  demoralized  condition  in  which  General 
unter  found  the  Third  and  Fourth  Kansas  Infantry  and  Fifth  and 
sixth  Kansas  Cavalry,  formerly  known  as  “ Lane’s  brigade,”  on  liis 
rival  in  this  department.  The  regimental  and  company  commanders 
lew  nothing  of  their  duties  and  apparently  had  never  made  returns 
reports  of  any  kind.  The  regiments  appeared  in  worse  condition 
lan  they  could  possibly  have  been  in  during  the  first  week  of  their 
llistment,  their  camps  being  little  better  than  vast  pig-pens,  officers 
id  men  sleeping  and  messing  together;  furloughs  in  immense  num- 
3rs  being  granted,  or,  where  not  granted,  taken ; drill  having  been 
)andoned  almost  wholly,  and  the  men  constituting  a mere  ragged, 
ilf-armed,  diseased,  and  mutinous  rabble,  taking  votes  as  to  whether 
iy  troublesome  or  distasteful  order  should  be  obeyed  or  defied. 

Vast  amounts  of  public  property  had  been  taken  from  the  depots  at 
ort  Scott  and  Fort  Lincoln  without  requisition  or  any  form  of  respon- 
bility,  and  horses  in  great  quantities  and  at  extravagant  prices  had 


616 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVm| 

been  purchased  under  irregular  orders  and  paid  for  by  the  Unite! 
States ; these  horses  being  then  turned  over  to  men  and  officers  will 
were  then  drawing  40  cents  extra  per  day  for  them  as  private  property! 

Without  troops  from  other  States  or  of  a better  kind  to  hold  thJ , 
mutinous  in  subjection  General  Hunter  had  a difficult  and  most  labo« 
rious  task  in  the  administration  of  the  department.  The  few  officer! 
willing  to  do  right,  if  they  knew  how,  had  to  be  instructed  in  nearl  j 
every  branch  of  their  duties,  and  this  was  the  more  difficult,  as  for  tin 
first  two  months  the  department  was  almost  entirely  destitute  of  blank! 
and  has  never  had  a proper  supply.  A 

To  remedy  these  things  mustering  officers  were  sent  to  remuster  tin 
regiments  of  Lunevs  brigade  and  consolidate  the  companies  to  tin 
minimum  standing,  mustering  out  the  surplus  officers  and  all  wlnl 
could  prove  they  had  been  enlisted  as  Home  Guards  under  Genera 
Lyon’s  call.  These  mustering  officers  found  that  the  companies  ranged 
from  25  to  60  men  each,  but  the  average  about  50,  each  having  a cap  ■ 
tain  and  two  lieutenants,  and  in  some  instances  more ; and  had  tin 
department,  as  previously7-,  been  without  troops  from  other  States,  then 
is  every  probability  that  a general  mutiny  of  the  regiments  namec 
would  have  taken  place,  instead  of  the  partial  mutinies  which  liav( 

been  suppressed.  . , I 

The  mustering  is  now,  I believe,  complete,  or  will  be  m a lew  days 
but  the  rolls  have  not  yet  been  received,  and  until  they  are  no  reliable 
returns  of  Lane’s  brigade  or  Clark’s  cavalry  battalion  (formerly  Tentl 
Kansas  Regiment)  can  be  prepared.  Four  or  five  companies  have  beei 
mustered  out  as  Home  Guards,  who  should  have  been  mustered  om 
last  October;  and  when  the  remuster  rolls  are  received  no  doubt  tin 
Third  and  Fourth  Kansas  Infantry  will  be  consolidated  into  one  regi 
ment,  their  overplus,  if  any,  being  needed  to  fill  the  ranks  of  the  Firsi 
Kansas,  which  has  lacked  its  full  complement  by  several  hundred  smct 
the  battle  of  Wilson’s  Creek.  This  will  leave  the  State  but  tliret 
infantry  regiments — the  First,  Third  and  Fourth  consolidated,  and 

Eighth.  , 

The  Fifth  and  Sixth  Cavalry,  too,  can  be  consolidated  into  one  regi 
ment,  absorbing  a portion  of  Clark’s  battalion,  and  turning  over  tin 
balance  to  fill  the  incomplete  companies  of  the  Kansas  Ninth,  hereafter, 
by  Governor  Robinson’s  order,  to  be  known  as  the  Kansas  Second. 
This  last-named  regiment,  of  twelve  companies,  is  now  being  armed, 
mounted,  and  equipped  in  camp  near  Lawrence,  about  200  of  its  men 
belonging  to  the  old  Kansas  Second  (disbanded  after  the  battle  oi 
Springfield),  and  six  companies  of  the  Ninth  Kansas  Cavalry,  with  otliei 
cavalry  companies  drawn  from  infantry  regiments.  This  will  give  three 
full  regiments  of  cavalry,  of  twelve  companies  each,  as  the  complement 
of  the  State— the  Second,  and  Fifth  and  Sixth  consolidated,  and  Seventh 
(Colonel  Jennison’s.)  Meantime  the  State  had  recently  twelve  regiments 
nominally,  ten  quasi  regimental  organizations,  and  attempts  were  m 
progress  to  raise  two  more  Kansas  regiments  for  service  in  New  Mexico. 
This  no  doubt  has  caused  the  exaggerated  opinions  as  to  the  strength 
of  the  department.  It  was  represented  that  all  Kansas  had  flocked  to 
arms,  whereas,  in  fact,  no  State  has  been  more  backward. 

In  the  posts  of  the  State  there  are  distributed  altogether  1,600  troops. 
1,000  at  this  post,  of  whom  200  cavalry  have  been  dispatched  to-day  to 
Independence,  Jackson,  and  Johnson  Counties. 

In  Colorado  there  are  about  700  troops,  the  Colorado  ^ olunteeis  n 
re-enforcing  Colonel  Canby  in  New  Mexico.  . , . 

In  Nebraska  two  volunteer  companies  have  been  authorized,  oiu 
have  never  reported ; and  in  Dakota  one. 


617 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Finally,  I liave  the  honor  to  submit  that  Colonel  Deitzler  has  now 
nder  his  command  at  Fort  Scott  the  effective  troops  already  set  forth, 
nd  could  raise  500  more  cavalry  by  selecting  the  least  badly  mounted 
nd  armed  of  the  Fifth  and  Sixth  Kansas  Cavalry,  who  all  have  old 
mooth-bore  muskets,  most  of  them  pistols — their  private  property — 
ut  no  swords.  It  was  the  intention  to  have  armed  and  equipped  them 
roperly  on  the  roll  of  their  remuster,  when  it  could  be  seen  what 
len  and  companies  were  mustered  out  as  Home  Guards  and  what 
stained.  I may  add,  however,  that  General  Hunter  entered  a respect- 
il  remonstrance  against  raising  in  and  sending  to  this  department  so 
lany  cavalry  regiments,  Kansas,  except  in  spring  and  summer,  being 
lore  destitute  of  forage  than  any  other  of  the  States. 

In  conclusion,  I would  state  that  it  was  General  Hunter’s  opinion, 
ad  that  of  all  the  experienced  regular  officers  at  the  post  that  until 
le  more  objectionable  of  the  Kansas  regiments  can  be  reofficered 
> a great  extent  and  removed  from  local  influences  they  can  never 
ssume  a respectful  position  in  the  service  of  their  country. 

Pardon  me  for  having  intruded  at  such  length  on  time  so  valuable 
p yours,  my  motive  having  been  an  eager  desire  to  place  you  at  the 
irliest  possible  moment  in  possession  of  information  that  might  pos- 
hly be  important  to  your  plans. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  sincere  respect,  your  most  obe- 
ient  servant, 

CHAS.  G.  HALPINE, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

(Forwarded  to  Secretary  of  War,  March  18,  1862.) 

[Inclosure.l 

eneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Dept,  oe  Kansas, 

No.  26.  j Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  February  28,  1862. 

I.  Pursuant  to  instructions  from  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  dated 
djutant- General’s  Office,  Washington,  D.  C.,  February  1,  1862,  and 
v and  with  the  consent  of  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Kansas, 
ie  following  reconstruction  of  the  volunteer  forces  of  the  State  of 
ansas  is  hereby  made,  in  accordance  with  the  acts  of  Congress  here- 
fore  promulgated  in  General  Orders,  series  of  1861,  from  the  War 
epartment.* 

******* 

By  order  of  Major-General  Hunter : 

CHAS.  G.  HALPIKE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  14,  1862. 

eneral  Curtis,  Arkansas: 

Re-enforcements  and  ammunition  have  been  sent  and  will  reach  you 
time.  Hold  your  position.  If  the  enemy  should  attack  you  again 
>u  will  be  relatively  much  stronger  than  before. 

H.  W.  I1ALLECK, 

M ajor-  General. 

.The  remainder  of  this  order,  ia  detail,  recognizes  the  existing  First  and  Fourth 
fan  try,  the  Seventh  Cavalry,  and  Clark’s  battalion  ; and  reorganizes  the  Third  and 
ghth  Infantry,  and  the  Fifth,  Sixth,  and  Ninth  Cavalry. 


618  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XVIIL 

Camp  Stevens  (via  Springfield , March  15, 1862).  ! 
Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : I 

A few  cartridges  have  arrived.  Flour  said  to  be  within  one  day’s 
drive  I hear  of  Hunter’s  troops  this  side  of  Fort  Scott.  All  quiet 
here  * Near  Bentonville  found  large  quantity  of  arms  concealed  m a 
cave  probably  the  arms  of  Colonel  Hector’s  regiment.  Have  horsesi 
beer,  started  to  supply  those  killed  in  battle^  r 

Brigadier- General. 


General  Orders, 
No.  25. 


) Hdqrs.  Hist,  of  the  Mississippi, 
f New  Madrid , March  16,  1862. 

The  following  dispatch  from  Major-General  Halleck,  commanding 
this  department,  has  been  received,  and  with  this  order  will  be  pub- 
lished  at  the  head  of  every  regiment  and  detachment  of  this  command . 


Headquarters,  Saint  Louis,  March  14. 

Major-General  Pope: 

T non  pratulate  you  and  your  command  on  the  success  which  has  crowned  your  toih 
and  eT"*  Ceygiven  the  final  blow  to  the  rebellion  in  Missouri  and  proved 
yourselves  worthy  members  of  the  brave  Army  of  the  West.^  ^ HALLECK, 

Major-General.  ' 

Much  as  the  general  commanding  this  army  desired  to  shield  the 
forces  under  his  command  from  unnecessary  suffering  and  loss  of _lile. 
the  success  of  our  operations  required  unusual  courage  and  fortitude 
and  an  exhibition  of  the  highest  qualities  of  the  soldiei  . 

The  general  commanding  had  expected  much  from  the  gallant  me 
of  this  army,  but  he  is  proud  and  gratified  to  say  that  his  anticipation ? 
have  been  more  than  realized,  and  that  he  has  been  impressed  with 
confidence  in  the  officers  and  men  of  this  army  which  foreshadows  foi 

them  a most  brilliant  future.  - 

To  be  the  commander  of  such  troops  is  an  honor  to  any  man,  am 
the  general  commanding  assures  them  that  in  their  future  operatiom 
he  will  endeavor  to  so  conduct  them  that  their  gallant  and  sol(l|^ll> 
qualities  shall  secure  for  them  that  honor  and  fame  which  are  then 

due. 


JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  ™e  Mississippi,^^ 


Brigadier-General  Strong,  Cairo, 


Saint  Louis , March  17, 


III. : 


Steamer  Nebraska  will  join  Commodore  Foote’s  expedition,  th<‘.  'Smg' 
guns  to  be  used  in  reducing  the  enemy’s  works.  Send  the  followup 
with  all  possible  haste  to  General  Pope  : 

You  will  immediately  construct  a road  across  the  swamp  to  the  river  ^^elow^Sain 
James  so  that  your  forces  can  assist  the  flotilla  against  Island  N.  • _ . j 

siege  guns  and  siege  ammunition  and  ferry-boats  will  meet  you i on  1 the  river.  I th^ 
you  had  better  strike  nearly  straight  across  the  peninsula,  as  it  will  be  the  sliones 

W H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General 


■H Al\  XVIII.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


619 


Cairo,  III.,  March  17,  1862. 

fieut.  H.  A.  Wise, 

Bureau  Ordnance  and  Hydrography  : 

Dispatch  received  from  squadron  3 o’clock  last  night.  We  have  had 
some  beautiful  practice  to-day  with  rifles  at  their  upper  battery.  Mor- 
ars  firing  also.  No  special  result.  Rebels  very  strong.  Hard  for  us 
o get  at  them.  The  upper  battery  about  2 miles  above  No.  10,  on 
Kentucky  shore.  General  Pope’s  guns  at  New  Madrid  command  the 
iver,  preventing  rebel  gunboats  and  transports  from  passing,  they 
>eing  between  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10. 

A.  M.  PENNOCK, 

For  Flag-Officer  Foote . 


Cairo,  March  17,  1862. 

leneral  Halleck  : 

Expedition  heard  from  up  to  5 o’clock  last  evening.  The  Benton, 
vitli  her  two  stern  guns,  and  eight  mortar  boats  were  attacking  first 
ort  on  the  Kentucky  shore,  2 miles  above  Island  No.  10.  Enemy 
Iriven  out  several  times,  but  returned.  His  fort  reduced.  More  ex- 
ended  operations  will  be  undertaken  this  morning.  Fortifications  on 
Kentucky  and  Tennessee  shore  extend  2 miles,  strongly  fortified,  and 
inemy  in  large  force.  General  Pojie  had  sent  message  to  flag-officer 
hat  his  heavy  guns  command  the  river  from  New  Madrid,  so  that 
) either  steamers  nor  gunboats  of  the  enemy  can  escape  by  the  river. 

WM.  K.  STRONG, 

Brigadier- General . 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  17,  1862. 

dajor-General  Halleck  : 

Your  dispatch  of  this  date  received.  Will  take  immediate  steps  to 
>bey  your  instructions.  Think  I shall  get  up  with  less  trouble  than 
ou  suppose.  River  blockaded  by  heavy  guns  here,  between  here  and 
3oint  Pleasant  and  5 miles  below  Point  Pleasant.  Have  caught  six 
arge  transports  and  five  gunboats  above  my  lower  battery  of  heavy 
pins,  which  will  be  ours  or  destroyed.  Very  few  troops  on  Island  No. 
0;  all  on  main-land.  My  spies  opposite  Island  No.  10  reported  to  me 
esterday  and  day  before  that  enemy  were  leaving  island  for  main  land, 
vhich  led  me  to  believe  that  thev  were  evacuating. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  17,  1862. 

leneral  Cullum  : 

If  Commodore  Foote  can  run  past  the  batteries  of  Island  No.  10  with 
wo  or  three  gunboats  and  reach  here  I can  cross  my  whole  force  and 
apture  every  man  of  the  enemy  at  Island  No.  10  and  on  the  main  land. 
I shall  send  a messenger  to  him  suggesting  it ; but  for  fear  of  accident 


620 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK., 


IvANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


you  had  perhaps  best  send  him  this  letter.  He  had  best  be  careful  it 
approaching'  this  place,  incase  he  gets  past  the  battery,  and  display  el 

white  flag  some  distance  off. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servants 

J JN U . xUr ij, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding.  I 


Headquarters  District  oe  the  Mississippi, 

N'ew  Madrid , March  17,  1862. 

General  Palmer: 

On  no  account  permit  the  24-pounder  gun  to  be  fired  at  Point  Pleas 
ant.  You  will  defeat  my  whole  object  by  letting  the  enemy  know  tin 
o-un  is  there.  I was  surprised  to  learn  from  Colonel  Bissell  that  yoi 
had  thought  even  of  firing  it  at  gunboats  or  any  other  boats.  Once 
for  all,  my  object  is  to  establish  this  heavy  battery,  without  the  lmowl 
edge  of  the  enemy,  at  a point  below  or  nearly  opposite  Tiptonville,  S( 
as  to  command  the  place  where  troops  can  be  shipped.  By  getting  tin 
guns  quietly  into  position  near  the  lower  Biddle  tarm  to-night  tin 
gunboats  will  be  above  you  and  can  be  dealt  with.  The  transport* 
lying  there  can  be  destroyed  at  daylight,  belore  they  can  get  out  of  tilt 
way?  If  you  fire  the  24-pounder  at  Point  Pleasant  my  whole  purpos 

is  defeated.  , 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  se^ant, 

JJNO.  4 OP iii, 

Briaadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Hew  Madrid,  March  17  (via  Cairo , 18),  1862. 
Major-General  Halleck  : 

Commodore  Foote  arrived  near  Island  Ho.  10  at  12  m.  on  1 5th.  Hav< 
neard  no  bombardment  nor  anything  of  him  since  the  island  was  benii 
evacuated,  on  the  15th,  by  the  few  troops  there.  I have  no  means  t; 
cross  the  river,  or  I could  intercept  all  the  troops  which  left  lieie  am 
the  island.  They  are  trying  to  get  off  in  steamers  4 miles  below  1 om 
Pleasant  and  opposite.  I occupied  a point  5 miles  below  Point  P leasant 
immediatel  v opposite  the  begiuniug  of  the  swamps,  on  the  east  sideot  tli 
river,  with  four  regiments  and  two  24-pouuder  gnu s,  last  night.  As  tn 
movement  was  secret  and  was  made  m the  night  we  shall  uudoubtedl, 
cutoff  some  of  their  gunboats,  which  are  opposite  and  above  lorn 
Pleasant,  and  prevent  any  shipment  of  troops  down  the  river. 

With  some  transports  to  pass  round  the  swamps  I can  move  dowi 
the  river,  flanking  and  forcing  the  evacuation  of  any  batteries  that  the, 

may  liuvc  on  tliG  ri\er.  JHO  POPE 

Briaadier-  General , Commanding. 


United  States  Flag-Ship  Benton, 

March  17,  1862. 


Map  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  . T • . 

' Commanding  Department  of  Missouri , Saint  Boms , Mo. . 

General:  Leaving  Cairo  on  the  14th  instant 
gunboats  and  ten  mortar  boats,  and  being  joined  at  Columbus  on  tn 


Lap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  621 

ame  day  by  Colonel  Buford,  in  command  of  some  1,200  troops,  I reached 
[ickman  that  evening  with  the  flotilla  and  transports,  where  the  Louis- 
ille,  Commander  Dove,  was  found  leaking  in  her  boilers,  and  was  sent 
ack  to  Columbus  for  repairs. 

On  the  15th  instant,  at  daylight,  the  flotilla  and  transports  moved 
own  the  river,  arriving  in  the  vicinity  of  Island  No.  10  at  9 a.  m.  The 
ain  and  fog  prevented  our  getting  the  vessels  in  position  other  than 
wo  mortar  boats  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  their  range.  Early  on 
tie  morning  of  the  lOth  instant  I placed  the  mortars  in  as  good  position 
s the  circumstances  would  admit,  when  they  shelled  several  regiments 
ut  of  their  encampment,  and  at  extreme  range  reached  the  batteries  at 
To.  10,  the  floating  battery,  and  the  five  batteries  on  the  Tennessee 
bore.  The  mortar  boats  are  in  charge  of  Captain  Maynadier,  U.  S. 
mny,  as  ordnance  officer,  assisted  by  Acting  Lieutenant-Commander 
lanford,  U.  S.  Navy,  who  volunteered  his  services. 

This  morning,  the  17th,  some  time  after  daylight,  the  mortar  boats 
•eing  in  position,  I had  the  Benton  lashed  between  two  other  steamers, 
Cincinnati  and  St.  Louis,  and  with  the  remaining  three  iron-clad 
teamers  made  an  attack  on  the  forts  at  the  distance  of  2,000  yards  or 
aore,  on  account  of  the  rapid  current  rendering  the  boats  too  unman - 
geable  to  come  within  a shorter  range  without  endangering  their  being 
arried  under  the  enemy’s  guns.  We  opened  upon  the  upper  fort  on 
he  Tennessee  shore  at  meridian,  and  continued  quite  a brisk  fire  until 
larkness  obscured  the  forts  from  view.  The  ten  mortars  in  the  mean 
ime  shelled  the  troops  out  of  range,  excepting  those  in  the  forts  man- 
ling  the  batteries.  The  upper  fort  was  badly  cut  up  by  the  Benton 
md  the  other  boats  with  her.  and  the  men  at  times  ran  from  their  guns. 
Colonel  Buford  has  been  busy  and,  I trust,  profitably  engaged  in  mak- 
ng  reconnaissances,  and  is  preparing  to  mount  his  siege  guns. 

In  the  attack  of  to-day  this  vessel  received  five  shots,  while  a rifled 
•mi  burst  aboard  the  St.  Louis  and  killed  and  wounded  14  officers 
md  men,  and  the  Cincinnati  has  had  her  engine  injured  by  a shot, 
vhich  may  render  it  necessary  for  me  to  send  her  to  Cairo  for  repairs, 
hope  to  be  able  to  silence  the  upper  battery  to-morrow ; after  which 
ve  can  plant  the  mortars  in  a position  where  we  expect  to  be  able  to 
ihell  the  rebels  out  of  their  batteries. 

This  place  is  stronger  and  even  better  adapted  for  defense  than 
jolumbus  ever  was.  Each  fortification  commands  the  one  above  it. 
vVe  can  count  forty-nine  guns  in  the  different  batteries,  where  there 
ire  probably  double  the  number,  with  10,000  troops.  Exhaustion,  aris- 
ng  from  continuous  service  and  want  of  sleep,  will  excuse  this  inco- 
lerent,  discursive  report. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J ’ A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer , Comdg.  U.  S.  Naval  Forces  Western  Waters. 

P.  s. — Our  shells  bursting  prematurely,  I have  had  to  drown  them 
before  loading  the  guns  ; the  fuses,  many  of  which  I am  told  were  made 
before  the  Mexican  war,  ought  to  have  been  condemned. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Camp  Stevens,  Ark.,  March  17,  1862. 

Oapt.  N.  H.  McLean: 

Captain:  I am  glad  to  hear  troops  are  expected  through  Kansas. 
If  quartermasters  would  furnish  supplies  or  competent  men  with  means 


622 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII]| 

to  purchase,  jayhawking  could  be  controlled.  So  far  from  our  usua 
source  some  exertion  is  required  to  avoid  the  alternative  which  is  con  j 
stantly  presented,  starve  or  steal.  This  dilemma  could  be  avoided  b;  I 
an  efficient  quartermaster,  and  I hope  I will  be  supported  m my  effort 
to  secure  reform  in  this  regard. 

The  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  at  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge  is  nea 
1,400.*  My  accommodations  for  the  wounded  are  very  meager,  ant 

they  suffer  in  consequence.  . || 

All  quiet  this  side  the  Boston  Mountains,  except  some  mischief  t 
the  people,  committed  by  the  Indians  near  Cane  Hill. 

SAML.  R.  OURllo, 

Brigadier-  General . . i 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  18,  1862.  I 

General  Plummer  : 

It  is  possible  that  the  enemy,  who  is  moving  his  whole  infantry  fore 
from  Island  Ko.  10  to  Tiptonville,  may  attempt  to  cross  m force  an 
attack  the  lower  batterv,  now  supported  by  General  Palmer.  In  tha 
case  you  will  at  once  march  to  his  aid,  leaving  only  your  guns  m bat 
tery  and  your  sharpshooters  in  the  rifle  pits.  The  enemy’s  whole  tore 
is  only  about  8,500  infantry,  with  perhaps  two  batteries  of  light  arti 
lery;  no  match  for  Palmer  and  yourself  united.  I send  down  a fir 
regiment  of  cavalry  to  report  to  you.  Send  three  companies  to  Gei 
eral  Palmer  and  keep  open  constant  and  frequent  communication  wit 
him  and  with  me.  There  are  two  regiments  of  Michigan  cavalry  hew 
many  of  the  companies  armed  with  revolving  rifles,  who  can  serve  ac 
m ir ably  on  foot,  and  can  re-enforce  you,  if  necessary,  m an  hour.  It  i 
beyond  measure  important  to  maintain  the  heavy  batteries  below  1 om 
Pleasant.  As  long  as  they  are  there  supplies  are  cut  off  and  there  i 
no  escape  for  the  enemy.  They  cannot  get  off  by  land.  Below  liptoi 
ville  the  swamps  begin,  a&id  it  will  not  be  possible  to  ship  tioops  an, 
lower  down  than  that  place.  I rely  much  upon  your  skill  and  vigoi 
which  if  fairly  exhibited  for  a few  days  will  secure  us  most  importan 
results. 

Respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPD, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  18,  1862. 

General  Palmer  : 

I judge  from  what  was  stated  to  me  by  the  officer  of  engineers  wli 
came  up  this  morning  that  the  24-pounder  siege  gun  which  was  place 
in  battery  last  night  is  too  high  up  the  river  to  accomplish  the  pm 
pose  for  which  it  was  designed.  I have  directed  Lieutenant-Colom 
Adams  to  place  the  other  guns  in  position  about  1J  miles  below  wher 
the  other  gun  is,  if  a suitable  place  can  be  found  there.  The  objet 
is  to  command  Tiptonville  and  the  shore  for  a half  a mile  below,  so  a 
to  prevent  the  embarkation  of  troops.  It  may  be  that  the  enemy  wi 
attempt  to  cross  and  come  up  on  you  from  below.  I send  three  con 
panics  of  cavalry  to  you,  to  enable  you  to  keep  out  scouts  and  k&b 


* See  p.  206. 


;hap.  xviii.] 


623 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

f ourself  fully  apprised  of  wliat  is  going  on  for  some  distance  belovr 
fou.  You  will  use  all  vigilance,  and  be  ready  to  support  the  guns  with 
four  whole  force  if  necessary.  Keep  up  constant  communication  with 
General  Plummer  and  advise  him  immediately  of  any  movement  of  the 
memy.  He  is  instructed  to  move  with  his  whole  force  to  your  assist - 
mce  if  necessary.  It  is  of  the  last  importance  to  the  operations  here 
hat  the  battery  of  the  two  24-pounder  guns  be  maintained  in  its  present 
>osition,  and  I will  move  the  whble  force  from  here  for  that  purpose  if 
lecessary.  If  there  be  no  suitable  point  below  the  gun  m position  for 
he  one  which  I sent  down  last  night,  you  will  cause  it  to  be  placed  in 
losition  near  the  other.  But  I must  impress  upon  you  that  it  is  the 
anding  at  Tiptonville  and  for  a half  a mile  below  it  which  must  be 
iommanded  by  our  guns  to  effect  the  purpose  contemplated.  Keep  your 
aounted  scouts  along  the  river  for  at  least  4 or  5 miles  below  you,  to 
vat cli  carefully  whether  the  enemy  make  any  attempt  to  cross.  Their 
viiole  force  in  this  vicinity,  at  Island  No.  10  and  elsewhere,  does  not 
xceed  9,000  infantry,  with  perhaps  two  batteries  of  light  artillery  j no 
natch  for  yourself  and  Plummer  united.  Write  to  me  regularly  and 
ally  two  or  three  times  a day. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


New  Madrid,  March  18,  1862.  (Received  March  19.) 
lajor-General  Halleck: 

As  soon  as  daylight  unmasked  my  heavy  battery  below  Point  Pleas- 
nt  the  enemy  moved  with  five  gunboats  to  within  300  yards  and  at- 
empted  to  dislodge  us.  A furious  cannonade  was  kept  up  for  an  hour 
nd  a half,  when  the  gunboats  rapidly  retreated  out  of  range.  On© 
unboat  was  sunk  and  several  badly  damaged.  Many  of  the  gunners 
ere  shot  down  from  our  rifle  pits.  We  lost  a single  man.  Our  lower 
attery  is  so  placed  that  it  commands  the  upper  end  of  the  overflowed 
mds  on  east  side  of  river,  and  no  communication  from  below  with  the 
uemy  is  now  possible.  They  are  shut  up  in  the  bend  of  the  river,  with 

0 egress  whatever  except  by  a road  from  Tiptonville  to  Union  City, 
Inch  crosses  Reelfoot  Lake,  2 miles  wide,  and  with  only  one  small 
at-boat.  If  I had  the  means  to  cross  the  river  with  my  command  1 
ould  bag  the  whole  of  them. 

I made  reconnaissance  across  peninsula  to-day  towards  Island  8. 
'arty  not  returned.  Will  write  fully  by  mail,  to  reach  you  day  after 

1 morrow. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General. 


Cairo,  III.,  March  18,  1862. 

ieut.  H.  A.  Wise, 

Bureau  of  Ordnance  and  Hydrography : 

News  received  this  9 a.  m.  from  flag-ship-  Benton,  dated  near  Island 
*o.  10,  March  17.  We  had  hard  work  this  afternoon  with  the  upper 
attery.  Of  all  at  this  point  four  shots  struck  us  only  out  of  the  fire 
f some  five  foits.  One  shot,  after  striking  the  upper  deck  twice  and 
be  lower  one  once,  breaking  some  half  dozen  beams,  finally  lodged 


624 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYld 


in  the  flag-officer’s  desk,  depositing  itself  in  the  drawer  as  quietly  a 
possible.  We  have  battered  the  fort  all  to  pieces,  dismounting  op 
gun;  but  night  came  upon  us,  and  we  had  to  leave  without  finishing  tbi 
work,  but  will  to-morrow  go  at  him  again.  A rifled  gun  burst  on  boar, 
the  St  Louis  and  killed  2 outright,  wounded  mortally  2 more,  am, 
wounded  10  others.  These  are  the  only  casualties.  The  mortars  aj 
doing  their  work  well.  I shall  to-day,  by  direction  of  IlagOfhce 
Foote,  send  down  six  more  mortar  boats  ,jn ak i alL 

Fnr  Flan-  OtUcer  Foote . 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

March  18,  1862  (via  Springfield). 


Capt.  K H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain:  The  enemy  again  approaching  in  force.  Will  have  to  la 
back  to  near  Keetsville;  otherwise  my  supplies  will  be  m dangej 
Besides,  we  must  have  cartridges.  Hurry  them  forward;  rege]| 
forcements.  This  move  is  the  unanimous  opinion  of  my  officers  ll 

counci1-  8AML.  B.  OXJBTIS, 

Brigadier- General,  i 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , J).  <7.,  March  19,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck  : . 

General  : Numerous  complaints  have  been  made  to  this  Departmed 
on  behalf  of  persons  representing  themselves  to  be  ag|TieA  e<l  by  m 
tary  outrages,  especially  in  Jackson  County,  Missouri.  . • 

esq.,  an  agent  of  these  persons,  has  been  here  for  some  tune  Yo 
orders  from  time  to  time  have  manifested  your  purpose  to  afford  all l tl 
protection  in  your  power,  and  you  are  best  able  to  judge  what  shoul 
be  done  in  the  premises.  The  whole  subject  is  therefore  referred  to  yd 
and  if  any  aid  can  be  rendered  by  this  Department  it  will  be  furnish© 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient^ervant,  ^ gxANTON, 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  0.,  March  19,  1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  . . . 

Commanding  the  Department  of  Mississippi : 

General  : It  is  the  desire  of  the  President,  on  the ' y( 

Secretary  of  the  Interior  and  ttieCommissioner  of  Ind  anAfla  rs  thaty 

should  detail  two  regiments  to  act  in  the  Indian  country,  with  a ™ 
open  the  way  for  the  friendly  Indians  who  are  now  refugees  m Southe, 
Kansas  to  return  to  their  homes  and  to  protect  them  there.  T J* 
sand  friendly  Indians  will  also  be  armed  to  aid  in  their  own  piotect 
and  you  will  please  furnish  them  with  necessary  snbsistenc  . 


ai*.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  625 

Please  report  your  action  in  the  premises  to  this  Department.  Promfit 
tion  is  necessary. 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General . 


New  Madrid,  March  19,  1862. 

ajor-General  Halleck: 

Have  had  the  country  examined  between  here  and  Islands  8 and  10. 
id  to  be  done  in  skiffs,  as  the  whole  region  is  under  water.  Kiver 
ling  rapidly  and  threatening  to  overflow  this  place.  For  the  present 
is  impossible  to  get  troops  to  Foote’s  assistance  this  side  of  the  river, 
tey  could  not  aid  him  even  if  there.  The  only  way  to  attack  the 
>rks  opposite  Island  No.  10  is  by  crossing  the  river  here.  Nearly 
3 whole  of  the  enemy’s  force  now  encamped  at  Tiptonville,  5 miles 
low  Point  Pleasant,  and  a little  above  my  lower  battery.  Am  having 
examination  made,  to  see  if  by  digging  across  one  or  two  ridges  I 
tinot  connect  Island  No.  8 with  river  below  Island  No.  10  by  con- 
ct-ing  two  bayous.  If  so,  the  work  will  be  done  by  as  large  a force 
necessary  to  complete  it  in  twenty-four  hours.  All  the  roads  lead- 
* northeast  from  here  are  under  water — in  many  places  6 feet  deep 
(1  rising.  It  is  impracticable  for  the  present  to  build  a road  across 
3 peninsula — utterly  so.  Rebels  are  shut  up  in  bend  of  river,  with 
ly  outlet  across  Eeelfoot  Lake  by  flat-boat.  Impracticable  now,  as 
3 lake  is  4 miles  wide  in  cypress  timber. 

Japture  of  the  enemy,  I think,  only  a question  of  time.  They  have 
all  supplies  of  provisions,  and  can  get  no  more.  Is  it  not  possible 
a couple  of  gunboats  to  run  past  Island  No.  10  so  I can  cross  my 
nmand  over  the  river*?  Have  urged  Foote  to  try. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  19,  1862. 

1.  J.  W.  Bissell: 

four  two  communications  of  yesterday  have  been  received.*  If  it 
i eed  be  impracticable  to  get  a gunboat  or  two  past  the  enemy’s  bat- 
'ies,  some  other  mode  of  dealing  with  him  must  be  devised,  i desire 
|b  therefore,  to  make  an  examination  of  the  peninsula  opposite 
md  No.  10,  to  ascertain  whether  a short  canal,  not  to  exceed  2 miles 
length,  cannot  be  dug,  so  that  boats  can  enter  above  Island  No.  10 
1 come  out  into  the  river  below  it.  A mere  ditch,  through  winch 
water  of  the  river  can  be  started,  will  at  this  stage  of  the  river 
ldi  into  a deep  channel  in  one  night.  I think,  from  the  character  of 
ground  and  the  high  condition  of  the  river,  it  may  be  feasible  to 
\ this  in  twenty-four  hours,  so  that  gunboats  at  least  could  pass 
ough  and  enter  the  river  below  the  island.  Show  this  letter  to 
onel  Buford,  who  will  furnish  you  every  assistance.  If  the  work 
i be  done  lay  off  the  line  of  it  and  call  on  Colonel  Buford  for  all  his 

* Not  found. 

40  R R — VOL  VIII 


626 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIC,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chat.  XY 


available  men  to  do  the  digging.  Of  course  you  will  begin  below,  a 
not  open  the  upper  end  to  the  river  until  the  whole  ditch  is  complet 
Affairs  below  are  in  such  condition  that  the  presence  of  this  force  * 
is  necessary  It  is  not  possible,  from  your  report,  to  get  any  part 
it  Sp  to  Island  No.  10  or  to  Island  No.  8,  nor  do  I see  what  good  res 
could  be  effected  by  carrying  it  there.  Ooionel  Buford  has  men  enor 
to  establish  and  work  his  heavy  guns  if  it  be  desirable  to  establ 

them  in  position.  Write  fully.  , 

Respectfully,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant,^  p0PE 

Brigadier-General , Commanding 


Saint  Louis,  March  19,  186! 


J 


General  Curtis,  , . 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest : 

Genebal:  I was  by  no  means  surprised  at  General  Sigei  s cond 
Uafnrp  thp  battle  of  Pea  Ridge.  It  was  precisely  m keeping  with  wfc 
he  did  at  Carthage  and  Wilson’s  Creek.  After  your  expedition  stari 
I received  documentary  proofs  from  Generals  Sturgis,  Schofield,  <1 
Totten  and  a number  of  other  officers,  in  regard  to  his  conduct-! 
tliose  occasions,  which  destroyed  all  my  wnfldence  m him.  It  was 
that  reason  that  I telegraphed  you  so  often  not  to  let  Si^el  sepad 
from  you.  I anticipated  that  he  would  try  to  play  you  a trick -by  b< 
absent  at  the  critical  moment.  I wished  to  forewarn  ^hlt  you 
but  I could  not  then  give  you  my  reasons.  I am  glad  that  you  ] 
vented  his  projects  and  saved  your  army.  I cannot  describe  to  1 
bow  much  uneasiness  I felt  for  you.  You  saved  your  army  and  wo 
elorious  victory  by  refusing  to  take  his  advice.  I do  not  believe 
&en  mad°e  a rLjor-genfral.  If  so,  I shall  ask  to  have  him  sen 

SOAeiarge  numbertof  extra  teams  have  been  sent  you  from  Tipton 
Sedalia via  Linn  Greek,  and  horses  and  wagons  will  be  sent  to  Holt 
fast  as  possible.  The  drafts  for  transportation  in  Tennessee  have  l 
so  urgent  as  to  greatly  embarrass  us.  We  are  doing  everything  m 


power  to  supply  you. 

It  is  not  intended  to  advance  across 


Boston  Mountains  on  any  j 
sideration.  My  instructions  are  not  to  advance  to  Fort  Smith,  bu 
keen  the  enemy  south  of  Boston  Mountains  till  he  can  be  turned 
cut  off  from  Ws  main  source  of  supplies.  He  has  already  evacm 
Pocahontas  and  we  hope  soon  to  hear  of  his  leaving  Jacksonport, 
V^n  “ does  not  fallback  for  the  defense  of  White  Kiver  and  h 
Arkansas  he  will  be  obliged  to  retreat  south  of  the  latter  liver, 
either  case  you  will  be  relieved  of  his  presence. 

Yours,  in  haste,  Q w HALLEOK, 

Major- Gener( 


Pilot  Knob,  Mo.,  March  19,  18f 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department : 

Genebal:  We  have  reliable  information  1lr"m1^n0^L.0i“t®1s(;n  tl 
are  2,000  State  troops  and  Jeff.  Thompson  with  100  of  his  men 


ap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  627 

iey  have  also  seven  or  eight  pieces  of  artillery,  not  all  serviceable, 
le  roads  are  in  such  a state  that  the  supply  train  sent  to  Carlin  could 
t make  over  6 miles  a day.  Carlin  has  succeeded  in  getting  some 
UL  nieal?  Por^?  an(l  bacon,  and  considerable  forage  in  the  neighbor- 
ed where  he  now  is  5 thinks  he  can  get  all  the  forage  he  wants.  It 
his  opinion  that  we  can  safely  calculate  upon  getting  half  rations  of 
iat  and  flour  anywhere  in  this  State  or  in  Arkansas.  If  the  maraud- 
r bands  should  be  broken  up  and  the  people  feel  assured  of  our  pro- 
‘ti°n  they  will  bring  in  everything  we  want  that  they  can  spare  for 
3 money.  As  I supposed,  the  rebels  have  removed  ail  the  ferries  on 
rrent  River.  Carlin  is  building  a bridge  across  Black  River.  I will 
•ect  him  to  move  forward  to  Doniphan  or  Pitman’s  Ferry  and  estab- 
h a depot  there.  Supplies  of  forage,  &c.,  will  be  more  easily  pro- 
red  from  the  country  at  either  of  those  points.  I sent  a man  down 
o is  well  acquainted  with  the  people,  and  who  assured  me  that  he 
dd  get  a plenty  of  corn.  The  roads  south  of  Rives’  Station  are 
>orted  good.  The  mules  we  have  are  all  so  small  that  I sent  my 
gon-master  to  Saint  Louis  to  get  some  larger  ones  for  wheel  mules 
is  reported  at  Pocahontas  that  at  the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge  McCulloch 
s dangerously  wounded,  Price  wounded,  and  McIntosh  killed. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRED’K  STEELE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  March  19,  1862. 

I gadier-General  Schofield  : 

nformation  is  just  received  that  there  is  a body  of  organized  insur- 
es at  Florida,  in  Monroe  County,  of  from  1,000  to  1,500.  Numbers 
bably  exaggerated.  I think  that  Colonel  Huston’s  regiment  and 
haps  a part  of  Merrill’s  Horse  should  operate  to  break  them  up. 
1 are  authorized  to  give  all  orders  deemed  necessary. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


1.  E.  M.  Stanton: 


Saint  Louis,  March  20,  1862. 


Inemy’s  flotilla,  hemmed  in  between  Commodore  Foote  and  General 
>e,  has  made  another  attempt  to  escape  down  the  river.  Gunboats 
nonaded  General  Pope’s  batteries  on  the  18th  for  an  hour  and  a 
, but  were  driven  back  with  severe  loss.  One  gunboat  was  sunk 
several  badly  damaged.  They  are  completely  hemmed  in,  and 
1 escaPe  only  by  fighting  their  way  out. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


M.  Stanton, 


Saint  Louis,  March  20,  1862. 


Secretary  of  War , Washington 
ispatches  just  received  from  Colonel  Canby,  New  Mexico,  begging 


^enforcements.  Deitzler’s  command  of  five  or  six  regiments  near 

J ^c°tt>  intended  to  re-enforce  General  Curtis,  can  be  withdrawn 

7 


628 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


and  sent  to  New  Mexico,  if  you  approve 
re-enforce  General  Curtis  from  this  place 


nessee. 


it.  This  will  compel  me 
with  troops  intended  for  Ti 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General 


War  Department,  I 
Washington , March  20,  18621 

,,  . -rr  w TTalleck,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.:  I 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  maee^iv,  __force  Canbyby  all  means.  1 

Your  suggestion  is  approved.  Be-enlorce  oanoj  > 

have  felt  great  anxiety  about  mm.  EDWIN  M.  STANTON,  I 

Secretary  of  Wan 


Headquarters  Departmeot  of^he 


ATaior  PRINCE,  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kans. : T 

Send  dispatch  to  orders  to  movTtoNew  Mexico;  i 

rence,  to  prepare  immediately  for  , Quartermaster’s 

Hollister’s  battery  of  the  S®^dtr^0rtaIion;  also  will  be  prep 

partment  will  supply  them  with  transpomfaon  slioul 

to  fit  out  other  regiments  for  same  destmauo  ^ Hannl^ai  a„d  Qui 

to'hurry1  forward  all  Government  freight  for  Fort  Leavenworth.  '\ 
must  have  the  preference  of  all  other  freig  ^ w HALLECK, 


Headquarters 


Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louts , March  20,  lm 


Commanding  Officer,  Bolla: 

Send  forward  immediately  to 
spared  from  your  post. 


General  Curtis  all  troops  that  caj 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- Genen 


accounts  was  driving  back  the  a better  position,  comman 

and  Indians.  Meantime  }.^v^  “enemv  has  received  live  regm 
roads  and  nearer  our  supplies.  T __  > They  are  ais0  ret 

from  Texas  and  three  from  « » Benton’s  and  B 

iug  from  surrounding  country.  o f forces  have 

disbanded  after  the  battle,  and  o,000  t0  40,000  ' 

killed,  wounded,  and  dispersed.  o tQ  gecnre  a larger  lore 

lie  marched  against  me,  and  1 Pocahontas,  taking<io  ti 

fromW  es  tern  aT^T  ^ 


\v.  XYIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


629 


this  from  a reliable  Union  man  who  left  the  vicinity  of  the  enemy 
nday  night.  I sent  a party  to  Pineville  Tuesday  j all  quiet  there, 
ptain  Stephens,  of  Bowen’s  body  guard,  surrounded  and  attacked 
: arty  of  rebels  in  arms  on  Indian  Creek,  wounding  1,  taking  17  pris- 
brs,  including  3 captains. 

SAML.  E.  CUBTIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  March  21,  1862. 
j.  Gen.  John  Pope,  New  Madrid , Mo.: 

rENERAL : Your  telegram  in  relation  to  canal  (without  date*)  is  just 
Oived.  I heartily  approve  of  your  plan.  Impress  all  the  negroes 
r can  find  to  assist  in  the  work.  If  you  can  in  this  way  turn  and 
ture  the  enemy,  it  will  be  one  of  the  most  brilliant  feats  of  the  war. 
V'hen  occasion  requires  you  will  assume  command  of  all  the  forces 
ler  Colonel  Buford  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  also  those  at 
umbus.  Colonel  Buford  has  a number  (five,  I think)  of  large  siege 
3es.  Use  them  wherever  you  think  they  will  be  of  the  most  advan- 
e.  I will  not  attempt  to  hamper  you  with  any  minute  instructions. 
5 great  object,  you  know,  is  to  cut  the  enemy  off  from  any  chance 
etreat  by  water.  I leave  you  to  accomplish  this  according  to  your 
1 judgment,  having  full  confidence  in  your  ultimate  success.  Buell 
effect  a junction  with  Grant  and  Smith  by  Monday.  We  shall 
1 have  70,000  men  at  a single  point  on  the  Tennessee  with  which  to 
the  enemy’s  center,  destroy  their  railroad  connections,  and  thus 
ofl  the  retreat  by  land  of  Polk,  McCown,  &c.  Unless  the  enemy  is 
h stronger  at  Corinth  than  reported,  I can  see  no  chance  of  failure, 
re  will  probably  be  a big  battle  somewhere  in  that  vicinity, 
nfortunately,  just  as  I am  preparing  additional  re-enforcements  for 
Army  of  the  Tennessee,  to  make  everything  still  more  certain,  I 
e received  official  dispatches  of  new  troubles  in  New  Mexico  and 
condition  of  Colonel  Canby’s  forces.  This  compels  me  to  immedi- 
y fit  out  a column  of  5,000  men  for  Canby’s  assistance.  I do  it 
t willingly,  for  the  Government  has  shamefully  neglected  him,  but 
jae  same  time  it  seriously  interferes  with  my  plans. 

Yours,  truly, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


. E.  M.  Stanton: 


Headquarters, 
Saint  Louis , March  21,  1862. 


will  mimediately  organize  and  send  to  New  Mexico  a column  of 
1 'MOO  to  5,000,  Prom  all  the  information  I can  obtain,  Maj.  Ben- 
in W.  Brice,  Pay  Department,  now  in  Kansas,  is  the  most  suitable 
er  lor  the  command  if  he  can  be  made  brigadier-general  of  volun- 
"Ut  he  would  rank  Colonel  Canby.  I therefore  recommend 
‘nel  Canby  for  same  rank.  Both  would  be  excellent  appointments. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


* March  19,  p.  625. 


630 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIW 


New  Madrid,  March  21,  1862.1 


Major-General  Halleck: 

Have  found  place  for  canal  across  peninsula.  Two  bayous  hea 
near  together,  one  running  into  tlie  Mississippi  at  Island  8,  the  oth< 
about ^ miles’  above  New  Madrid.  A canal  500  yards  long  throng  , 
Cypress  Swamp  will  connect  tliem.  Work  will  be  commenced  t 
morrow  By  Monday  night  will  have  two  steam-tugs  and  five  barg* 
here  if  all  goes  well.  Route  has  been  carefully  examined  and  is  prai 
ticable.  If  enemy  are  opposite  here  Wednesday  next  they  will  be  oui , 
Gunboats  have  made  no  impression  and  I think  will  not  Oommodol 
Foote  positively  declines  to  run  any  of  his  gunboats  past  ^ 

teries.  They  are  firing  at  long  range,  with  only  enemy  s artillerists 
sight.'  River  still  rising  rapidly ; whole  country  northeast  of  us  ova 
flowed,  except  causeway  to  Sikeston.  JNQ  popB 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , March  21,  1862. 


Major-General  Halleck  : 

I transmit  inclosed  a very  rough  sketch  of  the  situation  hero 
What  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  is  of  course  from  hearsay.  3 
great  object  is  to  get  across  the  river,  which  I shall  do  as  soon  as  p > 
sible.  I expect  the  tugs  and  barges  here  by  the  canal  on  Monday. 

The  value  of  our  gunboat  flotilla  has  been  altogether  overestima  <. 
As  an  auxiliary  merely  to  land  forces,  to  escort  transports,  to  red 
noiter  in  advance  of  our  movements,  and  to  cover  the  landing  of  tro  ]j 
gunboats  can  do  admirable  service.  They  cannot  take  any  sort 
battery  on  the  shore,  as  I think  you  will  find.  The  enemy  s gunboj 
have  wholly  failed  to  dislodge  even  the  hasty  batteries  and  rifle  pitj 
have  madef  After  five  days’  bombarding  Commodore  Foote  has 
no  sort  of  impression.  Nothing  but  the  gunners  and  a few 
have  been  left  opposite  Island  No.  10.  My  impression  is  that 
enemy  is  trying  very  hard  to  get  off  by  river  from  Tiptonville.  Tk 
have  a very  small  supply  of  rations,  and  the  country  in  the  bend  is  ' 
settled.  One  of  their  transports  was  sunk  yesterday  by  o 
lower  battery  in  attempting  to  make  a landing  just  below  Tiptonvil 
itTsa  bare6  possibility  thatthe  men,  by  padd J£g  down  ti ie  swamps 
logs  and  wading  where  they  can,  may  get  off  on  boats  below, , du 
wfll  be  without  anything  whatever.  I have 

bend  by  way  of  the  river  as  far  as  guns  will  do  it.  The  means 
crossing  are  all  I need.  It  would  be  of  immense  service  for  such  op 
ations  on  thfs  river  if  you  would  send  me  the  20-pounder  Parro 
There  are  four  at  Jefferson  Barracks  and  I suppose  mwe  in  thap 
One  battery  of  them  is  at  Sedaliaor  Lexington,  and  can  well  be  spa 
from  theref  The  20-pounder  Parrotts  are  better  and  more  eflectl 
than  the  siege  twenty-fours,  and  can  be  used  as  field ] batten  • 
river  is  high  and  rising  and  is  nowhere  less  than  a , 

parts  it  is  at  least  a mile  and  a quarter.  I will  do  all  that  is  pos 
to  keep  things  going. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  sej^?Qt’ p0PE> 

Brigadier- General , Commanding 


* Not  found. 


p.xvm.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  631 

Saint  Louis,  March  21,  1862. 

tg-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote, 

! Commanding  Naval  Forces , &c. : 

Iir  : I have  just  received  your  report  (without  date)*  of  your  opera- 
ins  against  the  enemy’s  batteries  in  the  vicinity  of  Island  No.  10. 
file  I am  certain  that  you  have  done  everything  that  could  be  done 
icessfully  to  reduce  these  works,  I am  very  glad  that  you  have  not 
necessarily  exposed  your  gunboats.  If  they  had  been  disabled,  it 
aid  have  been  a most  serious  loss  to  us  in  the  future  operations  of 
I campaign,  whereas  the  reduction  of  these  batteries  this  week  or 
:t  is  a matter  of  very  little  importance.  Indeed,  I think  it  will  turn 
in  the  end  that  it  is  much  better  for  us  that  they  are  not  reduced 
we  can  fully  cut  oh*  the  retreat  of  their  troops. 

Everything  is  progressing  well  on  the  Tennessee  Eiver  towards 
sning  your  way  down  the  Mississippi.  The  reduction  of  these  works 
mly  a question  of  time,  and  we  are  in  no  hurry  on  that  point, 
thing  is  lost  by  a little  delay  there.  I am  directing  all  my  attention 
v to  another  object,  and  when  that  is  accomplished  the  enemy  must 
cuate  or  surrender. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


M.  Stanton : 


Headquarters, 
Saint  Louis , March  21,  1862. 

9 


brees  to  New  Mexico  and  Overland  Mail  Route  will  be  sent  with  all 
sible  dispatch.  These  detachments  and  the  necessity  of  re-enforcing 
leral  Ourtis  seriously  interfere  with  military  plans  on  the  Tennessee 
er,  but  I think  they  will  merely  delay  the  result.  To  fit  out  these 
editions  we  must  make  large  purchases  of  cavalry,  artillery,  and 
rtermaster’s  horses.  Vouchers  are  greatly  depreciated,  and  we 
st  have  money  to  make  these  purchases.  Major  Allen  should  be 
plied  immediately. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  21,  1862. 

j.  W.  E.  Prince, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans. : 

ou  will  immediately  send  a courier  to  Colonel  Deitzler  at  Fort 
tt  with  orders  to  move  to  Lawrence,  Kans.,  the  First  Kansas  In- 
:ry,  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry,  and  two  regiments  of  Wisconsin  in- 
;ry.  The  Second  Ohio  Cavalry,  one  regiment  Wisconsin  infantry, 
Rabb’s  battery  will  remain  at  Fort  Scott.  If  Colonel  Deitzler  and 
command  have  joined  General  Curtis  in  Arkansas  this  order  will 
suspended.  Every  exertion  should  be  made  to  organize  and  prepare 
the  field  all  Kansas  troops,  requisitions  being  made  here  for  what- 
p cannot  be  supplied  there.  A dispatch  will  be  sent  to  your  care 
Governor  Robinson,  which  please  forward  immediately. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Probably  that  on  p.  620. 


632 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap'  XVII]| 


Headquarters  Army 


of 


the  Southwest, 

March  21,  1862.  I 

Cant.  IT.  H.  McLean,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : I 

Captain:  The  enemy’s  cavalry  retired  beyond  the  mountains.  Ml 
i ^ in  Favetteville  yesterday.  Indians  retired  also  j probabl* 
ad™n< Dorn  was  at  Van  Buren  on  tbi 

15th.61  Lieutenant-Colonels  Herron  and  Chandler  have  ^en  ^ent  to  m 

sassslsStA  sasre&s  Ssffis  « - 

in  the  rebel  army  to  be  exchanged  on  the  same  terms.  Colonel  lajlc 
thinks  th^  wiR  be°  forwarded/  If  they  are,  I shall  send  for  some  ( 
Sose  I have  forwarded  to  Saint  Louis  as  equivalents.  A severe  snoj 
storm  is  aoinTolf.  I am  starting  new  mills,  and  hope  soon  to  hai 
flour  The  move  of  the  enemy  was  probably  for  the  purpose  mamly 
canturin-  my  foraging  parties,  but  it  terrified  the  citizens,  who  brougl 
news  of  the  former  movement,  and  they  came  again  with  exaggerate 
of  the  enemy.  I shall  continue  to  keep  a force  in  readmes 
but  the  entire  absence  of  forage  this  side  of  the  mountains  makes 
necessary  to  hold  my  main  force  near  my  source  of  supplies.  Paymaj 
ters  and^a  few  more  cartridges  are  said  to  be  en  route This  side  of  Si  ,| 
field.  No  news  from  Leavenworth  troops  ^ML^B^CURTIS, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  ^1lSSI^SI^PI’lQfio 
^ Saint  Louis , March  21,  1862. 

Col.  S.  H.  Boyd,  Rolla , Mo. : 

q,ptu1  forward  to  General  Curtis  all  available  forces  and  ammuniti* 
Without  ™ Additional  troops  will  be  sent  from  here  as  soon  . 

thIf  any  of  themFourth  Iowa  Cavalry  refuse  to  go  forward  immediate 
arrest  them  for  mutiny  and  place  them  m con^n^e^ALLEOKi 

Maior- General) 


Saint  Louis,  March  21,  1862.i 

Brigadier-General  Totten, 

Jefferson  City , Mo. : 

General  • I am  receiving  numerous  complaints  of  depreda  iou 

hope  to  hear  soon  some  good  results  from  prompt  ana  emcie  E 
tions  in  your  district. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, ^ gAELECK, 

Mai  nr- General 


Headquarters  Army  « the  862 

Brig«  Si  of  the  Frontier,  Ca^  on  FVcCreeK: 

General:  It  is  still  reported  that  Marmaduke  intends  mak 


XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


633 


>ther  raid  in  some  direction;  what,  does  not  appear.  He  may 
sibly  attempt  to  pass  between  yonr  division  and  White  River,  for 
purpose  of  attacking  Forsyth  in  the  rear.  This  would  be  com- 
atively  easy,  now  that  the  Third  Division  has  moved  east.  It  will 
necessary  for  you  to  watch  that  region  of  country  carefully.  You 
authorized  to  move  your  division  for  forage  whenever  it  shall  become 
essary  and  in  whatever  direction  you  find  it  expedient,  keeping  in 
w,  however,  the  necessity  I have  mentioned  of  guarding  the  passes 
ween  the  position  you  may  occupy  and  White  River. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Major- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington , March  22,  1862. 

jor-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis : 

he  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  is  making  arrangements  to  borrow 
ley  in  New  York,  and  hopes  to  supply  you  and  pay  off  your  troops 
b few  days. 

t will  be  necessary  to  report  the  state  of  your  command  and  the 
ober  of  troops  in  order  to  make  the  estimates,  so  as  to  keep  you 
plied.  I have  requested  the  Treasury  Department  to  give  you  the 
ference  over  all  other  claims  to  the  payment  of  troops  and  procure- 
lt  of  supplies. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , Mo .,  March  23,  1862. 

i.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , I).  C. : 
ir  : A telegram  from  General  Curtis  some  days  ago  stated  that  the 
my  was  returning  to  attack  him  with  a very  large  army,  and  that 
required  large  re-enforcements.  I immediately  sent  him  several 
itional  regiments,  but  another  telegram,  received  last  evening,  stated 
b it  was  a false  alarm,  and  that  the  enemy  had  now  withdrawn  all 
i forces  to  the  south  of  Boston  Mountains, 
am  organizing  a column  for  New  Mexico  as  rapidly  as  possible, 
however,  will  take  some  days  to  collect  troops,  artillery,  and  horses, 
a train.  General  Brice  will  be  placed  in  command  of  this  column, 
iv e no  personal  acquaintance  with  him,  but  many  officers  in  whose 
?ment  I have  great  confidence  say  he  is  admirably  suited  for  that 
y,  having  energy  and  good  judgment,  and  being  thoroughly  ac- 
inted  with  every  part  of  New  Mexico.  I know  General  Canby  well, 
is  one  of  the  best  officers  in  the  service.  I am  certain  that  he  will 
everything  possible  to  hold  out  until  our  re- enforcements  can  reach 
. 1 therefore  do  not  deem  it  necessary,  at  least  tor  the  present,  to 
ich  New  Mexico  to  this  department.  I am  confident  that  General 
iby  and  myself  can  co-operate  as  well  as  if  he  were  under  my  direct 
1 ers.  Moreover,  his  command  is  so  very  distant  that  I could  not  well 
;‘ct  his  movements,  and  by  having  an  independent  position  he  can 
< more  freely. 

reneral  Pope  is  gradually  working  his  way  through  the  swamps  south 


634 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [Chap.  XVIlj 


Madrid  His  progress  is  necessarily  slow,  but  if  the  operatioi 
1 iT it  can  hardly  fail  to  produce  important  results.  I 

near  S.e.nnal,  « the  T.nn«.«, 
iSSutSoOO  men.  The  stream,  in  the  rioimtj  «e  so  very  ... 

rSSi»S'.-p»4“«3  «»>.•;  M.a.  ijj 

ssr  iz  srt.Tn"er„n;..ru.s? 

“rn^mne^fe.^ 

Georgia  and  ^abaPa’  .fh  ” enforcements  from  Louisiana  ai 
Florida11  ^ann^Geuerals  Sherman  and  Butler  take  advantage  of  th 
Withdrawal  of  troops  from  Georgia  and  Alabama  to  attack  Savanncj 

“i  am°ranidlv  withdrawing  all  troops  mustered  into  the  service  of  tl, 
United^  from  State^ontrol 


This  causes  'some  grumbling  on  the  part  of the ^Pf.  Bto 


authorities8  way  to  get  these  forcj 

there  as  long  as  possible.  . 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, ^ hAXjLBCK, 

Major- General* 


Headquarters  District  0F_™^^SSI|SI<SlPI^o 

New  Madrid , March  23,  1862.f 


MSincf  yeeterd^y  our  gunboats  seem  to  have  ceased  their  Are  and  d 
S jft.  toyreducf  the  H U 


four  hours.  The  river  is  very  high  and  rising  stiil,  and  the 
runs  so  furiouslv  that  a row-boat,  manned  by  six  oarsmen,  which 
o^  yest"  Was  unable  to  stem  it  and  floated  down Sm**  M 

circumstances,  in  the  lace  ot  me  ews  y,  failure  of  our  gunboats 

and  the  imperative  necessity  of  taking  < 


The  difficulties  have  much  increased  since  I first  deternpned  p 

a movement  by  the  greatlydncreased intag «£* ,^nd  theWe  Will 
The  canal  cannot  be  made  deep  enough  for  gnnboats,  an“  tu^ 
nothing  to  cover  our  landing  on  the  opiate  bank.  Tl 

must  therefore  be  made  under  well  the  necess 

increase  the  danger  and  chance  ot  confusion,  i s 


ap.  XYUl.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  635 

carrying  the  enemy’s  works,  now  that  the  attack  has  begun,  but  it 
distinctly  to  be  understood  that  no  manner  of  assistance  has  been 
, from  appearances,  can  be  rendered  us  by  the  gunboats  of  the  flotilla, 
unmodore  Foote  declines  to  run  any  of  his  boats  past  the  batteries 
r fear  of  losing  them.  I have  offered,  through  Colonel  Bissell,  en- 
neers  to  secure  the  boat  against  damage  from  the  enemy’s  fire,  but 
)mmodore  Foote  fears  that  the  enemy  may  board  her.  Surely  such 
risk  is  much  less  than  will  be  that  of  crossing  a large  force  in  frail 
ats  over  a wide,  swift  river,  in  the  face  of  an  enemy,  and  without 
y thing  to  cover  the  landing.  I shall,  however,  carry  out  the  opera- 
>n;  but  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  if  any  plan  of  operations 
wn  this  river  has  been  made  with  the  belief  that  our  gunboat  flotilla 
n dislodge  the  enemy  from  any  batteries  they  choose  to  place  on  the 
iin-land  or  on  the  islands,  it  must  of  necessity  fail.  Unless  the  gun- 
ats  are  able  to  perform  what  has  been  asserted  for  them,  the  line  of 

0 river  is  the  strongest  the  enemy  has.  If  the  enemy  have  planted 
tteries  on  the  upper  end  of  any  island  below  us,  we  will  have  the 
me  delay  and  difficulty  we  have  had  here.  I must  disembark,  pass 
3und  by  land,  establish  batteries  below  the  enemy,  and  wait  until  they 
3 starved  out,  as  it  is  not  likely  that  other  places  will  be  found  where 
aals  can  be  dug,  so  as  to  bring  transports  below  the  enemy’s  bat- 
*ies  without  passing  in  range.  Even  if  such  places  could  be  found, 
lerever  the  enemy  established  a battery  I would  be  obliged,  as  I am 
w,  to  cross,  without  cover  or  the  aid  of  gunboats,  in  the  face  of  the 
emy.  Of  course,  if  the  land  forces  are  to  cross  and  recross  this  river 
every  battery  of  the  enemy  along  its  banks  and  on  the  islands  and 

irry  their  works,  we  must  be  delayed  in  our  progress  beyond  all  rea- 
: a and  must  certainly  sustain  some  disaster. 

1 write  you  frankly  the  facts,  as  I know  you  desire  to  have  them, 
i e newspaper  puffing  concerning  the  gunboats  has  misled  the  public 
l iatly.  I think  if  has  been  a fact  sufficiently  well  established  by  ex- 
;tience  that  batteries  on  the  water,  especially  where  they  have  not 
: 3 force  to  land  and  storm,  cannot  contend  with  redoubts  on  the  land. 

e enemy  here  has  been  unable,  with  all  his  gunboats,  to  dislodge  the 
emen  and  small  artillery  batteries  I ha,ve  established.  Batteries  of 
ivy  guns  would  be  still  more  difficult.  The  enemy  exposes  none  of 
men  in  the  batteries  except  those  at  the  guns,  and  as  he  does  not 
r a land  attack  or  any  attempt  to  storm  on  the  part  of  the  flotilla, 
scarcely  answers  Commodore  Foote’s  cannonade.  Colonel  Bissell, 
oin  1 sent  up,  informs  me  that  the  enemy  only  fired  twice  during  the 
y he  was  there.  I state  these  facts  because  I think  it  proper  that  it 
mid  be  understood  precisely  what  is  the  exact  capacity  of  the  naval 
Lilia  in  such  operations,  and  because  it  seems  to  me  that  we  are  un- 
taking  a most  difficult  line  of  operations  if  the  land  forces  are  to 
crossed  and  recrossed  at  every  battery  the  enemy  chooses  to  estab- 
i.  The  result  of  seven  days’  operations  of  the  gunboats  has  plainly 
| >wn  that  they  are  not  likely  to  reduce  any  of  the  enemy’s  batteries. 

L ave  also  to  complain  that  the  corps  of  newspaper  correspondents 
j h the  flotilla  have  been  put  in  possession  of  my  plans  for  bringing 
j vn  boats  here  by  digging  a canal  and  have  published  it  in  the  news- 
] Ders.  I fear  to  write  anything,  lest  I see  it  in  a day  or  two  in  all 
' newspapers  in  the  country.  My  dispatches  to  Colonel  Buford  and 
^mmodore  Foote  concerning  the  blockade  of  the  river  below  them 
*r.e  official,  and  not  designed  for  publication.  I regret  to  trouble  you 
^ li  such  matters,  but  if  my  intentions  and  movements  are  published 


636 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chaf.  XYH 


days  in  advance  by  persons  not  under  my  control  I must  cease  to  co: 

respond  with  the  forces  above  me. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  seJ^t’p0pE 

Briaadier- General , Commanding 


Pilot  Knob,  Mo.,  March  23,  1862 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok,  U.  S.  A.: 

General  : The  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Infantry  and  the  Sixteenth^Oh] 


Battery  marched  from  here  this  morning  to  join  the > advance  at 
phau  or  Pitman’s  Ferry.  Three  squadrons  of  the  Fifth  Illinois  Oa 
airy  are  waiting  here  for  the  return  of  their  baggage  wagons,  wliie 
were  sent  forward  with  supplies,  the  supply  tram  not  being  sufflcieii 
to  keep  the  troops  in  advance  provisioned.  The  other  three  squadroi 
of  that  regiment  are  at  Greenville,  having  been  sent  as  escorts  to  trail 
and  as  guard  to  the  depot.  I have  detailed  the  Thirteenth  Illinois  Oa^ 
airy,  four  squadrons,  under  Colonel  Bell,  to  guard  the  depot  at  th 
point  and  at  Greenville,  or  wherever  it  may  be  established,  and  to  e 
cort  trains  between  these  points.  The  squadron  of  Illinois  cava  y,J 
der  Captain  Dodson  (Dodson’s  and  Huntley’s  troop),  I shall  take  wil 
me  into  the  field.  We  have  received  75  wheel  mules  and  some  tear 
sters  from  Saint  Louis,  and  shall  be  able  to  get  up  an  efficient  supp  | 
train  immediately.  We  have  no  ammunition  for  the  batteries  excej 
what  is  in  the  boxes  of  the  caissons  and  limbers— 200  rounds  oi  miss 
ammunition.  This  is  half  the  usual  allowance  for  a campaign,  ar| 


aramumuou.  xiuo  , , TT  ~ mi, 

might  not  be  sufficient  if  we  should  intrench  ourselves  at  Helena,  lb 


did  not  occur  to  me  until  I inspected  Captain  Mitchell  s battery, 
has  four  6-pounder  guns  and  two  12-pounder  howitzers.  Captain  Ma 
ter  has  a 4-gun  battery.  I do  not  know  whether  either  one  is  a 
itzer.  I know  nothing  about  the  small  guns  in  possession  of  °ne  of  ti 
cavalry  regiments.  If  ammunition  should  be  sent  here,  it  could  be  fc 

warded  to  me  immediately.*  , , +1  h 

I have  been  informed  that  all  the  prisoners  of  war  taken  by  the  lebe 
in  Missouri  and  Arkansas  are  confined  in  the  penitentiary  at  Lit 
Rock.  I could  not  ascertain  whether  or  not  there  was  any  force 

that  place  besides  a prison  guard. 

I think  General  Curtis  will  have  another  battle  soon.  It  ' <111  Ho 
should  be  defeated  again  he  may  turn  his  attention  to  my  oommm 
I do  not  anticipate  much  resistance  this  side  of  Helena  It  is  report 
that  they  have  been  building  iron-clad  gunboats  on  the  Lower  Miss 

t,lPP1’  Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obed|“y“^m^EELB) 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  23,  looJ. 


General  Samuel  R.  Curtis:  . 

It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  has  about  100  negroes  engaged  in  t 
saltpeter  works  in  Marion  County,  a little  east  of  Wort  . 


* Some  matter  of  detail  here  omitted. 


lAr.XVm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  637 

larded  by  only  one  company.  A detachment  of  cavalry  from  Spring- 
3ld  could  destroy  these  works  and  free  the  negroes,  as  being  employed 
! enemy’s  service. 

'H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  District  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo .,  March  23,  1S62. 

apt.  NT.  tl.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  a commu- 
cation,  dated  Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  March  21,  1862,  from  Major-General 
alleck,  commanding  the  department,  touching  certain  reports  of  dis- 
irbances  in  La  Fayette,  Jackson,  and  Johnson  Counties,  in  this  State, 
is  instructions  shall  be  attended  to  carefully  and  at  the  earliest  pos- 
ble  day. 

In  connection  with  this,  I would  also  mention,  for  the  information  of 
ie  major-general  commanding,  that  I have  just  heard  rumors  from 
her  sources  of  a disorderly  state  of  things  in  Bates  County,  where  a 
xtain  scoundrel,  Jackman,  heads  a band  of  robbers  and  desperadoes, 
imbering,  it  is  reported  by  Colonel  Warren,  as  high  as  500.  Before 
y arrival  here  my  predecessor,  General  McKean,  had  given  orders 
liich,  when  carried  out,  places  eight  companies  of  the  First  Iowa  Cav- 
ry  and  one  section  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery  at  Clinton,  Henry 
aunty.  The  obj  ect  of  this  was  undoubtedly  to  watch  J ackman  in  Bates 
aunty,  and  also  to  keep  an  eye  to  the  quiet  of  the  other  counties  ad- 
cent  to  Henry.  The  order  of  General  McKean  directs  two  companies 
irst  Iowa  Cavalry,  stationed  at  Lexington,  to  proceed  to  Sedalia  when 
lieved  by  Companies  A and  C,  Missouri  State  Militia,  from  Booneville. 
The  two  companies  First  Iowa  Cavalry  from  Lexington  are  repre- 
nted  as  being  broken  down  in  horses  and  as  requiring  rest.  When 
ese  two  companies  reach  Sedalia,  and  General  McKean’s  orders  are 
•mplied  with,  there  will  be  four  companies  of  cavalry  at  Sedalia. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEK, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District . 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  March  23,  1862. 

ipt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
meral  commanding,  that  about  4 o’clock  p.  m.  to-day,  after  the 
iparture  of  all  the  mails,  I received  a messenger  from  Col.  L.  Merrill, 
Columbia,  who  brought  the  information  that  rebels  to  the  number  of 
om  60  to  150  were  concentrated  in  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Vernon,  Mon- 
3au  County,  and  that  he  would  co-operate  on  the  north  side  of  the 
ver  with  any  expedition  I might  be  pleased  to  order  in  that  direction. 
Deeming  this  matter  of  considerable  importance  I have  sent  out 
oops  named  in  the  inclosed  copy  of  instructions  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
lood,  commanding  post  at  Tipton,  Mo. 

The  infantry  from  here  went  by  special  train  and  the  cavalry  and 


638 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYlj 


artillery  marched  by  road,  both  leaving  here  about  9 o’clock  p.  m.  fj 

Caialsoincl^s°e  copies  of  Special  Orders,  Nos.  4 and  5,*  from  these  heal 

^ For  fear  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blood  might  be  absent  or  neressdnl 
prevented  from  taking  command  of  the  expedition,  I sent  Major  FletchP 
to  Tipton  with  dispatches,  and  in  such  event  to  take  command  himsel 

(Special  Order,  No.  5).  - J 

The  inclosed  telegrams!  were  deemed  necessary  on  account  ot  til 

weakening  of  the  posts  of  California  and  Tipton.  1 

Two  companies  Twenty-sixth  Indiana  are  to  move  from  the  La  Mine  I 
Svracuse  relieving  the  two  companies  Sixth  Missouri  Yolunteeis  theil 
who  will  move  to  Tipton,  and  the  one  company  Sixth  Missouri  at  Tiphl 
to  California,  thus  giving,  as  before,  two  companies  at  each  of  the  abo 
Tioints  and  leaving  still  seven  at  the  La  Mine.  , I 

P Owing  to  the  heavy  extra  duty,  building  block  and  guard  house 
guarding  bridges,  and  to  sickness  in  the  troops  here,  it  has  been  deemi 
necessary  to  bring  troops  from  the  La  Mine  to  other  points  m tb 

diin°order  that  the  major-general  commanding  the  department  ms 
comprehend  the  whole  affair,  1 send  also  herewith  a copy  of  Colon 
Merrill’s  letter  from  Columbia, t giving  the  information  relative  to  til 
band  after  whom  I have  dispatched  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blood. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serJ^>  ToTTER, 

Brigadier -General , Commanding  District J 


[Inelosure.] 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  March  23,  1862. 


Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Blood 


Sixth  Missouri  Volunteers : 

Sir  : Information  has  just  been  received  from  Col.  L.  Merrill,  co: 
manding  United  States  Volunteers  at  Columbia,  Boone  County,  M ; 


tha/ta band  of  guerrillas,  variously  estimated  at.  from  60  to  150. 
yiicti  cl  uciinu.  kj  5 x f , Misannri  River,  m Mom 


infesting  the  countiy  on  this  side  of  the  Missouri  River,  in  Modta 
County,  opposite  Providence,  in  Boone  County,  to  a point  as  high  j 
the  river  as  Rocheport  Ferry,  landing  within  10  miles  of  Boonevil 
The  camp-fires  of  these  guerrillas  have  been  seen  on  this  side  ot  the  n 
bv  scouts  in  Boone  County,  near  Providence. 

yit  is  necessary  that  these  bands  of  lawless  guerrillas  should 
thoroughly  broken  up  and  exterminated,  and  I have  selected  you 
this  instance  to  accomplish  this  most  desirable  and  ™P°rtant  d 


tins  instance  lu  accuiiijiucu  . ..  * 

and  I hope,  by  your  energy  and  secret  and  rapid  movements,  y 
may  be  able  to  give  the  outlaws  a terrible  and  long-to-be-remember 


To  accomplish  this  object  I have  caused  the  foUowing-named  teoo 
to  march,  and  have  directed  them  to  report  to  you  at  Pisgah, 
or  15  miles  northeast  from  Tipton.  The  troops  ordered  to  report  to  y 

from  this  place  and  California  are — . . „n 

1st.  Captain  Adams’  company,  C,  Sixth  Missouri  \ olunteers, 

berinc  about  45  men,  from  Jefferson  City.  T . , _ 

2d.SCapt.  Daniel  Rice’s  company,  with  a detachment  of  Lieutena 


* Omitted  as  unimportant. 


t Not  found. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


ap.  xvm.] 


639 


ard’s  company,  both  belonging  to  the  Missouri  State  Volunteers, 
3m  Jefferson  City,  numbering  about  90  men. 

3d.  One  section  (two  pieces)  of  Captain  Cockefair’s  Third  Indiana, 
ittery,  from  Jefferson  City,  numbering  about  30  men. 

4th.  Captain  Fletcher’s  company,  B,  Sixth  Missouri  Volunteers,  from 
difornia,  numbering  65  or  70  men,  probably. 

In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  troops,  you  will  take  with  you 
>m  Tipton  Captain  Bragg’s  company,  A,  Sixth  Missouri  Volunteers, 
inch  I have  calculated  will  make  your  entire  force  about  170  foot,  90 
rse,  and  two  pieces  of  artillery. 

|My  object  in  giving  you  thus  large  a force  is  that  you  may  crush  out 
is  band  of  outlaws,  guerrillas,  and  robbers,  and  utterly*  annihilate 

jem. 

On  the  receipt  of  this  you  will  proceed  with  Captain  Bragg’s  com- 
;ny  to  Pisgah,  where  you  will  be  joined  by  the  troops  hereinbefore 
pntioned.  When  your  command  has  all  come  up,  if  they  are  not 
*eady  there  when  you  arrive,  you  will  proceed,  via  Midway,  to  Mount 
rnon,  carefully  examining  the  country  as  you  approach  that  place, 
id  as  far  as  the  Missouri  Kiver,  opposite  Providence,  to  ascertain  the 
hereabouts  of  the  guerrilla  band  which  you  are  after,  and  which  is 
der  Watson. 

l our  expedition  may  take  you  as  far  as  Bocheport  Ferry  Landing,  or 
?n  nearer  to  Booneville,  before  learning  anything  of  the  robbers,  but 
d them,  and  do  not  spare  them  when  found. 

iou  would  do  well  to  get  a good,  reliable  guide  to  give  you  informa- 
n about  every  road  and  by-path  in  the  country  through  which  you 
ps.  About  northwest  from  Midway,  and  probably  8 miles  distant 
prefrom,  is  a place  called  Clarke’s  Fork,  which  it  may  be  well  to  ex- 
1 ine  into  closely  in  your  pursuit  of  the  guerrillas, 
py  inquiry  of  such  loyal  men  among  the  farmers  as  you  may  find,  it  is 
3ed,  however,  that  you  will,  without  much  trouble,  learn  the  where  - 
3uts  ot  the  band  you  seek,  and  come  upon  them  unexpectedly. 

Vfter  you  have  found  and  punished  the  robbers  and  utterly  broken 
m up  or  satisfied  yourself  they  are  not  in  existence,  you  will  order 
ir  troops  back  to  their  respective  posts,  and  report  the  result  of 
lr  expedition  to  these  headquarters. 

fou  must  take  at  least  ten  days’  rations  with  your  command  from 
don ; all  the  other  companies  have  the  same. 

f anything  of  importance  occurs  in  connection  with  your  command 
ort  immediately  by  express. 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding  District . 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo .,  March  24,  1862. 

t.  Lewis  Merrill, 

Commanding , Columbia , Mo. : 

our  communication  of  the  22d  instant  came  to  hand  yesterday  after- 
n at  4 o’clock,  and  in  accordance  with  your  suggestions  1 dispatched 
night  an  expedition  from  this  point,  to  proceed  via  California  and 
gah,  where  they  will  be  joined  byre-enforcements  from  Tipton,  and, 
ler  the  command  ot  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blood,  Sixth  Missouri  Vol- 
eers,  they  are  to  thoroughly  scour  the  country  on  this  side  of  the 


640 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVI 


river  from  Mount  Vernon  to  Rocheport  Ferry  Landing,  Booneville,  ai 
cS"™d  to  break  up  and  entirely  destroy  the  pestiferous  gaj 

' 'f  ThT«p^li  H<m  f^heuSitlr^:hes  Pisgah,  will  number  three  companil 
of  the  S?xth  Missouri  Volunteers  (infantry),  two  companies  of  MissoiJ 

They  will  doubtless  move  from  Pisgah  some  tune  to-day,  and  arj  | 
teit  ^ ra^redTere  that  the  ferry  at  Providence  is  in  the  habit  | 


It  is  rumored  Here  mat  tuc  ™ - — — — , , * , (I 

crossing  these  marauding  bands, .and doing i it  after  ght.  Al  t 


aTtcfosselmen  a short  distance  above  Providence,  and  perhaps 

;thtt  jUon  0<>n  I 

Sde  and"  ff°necla5, 1 shalTbrtak  up  every  ferry  between  here  a 
Booneville.  I would  give  you  more  particulars  as  to  the  expeditio  , 
am  in  doubt  as  to  whether  you  will  receive  this  safely. 

If  I learn  anything  of  importance  on  your  side  ot  the  nveror  in  (Ml 

nection  with  tiiis  expedition  I will  inform  you.  • , cf  Y(i 

Keep  a good  lookout  on  your  side,  as  soon  after  the  ai  rival  o y(l 
express  as  possible,  and  to-morrow  be  surely  on  the  watch. 

P I am?  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedieid  servnnb 

Briaadier-General,  Commanding  District I 


Headquarters  Army  of  thk  Southwest, 

Cross  Timber,  Arlc March  24,  186J 


Capt.  N.  H.  McLean: 

n apt ain  • The  general’s  dispatch  about  saltpeter  works  receiv 
Half  seift  spies  two  days  before  preparatory  to  the  purpose  suggest! 

WLasfof  my  forward  cavalry  movement  just  in.  They  went  souths 

from  Fayetteville  ; came  up  line  roadtit"  ^,neV^‘k  several  prison, 
into  Territory.  Colonel  Pease  commanded,  look  several  pr  so 
among  them  Captain  Boone,  who  says  he  escaped  from  former  r 
tivity  by  jumping  from  cars  on  being  transferred  from  Saint  Loui, 

CSome  Union  fugitives  have  just  come  in  from  east  ofFayetteville 
rohel  force  coming  again  to  devastate  and  destroy.  I think  it  men 
a forauing  party  of  the  enemy.  The  cavalry  suffered  for  forage  j 

myfor^ing  teamJ  hav^t^m'ake^two  days’*  journey*  north  tZget  t 

anffaSa^ 

S; 

Brigadier-  General , Commandin 


p.  XVHX]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  641 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  24,  1862. 

aeral  Pope,  New  Madrid : 

Tours  of  yesterday  received.  Commodore  Foote  will  not  attempt  to 
L past  tlie  batteries  and  lie  cannot  reduce  them.  If  the  crossing 
mot  be  effected  with  safety  it  had  better  not  be  undertaken.  The 
in  object  is  accomplished  by  holding  the  enemy  in  position.  If  the 
a of  crossing  is  given  up,  send  all  the  forces  you  can  spare  to  Bird’s 
int,  to  be  transported  up  the  Tennessee.  We  can  there  turn  the  en- 
y and  cut  off  his  retreat  by  land,  while  your  guns  command  the  river, 
his  meets  your  views,  I will  also  withdraw  the  forces  from  Hickman 
h the  same  object.  The  immediate  reduction  of  these  batteries  is 
important,  but  the  failure  in  an  attempt  to  cross  your  army  over 
river  might  be  disastrous.  I am  decidedly  in  favor  of  the  move  up 
Tennessee.  Answer. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  March  24, 1862. 

j.  J.  D.  Snedicor, 

Provost-Marshal , Fulton , Mo. : 

Iajor  : In  order  that  our  enemies  may  be  disarmed  and  that  our 
nds  may  not  be  left  isolated  and  exposed,  to  be  overpowered  and 
irmed  by  rebels,  you  will  take  possession  of  all  fire-arms  of  every 
cription  in  your  district.  Give  to  the  owner  a certificate,  and  so 
ober  or  mark  the  arms  that  they  can  be  restored  at  the  close  of  the 
ellion.  The  arms  you  will  keep  or  deposit  in  a secure  place,  where 
y will  be  properly  guarded.  In  order  to  obtain  arms,  &c.,  you  may 
our  discretion  resort  to  the  oath,  a copy  of  which  was  forwarded 
by  Dr.  Martin. 

^e  have  been  at  fault  to  know  where  to  ship  blanks  and  stationery 
you.  I will  send  them  to  Mexico,  to  care  of  postmaster,  immediately 
receipt  of  your  requisitions. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BERNARD  G.  FARRAR, 

Provost-Marshal-  General. 

G.  FLETCHER,  Assistant, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  25,  1862. 

i.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington: 

[R:  Your  letter  of  the  19th  instant  in  relation  to  military  outrages 
ackson  County,  Missouri,  is  just  received.  I have  had  two  regi- 
ds  stationed  or  moving  in  Jackson  County  for  some  time  past  in 
ir  to  put  a stop  to  these  depredations.  This  is  as  much  as  I can  do, 
many  other  counties  in  this  State  are  equally  urgent  in  their  calls 
protection,  and  to  gratify  them  all  would  require  an  army  of  50,000 
i to  be  distributed  through  Missouri  in  addition  to  the  militia, 
bat  many  and  in  some  cases  horrible  outrages  have  been  committed 
41  R r — VOL  VIII 


642 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV] 

in  this  State  I do  not  donbt.  They  have  been  committed  by  tin 
classes  of  persons. 

1st.  The  enemy’s  guerrilla  bands.  Since  the  expulsion  of  Price  th 
are  rapidly  diminishing.  Nevertheless  it  will  require  some  severe  i 
ainples  to  be  made  in  order  to  suppress  them. 

2d.  The  Kansas  jayhawkers,  or  robbers,  who  were  organized  unc 
the  auspices  of  Senator  Lane.  They  wear  the  uniform  of  and  it  is  1 
lieved  receive  pay  from  the  United  States.  Their  principal  occu; 
tion  for  the  last  six  months  seems  to  have  been  the  stealing  of  negro 
the  robbing  of  houses,  and  the  burning  of  barns,  grain,  and  fora; 
The  evidence  of  their  crimes  is  unquestionable.  They  have  not  here 
fore  been  under  my  orders.  I will  now  keep  them  out  of  Missouri 

have  them  shot.  x 

3d.  Our  own  volunteer  troops.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  some  ot  ( 
volunteer  regiments  have  behaved  very  badly,  plundering  to  an  en 
inous  extent.  I have  done  everything  in  my  power  to  prevent  this  a 
to  punish  the  guiltv.  Many  of  the  regimental  officers  are  very  bad  m 
and  participate  in  this  plunder.  In  such  cases  it  is  impossible  to  rep 
them  by  courts-martial.  Where  regiments  are  moving  in  the  field  con 
cannot  be  assembled,  and  when  courts  are  ordered  the  witnesses  cl 
not  be  procured,  or,  if  private  soldiers,  are  frequently  overawed  by  the 
colonels  or  other  officers.  This  matter  was  fully  represented  to  Assi 
ant  Secretary  Scott  when  here,  and  he  advised  the  mustering  out! 
service  of  officers  who  were  satisfactorily  shown  to  be  guilty  of  tl 
species  of  plunder  and  marauding.  Under  the  general  authority  gnl 
to  me  to  muster  out  of  service  I have,  in  a few  cases,  resorted  to  tt 
remedy,  and  it  is  producing  a good  effect.  By  this  means  the  oihcl 
escape  the  punishment  and  disgrace  which  they  deserve,  but  the  ar;j 
is  purged  of  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  HALLECK 

Major-General 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  25,  1862 

E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington : 

Pretended  Union  man  from  New  Orleans  just  arrived  within  our  hr 
represents  that  the  rebels  are  building  one  or  more  river  boats  at  tl 
place,  clad  in  railroad  iron,  like  the  Merrimac.  Such  a river  boat  cm 
pass  any  of  our  batteries,  destroy  Commodore  Foote’s  flotilla,  and  bi 
the  steamboats  in  the  Western  waters.  This  is  a very  serious  matt 
which  requires  immediate  attention. 

If  there  are  any  very  heavy  guns  at  Pittsburgh  they  should  be  s* 
immediately  down  the"  Ohio,  to  be  mounted  at  Cairo  or  Columbus. 

I have  written  to  Commodore  Foote  to  know  if  either  of  his  gunbOi 
can  be  more  heavily  iron-clad,  so  as  to  meet  the  apprehended  dang 
If  so,  authority  should  be  given  to  alter  her;  if  not,  authority  slio 
be  given  to  immediately  construct  a river  monitor  capable  ot  meet 
anything  the  enemy  can  send  up  the  river. 

The  matter  seems  to  me  to  admit  of  no  delay. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General 


u*.  XYin.j 


643 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

War  Department, 

March  25,  1862 — 6.35  p.  m. 

ijor-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis: 

Yours  of  this  date  has  just  arrived.  Information  of  the  same  charac- 
■ reached  me  from  other  sources  this  morning,  and  this  evening  a 
mher  of  Western  boat-builders  meet  at  the  Department  to  consider 
I best  mode  of  meeting  the  rebel  boat.  The  universal  opinion  among 
val  and  military  engineers  in  the  East  is  that  a floating  ram  striking 
d sinking  the  iron-clad  vessel  is  the  best  mode  of  encountering  it 
large  class  boat  at  Saint  Louis  might  perhaps  be  got  ready  in  a short 
le;  would  it  not  be  well  for  you  to  consult  some  of  your  river  men? 
mmodore  Vanderbilt  has  given  his  steamship  Vanderbilt  for  the 
rpose,  and  it  is  now  at  Norfolk  to  meet  the  Merrimac,  and  although 
b armor-clad,  he  is  very  confident  of  being  able  to  run  her  down 
arles  Ellet,  a distinguished  engineer,  has  given  the  subject  much 
ention.  I will  send  him  to-morrow  to  see  and  consult  you,  and  with 
hority  to  act  as  you  may  deem  best.  He  is  a man  of  courage  and 
>rgy,  and  willing  to  risk  his  own  life  upon  his  own  job. 

' EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


New  Madrid,  March  25,  1862. 

ijor-General  Halleck: 

>ur  canal  progresses  well;  two  steamers  with  four  barges  are  nearly 
ough.  I will  bring  down  several  more  steamers,  and  will  deepen 
canal  so  as  to  bring  through  it  the  smallest  gunboat.  We  need 
to  cover  our  landing  on  the  opposite  bank.  I sent  some  cavalry 
Irom  Point  Pleasant  25  miles  on  plank  road,  under  Major  P await 
enth  Illinois  Cavalry,  to  break  up  Jeff.  Thompson’s  camp.  Came 
>n  him,  killed  6,  and  wounded  many  more : dispersed  his  force 
irely  in  the  swamp. 

JNO.  POPE, 
Major-General. 


idAL  Orders,  ) War  Dept.,  Adjt.  Genl.’s  Office, 

•No*  i Washington , March  25,  1862. 

# # # # # # 

Brig  Gen.  Thomas  A.  Davies  is  assigned  to  duty  in  the  Depart- 
it  of  the  Mississippi,  and  will  report  in  person  to  Major-General 
leek  at  Saint  Louis, 
y order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant- General. 


^ „ Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  March  26,  1862. 

■i.  E.  M.  Stanton,  9 

Secretary  of  War: 

ke  main  works  of  tire  enemy  are  on  main  land,  above  Island  No.  10. 
and  mortar  boats  can  make  no  impression  on  them.  Pope  has 
■ preparing  to  cross  below  and  attack  them  in  the  rear,  but  may 
on  account  of  the  flood.  If  so,  he  will  probably  cross  above  to 


644  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvn 


Nearly  tie  whole  Mil 


Columbus  or  Hickman  for  the  same  purpose, 
sissippi  Valley  in  that  vicinity  is  overflowed^  ^ HALLBCK, 

Major-General,  i 


War  Department,  1 
Washington,  March  26,  1862.1 

Maior-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Your  letter  of  the  23d  just  received.  General  Hunter  has  be<J 
placed  in  command  of  the  Southern  Department,  including  ShermaJ 
and  Brannan’s  commands.  I have  instructed  him  to  proceed  immeJ 
ately  to  his  command  and  operate  vigorously  against  Savannah  ait 
Mobile.  The  sooner  all  the  troops  are  withdrawn  from  their  respectij 
States  and  placed  under  discipline  the  better  it  will  be > for  1 .he  servitl 
Nominations  of  Canby  and  Brice  are  pending  befoie  the  Sena* 
Strong  was  about  to  be  rejected,  but  I have  applied  for  his  confirm! 

tion,  and  it  will  be  done.  EDWIN  M.  STANTON,  ; 

mporptarn  of  War. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  March  26,  1862^ 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Information  received  from  a man  who  left  New  Orleans  that  01 
iron-clad  gunboat  for  river  was  nearly  completed.  Thinks  it  is  nq 
on  the  way  up  the  Mississippi.  Eleven  other  river  gunboats  buildjkj 
also  a very  large  ocean  steamer,  said  to  carry  twenty -four  guns,  al 
to  be  made  impenetrable  to  shot!  All  these  vessels  are  being  rapid 

completed.  H w HALLECK, 

71  /Ts*As\/v  ffa'viDX'fi] 


Headquarters  District  of  ™E7  MySI^S 

New  Madrid,  March  26,  1862 

Flag-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote:  . 

I have  directed  Colonel  Bissell,  who  is  making  slow  but  certain  I* 
ress  with  his  work,  to  deepen  the  channel  sufficiently  to  enab  e 
your  smallest  gunboats  to  be  brought  through.  The  m er  he  s 
wide  that  our  guns  on  this  side  cannot  command  the  tending  on  \ 
opposite  bank,  and  I need  a gunboat  to  lie  near  the 
prevent  the  establishment  of  batteries  or  the  l,fti5ilu  iinosU  sh. 
our  boats  in  crossing.  The  enemy’s  P^kets  line  the  °ppos  te  sh 
from  Island  No.  10  all  the  way  around  to  T p oimUc  (Men  , . 

Landing),  and  any  movement  will  be  observed  as  soon  as  ^ 

Of  course  the  frail  steamers  loaded  with  men  are  not  suitab  to 
the  passage  of  the  river  iu  the  face  of  an  enemy,  even  with  he 
teries.  Your  smallest  gunboat  will  answer  all  purposes  and^ 
brought  through,  even  if  it  be  necessary  to  ,tak®  fh®.  8 tl.aD) 
poranly.  They  can  either  be  brought  down  in  one  of  the  s 
or  barges  or  we  can  arm  her  with  32s  and  8-inch  howitzers  here. 


p.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


645 


ak  the  escape  of  the  enemy  nearly  impossible.  Certainly  no  bag- 
nor  any  sort  of  artillery  or  material  of  war  can  be  carried  off. 
• lower  battery  is  2 miles  below  Tiptonville,  and  commands  the 
pr  end  of  the  overflowed  lands  on  the  east  bank.  It  consists  of  two 
. and  two  10-pounder  Parrotts  well  supported.  From  this  place 
und  to  the  lower  battery  the  shore  is  lined  with  heavy  guns,  24s 
I 32s. 

shall  anxiously  await  your  reply,  in  which  I hope  you  will  let  me 
iw  the  draught  of  your  smallest  gunboat  with  and  without  guns, 
cross  this  furious  river,  so  wide  that  our  batteries  cannot  cover  the 
ding,  in  the  face  of  an  enemy  with  artillery,  and  on  such  frail  ves- 
3 as  we  must  use,  is  a very  hazardous  and  difficult  operation,  only 
be  justified  by  the  necessities  of  the  case.  Every  means,  therefore, 
st  be  taken  to  diminish  the  danger  of  any  disaster,  and  your  gun- 
it  will  render  matters  greatly  more  safe.  When  once  my  force  is  on 
other  side  I am  a match  for  any  enemy  to  be  found  there,  in  what- 
r numbers  they  are  likely  to  have.  Please  communicate  with  me 
soon  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

JHO.  POPE, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Hew  Madrid,  March  27,  1862. 

jor-General  Halleck: 

>ur  canal  progresses  slowly  but  surely.  Much  difficulty  has  been 
& with  sawing  off  trees  below  the  water.  It  will  require  three  days 
?et  the  boats  through  yet.  I fear  no  gunboat  can  be  brought,  but 
ill  speedily  fit  up  one  that  will  carry  a heavy  shell  gun  or  two  to 
er  our  landing.  Some  delay  is  unavoidable,  but  I am  confident  of 
cess.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  keep  very  clear  of  us.  I do  not  think 
ossible  for  the  enemy  to  escape  in  transports  from  Tiptonville  in  the 
3 of  our  heavy  battery  below.  They  cannot  embark  below  Tipton- 
e,  as  the  whole  country  is  under  water.  Bragg  is  said  to  be  at  Isl- 
L10.  Doubtful. 

JHO.  POPE, 
Major-General. 


Hew  Madrid,  March  27,  1862. 

Ijor-General  Halleck: 

our  dispatch  of  24th  received.  Will  take  Island  10  within  a week, 
st  me.  As  Commodore  Foote  is  unable  to  reduce  and  unwilling 
un  his  gunboats  past  it,  I would  ask,  as  they  belong  to  the  United 
tes,  that  he  be  directed  to  remove  his  crews  from  two  of  them  and 
a over  the  boats  to  me.  I will  bring  them  here.  I can  get  along 
hout  them,  but  will  have  several  days’  delay. 

he  railroad  from  Bird’s  Point  to  Sikeston  under  water,  and  route 
Commerce  impracticable  from  backwater  of  swamps.  Troops  could 
j be  taken  from  here  till  river  is  open.  I am  confident  of  success, 
I shall  carefully  provide  against  anv  danger  in  crossing  the  river. 

JHO.  POPE, 

Major-  General. 


646 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV* 


Headquarters  Army  oe  the  Southwest, 

March  27,  1862. 


Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  G ener al : 

Captain  : A reliable  friend  from  Huntsville  says  Price’s  army 
losing  and  gaining.  Van  Dorn  goes  East,  leaving  Price  in  commas 
He  must  attack  me  soon  or  the  Missouri  troops  will  leave  him.  Expec 
fifteen  regiments  from  Texas.  Four  contrabands  just  arrived.  E 
Yan  Burin  Sunday  last.  They  think  most  of  the  troops  are  ordered 
Little  Rock  and  Memphis,  and  were  about  going.  They  say  the  troo 
were  badly  whipped  and  swear  they  won’t  fight  us  again ; that  all  w 
won’t  join  the  Confederates  are  breaking  for  home.  ^ 0URTIS 

Major-General 


Saint  Louis,  March  28,  1862 

Flag-Officer  Foote  : 

General  Pope  is  confident  that  he  can  turn  the  enemy’s  position 
crossing  below.  Give  him  all  the  assistance  in  your  power  by  the  r 
of  vour  gunboats.  I think  that  by  a combined  operation  the  objt 
can  be  accomplished.  One  or  two  gunboats  are  very  necessary  to  |> 
tect  his  crossing.  Assist  him  in  this  if  you  eau-^  hALLECK 

Major-General 


New  Madrid,  March  28,  1862 


Major-General  Halleck  : 

Our  canal  approaches  completion.  It  has  been  a great  labor  to 
through  the  swamps,  but  to-morrow  brings  us  to  the  bayou  which  ce 
ducts  to  this  place.  During  progress  of  this  work  have  bad  two  M 
barges  lashed  together,  strengthened  all  around  with  4 feet  thioti 
heavy  timber,  and  to  be  lined  with  batters  of  pressed  hay,  ami  to  cat 
one  columbiad  and  two  Dahlgrens.  Pour  steamers  will  be  broad 
through  immediately.  I have  little  doubt  ot  success  m crossing  a] 
capturing  everything.  JN()  p0pB 

Major-  General , Commanding 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missmotp1, 

Saint  Louis,  March  28,  186^ 

General  Pope,  New  Madrid : « 

I have  telegraphed  to  Commodore  Foote  to  give  all  the  aid  m 
power.  You  have  a difficult  problem  to  solve.  I will  not  embarr. 
you  with  instructions.  I leave  you  free  to  act  as  your  judgment  n 

deem  best,  H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General 


ur.  XVIII.  1 


COERRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


647 


Headquarters 

apt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 


Army  of  the  Southwest, 
Cross  Timber , March  28,  18G2. 


Captain  : A scout  from  Fort  Scott  reports  that  Deitzler  is  ordered 
* New  Mexico.  What  does  this  mean  ? Price  lias  announced  his 
arch  against  me  with  re-enforcements,  starting  on  the  26th.  No  re- 
iforcements  and  no  artillery  ammunition  has  yet  arrived  for  me. 

The  time  of  Phelps’  regiment  is  ending  and  it  wants  to  go  out  I 
ive  ordered  forward  all  available  detachments,  but  mainly  depended 
i Kansas  forces,  which  I have  been  assured  were  moving  to  this  coin- 
land.  I rice,  at  last  accounts,  was  making  great  preparations  for 
bother  march,  and  if  he  is  coming  this  way  I should  surely  be  re-en- 
(Bed.  J 


SAML.  It.  CUBTIS, 
Major-  General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

^ ^ Saint  Louis , March  28,  1862. 

bit  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington : 

Sir  : I have  directed  that  Jefferson  Barracks  be  evacuated,  the  nub- 
property  to  be  removed,  and  the  buildings  to  be  turned  over  to  the 
hdical  department  for  a hospital.  General  Buell  reports  the  number 
■ k and  absent  of  his  army  (of  101,000  men)  to  be  30,000,  or  nearly 
c in  every  three.  This  is  certainly  an  enormous  sick  list  for  an  army 
it  has  been  engaged  in  no  serious  battle.  Of  the  regiments  which  I 
:lye  recently  sent  up  the  Tennessee  Kiver,  now  numbering  in  all  about 
000  men,  all  the  sick  were  left  behind  in  hospital,  and  yet,  after 
! n g less  than  two  weeks  in  the  field,  it  is  reported  that  5,000  men  are 
eady  on  the  sick  list.  This,  at  a healthy  season  of  the  year,  is  cer- 
nly  an  unprecedented  condition  of  things,  and  would  seem  to  indi- 
te a radical  deficiency  somewhere.  I am  confident  it  does  not  result 
im  a want  of  proper  provisions  and  hospital  stores,  for  no  army  was 
‘ ‘i  better  supplied.  I have  given  the  subject  as  much  attention  as 
i time  would  permit,  and  I think  one  great  source  of  the  evil  is  in 
r ^competency  of  the  brigade  and  regimental  surgeons  of  volun- 
rs.  It  is  alleged  that  men  are  placed  on  the  sick  list  and  given  cer- 
j cates  of  inability  as  a mere  matter  of  favoritism,  in  order  that  they 
y visit  their  homes  or  avoid  disagreeable  service  in  the  field.  On 
jeral  occasions  I have  ordered  medical  boards  to  re-examine  men 
jt  from  the  field  to  the  hospitals  in  this  city,  and  a large  portion  of 
»se  so  re-examined  have  been  reported  fit  for  duty  in  the  field.  This 
t serious  evil,  but  very  difficult  to  remove.  To  order  men  into  the 
d who  are  reported  by  their  surgeons  as  sick  would  seem  a cruel 
►I  ced are  on  the  part  of  a commander. 

In  detailing  General  Denver  for  the  command  in  Kansas  I followed 
advice  of  the  officers  of  General  Hunter’s  staff.  They  gave  it  as 
j ir  opinion  that  he  was  best  suited  for  the  place,  and  as  l had  very 
V?  Personal  acquaintance  with  him  I felt  bound  to  follow  the  best 
vice  I could  obtain.  Subsequent  information  convinces  me  that  it 
V good,  and  that  a better  selection  could  not  have  been  made.  There 
||  if  any,  enemies  in  Kansas,  and  the  qualities  most  required  there 
administrative.  I think  General  Denver  would  preserve  peace  on 


648 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


the  border  and  enable  me  to  send  most  of  the  Kansas  troops  mto  tl 
field"  where  they  might  be  of  some  use.  As  it  now  is  they  are  real] 
worse  than  useless,  for  they  compel  me  to  keep  troops  from  other  Stab 
on  the  Missouri  border  to  prevent  these  Kansas  troops  from  committir 
murders  aud  robberies.  It  appears,  however,  that  there  are  some  poln 
cal  influences  connected  with  this  matter.  Not  being  a politician,  th 
did  not  occur  to  me.  I am  a little  surprised,  however,  that  l>2,'t^laf| 
in  Congress  should  be  permitted  to  dictate  the  selection  of  officeis  fl 
n articular  duties  in  this  department.  Under  such  circumstances 
cannot  be  responsible  for  the  results.  Nevertheless  I shall  comp 
with  the  President’s  wishes,  and  place  some  other  ofhcer  in  cornmai 
in  Kansas  as  soon  as  I can  spare  one  for  that  purpose. 

On  consultation  with  Major  Donaldson,  just  trom  New  Mexico, 
has  been  determined  to  send  out  an  expedition  of  one  regiment  of  ca 
airy  three  of  infantry,  and  two  or  three  batteries.  He  does  not  dee 
n larger  force  necessary..  Moreover  it  will  be  a very  difficult  task 
set  this  number  through  at  this  season,  as  there  is  no  forage  or  grass  < 
the  road  Many  say  that  all  our  animals  will  die  for  want  ot  fo. 
before  they  can  reach  Fort  Union,  while  others  say  they  can  get  thiouj 
if  managed  with  care.  The  urgency  of  the  case  requires,  in  my  opuuc 
that  weranTll  risks  in  order  to  save  General  Canby’s  command  if  i 
possible.  It  is  estimated  that  each  regiment  will  require  at  least  ll 
wagons  to  carry  it  through,  and  as  there  is  no  large  amount  of  stoil 
at  Fort  Union,  the  general  supply  train  must  follow  as  early  as  pos- 
ble.  I shall  do  everything  in  my  power  to  urge  the  expedition  forwal 

as  rapidly  as  possible.  , ..  . . 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  HAlLeCk, 

Major-General 


Circular. 


Department  oe  the  Mississippi, 

Office  Provost-Marshal-General, 

Saint  Louis , March  28,  lbbz 

p n-pr,prul  Orders  No.  41,  current  series,  issued  from  headquart*! 
of  tL  Srtment  Of  the  Missouri  by  Major-General  Halleck^^ 
ruandino*  every  voter  will  be  required  to  take  the  oath  of 
prescribed  in  article  6 of  the  ordinance  of  the  ConvcnDon,  dated  O 

ber  16,  1861.  This  applies  to  all  elections,  whether  tor  Stat  , 1 

1>:i(  IfficcI^  of 'then'll  s°Judges,  clerks,  and 

law  it  is  made  to  attend  elections,  will  be  held  responsiDie  nn 
execution  of  this  order.  If  they  receive  votes  of  P^ons  ”0 "f. 
the  oath,  they  will  be  arrested  and  tried  for  military  oflense  ana 

election  will  be  declared  void.  fiirected  e 

In  order  that  no  mistake  or  fraud  may  occur,  it  is  directea^ 

required  that  every  voter  subscribe  the  oath  of  ailegiance  m the 

directed  by  the  order  of  General  Halleck,  and  swear  to  it, 

some  officer  authorized  to  administer  oaths  for  general  purpo  ^ 

before  one  of  the  judges  of  election,  and  file  the  same  with  the  J 

of  Section  at  the  time  of  depositing  his  vote ; that  said  oaths  so  tal 

shall  be  returned,  with  the  poll-book,  to  the  officer^o  w 

may  direct  the  same  to  be  returned,  and  said  oaths  to  be  b>  n j 

served.  BERNARD  G.  FARRAR, 

Provost-Marshal-  Genera 


A.P.  XVIII.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


649 


War  Department, 

; Washington , March  29,  1862. 

ijor-General  Halleck:,  Saint  Louis  : 

Without  waiting  for  details  yon  will  report  without  delay  by  tele- 
japh  about  the  strength  of  your  command  and  the  general  distribu- 
>n  of  the  troops,  naming  the  localities  of  the  principal  commanders. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


(m.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 


Saint  Louis,  March  30,  1862. 


jCnder  Major-General  Buell,  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  101,000 ; 
jder  Major-General  Grant,  in  Tennessee,  75,000 ; under  General  Pope, 
' w Madrid,  25,000 ; under  General  Curtis,  Arkansas,  23,000 ; under 
jneral  Strong,  Cairo,  Columbus,  &c.,  9,000 ; under  General  Steele, 
kansas,  6,000 ; under  General  Schofield,  Saint  Loifis  District,  15,000, 
hiding  regiments  organizing  at  Benton  Barracks;  under  General 
(tten,  in  Central  Missouri,  4,000;  in  Northern  Missouri,  2,000  volun- 
]ts  and  State  militia;  in  Kansas,  Colorado,  Nebraska,  &c.,  about 
000. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Cairo,  III.,  March  30,  1862. 

n.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

reached  Island  No.  10  last  evening  about  5 o’clock.  Found  mat- 
's very  quiet.  A plan  was  agreed  on  for  active  operations,  which  will 
'into  effect  about  Thursday.  I will  write  you  fully  in  regard  to  it. 
-umodore  Foote  has  asked  the  Navy  Department  for  more  guns,  to 
tlace  those  on  his  boats,  which  are  nearly  worn-out.  It  is  very 
port  ant  to  have  these  guns  by  the  time  No.  10  is  taken,  and  the 
jvy  and  War  Departments  should  by  some  means  manage  to  for- 
M the  guns  immediately.  We  have  information  here  that  the 
‘els  are  finishing  some  heavy  gunboats  to  ascend  the  river.  To 
* vide  for  them  and  any  mishap  that  may  occur  to  our  own  fleet  in 
' tending  with  their  combined  land  and  water  batteries,  Columbus 
|l  Belmont  should  be  strongly  fortified.  Halleck  and  Foote  both 
:ious  to  have  this  done.  I returned  to  Cairo  this  morning.  Proba- 
» return  to  island  to-night. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


'jor-General  Halleck: 


Cairo,  III.,  March  30,  1862. 


left  fleet  10  o’clock  last  night.  Matters  quiet.  Bissell  progressed 
’files;  feels  confident  will  get  through  by  Tuesday  night.  Commo- 
i 'Q  will  give  all  aid  possible. 

'olumbus  arid  Belmont  should  have  heavy  batteries  in  position  soon 


650 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XyJ 


as  nossible.  Glad  to  see  you  moving  in  that  direction.  Have  you  se 
engineer  officers  to  locate  and  proceed  with  work?  Should  you  n 
have  twenty  heavy  columbiads  and  rifled  cannon  in  addition  to  tho 
you  have  ordered  ? Those  batteries  should  be  strong  enough  to  pil 
vent  any  gunboat  or  war  vessel  of  the  enemy  from  coming  up  in  ca 
our  fleet  should  he  disabled. 


I will  go  down  to  flotilla  to-night.  Have  you  any  order?  How  a 


matters  nrogressing  up  the  Tennessee  ? Is  Buell  in  motion  for  co-c 
“ration?5  I suppose  the  order  ^^^^S^SCOTt" " 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Cross  Timber , March  31,  1862. 


Capt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Captain  : Accounts  continue  to  bear  testimony  that  the  enemy  mov 
cast  for  a movement  on  Forsyth  or  Jacksonport  or  1 ocahontas.  \ 
Dorn  had  passed  Dover  last  Tuesday  with  the  advance.  It  is  said  P 
Smith  is  evacuated  and  guns  carried  down  the  river;  that  they, 
pulling  down  telegraph  wires  from  Fayetteville  to  Van  Buren  ] 
cavalry  was  in  Fayetteville  yesterday  and  will  try  to  be  in  Huntsvij 

^Pike’s  forces  must  be  in  Indian  Territory.  Five  thousand  Texd 
were  hourly  expected  at  Fort  Smith  on  Wednesday. 

Much  talk  about  Thompson  and  others  burning  railroad  and  l.o. 
Rebels  think  that  is  Price’s  next  move.  Recruiting  rapidly,  it  is  sa. 
about  Little  Rock,  to  go  with  Van  Dorn. 

Rebel  bands  through  the  country  impudent,  but  impotent. 

Very  respectfully,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS,  I 

Major-General 


New  Madrid,  March  31,  1862' 

Maior-General  Halleck:  . , j 

Our  canal  is  finished.  The  barges  and  first  steamer  are  m the  baN 
which  conducts  to  this  place.  The  other  steamers  are  eutering  thtj 
above  The  heavy  work  is  done,  and  it.  only  remains  to  cut.  out  o\ 
hauling  limbs  and  remove  drift-wood  in  the  bayou.  Our  floating  h 
terv  is  nearly  ready,  and  will  carry  three  heavy  guns  It  mil 
anchored  within  SOU  yards  of  the  opposite  bank,  to  cover  landing.  . 
gunboat  or  two  would  remove  nearly  all  our  difficulty  m cu-ossing, 

I am  sure  they  could  be  brought  down  without  lnjurj.  Several  r 
niffits  are  ready  to  bring  them,  and  state  that  at  this  stage  ol  « 
?hey  can  mn  down  close  to  the  Missouri  shore  without  being  wit 
three-fourths  of  a mile  of  the  batteries  on  Island  10.  It  we  cannot 
them  we  shall  get  along  without.  By  Tuesday  night  it  is  expected  t 
all  our  boats  will  be  there.  From  all  information  the  eneny f ^ 
Island  10  and  in  the  bend  does  not  exceed  ',000.  They  see 
made  no  preparation  to  resist  our  crossing.  Probab^  the  y do 
believe  it  possible  to  get  boats  through  from  Ho.  8.  W ill  keep  3' 
vised  now  of  enemy’s  movements.  POPK, 

Major- Genera 


ap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  G51 

Paris  Station,  March  31,  1862. 

sneral  Halleck:  : 

Colonel  Carlin  marched  this  morning  with  two  regiments  infantry 
e regiment  cavalry,  and  one  battery,  by  way  of  Doniphan,  to  collect 
I pplies  and  take  possession  of  Pitman’s  Ferry.  The  rest  of  the  com- 
und  will  go  direct  to  Pitman’s,  but  cannot  leave  for  several  days  I 
pnd  it  necessary  to  send  a train  back  to  Pilot  Knob  for  articles  which 
(e  regiments  ought  to  have  supplied  themselves  with. 

FKED’K  STEELE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


sneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

No-  7*  S Gross  Timber , March  31,  1862. 

The  following  order  of  Major-General  Halleck,  commanding  the  de- 
ytment,  having  just  been  received,  is  published,  that  the  officers  and 
sdiers  of  this  command  may  know  that  during  their  long  winter 
i relies  they  have  neither  been  forgotten  nor  their  merits  unappre- 
s ted  at  home. 


Jsteral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

No-  56‘  > Saint  Louis,  March  5,  1862. 

jOLDiERS  OF  THE  Army  of  the  Southwest:  You  have  nobly  performed  the  duty 
gned  >ou.  iou  have  made  a long  and  fatiguing  march  in  midwinter  over  almost 
eatable  roads,  through  snow,  deep  mud,  and  swollen  streams.  You  have  driven  the 
my  from  Missouri  into  the  barren  mountains  of  Arkansas.  It  is  not  your  fault  that 
i lid  not  stay  to  give  you  battle.  Fighting,  however,  is  but  a small  part  of  a soldier’s 
y-  At  18  discipline,  endurance,  activity,  obedience  to  orders,  as  much  as  steadiness 
courage  in  the  battle-held,  that  distinguishes  the  veteran  from  the  recruit 
et  not  the  honors  you  have  won  in  this  campaign  be  tarnished  by  any  excesses  or 
ropneties.  All  officers  must  maintain  order  and  enforce  discipline  in  their  com- 
; *°u  liavo  ai}  active  foe  before  you.  Be  vigilant,  and  ready  to  take  advantage 

\ he  hrst  opportunity  to  fight  him.  s 

y command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


hese  high  compliments  are  fairly  earned.  You  were  foremost  in  the 
at  interior  movements  south.  You  have  driven  the  enemy  under 
! Y fire  and  the  point  of  your  bayonets  from  Missouri;  restored 
nag  of  the  Union  to  Arkansas;  routed  the  foe  from  all  his  strong- 
els,  and  since  the  foregoing  order  of  General  Halleck,  in  a three 
\s  hard-fought  battle  against  three  times  your  own  number,  have 
1 leved  a signal  and  most  decisive  victory,  scattering,  demoralizing, 
almost  destroying  the  combined  forces  of  the  enemy.  You  have 
wn  to  the  general  commanding  the  department,  to  your  friends  at 
He,  and  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  that  your  activity  and 
[ urance  in  midwinter  are  only  equaled  by  your  prowess,  bravery, 

! invincible  determination  in  battle. 

our  praises  are  in  every  mouth  throughout  the  loyal  States ; you 
carved  out  a history, /and  the  name  of  the  Army  of  the  Southwest 
hve,  the  result  of  your  diligence  and  valor. 

he  following  congratulation,  written  since  the  news  of  this  battle 
• *ued  General  Halleck,  was  received  a few  days  ago: 


652 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI3 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  March  10,  1862. 

Major-General  Curtis. 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Southwest:  ■ ,a+  Y 

A grateful  country  will  honor  yon  for  both.  H w HALLECK, 

Major-General 

This  victory  so  decisive  and  thus  commended,  by  no  means  insur 
you  depose  You  must  expect  to  bear  further  trials  of  your  euduran 
frul  valor  The  general  will  confide  m you  as  m veterans,  and  w 
rely  upon  your  discipline,  devotion,  and  well-tried 
and  effect  to  our  further  movements,  supported,  as  we  shall  be,  by  g 
[3  forces  now  mining  our  standard.  While  we  rejoice  we  should  fl 
forget  to  contribute  kindness  to  our  wounded  comrades  and  a tear 
^memory  of  those  who  lie  buried  on  the  field,  and  reverently  to « 
cribe  thanks  to  the  God  of  Battles,  who  giveth  the  victory . , , 

A grateful  people  will  provide  for  and  comfort  the  bereaved,  an 
rocky  cliffs  of  the  Ozark  Mountains  will  remain  monuments  to 
memory  of  those  who  fought  and  fell  for  their  country  at  the  battle 

Pea  Bidge.  . _ „ , . 

By  command  of  Major-General  Curtis : ^ ^ CURTIS, 

A distant  Adjutant-  General 


Abstract  from  return  of  the 


Department  of  the  Mississippi , Maj.  Gen.  Henry 
commanding,  for  March,  1862. 


W.  Hall 1 


Commanders. 


Districts. 


Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant 

Maj.  Gen.  John  Pope 

Mai.  Gen.  S.  R.  Curtis 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  K.  Strong 

Brig.  Gen.  J.M.  Schofield 

§ !i  ':j  ISti: 

*rJT  m Glover  ' Northeast  Missouri. 

Col.  J-  M-  mover i (In  minois  and  Minnesota) 


West  Tennessee 

The  Mississippi 

Southwest  Missouri. 

Cairo 

Saint  Louis 

Southeast  Missouri.. 


Total* 


Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present,  j 

Officers.  | 

Men. 

2, 093 
901 
578 
221 
507 
286 
116 

4 

37 

81 

44,  277 
19,  509 
12,  480 
4,425 
10,  540 
5, 983 
3,  045 
137 
893 
1,668 

56, 336 
24,519 
15, 038 

5, 918 
12, 741 

7,  043 

3,  582 
226 

1, 277 

2, 132 

. 4, 824 

102, 957 

> 1 rntnm 

128,810 

hot,  see  Ha 

- 

6 


* The  distriots  oi  Kansas  anuui 
Secretary  of  War,  March  30,  p.  649- 


United  States 

Near  Island  Mo.  10,  April  1,  1862. 


Plag-Ship  Benton, 

(Received  April  3,  180- 


General  M.  C.  Meigs  : , f vp 

General  : On  examination  it  is  found  that  °“ Jf^^aVam  b, 
not  being  in  as  good  condition  as  was  supposed,  and  a ram 


ip.  XVUI.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  653 

cess  ary,  the  cost  of  completing  the  Eastport  for  that  purpose  will 
about  $56,000.  As  I am  authorized  by  General  Halleck  to  make 
y arrangements  I may  deem  advisable  for  the  construction  of  rams, 
d as  the  Eastport  is  designed  to  be  used  in  part  as  a ram,  I shall, 
der  that  authority,  proceed  to  finish  her,  unless  otherwise  directed 
you  or  by  the  President.  Considering  the  strength  of  naval  force 
J rebels  have  ready  and  in  preparation,  and  also  the  service  re- 
ired  of  this  flotilla,  I consider  that  it  is  essential  to  have  the  East- 
'rt  ready  in  the  shortest  possible  time. 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-  Officer . 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , April  1,  1862. 

jor-General  Halleck: 

N as  absent  when  your  dispatch  arrived.  Canal  is  finished  and 
its  are  now  descending  bayou  to  this  place.  Expect  them  here 
light.  The  enemy  commenced  erecting  batteries  at  points  of  high 
d and  landing  places  on  the  river ; little  serious  to  be  feared  from 
I m.  Our  floating  battery,  properly  placed,  will  deal  easily  with 
I m or  any  other  obstacle  to  landing.  Have  erected  two  batteries, 
two  32s  each,  about  a mile  and  a half  below  the  24-pounder  bat- 
55  opposite  mouth  of  slough.  (See  sketch  sent  you.)  These  bat- 
hes cover  handsomely  the  landing  on  opposite  shore;  1 have  no 
prehensions  of  the  result.  Commodore  Eoote  promises  to  run  a 
pie  of  his  gunboats  past  island  to-night ; if  so,  all  difficulty  is  over, 
•ops  in  fine  condition  and  can  be  relied  on.  Railroad  to  Sikeston 
ler  water  and  road  to  Commerce  bad.  Best  send  everything  for 
5 command  to  Island  No.  8,  with  orders  to  Colonel  Buford  to  send 
hrough  the  canal  in  barges  or  flats.  Easy  communication  in  this 
7 for  heavy  stores.  Do  not  be  uneasy.  No  precaution  will  be 
tted,  and  there  is  no  fear  of  the  result  in  this  command.  I tele- 
phed  you  yesterday  that  gunboats  had  again  been  repulsed  by  our 
vy  battery ; one  of  them  so  badly  damaged  as  to  drift  broadside 
m the  river,  unable  to  work  her  engines. 

%JNO.  POPE, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  April  2,  1862. 
distant  Adjutant -General, 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 
iR : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I arrived  at  this  post  yesterday 
^ ning,  and  immediately  assumed  the  command  of  the  district. 

have  been  unable  at  present  to  obtain  accurate  statistics  of  the 
1 lbers  and  stations  of  the  troops  within  this  district,  but  as  near  as 
n ascertain  they  consist  of  the  following  regiments : First  Kansas 
1 an  try),  Colonel  Deitzler,  stationed  at  Lawrence;  Second  Kansas 
"airy),  Colonel  Mitchell,  stationed  at  Shawneetown;  Third  Kansas 
Untry),  Colonel  Cloud,  stationed  at  Mound  City  or  Fort  Scott; 

1 rtli  Kansas  (infantry),  Colonel  Cloud,  stationed  at  Wyandotte.  The 
r ernor  proposes  to  consolidate  these  two  regiments,  to  be  designated 


654  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


as  the  Tenth  Kansas,  and  desires  them  to  be  concentrated  at  Lawren 
for  that  purpose.  Fifth  Kansas  (cavalry),  Colonel  Clayton,  at  Ft 
Scott-  Sixth  Kansas  (cavalry),  Colonel  Judson,  at  Fort  Scott;  S$ 
enth Kansas  (cavalry).  Colonel  Jennison,  at  Lawrence;  Eighth  Kans 
(infantry),  Colonel  Graham’s,  scattered,  headquarters  at  Leavenwor 
City  • Ninth  Kansas  (cavalry),  Colonel  Lynde  (incomplete),  at  a 
near  Humboldt ; Ninth  Wisconsin  (infantry),  Colonel  Salomon,  at  Ft 
Scott  • Twelfth  Wisconsin  (infantry),  Colonel  Bryant,  at  Lawrenc 
Seenth  Wisconsin  (infantry),  Colonel  Maloney,  at  Lawrence  yk 
ond  Ohio  (cavalry),  Colonel  Doubleday,  at  Fort  Scott;  Kabbs  India 
battery  at  Fort  Scott ; Hollister’s  battery,  at  Fort  Leavenworth 
It  has  been  recommended  by  Major  Prince  to  detail  the  lollowi 


regiments  for  the  expedition  to  Ne^v  Mexico:  First  Kansas  Twell 
and  Thirteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  Second  and 01 * * *  SfventtiKansas  C< 


Louis,  and  Hollister’s  battery  The  latt 
battery  is  at  present  composed  of  men  detailed  from  the  Second  01 
Kegimeut,  but  this,  unless  that  regiment  accompanies  the  expedite 
oufht  to  be  changed,  and  men  detailed  from  some  regiment  of  the  sa» 

department,  willhave  311  wage, 
jiml  teams  ready  for  service  in  a few  days  and  50  ambulances  ; tea  j 
no  complete, butcan  be  purchased  in  a few  days.  This  includes  I 
the  wagons  which  can  be  spared  from  this  post,  but  he  has ; nc jinftjU 
tion  of  the  amount  of  transportation  at  other  posts  or  with  the  t o 
in  the  district.  Estimates  have  been  forwarded  to  department  lie.' 
ouarters  for  500  wagons,  and  arrangements  have  been  made  by  vhn 
mules  will  be  obtained  to  complete  500  teams  by  the  18th  instant. 

It  is  estimated  that  the  expedition  to  New  Mexico,  composed  I 
about  5 000  men,  will  require  500  wagons  and  2o  ambulances.  ■ 
-will  give  them  transportation  for  fifty  days’  provisions  and  an  ai  t 

SnRequMti™m  ™we°  been  made  for  au  ample  supply  of  subsisted 
stores  "over  a large  amount,  say  over  100,000  rations  can 
spared  from  the  stores  at  Fort  Wise,  which  might  be  reserved  for  1 
expedition  to  New  Mexico  should  they  take  that  route. 

Some  of  the  mounted  regiments  in  this  district  are  armed  with  l 
Austrian  carbi“e?Wch  has  been  found  very  inefficient  and  unrelial 
ttie .hammers  of  many  of  them  breaking  after  a 
cartridges  furnished  for  them  being  entirely  too  small.  I am  fiav 
an  inspection  of  these  arms,  and  will  have  them ' r^lal^dbf 
possible,  but  if  better  arms  can  he  furnished  it  ought  to  he  (lone 

01The  artillery  and  artillery  equipments  are  very  good,  but  an  ex 

supply  of  ammunition  for  the  Palrott  guns  ought  to  be  forwarded 
mediately,  as  that  cannot  be  fabricated  here.  . 

The  medical  department  is  well  provided  with  everything. 

I vmidd  strongly  urge  that  the  troops  to  compose  the  |xped,tmn 
"NTcw  Mexico  may  be  designated  at  as  early  a day  as  possible,  « • 
Sv  intffii  “^concentrate  them  at  Fort  Riley  there  being  a la 
amount  of  forage  at  that  post  which  has  been  on Hiand 
and  which  it  would  be  economy  on  the  part  of  the  Goyernme  it  to 
at  once;  and,  besides,  being  the  most  convenient  post  m KansM 
outfitting  a large  expedition  with  the  exception  of  this  P'a«e,  w 
would  be  almost  impossible  to  supply  them  with  forage  even 

, • .1  4+  1c?  -t-lia  miinin 


largely -increased  c^ii‘is“the  opinion  of  B«ton 

experienced  officers  that  this  expedition  should  not  start  unti 


kf.  XVHL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  655 

the  10th  of  May.  Should  they  leave  before  that  time  their  animals 
>uld  be  badly  broken  down  before  reaching  their  destination,  and  it 
uld  require  a long  time  in  that  country  to  recruit  them.  It  has  been 
rod  impossible  "to  take  any  number  of  animals  over  the  plains  in  fair 
idition  before  grass. 

So  provision  whatever  has  been  made  for  the  expedition  south,  which 
5,000  men  will  require  about  the  same  transportation  and  nearly 
] same  supplies  as  the  expedition  to  Hew  Mexico, 
f possible,  the  four  companies  of  Missouri  cavalry  referred  to  by 
jor  Prince  ought  to  be  returned  and  kept  on  duty  here.  This  would 
)w  two  mounted  regiments  for  Hew  Mexico j and  as  the  impression 
*e  is  that  Sibley  has  already  done  all  the  harm  there  he  can,  the  force 
it  out  ought  to  be  strong  enough  to  overwhelm  him,  without  reference 
the  troops  under  General  Oanby.  From  all  the  information  I can 
ain,  I think  Major  Prince’s  recommendation  is  about  correct.  It 
>ht  perhaps  be  as  well  to  substitute  Doubleday’s  for  Mitchell’s  re<>i- 
nt,  but  that  is  not  material,  except  as  regards  Hollister’s  battery* 
earing  you  may  have  left  Saint  Louis,  I send  this  by  my  aide,  Lieu- 
ant  Broadhead,  who  will  bring  back  your  answer, 
have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

j.  W.  DEHYER, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid  j April  2,  1862. 

jor-General  Halleck: 

submit  herewith  two  plans  of  crossing  the  river  with  this  command, 
ot  which  will  be  adopted,  as  circumstances  dictate: 
irst  plan  (without  any  assistance  from  Commodore  Foote).  The 
1 down  the  bend  runs  nearly  due  east,  and  intersects  the  road  from 
nd  Ho.  10  to  Tiptonville  at  right  angles  about  midway  between 
>e  places.  This  road  leaves  the  river  at  Watson’s  Landing,  l\  or  2 
;s  below  the  slough  which  makes  the  small  island  opposite  this 
l e.  From  Watson’s  Landing  to  Tiptonville,  or  Island  Ho.  10,  is  10 
1 have  thrown  up  a battery  of  four  32s,  flanked  by  rifle  pits  for 

0 men,  immediately  opposite  Watson’s  Landing,  or  about  1^  miles 
- w the  battery  of  two  24s  thrown  up  some  time  since,  to  command 

1 mouth  of  the  slough.  (See  sketch  I sent  you.)  The  enemy  has 
1 wn  up  batteries  and  rifle  pits  at  Watson’s  Landing,  immediately 
1 isite  our  battery  of  32s.  I am  extending  our  batteries  and  rifle 

and  bring  frequently,  so  as  to  draw  his  attention  as  much  as  pos- 
* to  that  point  and  induce  him  to  concentrate  his  opposition  to  our 

img  as  much  as  possible  at  Watson’s.  As  soon  as  everything  is 
y I shall  tow  over  in  the  night  to  the  shore  of  the  small  island 
ediately  opposite  to  this  place  our  floating  battery,  and  drop  it 
> a along  the  shore  until  it  enters  the  mouth  of  the  slough,  anchoring 
at  way  across  the  slough  and  within  100  yards  of  the  main  shore, 
iat  it  will  enfilade  the  bank  of  the  river  for  a mile  and  a half  below 
1 completely  cover  the  high  land  at  the  mouth  of  the  slough.  At 
L ight,  having  one  whole  division  of  four  infantry  regiments  and  a 
j ‘ry  of  artillery  on  board  the  boats,  I shall  commence  to  cross, 
lI!§  at  ^e  mouth  of  the  slough,  every  man  with  a spade  to  put 
eU  at  once  into  a rifle  pit.  Our  32s  opposite  Watson’s  Landing 


656 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK,  KANS,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvn 


, nf  oioueh,  together  with  the  floating  ba 

and  our  24s  opposite  mouth  ots  g i ^ corn  fie,ds)  for  half  a mi 

tery,  will  coyer  the  whole  gro  round  shot,  and  prevent  any  co 

hack  from  the  river  Math  shells  bUn<,  again8t  the  first  divil 

siderable  body  of  the  ? that  division  a foot-hold  on  the  ban! 
aM  Covered 'by  aese  batteries,  and  no  force  the  enemy  has  can*, 

graphed  you.  In  addltl°nfl  , over  ffitb  empty  water-tight  barn! 
on  each  side  of  it  a barge  floore  cottonwood  rails  packed  tiglj 

and  loaded  with  cotton  bales  y heavy  planks,  spiked  ] 

The  barges  will  be  pianked  over  the  top  with  heavy  P ^ ^ 

string  pieces,  to  prevent  of  the  baw. m with  water.  Til 

escaping.  These  barges  ml  bales  and  tightly-packed  raj 

arrangement  will  give  20 ' ^ the Sdesmid emls of  whi 

oneachsideof  the  barge  carrying  the  guns,  tne  sme  , 

are  feet  thick,  of  heavy  timber  This  ™ucrf  y^l 

accident  "£  it 

h,Jf^ r^an  c^ce  to  StoSiSwiCS  temd 

terms  opposite  Watson  s,  ana  aur  g . » d along  the  M1Ssol 
and  gunboats,  without  lights,  do™?  the  r , ^ Island  J 

shore.  Just  below  our  batten ^ of JZ, . tney^p  ^ half  a J 

11.  and  even  in  day-time  . ■»  m island  they  would  be  wit) 

along  the  shore,  until  they  pass . behind  n0  risU  in  , 

range  of  the  enemy  s batterie  PP  A -ue  n^ard.  I propose  to  pn 
night,  as  they  cannot  be  seen  an  Tiptonville,  marching  i 

them  on  down  the  river  to  f J^^^tso  as  to  embark  and  cr| 
whole  force | down  by  land .the sav  ing  tw0  gUnboats.  Thisp 
to  Tiptonville  atday  hsht  unde  , w(mjd  completely  cut 

is  perfectly  feasible  and  i S > ^ euelIiy!s  gunboats  co 

everything  in  the  bend  and  at  the: wand,  eei  . j » gUus  0f 

not  for  a moment  contend  with  our  • f gunboats  tl 

enemy  near  Tiptonvflle,  thougb  without^tlie  co_ver  o^  ^ ^ „ 

own  gunboats  and  field  batte  , . This  t>1  an,  therefore, 

Sefcould  effectually  prevent : ^Xllete  ta  itsTesults,  depe’ 
far  the  easiest  to  execute  and  the  m P under  my  c 

upon  getting  two  gunboats.  If  I had  the , gunoo  ln  a tl 

trol  I would  have  them  ^^y.^hit  or  even  seen  in  the  night.  Tl 
sand  that  either  of  them  wou  , Missouri  shore  from  C 

are  9 feet  of  water  in  the  channel  along  themssour^  theb( 

modore  Foote’s  flotilla  to  this  p , batteries  of  Island  No. 

be  nearer  than  three-fourths  of  a md«  to  the  by  the  c 

I could  teU  you  many  strange  and irresponsibility  to  the  com 
modore  for  not  risking  it,  such  as  Ina  grave  P J the  Bei 

for  the  security  of  Saint  Lo^tn  faH  ^V  of  his  iron-clad  boats,  wl 
were  taken  by  the  enemy,  orm  fact  yolti  wUole  fleet  coul< 
(as  he  says)  are  invincibiefightingup  stre  , of  the  eu 

matt  in.fr  ««*>« — ■*-* 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


657 


AP.  XVIII.] 

Lall  probably  do  the  work  yrith  the  army  alone.  Our  canal  has  been 
gigantic  work  5 it  has  been  infinitely  more  difficult  than  at  first  sup- 
>sed.  Six  miles,  through  a great  forest  of  immense  trees,  which  had 
be  sawed  off  4 feet  under  water,  and  then  through  cypress  swamp 
ickly  studded  with  cypress  knees,  have  furnished  us  with  an  amount 
1 labor  surpassing  any  one’s  belief  who  has  not  seen  it.  We  have  now 
i canal  50  feet  wide,  4 feet  deep,  and  6 miles  long,  through  which 
irge  steamers  can  pass  and  all  our  supplies  be  delivered  to  us. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


New  Madrid,  April  2,  1862. 

' ijor-General  Halleck  : 

Our  boats  are  in  the  main  bayou  and  ready  to  move  into  the  river 
i a moment’s  notice.  1 keep  them  up  the  bayou,  concealed  from  the 
>3iny.  I am  only  waiting  to  finish  the  floating  battery,  which  carries 
p 8-inch  columbiad  and  three  32s.  It  will  be  finished  by  to-mor- 
W night,  and  I think  will  be  impregnable  to  any  batteries  the  ene- 
r can  establish  in  any  reasonable  time.  I have  no  hope  of  Com- 
idore  Foote.  He  has  postponed  trying  to  run  any  of  his  gunboats 
pt  Island  No.  10  until  some  foggy  or  rainy  night.  The  moon  is  begin- 
ug  to  make  the  nights  light,  and  there  is  no  prospect  of  fogs  during 
s sort  of  weather.  We  must  do  without  him.  I will  give  you  details 
the  manner  I intend  to  cross  by  mail. 

JNO.  PQPE, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


u.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 


Saint  Louis,  April  3,  1862. 


reneral  Steele’s  advance  guard  has  reached  Pitman’s  Ferry,  Ark. 
; onel  Carlin  had  an  engagement  with  the  enemy  on  the  1st  instant 
crossing  the  river.  Killed  one  lieutenant  and  wounded  several 
iers.  Captured  5 prisoners,  camp  equipage,  horses,  mules,  forage, 
i a number  of  small-arms. 


H.  W.  HALLECK. 


Saint  Louis,  April  3,  1862. 
'lliam  M.  McPherson,  Esq.,  Saint  Louis , Mo.  : 

IR : Your  letter  of  this  date  is  received.*  In  answer  to  your  in- 
lnes  I have  to  state  that  persons  in  arms  against  the  United  States 
er  General  Price  can  be  received  only  as  prisoners  of  war,  and  that 
v will  be  treated  in  the  same  kind  and  lenient  manner  as  others 
s ebeen  who  are  willing  to  abandon  a hopeless  and  unholy  cause, 
^6  the  prescribed  oath  of  allegiance,  and  give  satisfactory  security 
]!  tbeir  future  good  conduct. 


42  R R — VOL  VIII 


Not  found. 


658 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII1 1 


A,w  one  who  voluntarily  takes  the  oath  and  gives  his  parole  o 
hotor  and  afterwards  violates  it  by  aiding  or  abetting  the  enemy  wil 
h t ! he  executed  A man  who  violates  his  military  parol, 

commits  thett  serious  of  all  military  offenses,  and  I will  pardon  n< 

f ? VF% 

what  return  have  these  ladies  made  for  this  protection?  In  man. 
cases  they  have  acted  as  spies  and  informers  for  the  enemy  and  at 
cases  > mouthed  in  their  abuse  of  our  cause  and  most  msultin 

should  be  permitted  to  return  to  their  homes  without  being  co^idere 

tions  of  these  same  rebels. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv-mt^  HALLE0K) 

Mainr-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

v Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  April  3,  1862. 


Cant  N.  EL.  McLean,  _ . ,r 

1 Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.: 


Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  t 
mai or- general  commanding,  that  official  communications  from  C 
Fkz  Henry  Warren,  First  Iowa  Cavalry,  bearing  date  Clinton,  M 
±}lz  r.onaiT7Prl  Iiminunc  n^  the  arrival  ot  two 


sion  ambulance,  Z wagons,  anu  ^ r ' * The  second  detachine 

army.  Two  rebels  were  wounded  ; 1 fatally  lheseconauei 


irthatdateCo^onel  Warren  had  also 
He  seems  to  be  following  up  the  guerrillas,  of  whom  there  are  m 

in  tlia^uarter,  with  obedient  ^ant,^ 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  District 


IAV.  XVIII. ) 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


659 


on. 


Near  Island  No.  10, 

April  4,  1862 — 8 a.  m. 

E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

The  commodore  opened  fire  at  11  o’clock  yesterday  with  cannon  and 
ortars.  Struck  their  large  floating  battery  a number  of  times.  Our 
outs  report  it  completely  disabled.  Also  burned  a steamer  the  enemy 
id  sunk  in  Missouri  channel.  Will  report  from  New  Madrid  to-night 
"eat.her  delightful. 


THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

April  4,  1862. 

ipt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.  : 

Captain  : Men  direct  report  Price,  with  infantry  and  artillery,  went 
st,  with  intent  to  reach  Pocahontas  very  soon  by  rail  and  water. 

Six  regiments  of  cavalry  were  moving  east  or  north  through  Jasper 
d Sunday.  The  cavalry  at  Salem,  Ark.,  were  also  gaining  recruits. 
Have  sent  to  Forsyth  and  Yellville  to  ascertain  the  further  move- 
mts  of  the  enemy. 

No  signs  of  force  at  Huntsville  and  Fayetteville.  If  line  gets  open 
Saint  Louis  I desire  to  confer  with  the  general  as  to  a counter  move. 
Respectfully, 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Major-  General. 


: ecial  Orders, 
No.  134. 


Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Gross  Timber,  April  4, 1862. 
* * * * * 


yHII.  The  army  in  the  field  will  move  to-morrow,  the  5th  instant,  in 
i order  herein  stated,  on  the  road  northeastward  leading  through 
ssville  and  thence  toward  Yellville. 

Order  of  march. — First  Division  will  move  at  6 a.  m. ; Fourth  Divis- 
< at  8 a.m.;  Wyman’s  brigade  at  8.30  a.  m. ; Second  Division  at 8.30 
Ln.;  Third  Division  upon  the  arrival  of  its  trains. 


ly  command  of  Major-General  Curtis  : 


H.  2.  CURTIS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

Washington,  April  4,  1862. 

Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  A., 

Gomdg.  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

General  : The  Secretary  of  War,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Sec- 
1 ll7  of  the  Interior,  has  granted  authority  * to  Robert  W.  Furnas  and 


* Under  date  of  April  2, 


660 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


X.  [Chap.  XVIII. 


John 

S£5SS  wd 

their  COTnman^shall^havebeeiicoii^lete^or^amzed^^Whenthwshalj 

nfr^ore^mentsSof  volunteers  to  aid  these  Indian  troops  in  effecting 
the  purpose  obedient.serv^t, 

A m flnnn  />*»/»  7 


Headquarters  District^ k, 


Commodore  Andrew  H.  Foote  : rwiin  Walke  arrive 

*«  *j~os  ;arS»SSi.» 


25,"!,.  good  ooodition 


„en»rol«g<«d™»dmonddoou™^-.:™. 

cits  .2  »s™\ ’rTd^'Ssi.sr  ™~:  s 
SSrss.'Kt  iutiio  ~|M » ss  ‘1,55 

no  such  consequences  as  the  risk  to  jamsurt,  if  I see 

the  facts  to  * 

38  ^0rCx*am,asir,°resp^ctfully , your  obedient  servant.^  ^ 

Mainr- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters 


)epartment  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  5,  loo^ 


Flag-Officer  Foote: 

1 shall  want  a gunboat 
early  part  of  next  week. 


iairo  ready  to  go  up  the  Tennessee 
r Department  has  authorized  the  purctt. 


* Not  found, 


1IA1'.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


661 


f two  steamers  at  this  place  to  be  fitted  up  as  rams  and  gunboats.  I 
hall  intrust  the  whole  matter  to  Captain  Porter  till  you  otherwise 
iirect.  Everything  in  relation  to  these  boats  will  be  subject  to  your 
rders.  Is  it  not  possible  by  lashing  bales  of  wet  hay  or  cotton  on  ex- 
tosed  sides  of  gunboats  to  get  one  or  two  through  in  the  night  to  the 
ssistance  of  General  Pope  % 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


[New  Madrid,  Mo.,  April  5,  1862. 

Ion.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

I arrived  here  at  noon  yesterday.  Found  General  Pope’s  command 
11  ready  for  movement  as  soon  as  batteries  and  transports  could  be  got 
eady.  Last  night  Captain  Walke,  with  gunboat  Carondelet,  ran  the 
auntlet  at  Island  No.  10.  Was  fired  upon  from  all  their  batteries,  but 
^as  not  struck  once.  Her  arrival  will  enable  General  Pope  to  carry 
ut  his  plans  promptly.  You  will  hear  from  here  within  three  days, 
remain  with  this  army  and  will  report  frequently. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  5,  1862. 

General  Curtis,  Cassville , Mo. : 

I will  meet  you  to-morrow  morning  at  10  o’clock.  The  great  battle 
f the  war  is  to  be  fought  on  the  Tennessee  Eiver.  If  we  succeed,  Price 
nd  Van  Dorn  will  soon  leave  vour  front. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  5,  1862. 

reneral  Curtis,  Cassville , Mo. : 

Captured  letters  received  to-day  from  General  Steele  say  Van  Dorn 
; at  Jacksonport,  and  is  expecting  re-enforcements  from  Price  by  Chu- 
rn and  Batesville.  General  Cabell  is  at  Pocahontas  with  about  3,000 
len,  but  expects  Van  Dorn  daily.  Kansas  troops  a humbug.  Can’t 
o anything  with  them  till  reorganized,  with  different  officers.  Send 
reneral  Sturgis  to  do  this.  If  fully  satisfied  of  Price’s  move  east, 
>ave  a small  force  to  hold  a position  near  the  frontier,  move  with  main 
ody  by  Forsyth  and  thence  on  Salem  or  down  White  Eiver  on  Bates- 
ille.  General  Steele  will  be  ready  to  co-operate  with  you.  I think  a 
avalry  force  should  move  by  Carrollton  and  Yellvilie  to  observe  the 
nemy.  If  you  think  best,  drawT  down  the  Tenth  Illinois  Cavalry  to 
ainesville  or  to  Salem.  The  First  Illinois  Cavalry  will  be  sent  to 
’olla  on  Monday  or  Tuesday,  to  act  as  you  order.  I go  to  Tennessee 
ae  early  part  of  next  w~eek.  We  should  converse  freely  before  I leave ; 
evert heless  I have  arranged  to  have  telegraphic  communication  with 
ou  and  General  Steele  from  here. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General . 


662 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


X.  [Chap.  XVIIJ 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Gross  Timber , April  5,  1862. 

Capt.  N.  H.  McLean,  . r 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis  : 

Captain  • The  army  has  moved  this  morning  and  will  camp  to-nigh 
3 or  f^iles  northeast  of  Oassville,  to  proceed  on  the  way  to  Eorsyt, 
to  morrow  A large  force  of  cavalry  in  Carroll  County  threaten, nj 

SPAllqufe<t'here  and  southwest  of  me.  Shall  crowd  the  enemy  towar, 

Tellville-  SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 

Maior- General. 


Headquarters  Army  op  the  Southwest, 

Gassmlle , April  5,  1862. 


General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department : 

Hone  I meet  you  well.  I have  sent  your  adjutant  my  news  of  Arkai 
safarmv  goTng^own  east  and  some  recent  attempt  to  send  a larg 

force  of  cavalry  in  my  rear  through  Forsyth. 

The  White  River  is  high  ; hence  it  is  not  very  easy  for  either  of  i 

t0 The*  only  shadow  of  force  I can  hear  of  in  the  west  is  some  of  th 
Indians,  who  have  gone  home,  and  some  small  roving  bands,  who  ar 

^Wbsterrf Arkansas^  is° particularly  sick  of  the  rebellion.  They  nevi 

haYaTDornaLad  Price  are  ‘taking  east  a large  number,  many  of  the, 
from  Missouri,  who  expect  to  get  behind  somebody  to  do  some  mischi 

them  eastward  s^  they  could  co-operate,  but  I do  not  know  whether  | 

- stiikdleavvd^vcl1  care  aud  prival 
grief  bear  heavy  on  me,  but  I can  still  do  my  duty. 

Kespectfully,  SAML.  B.  CUBTIS, 

Major-General. 


headquarters  Departmext^the  Miss^iiu>b8(i2 


Mai.  Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis, 

Army  of  the  Southwest:  . 

Tenth  Illinot.  Cw.lr,  mrmU  «*  >**““>*  “ e" 

present  position.  H w HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 


AI\  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


663 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  April  5,  1862. 

:ig.  Gen.  John  M.  Schofield, 

Commanding  Missouri  State  Militia: 

General:  Numerous  irregularities  and  outrages,  such  as  indicated 
i Special  Orders,  No.  27,  of  this  date,  from  these  headquarters  (a  copy 
which  has  been  inclosed  to  your  assistant  adjutant- general),  have 
Sen  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  undersigned;  and  I now  have  the 
luor  to  call  your  attention  to  the  same,  and  propose  a remedy,  in  some 
i?asure,  by  which,  possibly,  they  may  be  hereafter  prevented. 

The  disturbances  throughout  this  district,  wherever  the  Missouri 
: ate  Militia  have  been  implicated  in  improper  conduct,  have  princi- 
lly  arisen  from  a desire  for  personal  revenge  to  satisfy  past  difficul- 
I ;s,  having  no  bearing  whatever  upon  the  cause  for  which  we  are  now 
I boring. 

Private  quarrels  of  long  standing,  originating  out  of  matters  con- 
i cted  with  property,  county  politics,  and  neighborhood  disagreement, 
e too  often  the  cause  of  persecution  of  those  in  military  power,  and 
jl  is  made  to  appear  as  connected  with  the  rebellion. 

This  state  of  things  should  be  put  a stop  to,  and  officers  and  enlisted 
i?n  should  be  made  to  feel  that  they  are  watched,  and  will  be  punished 
r any  such  conduct  not  warranted  by  the  necessities  of  the  case. 

At  present  I can  contrive  no  better  method  than  having  a constant 
•stem  of  inspections  made  by  impartial  officers  unprejudiced  on  either 
•le. 

I therefore  have  to  propose  that  some  officer  of  sufficient  rank  may 
! appointed  and  authorized  as  inspector- general  by  the  State  auth on- 
es to  inspect  and  investigate  all  such  matters,  as  well  as  to  attend  to 
le  military  functions  of  his  office  in  connection  with  the  Missouri  State 
lilitia.  My  staff  is  too  small  and  the  business  of  this  office  too  exten- 
; reto  admit  of  my  detailing  one  from  these  headquarters.  If,  there- 
I’e,  you  could  detail  such  an  officer  as  indicated  and  direct  him  to 
i port  to  me  for  such  orders  as  I might  give  I think  great  good  might 
1 tbe  result. 

Ool.  W.  D.  Wood,  aide-de-camp  to  the  Governor,  I am  inclined  to 
tink  would  impartially,  intelligently,  and  justly  fill  the  position,  and 
auld  he  be  detailed,  if  only  temporarily,  I should  hope  to  accomplish 
■ tnething  beneficial  in  preventing  such  troubles  and  outrages  as  men- 

t*ned. 

1 beg  that  you  will  give  your  early  attention  to  this  and  inform  me 
your  conclusions  and  actions  in  the  case. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  District. 


[Inclosure.] 

‘ ecial  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  District  Central  Missouri, 

No.  27.  j Jefferson  City , Mo.,  April  5,  1862. 

1.  Maj.  W.  M.  G.  Torrence,  commanding  at  Warrensburg,  will  fur- 
uh  Col.  John  A.  Turley,  formerly  of  the  Eighty-first  Ohio  Volunteers, 

pry  assistance  and  facility  in  his  pow  er  to  enable  him  to  thoroughly 
^estigate  the  cause  and  manner  of  his  brother’s  recent  death  at  War- 
isburg,  Mo. 

2.  Major  Torrence  will  take  measures  to  examine  into  the  circum- 
mces  connected  with  the  murder  of  Mr.  Turley.  Also  those  attend- 


664 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 


ing  the  causes  recently  reported  by  Captain  Thompson  First  low 
Cavalry  viz,  the  burning  of  the  residence,  furniture,  &c.,  of  Coloml 
McCowan ; the  shooting  of  Mr.  Burrgess  and  his  brother,  and  the  bud 
in„  0f  their  dwelling:  the  killing  by  Captain  Hart’s  company  of  M, 
Piper  on  March  30,  and  the  burning  of  some  five  dwellings  by  the  sam, 
*11101  anv  other  misdemeanors  which  may  come  to  his  notice.  He  wil 
placeTn  arrest  “nd  prefer  charges  against  such  officers  or  men  as  al 
examination  shall  indicate  as  guilty  of  these  outrages  without  suffieierl 
cause  A minute  report  will  lie  made  to  these  headquarters  upon  thesl 
cases  supported  by  charges  and  specifications,  where  wrong  has  beej 
committed  upon  quiet  aSd  unoffending  citizens  peaceably  occupym 

th?"'  tlnSe  investigations  Major  Torrence  will  be  guided  by  Gener: 
Orders  No.  8,  of  November  26,  1861,  General  Orders,  No.  13,  of  Decerj 
ber  4,  1861,  Department  of  the  Missouri,  and  the  thirty^second,  thirt.  i 

third  forty -first,  fifty-first,  and  fifty -fourth  Articles  of  War. 

By' command  of  Brig.  Gen.  James 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwes' t, 

Cassville , April  5,  18b  A 


Capt.  K H.  McLean:. 

Captain  • The  general’s  dispatch  is  received.  Price  has  gone  belo 
Hover  ^th  his  n4i  force,  at  least  60  miles  below  Van  Bowj}  M 
is  going  to  Missouri.  I am  moving  east,  keeping  north  of  White  Ki 
which  carries  me  through  Galena  and  Forsyth,  Mo 

No  enemy  at  Huntsville,  Van  Buren,  Fort  Smith,  01  Fayette\Ul 
but  Price  takes  with  him  some  20,000  or  30,000. 

1 From  8,000  to  10,000  cavalry,  under  Van  Dorn,  were  oppomte  Fo 

svth  day  before  yesterday,  but  it  is  said  they  were  ordered  to  Des  Ai 
' I think  Kansas  troops  should  move  east  with  me,  but  I cannot 

thH“ve  hid  no're  enforcements,  and  shall  try  to  hold  any  on  their  wj 
till  Price  and  Van  Dorn  are  better  known  or  disposed  of.  I vdl  j 
main  here  to-night  to  keep  in  easy  communication  with  Feadquarte 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  5,  lbbJ. 


Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Denver,  Fort  Leavenworth : 

General  : Yours  of  the  2d  is  received.  You  ^ll  ^siguate  fijr 
New  Mexico  expedition  the  First  Kansas  Infantry  and  the  Tweifth  a^ 
Thirteenth  Wisconsin  Regiments  and  the  Second  and  Seventh  K«| 
Cavalry.  There  should  be  two  batteries  of  artillery . I one 
penter’s  Wisconsin,  about  150  men  and  six  ineces-from  here  Is 
that  by  Governor  Robinson’s  General  Orders,  No.  1,  N.  Alle  - 8 

artillery  company  is  attached  to  Colonel  Deitzler  s legim  • . 

this  should  go  in  place  of  Hollister’s,  making  the  troops  entneljHJ 
sas  and  Wisconsin.  If  Allen’s  company  lias  no  guns,  those  of  Ho  i 
ter’.^can  be  Transferred  and  others'  sent  to  Hollister  from  tins  pl» 


U*.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  665 

I approve  of  concentrating  the  troops  of  this  expedition  at  Fort 
ley  as  soon  as  possible.  No  time  should  be  lost  in  completing  their 
ganization  and  the  supply  train.  As  it  will  go  by  Fort  Wise,  it  can 
ail  itself  of  the  supplies  at  that  place.  I directed  Colonel  Leaven  - 
>rth  to  take  his  command  up  the  Platte  River  so  as  to  economize  for- 
e on  the  Arkansas  route. 

Major  Allen  has  ordered  wagons  from  Cincinnati  and  Chicago  to  fill 
ajor  Easton’s  requisition. 

The  cavalry  is  as  well  armed  as  ours  here.  We  can  do  no  better  for 
era.  I understand  that  you  have  Fremont  revolvers  at  Fort  Leav- 
worth.  You  can  have  them  issued.  The  carbines  should  be  put  in 
der  and  the  ammunition  carefully  inspected  and  all  defects  supplied. 
Requisitions  should  be  forwarded  immediately  for  the  Parrott  guns. 

I cannot  send  ammunition  until  requisitions  are  made,  sta  ting  caliber, 
lOUllt,  &c. 

The  expedition  must  start  as  early  as  possible.  As  soon  as  General 
l ice  is  confirmed  he  will  be  ordered  into  the  field. 

All  troops  not  required  for  the  New  Mexico  expedition  or  in  Kansas 
ould  be  prepared  as  soon  as  possible  to  move  via  Fort  Scott  or  Hum- 
ldt  into  the  Indian  country.  Report  immediately  what  means  you 
ve  for  arming  friendly  Indians,  and  how  many  it  will  be  safe  to  arm. 
I.ese  Indians  can  be  used  only  against  Indians  or  in  defense  of  their 
u territory  and  homes. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General . 


War  Department, 
Washington , April  (3,  1862. 

'ijor-General  Halleck: 

The  chief  part  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is  now  at  Fort  Monroe. 
hDowell’s  and  Banks’  corps  remain.  Yesterday  General  McClellan 
mmenced  an  advance  on  Yorktown.  The  enemy  are  expected  to 
ke  their  strong  stand  there.  Three  steam  rams  are  rapidly  being 
instructed  at  Pittsburgh;  one  at  Cincinnati  for  your  use.  We  are 
king  anxiously  toward  Island  No.  10. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

[ Cassville ,]  dfo.,  April  6,  1862. 

neral  H.  W.  Halleck: 

General:  I will  try  to  form  a junction  with  General  Steele,  and  he 
ould  try  to  unite  with  me.  Together  we  would  repel  Van  Dorn’s 
Jnbinations,  but  I have  a long,  rough  road  before  me,  and  the  matters 
i supplies  may  retard  me. 

My  advance  is  15  miles  east  of  this  place.  This  accords  with  my 
^ws.  My  force  is  too  small  to  divide  and  leave  a large  force  here, 
* hough  I admit  the  good  results  of  holding  on  at  Pea  Ridge  would 
I further  realized  by  remaining  steady  farther  west.  The  trouble  is 
rear,  threatened  by  forces  through  Forsyth  and  Yellville ; and 
( neral  Steele  could  not,  where  he  now  is,  check  a dash  down  on 
■ nngfield,  which  my  present  movement  is  designed  to  effect  ; besides, 
f age  is  so  exhausted  I must  shift  west  or  east. 


666 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVliJ 


There  is  no  doubt  of  Price  having  gone  down  east  I should  havl 


lhere  is  no  auuui  ui  a tioo  T,.  , , 

moved  through  Carrollton  if  I could  have  crossed  TV  hite  River,  but 
shall  send  spies  and  force  there  as  soon  as  possible. 

Respectfully,  SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

M alar-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  1 

Saint  Louis , April  b,  18b2.  1 

General  Curtis,  Cassville , Mo.:  I 

General  Steele  will  cross  Black  River  at  Pitman’s  Ferry  and  ot 
serve  Pocahontas.  As  you  approach  he  will  move  towards  Salem  o 
that  vicinity  to  join  you.  Great  care  should  be  taken  m ^our  an  j 
march  not  to  be  attacked  in  flank.  Steele  will  observe  same  precaJ 
tion  1 think  your  combined  forces  will  be  sufficient  for  an>  thing  til 
enemy  can  bring  against  you.  If  certain  that  mam  body  of  enemy  hJ 
moved  to  Black  River,  you  should  move  by  rapid  marches,  so  as  M 
prevent  his  driving  Steele  back  before  you  can  effeef  a junctmn. 

Maior- General.  y 


Headquarters 


Department  of  the  Mississippi,  I 
Saint  Louis , April  6,  1862.  H 

General  Curtis,  Cassville,  Mo.:  I 

must  clause  before  the  Fort  Scott  forces  will  be  m a con 
dMonto  ™Zch  I think  a large  force  should  be  left  in  southwe 
ff  vou  can  spare  it.  General  Steele  will  be  directed  not  to  advan 
hevond  Pitman’s  Perry,  but  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  co-opera] 
wXyoP  If  the  enemy  should  concentrate  near  Batesville  or  Jac. 
sonport,  Steele  will  unite  with  you.  }]  w hALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Rew  Madrid  (via  Cairo),  April  6, 1862. 
Hon  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

SSSSSlI 

PrnWs  army  Can  you  have  it  ordered  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Na 
to  day,  a™  thus  relieve  the  flag-officer  from  a responsibility  which 

is  not  willing  to  assume  ? THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters 


)ISTRICT  OF  THE  MISSISSIPPI, 

Wew  Madrid , April  6,  180J. 


General  E.  A.  Paine: 

I desire  you  to  march 
redoubt,  to  take  post  at 


your  division  down  to 
the  steamboat  landing 


the  river  at  the  upp 
of  the  town  as  soon 


flAP.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


667 


ay  dawns.  Carry  two  days’  cooked  rations,  the  spades,  shovels,  axes, 
ad  everything  complete  for  service.  Load  your  command  on  the 
leamboats  as  soon  as  possible  and  await  further  orders.  I will  be 
own  in  person.  Your  supply  of  ammunition,  over  and  above  the  full 
irtridge-boxes,  you  will  have  placed  on  one  of  the  steamers,  and  when 
ou  disembark  leave  an  officer  in  charge  of  it.  Be  prompt  and  up  to 
me. 

Respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , April  6,  1862. 

apt.  Henry  Walke  : 


I am  induced  to  believe,  by  the  reports  of  General  Granger  and 
olonel  Smith,  that  you  will  be  able  to  silence  or  take  the  upper 
Iitteries  ot  the  enemy  on  the  opposite  shore;  I mean  the  batteries 
^mediately  opposite  our  batteries  of  32s.  Commodore  Poote  sends 
lotlier  boat  down  to-night.  I design  to  attempt  the  crossing  with 
y force  to-morrow,  and  I desire,  if  it  meet  your  views,  that  the  two 
inboats  go  down  as  soon  as  day  dawns  and  silence  the  batteries 
►ecified  and  to  hold  on  near  the  shore  until  the  troops  disembark, 
s soon  as  you  start  I will  have  the  transports  brought  into  the  river 
id  loaded  with  troops,  which  will  cross  the  river  and  land  near  you 
soon  as  the  batteries  are  silenced.  You  will  doubtless  have  to  run 
ase  into  them,  and  maintain  your  position  so  as  to  cover  the  whole 
ound  in  rear  of  the  landing.  Our  batteries  will  be  ordered  to  open 
soon  as  day  dawns  and  to  keep  up  their  fire  vigorously  until  the 
>ject  is  accomplished.  I can  cross  3,500  men  at  a time.  If  you  can 
us  silence  those  batteries  in  three  hours  or  more  we  have  the  rebels 
*posite  in  our  hands.  Call  on  Colonel  Bissell,  who  is  in  the  intrench- 
ents  near  you,  and  he  will  give  you  32  and  64  pounder  ammunition. 

Respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


New  Madrid,  April  6,  1862. 

aj or- General  Halle ck  : 

The  second  gujiboat  did  not  try  to  run  the  batteries  last  night;  will 
obably  be  here  to  night.  I sent  down  the  Carondelet  with  some  offi- 
rs  to  reconnoiter  the  opposite  shore  closely  between  here  and  Tipton- 
tle.  She  unmasked  five  or  six  batteries  along  the  shore,  I think 
igely  in  consequence  of  my  plan  of  getting  transports  to  cross  the 
er  to  take  the  enemy  in  rear  having  been  published  by  the  newspaper 
porters  of  the  flotilla.  The  enemy  has  for  two  weeks  been  kept  ad- 
“$ed  of  my  plans  and  have  lined  the  whole  river  bank  with  guns, 
i-morrow  will  determine  whether  we  can  dislodge  a sufficient  number 
cross  with  any  sort  of  security  by  the  aid  of  gunboats,  our  floating 
ttery,  and  our  land  batteries.  The  matter  will  be  settled.  Of  course 
ere  will  be  no  such  thing  as  crossing  in  frail  steamers  in  the  face  of 
avy  guns  at  all  points  of  landing.  I will  telegraph  you  further  to- 
ght.  The  gunboat  has  not  yet  returned  from  below. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major- General. 


668 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  6,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  D.  Sturgis,  Saint  Louis,  Mo. : 

General  : I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a letter  written  yesterday 

° oTaLumiugcommand  of  the  district  you  will  take  measures  to  carj 
out  these  instructions  with  the  least  possible  delay. 

General  Denver  should  be  sent  with  such  forces  as  may  be  span 
from  Kansas  to  Port  Scott  to  take  the  immediate  command  in  thl 
vicinity,  and  particularly  to  take  the  general  charge  of  the  Indial 
tribes  He  will  give  all  proper  protection  to  the  friendly  Indians,  ai 
seek  to  bring  back  to  their  peaceful  position  those  who  through  tl 
influence  of  Pike,  Ross,  and  others,  have  been  induced  to  take  up  aril 
against  the  Government,  He  should  also  observe  the  enemy’s  moil 
rnent  near  the  Arkansas  frontier,  and  break  up  all  insurgent  and  gu| 
rilla  bands  in  the  western  counties  of  Missouri.  In  doing  this  he  wl 
not  limit  himself  by  the  State  line,  but  will  operate  wherever  he  cfl 

'''ihe  'sixth  Ohio  Cavalry,  four  companies,  have  been  ordered  to  hi 
braska  City,  to  be  fitted  out  for  Fort  Laramie,  to  serve  for  the  protJ 

tion  of  the  Overland  Mail  Route.  ,.  . ,,  ,J 

Inclosed  herewith  you  will  find  a copy  of  instructions  to  the  l w 
tenant-colonel.f  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  fit  them  out  and  dl 
natch  them  on  the  route  as  early  as  possible.  I 

1 Colonel  Leavenworth  takes  with  him,  via  Nebraska  City,  a W iscomj 
battery  of  artillery  for  service  in  Colorado  Territory.  All  the  troops>i 
Colorado  should  be  made  available  for  service  in  New  Mexico,  it  th 
should  be  required  there. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ HALLECK 

Maior - General ] 


United  States  Flag-Ship  Benton, 

Off  Island  No.  10  (via  Cairo),  April  7,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

This  morning  at  2 o’clock,  in  a heavy  thunder-storm,  the  gunld 
Pittsburg,  Lieutenant-Commander  Thompson,  ran  the  blockade  unu 
fire  of  seventy-three  guns,  and  has  probably  reached  New  Madrid,  a 
is  now  with  the  Oarondelet,  Commander  Walke,  as  reports  ot'  hea. 
guns  are  heard  opening  upon  the  rebel  battery  on  the  oppoi’it 
to  destroy  them,  that  General  Pope  with  Ins  army  may  laud  on i 1 
Tennessee  side  preparatory  to  moving  to  attack  the  rear  ol  the  reb 

at  this  place  while  we  attack  them  in  front,  y FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer,  Comdg  IT.  8.  Naval  Forces  Western  Waters 


Steamer  Benton,  off  Island  No.  10, 

April  7,  lo62 


Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Two  officers  from  Island  No.jlO  have  this  instant  boarded  ns,  stab 
* See  p.  604. 


tNot  found. 


r.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


669 


it  by  order  of  their  commanding  officer  they  are  ordered  to  surrender 
and  No.  10  to  commodore  commanding  the  gunboats.  As  these  offi- 
s know  nothing  of  the  batteries  on  the  Tennessee  shore  I have  sent 
ptain  Phelps  to  ascertain  something  definite  on  the  subject.  I will 
egraph  when  further  information  is  received  from  General  Pope,  now 
dancing  from  New  Madrid  in  strong  force  to  attack  in  rear.  I am 
th  the  gun  and  mortar  boats,  ready  to  attack  in  front  while  General 
ford  here  is  ready  to  co-operate  with  the  land  forces ; but  it  seems 
if  the  place  was  to  be  surrendered  without  further  defense. 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer , Commanding  Naval  Forces  in  Western  Waters. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , April  7,  1862. 

ig-Officer  Andrew  H.  Foote  : 

[ am  happy  to  inform  you  that  the  Pittsburg  has  arrived  untouched, 
hall  cross  the  river  if  possible  to-day,  and  shall  probably  be  prepared 
assault  the  works  near  Island  No.  10  by  2 p.  m.  to-morrow.  May  I beg 
it  you  will  have  a careful  watch  kept  for  us,  that  we  may  suffer  no 
ury  from  your  boats  as  we  approach  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  bat- 
ies  ? With  the  aid  of  the  two  boats  you  have  sent  and  of  the  gallant 
icers  who  command  them  I shall  be  able  to  effect  the  passage  of  the 
er  with  the  necessary  force,  and  without  increasing  the  tremendous 
zard  which  must  otherwise  have  attended  such  an  operation. 

Be  pleased,  sir,  to  accept  my  hearty  good  wishes. 

Respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


New  Madrid,  April  7,  1862 — 12  m. 

tjor-General  Halleck: 

Enemy’s  batteries  silenced,  and  Paine’s  division  has  made  good  its 
Ilgment  on  the  other  shore.  Stanley’s  division  follows  immediately. 
1 goes  well. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Mississippi, 

New  Madrid , April  7,  1862. 

pt.  Henry  Walke: 

General  Pope  requests  that  as  soon  as  the  next  division  has  crossed 
p river  you  proceed  with  the  two  gunboats  to  Tipton ville  and  the 
iding  below  and  endeavor  to  intercept  the  retreat  of  the  rebels. 
>u  had  best  confer  with  General  Palmer,  commanding  battery  2 miles 

Bow. 

1 am,  captain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  A.  MORGAN, 

Major  and  Aide-dc-Camp. 


670 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 

Headquarters  District  oe  the  Mississippi, 

In  the  Field , April  7,  1802. 

General  Paine  : 

The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you  that  he  has  r 
ceived  reliable  information  of  the  evacuation  of  Island  No.  10,  anl 
that  you  will  probably  find  no  force  to  oppose  you.  He  wishes  yo| 
instead  of  waiting  for  General  Hamilton,  to  march  on  Tiptonville.  A 
soon  as  Stanley  commences  to  cross  he  will  follow  you  immediately 
Keep  a cloud  of  skirmishers  in  advance  of  your  column. 

Respectfully,  yonr  obedient  servant,  ^ MORGAN,] 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp.  J 


1862. 


New  Madrid,  April  7, 

Major-General  Halleck: 

Paine’s,  Stanley’s,  and  Hamilton’s  divisions  are  across,  together  wifi 
three  batteries  of  light  artillery  and  a battalion  of  cavalry . Everythin 
will  be  over  by  12  to-night.  The  divisions  ot  Paine  and  Stanley  are  c 
the  march  to  Tiptonville.  Rebel  force  in  the  bend  rapidly  retreatir 
ou  that  place.  Hamilton’s  division  and  the  cavalry  move  forward  A 
once.  Do  not  believe  there  will  be  more  than  a skirmish.  Am  jul 
embarking  myself.  You  will  not  hear  from  me  before  to-morrov.  A 
goes  well  and  everybody  in  fine  spirits.  No.  10  will  be  ours  befo: 
to-morrow  night.  ‘ JN().  POPE, 

Major-General , Commanding.  I 


Camp  on  East  Side  of  Mississippi  River, 

April  7,  1862 — 7 p.  m.l 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Enemy  in  rapid  retreat,  leaving  artillery,  baggage,  supplies,  ail 
sick.  Paine  is  near  Tiptonville;  Stanley  within  mile  of  him;  Hannlto 
3 miles  in  rear  of  Stanley ; Plummer  now  at  landing  on  this  side  ; oi 
gunboats  below  Tiptonville  on  the  bank.  Think  we  shall  bag  who 
force,  though  not  certain.  No  escape  for  them  below  Tiptonville,  e 
cept  by  wading  shoulder-deep  in  swamp.  Whole  command  well  | 
hand  and  will  move  forward  at  daylight.  Captured  eleven  heavy  gun! 
and  enemy’s  famous  floating  battery,  carrying  fourteen  guns,  whi( 
drifted  down  from  Island  10.  I think  rebels  are  trying  desperate 
to  escape  ; many  of  them  must  be  captured.  Have  already  taken  II 
prisoners.  Will  occupy  Island  10  early  to-morrow  unless  enemy  is  a 
sembled  there  in  force ; capture  it  anyhow  by  evening.  Send  down  a] 
transports  you  can  get  at  once.  Do  not  believe  enemy  will  mai 
another  stand  this  side  of  Memphis.  If  I can  get  transportation,  1 w 
be  in  Memphis  in  seven  days. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


New  Madrid,  April  7,  1862., 

E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : I 

General  Pope  has  just  landed  General  Paine’s  division  on  the  Te 
nessee  shore.  The  whole  movement  has  been  a grand  success.  D 


I*.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC* UNION. 


671 


ole  army  will  be  moved  over  to-day  and  to-night.  General  Pope 
5 four  steamers  to  ferry  with,  which  arrived  by  the  new  route  through 
5 swamps  last  evening.  Another  gunboat  arrived  this  morning  from 
)ve  Island  No.  10.  I will  report  from  the  field  as  frequently  as  pos- 

le. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War . 


New  Madrid,  April  7,  1862. 


n.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sight  thousand  infantry,  three  batteries  of  artillery,  and  one  regi- 
at  of  cavalry  have  crossed  the  Mississippi  within  the  last  six  hours, 
erything  working  well.  Forces  advancing  to  Tiptonville  to  cut  off 
reat.  By  to-morrow  night  General  Pope  will  have  the  enemy  com- 
tely  caged. 


THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


. Watson’s  Landing,  Tenn., 

April  7 (via  Cairo , April  8,  1862). 

a.  E,  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

'he  movement  across  the  river  has  been  a great  success.  The  divis- 
$ of  Generals  Paine,  Stanley,  and  Hamilton  have  advanced,  and 
believe  will  occupy  Tiptonville  before  morning.  About  100  prison- 
three  pieces  of  light  artillery,  eleven  large  cannon  in  batteries, 
ip  equipage,  and  other  property  have  been  captured  here.  Enemy 
in  great  haste.  Gunboats  have  been  sent  below  Tiptonville  to 
ture  any  transports  that  may  appear  and  prevent  the  escape  of  the 
my.  The  large  floating  battery  (fourteen  guns),  that  the  enemy 
ed  from  New  Orleans  to  Island  No.  10,  came  down  the  river  adrift 
1 evening  and  has  been  secured.  We  leave  for  Island  No.  10  at  dav- 
ak. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  7,  1862. 

L Gen.  Fred.  Steele, 

Rives’  Station  : 

eneral  Curtis  reports  Price  moving  from  Dover,  on  Arkansas  Iiiver, 
1 atesville,  and  Van  Dorn  from  Yellville,  on  same  place  or  Pocahontas, 
tis  is  following  on  their  left  flank,  to  communicate  with  you,  prob- 
r at  Salem. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

M ajor- Genera  I. 


672 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  ICiiap.  xvn 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  7,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Fred.  Steele: 

The  concentration  of  enemy’s  forces  at  J acksonport  and  Pocahonta 
renders  it  perilous  for  you  to  advance  farther  south  than  Pitman 
Ferry  I send  you  a pontoon  train  to  enable  you  to  operate  on  Blac 
and  Current  Rivers.  Push  your  reconnaissance  in  direction  ol  balei 
and  White  River  to  connect  with  General  Curtis,  who  is  moving  iroi 
Forsyth  towards  Salem.  The  enemy  is  reported  to  be  m considerab* 
force  at  Yellville.  If  he  attempts  to  move  between  you,  operate  again 

his  flank.  H W.  HALLECK, 

Major- General . 


Saint  Louis,  April  7,  1862. 

Capt,  W.  D.  Porter,  TJ.  S.  K., 

Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

CAPTAIN : Flag-Officer  Foote,  commanding  flotilla  in  W estern  water] 
has  designated  you  to  take  charge  of  fitting  out  two  gunboats  to  1 
purchased  at  this  place.  It  is  proposed  that  they  be  so  altered  asj 
serve  the  double  purpose  of  gunboats  and  rams.  The  Quartei  masted 
Department  will  purchase  the  boats  under  your  direction  and  suppn 
all  the  necessary  means  for  fitting  them  out.  .A 

It  is  expected  that  the  work  will  be  pushed  forward  with  all  possibj 

dispatch.  1 , , 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALJuLiUIA, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  April  7,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton:  l 

General  Denver  goes  to  Indian  Territory,  Sturgis  to  Kansas,  and  Ge 
eral  Craig  to  Overland  Mail  Route.  Until  General  Brice  iscoijflrmr 
I have  no  one  to  command  New  Mexico  expedition.  Flag-Officer  Foo. 
has  designated  Captain  Porter  to  direct  the  fitting  out  of  new  gunboat 
I shall  probably  leave  on  the  morning  of  the  ^th  for  Tennessee.  Ge 
eral  Buell’s  advance  guard  has  reached  Grant.  Entire  force  will  co 
nect  in  two  or  three  days.  I will  write  you  about  dispositions  of  Gel 
erals  Curtis  and  Steele.  H w HALLE0K) 

Major-General 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Militia, 

Saint  Louis , Mo.,  April  7,  1862. 

General  James  Totten, 

Jefferson  City , Mo. : 

I have  seen  General  Halleck  about  giving  you  more  cavalry,  but 
VS  he  cannot  do  it.  You  will  have  to  do  the  best  you  can  for  the  pi< 
ent.  The  same  calls  are  made  from  all  parts  of  this  State,  Kentucky , ai 


(HAP.  XVIII.  ] 


' CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


673 


Qenness.ee.  It  would  require  100,000  men  to  supply  all  sueli  demands. 
Tory  naturally  the  general  is  inclined  to  overlook  them  all  in  view  of 
he  great  battle  that  must  soon  be  fought  near  Corinth.  Something 
an  be  risked  elsewhere,  but  nothing  there. 

There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  you  should  have  more  cavalry,  and 
shall  make  it  my  business  to  get  it  for  you  in  some  way  or  other  as  soon 
s possible.  I shall  be  able  to  spare  some  from  Northern  Missouri  before 
ong  and  then  will  send  it  to  your  district.  We  could  soon  raise  enough 
a Southwestern  Missouri,  if  allowed  to,  but  that  is  forbid.  Even  re- 
ruiting  for  the  volunteer  service  is  forbid.  I hope,  however,  when  we 
;et  what  men  are  now  enlisted  well  organized  and  equipped  we  will  be 
trong  enough,  with  what  United  States  troops  are  now  in  the  State, 
nd  1 shall  try  to  keep  them  all  here  if  possible. 

Our  men  complain  very  much  about  their  arms,  and  perhaps  with 
ome  reason,  yet  they  are  better  supplied  than  the  majority  of  volun- 
eers.  There  are  several  regiments  here  now  for  which  there  are  no 
rms  of  any  kind $ carbines,  revolvers,  and  sabers  can’t  be  obtained, 
or  are  they  indispensable.  Our  men  have  no  more  use  for  a saber  than 
>r  a columbiad,  and  yet  all  clamorous  to  get  them. 

We  will  be  able,  I think,  now  to  get  transportation  without  delay.  I 
m pushing  it  forward  all  the  time.  Have  ordered  a full  supply  of 
verything  sent  to  Colonel  McClurg,  including  thirty  days’  rations. 

I will  let  you  have  Wood  as  inspector-general  in  a short  time.  He 
* now  attending  to  ordnance  duties,  which  will  be  closed  up  soon,  as 
II  will  be  supplied,  and  Callender  will  have  more  time  to  attend  to  our 
latters. 

Keep  me  informed  of  your  wants.  I will  do  what  I can  to  supplv 
hem.  * J 

Very  respectfully, 


J.  M.  SCHOFIELD, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City,  Mo.,  April  7,  1862. 

apt. -N.  H.  McLean, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Genera?!,,  Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a communication  from  Col. 
itz  Henry  Warren,  dated  April  4,  announces  the  capture,  by  de- 
achments  of  his  command,  of  25  more  prisoners,  including  Lieutenant- 
olouel  Murrell  and  quartermaster  Cox,  of  Price’s  army.' 

| Evidence  reaches  me  daily  of  the  return  of  men  from  Price’s  army 
> every  portion  of  this  district.  Wherever  these  characters  are  roam- 
ig  about  and  can  be  captured,  what  is  the  general’s  pleasure  in  regard 
) them  ? Where  they  do  not  voluntarily  give  themselves  up  and  give 
ond  for  future  good  behavior  I can  regard  them  only  in  the  light  of 
)ies,  they  being  within  our  lines  and  in  citizen’s  dress. 

If  not  otherwise  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding,  I shall 
lerefore  give  orders  to  arrest  them  accordingly. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding  District . 


43  r r — VOL  VIII 


674  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 

United  States  Flag-Ship  Benton, 

Island  Ho.  10,  April  8,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  the  department  that  since  I sent  th< 
telegraph  last  night  announcing  the  surrender  of  Island  10  to  uu 
possession  has  been  taken  of  both  the  island  and  the  works  upon  tin 
Tennessee  shore  by  the  gunboats  and  the  troops  under  commando: 
General  Buford.  Seventeen  officers  and  368  privates,  besides  100  o 
their  sick  and  100  men  employed  on  board  transports,  are  in  our  handy 
unconditional  prisoners  of  war. 

I have  caused  a hasty  examination  to  be  made  of  the  forts,  batteries 
and  munitions  of  war  captured.  There  are  eleven  earthworks,  witt 
seventy  heavy  cannon,  varying  in  caliber  from  32s  to  100  pounders 
rifled.  The  magazines  are  well  supplied  with  powder,  and  there  ar< 
large  quantities  of  shot  and  shell  and  other  munitions  of  war,  and  als< 
great  quantities  of  provisions.  Four  steamers  afloat  have  fallen  in  om 
hands,  and  two  others,  with  the  rebel  gunboat  Grampus,  are  sunk,  bui 
will  be  easily  raised.  The  floating  battery  of  sixteen  heavy  guns  turner 
adrift  by  the  rebels  is  said  to  be  lying  on  the  Missouri  shore  beloi\| 
New  Madrid. 

The  enemy  upon  the  main  land  appear  to  have  fled  with  great  precip 
Ration  after  dark  last  night,  leaving  in  many  cases  half-prepared  meal! 
in  their  quarters,  and  there  seems  to  have  been  no  concert  of  action  be! 
tween  the  rebels  upon  the  island  and  those  occupying  the  shore,  but  the 
latter  fled,  leaving  the  former  to  their  fate. 

These  works,  erected  with  the  highest  engineering  skill,  are  of  grea: 
strength,  and  .with  their  natural  advantages  would  have  been  impregf 
liable  if  defended  by  men  fighting  in  a better  cause.  A combined  at 
tack  of  the  naval  and  land  forces  would  have  taken  place  this  afternoon 
or  to-morrow  morning  had  not  the  rebels  so  hastily  abandoned  this 
stronghold.  To  mature  these  plans  of  attack  have  absolutely  re 
quired  the  past  twenty-three  days’  of  preparation.  General  Pope  h 
momentarily  expected  to  arrive  with  his  army  at  this  point,  he  having 
successfully  crossed  the  river  yesterday  under  a heavy  fire,  which  n( 
doubt  led  to  the  hasty  abandonment  of  the  works  last  night.  I 

I am  unofficially  informed  that  the  two  gunboats  which  so  gallantly 
run  the  fire  of  the  rebel  batteries  a few  nights  since,  yesterday  attacked 
and  reduced  a work  of  the  enemy  opposite  New  Madrid  mounting  eight 
heavy  guns.  I regret  that  the  painful  condition  of  my  foot,  still  requir 
ing  me  to  use  crutches,  prevented  me  from  making  a personal  examina 
tion  of  the  works.  I was  therefore  compelled  to  delegate  that  duty  t( 
Lieutenant-Commanding  S.  L.  Phelps,  of  the  flag-ship  Benton. 

A.  H.  FOOTE, 

Flag-Officer , Commanding  Haval  Forces  Western  Waters . 


Camp  on  East  Side  Mississippi  River, 

April  8,  1862 — 7 a.  m. 

Major-General  Halleck  : 

Island  No.  10  was  hastily  evacuated  last  night  and  the  forces  an 
trying  to  get  off.  Whether  they  will  succeed  remains  *to  be  seen 
Paine’s  division  is  in  advance.  I have  not  heard  from  him  since  las) 
night ; everything  the  enemy  had  is  ours  at  all  events.  It  may  be 


[Al\  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  675 

issible  to  get  their  men  off  by  wading  the  swamps,  but  nothing  in  the 
ay  of  baggage,  supplies  of  any  description,  can  go. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major- General,  Commanding 


Tiptonyille,  April  8,  1862—9  a.  m.- 

ajor-General  Halleck: 

The  advance  under  General  Paine  reached  this  place  at  daylight 
iving  the  enemy  before  him.  After  sharp  skirmishing  and  frantic 
tempts  to  cross  the  swamp  the  enemy  was  so  furiously  pressed  by 
ime  that  he  laid  down  his  arms.  Two  thousand  prisoners,  including 
eneral  Mackall,  formerly  of  the  Adjutant-General's  Department,  and 
all,  together  with  large  quantities  of  siege  and  field  artillery,  tents 
ggage,  and  an  immense  quantity  of  supplies  have  fallen  into  our 
nds.  Our  troops  are  scouring  the  country  between  here  and  Island 
: Many  more  prisoners  will  be  taken  in  course  of  the  day.  Everv- 
mg  has  worked  smoothly  and  well. 

The  captured  troops  are  from  Arkansas  and  Louisiana. 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


New  Madrid,  April  8,  1862—7  p.  m. 

neral  Halleck: 

^V6^yniling  j.s  ours*  Few’ if  any> of  the  ^emy  escaped.  Three  gen- 
Hs,  6,00°  prisoners,  an  immense  quantity  of  ammunition  and  sup- 
es,  100  pieces  of  siege  and  several  batteries  of  field  artillery,  great 
mbers  of  small-arms,  tents,  wagons,  horses,  &c.,  have  fallen  into  our 
ads.  Our  success  has  been  complete  and  overwhelming.  The 
3my's  forces  are  from  Arkansas,  Louisiana,  Mississippi,  Tennessee, 
I Alabama.  I will  give  to-morrow  by  telegraph  a brief  summary 
our  operations.  * 

^e  have  not  lost  a man  in  crossing  the  river  or  in  pursuing  or  can- 
ing the  enemy.  ^ 1 

JNO.  POPE, 

Major-  General. 


New  Madrid,  April  8,  1862. 

I jor-General  Pope  : 

congratulate  you  and  your  command  on  your  splendid  achievement, 
exceeds  m boldness  and  brilliancy  all  other  operations  of  the  war. 
-vill  be  memorable  in  military  history  and  will  be  admired  by  future 
lerations.  You  deserve  well  of  your  country. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General . 


Meriwether  Landing,  April  8,  1862. 

E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  Wa/r : 
ieneral  Paine's  division  marched  forward  to  Tiptonville  last  night 
r caPtured  General  Mackall,  formerly  on  the  Adjutant-General's 


676  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 

(US)  staff,  with  about  2,000  prisoners  from  Arkansas  and  Louisian* 
lame  quantities  of  stores,  ammunition,  and  other  property.  Geners 
Pope’s  movement  has  been  a complete  success.  We  move  m the  direi 
tion  of  Island  No.  10  in  a few  moments^o  capture  alUhat^are  left. 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


New  Madrid,  April  8,  1862. 


Hon. 


E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Just  returned  from  Tennessee.  General  Pope’s  movement  has  be 
a glorious  success.  Captured  the  rebel  general  and  nearly  all  h 
forces  are  prisoners.  They  will  number  about  o,000.  Over  100  pie©  I 
of  heavy  artillery  at  Island  No.  10,  and  along  the  river  shore  a lar{ 
amount  of  arms  and  property  of  every  description.  The  rebels  sad- 
six  steamers.  Will  endeavor  to  have  five  of  them  raised.  It  tran 
portation  arrives  to-morrow  or  next  day  we  shall  have  Memphis  with 
ten  days,  and  General  Pope  can  co-operate  with  General  Grant  * 
Corinth  in  wiping  out  secession.  Captain  Walke,  of  the  gunbo 
Carondelet,  is  entitled  to  great  credit  for  his  efficient  co-operation  wi 
General  Pope  to  effect  the  crossing  aftoe  nver.  ^ ^COTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


^ew  Madrid,  April  8,  1862. 

Major-General  Halle ck  : 

The  movement  of  General  Pope  yesterday  and  to-day  has  been  a 
that  could  be  desired.  If  you  can  send  him  transportation,  Mempbi 
will  fall  within  seven  davs.  Then  for  co-operation  at  Corinth  or  a D, 
fight  wherever  you  want  the  work  ^ 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  8,  1862. 

Thomas  A.  Scott,  Kew  Madrid: 

Ten  large  steamers  are  preparing  to  take  General  Pope’s  commai 
down  the  river.  Gunboats  and  mortars  should  be  m readiness  j 

“TTevere  battle  and  splendid  victory  yesterday  at  Pittsburg,  Ten 
I shall  be  in  Cairo  early  Thursday  morning.  Can’t  you  meet  me  ai 
go  with  me  up  the  Tennessee  Elver  1 H w HALLECK, 

Maior- General. 


New  Madrid,  April  8,  1862. 


Major-General  Halleck: 

I will  meet  you  at  Cairo  Thursday  morning, 
words.  After  interview  will  decide  where  to  go. 


Want  to  say  a f< 
Will  urge  the  eai 


:nxr.  XV.TII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  677 

novement  of  gunboats  and  mortars.  I go  with  General  Pope  to  see 
he  commodore  to-morrow. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


3on.  E.  M.  Stanton: 


Saint  Louis,  April  8,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall,  late  of  United  States  Adjutant-General’s 
department,  with  over  2,000  of  the  rebel  forces,  has  surrendered  to 
leneral  Pope,  and  it  is  expected  that  many  more  will  be  captured  to- 
lay.  Immense  quantities  of  artillery  and  supplies  have  fallen  into  our 
lands. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Saint  Louis,  April.  8,  1862. 


Ion.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

General  Pope  has  captured  3 generals,  6,000  prisoners  of  war,  100 
iege  pieces,  and  several  field  batteries,  with  immense  quantities  of 
mall-arms,  tents,  wagons,  horses,  and  provisions.  Our  victory  is  com- 
pete and  overwhelming.  We  have  not  lost  a single  man. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Army  op  the  Southwest, 

No.  138.  i Galena , Ifo.,  April  8,  1862. 

1.  Order  and  hours  for  marching  April  9 will  be  as  follows  : 

First  Division  at  6 a.  m.,  and  proceed  to  the  mouth  of  Bear  Creek, 
6 miles.  The  transportation  wagons  belonging  to  this  division,  now 
Mining  a part  of  the  brigade  at  James  Fork,  will  be  left  in  such  brigade, 
nd  one  regiment  of  this  division  remain  and  bring  up  the  rear,  with 
lie  trains. 

Fourth  Division,  immediately  after  Bowen’s  battalion  and  train  have 
rossed  James  Fork,  will  cross  and  camp  on  the  east  bank,  move  at 
.30  a.  m.  of  10th  in  rear  of  Third  Division. 

Bowen’s  battalion,  immediately  after  the  First  Division  has  crossed 
ames  Fork,  and  proceed  with  the  same  to  the  mouth  of  Bear  Creek. 

Wyman’s  brigade,  immediately*  after  Fourth  Division  camp  on  the 
ast  bank,  move  at  8 a.  m.  of  the  10th  instant  rear  of  Fourth  Divis- 
m,  and  camp  at  mouth  of  Bear  Creek. 

Third  Division  move  from  camp  on  east  bank  of  Flat  Creek  at  7 a.  m. 
tk,  cross  James  Fork  at  Galena,  camp  on  east  bank,  and  move  at 
•30  a.  m.  of  the  10th,  and  camp  at  the  mouth  of  Bear  Creek. 

Second  Division  will  bring  up  and  protect  the  rear. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Curtis : 


H.  Z.  CUKTIS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


678 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYI3 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , April  9,  1862. 

Major-General  Pope,  New  Madrid: 

Send  sick  to  this  city.  General  and  field  officers,  prisoners  of  wa 
to  Fort  Warren,  Boston  Harbor;  other  officers  to  Columbus,  Ohi 
Send  1.500  prisoners  to  Chicago,  1,000  to  Springfield,  and  remainder 
Madison  and  Milwaukee,  via  Prairie  du  Chien.  Wisconsin  troops  shoir 
be  sent  to  guard  the  latter.  I suggest  Colonel  Murphy.  Telegrai 
to  Major  Allen  when  you  will  be  ready  to  send  back  your  troops.  He 
preparing  ten  large  steamers. 

All  stores,  &c.,  should  be  removed  from  Commerce,  and  all  mule 
wagons,  &e.,  not' required  by  you  must  be  immediately  sent  up  the  Te 
nessee  River.  As  you  will  have  all  your  supplies  in  steamers  and  wi 
not  move  far  from  the  river,  you  will  not  require  a large  amount  of  lac 


UUt  1JLLV/  v ^ J-C4J1.  Iium  - - » - - 7 ^ -■■•ill  * dA  * J_ 

transportation.  I shall  leave  here  at  2 p.  m.  and  will  be  in  Cairo  t 


morrow  morning. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington , April  9,  1862. 


Major-General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis: 

Ordered: 

1st.  That  at  meridian  of  the  Sunday  next  after  the  receipt  of  th 
order  at  the  head  of  every  regiment  in  the  armies  of  the  United  btatt 
there  shall  be  offered  by  its  chaplain  a prayer  giving  thanks  to  the  Loi 
of  Hosts  for  the  recent  manifestation  of  his  power  in  the  overthrow  ( 
rebels  and  traitors,  and  invoking  the  continuance  of  his  aid  in  delive|j 
ing  this  nation,  by  the  army  of  patriot  soldiers,  from  the  horrors  of  trei 

son,  rebellion,  and  civil  war.  „ , ^ _ , , J 

2d  That  the  thanks  and  congratulations  of  the  ^ ar  Department  an 
rendered  to  Major-General  Halleck  for  the  signal  ability  and  succei 
that  have  distinguished  the  military  operations  of  his  department  an 
for  the  spirit  and  courage  manifested  by  the  army  under  his  command 
under  every  hardship  and  against  every  odds,  in  attacking,  pursuing 
and  destroying  the  enemy  wherever  he  could  be  found. 

3d.  That  the  thanks  of  the  Department  are  also  given  to  Genera 
Curtis  and  Sigel  and  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  their  co_minand  fd 
matchless  gallantry  at  the  bloody  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  and  to  MajOj 
Generals  Grant  and  Buell  and  their  forces  for  the  glorious  repulse  | 
Beauregard  at  Pittsburg,  in  Tennessee,  and  to  Major-General  -Pope  an 
his  officers  and  soldiers  for  the  bravery  and  skill  displayedinthe 
operations  against  the  rebels  and  traitors  intrenched  at  Island .TSo.  1 
on  the  Mississippi  River.  The  daring  courage,  dihgent  prosecutioi 
persistent  valor,  and  military  result  of  these  achievements  are  unsu 

passed.^hat  tliere  sliall  this  day  be  a salute  of  one  hundred  guns  froi 
the  United  States  Arsenal  at  Washington  in  honor  of  these  great  vi 

t0rieS*  EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


HAI*.  XVIII.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


679 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Southwest, 

Forsyth , April  10,  1862. 

iapt.  N.  H.  McLean, 

i Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis  : 

High  water  detained  me  so  I have  only  arrived  to-day  at  2 p.  in. 
kirmishing  with  a rear  guard  of  enemy’s  cavalry,  and  some  prisoners 
iken. 

My  cavalry  is  scouring  the  country  down  in  Arkansas.  No  force  of 
msequence  near.  Main  force  was  cavalry,  and  left  some  days  since, 
he  country  is  very  rough.  Roads  pass  down  deep  valleys  or  run  on 
arrow  divides.  My  main  force  m ust  remove  back  to  more  open  ground, 
erhaps  near  Ozark,  for  forage  and  convenience  of  movement  east  or 
est.  One  division,  with  cavalry,  could  hold  this  point  against  the 
orld,  and  keep  the  enemy  pressed  down.  I shall  try  to  alarm  the  en- 
ny  in  front,  but  cannot  extend  far  enough  to  do  much.  The  taking 
Island  No.  10  may  soon  give  you  the  mouth  of  the  river,  which  is  the 
By  to  Arkansas.  I am  arranging  a rope-ferry  for  convenience.  White 
iver  is  not  fordable,  and  rebels  come  and  fire  across.  Will  soon  stop 
lat. 

I will  try  to  get  into  telegraphic  communication  as  soon  as  I com- 
lete  arrangements  here. 

This  is  a dilapidated  town.  It  is  only  important  when  steamboats 
e running  and  commerce  is  safe  on  the  White  River.  The  surround - 
ig  country  is  not  cultivated. 

SAML.  R.  CURTIS, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo.,  April  10,  1862. 

apt.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Saint  Louis,  Mo.: 

Captain  ; I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  ma- 
r-general commanding  the  department,  that  I have  been  advised  by 
al.  Fitz  Henry  Warren  of  the  capture  of  15  more  prisoners,  one  a 
bel  lieutenant,  and  the  recovery  of  a herd  of  cattle  jayhawked  near 
linton  some  time  ago.  Also  a letter  of  the  next  date  (7th)  announces 
turn  of  another  scouting  party,  with  4 prisoners,  with  horses  and  side- 
ms  of  each.  One  of  these  latter,  Mr.  Beasley,  had  taken  the  oath 
ily  the  previous  week,  and  when  taken  denied  most  solemnly  hav- 
g any  arms  or  ammunition,  but  a search  of  the  premises  revealed 
le  revolver,  one  double-barreled  shot-gun,  and  one  rifle,  with  buck- 
et and  powder. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier -General.  Commanding  District. 


Saint  Louis,  April  10,  1862, 

From  Fort  Leavenworth,  April  8,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck: 

From  the  best  information  obtainable  at  least  2,000  Indians  can  be 
med.  Arms  for  that  number  are  now  goiug  forward  to  Humboldt, 
iking  out  troops  for  New  Mexico  will  leave  three  regiments  of  in- 
utry,  four  of  cavalry,  and  two  batteries  in  thi§  State. 


680  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvin 

General  Curtis  seems  not  to  have  received  your  order  returning  Kan 


8aTexatm  reported  leaving  New  Mexico.  If  trne,  might  not  one  mounter 


regiment  be  left  on  the  plains. 

Snake  Indians,  Bannocks,  and  Mormons  reported  committing  depre 
dations  about  South  Pass.  j w DENVEK, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding 


i 


Headquarters  District  of  Central  Missouri, 

Jefferson  City , Mo.,  April  10,  1862. 

To  Deputy  Sheriff  and  Members  of  the  Grand  Jury, 

Moniteau  County , Mo.  : 1 

Gentlemen:  It  has  been  officially  reported  to  these  headquarter 
that  certain  officers  in  civil  authority,  including  members  of  the  granj 
jury  have  evinced  a determination  to  persecute  Union  men  as  such,  it 
eluding  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  U.  S.  Aim^.  . 

For  instance,  at  the  late  session  of  the  grand  jury,  two-thirds 
whom  were  secessionists,  known  and  avowed,  a bill  of  indictment  w 
found  against  one  Grason  for  stealing  a horse  from  a s^essiomst  la, 
fall,  while  said  Grason  was  a lieutenant  m the  Home  Guards,  whic 
horse  was  never  taken  from  California,  Mo.  and  has  long  1 since .bed 
restored  to  the  owner,  and  in  fact  was  not  taken  by  the  said  Grason 
all  He  is  held  in  $500  bonds  for  appearance  next  term,  which  he  give 
Soon  after,  he  is  arrested  upon  another  and  similar  charge,  and  re* 
the  officer  (deputy  sheriff*)  attempting  to  make  the  arrest.  He  bem 
at  this  time  a member  of  the  Missouri  State  Militia,  and  in  that  capaJ 
ity  assisting  to  maintain  the  Federal  Union  and  the  constituted  authoi 
ties  thereof,  it  would  therefore  seem  that  the  grand  jury  is  persisting  i. 
persecuting  the  said  Grason  because  he  is  actively  engagec  in  ic  eausl 
of  the  Union,  and  that  this  is  not  the  only  case  in  which  their  perseuj 

lions  have  been  made  apparent.  mnflnn  ^ 

If  these  statements  be  facts— and  they  come  as  official  information  tj 
these  headquarters  from  officers  of  the  U.  S.  Army  m responsible  p , 
tions— the  civil  officers,  including  members  of  the  grand  jury  an 
deputy  sheriff,  are  warned  that  their  action  is  closely  observed,  and  wi 
be1  if  persisted  in,  further  investigated  and  they  held  accountable.  I 
Martial  law,  as  declared  in  General  Orders,  No.  2,  Headquarters^ 
partment  of  the  Mississippi,  Saint  Louis,  March  13,  186-, 
legally  declared  in  the  city  of  Saint  Louis  and  on  anil .in  the  immf 
ate  vicinity  of  the  railroads  and  telegraph  lines,  and  thereby  civil  at, 
thority  having  been  partially  suspended,  the  officers Af’J.f8 Jnitkrv  ii 
same  are  cautioned  that  they  are  not  beyond  the  power  of  militaryat 

vestigation,  and  that  such  a course  will  be  adopted  in  reference  to %j 
actions  whenever  it  seems  they  are  persisting  in  persecuting  Lmon  me 
or  opposing  the  military  authority  of  the  Federal  Government.  In i th 
SnnTtion  it  maybe  well  enough  for  the  civil  authorities ; above  * 
ferred  to  to  consider  how  far  and  in  how  many  cases  theyhaietoup 
indictments  against  known  rebels  and  sympathizers  «th«be 
who  have  perpetrated  acts  in  opposition  to  the  laws  of  A1 
States.  It  is  doubtless  known  to  them  that  many  such  acts  of  oj  1 
lion  to  the.  Government  and  its  supporters  have  been  Perprtrat^  aji 
Unit  the  perpetrators  of  the  same  are  m many  instances  indictable 


iap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  681 

er  the  criminal  law,  and  therefore,  t@  make  their  record  clear,  the  grand 
iry  and  other  civil  officers  in  and  around  California  should  he  able  to 
iow  that  they  have  been  zealous  to  bring  to  trial  the  law-breakers 
idicated. 

It  seems  incredible  to  suppose  that  members  of  the  grand  jury  and 
le  deputy  sheriff  are  not  acquainted  with  the  names  and  residences 
■ men  within  their  jurisdiction  who  have  by  acts  of  violence  committed 
pon  Union  men  and  in  a spirit  of  opposition  to  the  laws  of  the  United 
tates  and  State  of  Missouri  laid  themselves  liable  to  serious  charges, 
r which  they  should  have  been  indicted  by  the  grand  jury.  The 
lestion  arises,  has  this  been  done  in  every  instance  where  the  party 
lplicated  was  known  to  be  of  secession  proclivities  I There  should 
} no  partiality,  favor,  or  affection  in  such  matters. 

I am,  gentlemen,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  TOTTEN, 

Brigadier  General,  Commanding  District 
— 

Cairo,  April  10,  1862. 

on.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

General  Halleck  arrived  at  9 o’clock  on  way  to  Tennessee.  After 
nference  he  desired  me  to  go  down  Mississippi.  I leave  for  Madrid 
11  o’clock.  Will  push  everything  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible, 
uemy  concentrating  to  two  other  points  in  great  force.  We  should 
ive  a column  from  Potomac  for  Tennessee  Eiver.  Cannot  20,000  or 
,000  efficient  men  be  spared  to  replace  those  lost  ajfo  rendered  in- 
active in  battle  ¥ If  you  have  any  instructions  telegraph  me  at  New 
adrid.  Victory  near  Corinth  has  been  decisive  in  our  favor,  but  at 
rrible  cost. 

THOMAS  A.  SCOTT, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War . 


sneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Hist,  of  the  Mississippi, 

No.  30.  1 New  Madrid , April  10,  1862. 

The  following  dispatch  from  Major-General  Halleck,  commanding 
is  department,  has  been  received,  and,  with  this  order,  will  be  pub- 
hed  at  the  head  of  every  regiment  and  detachment  of  this  command : 


Saint  Louis,  April  8,  1862. 

Iijor-General  Popk: 

congratulate  you  and  your  command  on  your  splendid  achievement.  It  excels  in* 
Idness  and  brilliancy  all  other  operations  of  the  war.  It  will  be  memorable  in  mili- 
l y history  and  will  be  admired  by  future  generations.  You  deserve  well  of  your 

t intrv. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


The  general  commanding  has  but  little  to  add  to  this  dispatch.  The 
\ nduct  of  the  troops  was  splendid  throughout.  It  was  precisely  what 
expected.  To  such  an  army  nothing  is  impossible,  and  the  general 
•ramanding  hopes  yet  to  lead  them  to  some  field  where  superiority  of 
imbers  and  position  will  tempt  the  enemy  to  give  them  the  oppor- 
nity  to  win  the  glory  which  they  are  so  capable  of  achieving. 


€82 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Cuap.  xyj 


The  regiments  and  battalions  of  this  command  will  inscribe  on  th 


flags  New  Madrid  and  Island  10. 


JNO.  POPE, 

Major-General , Commanding 


General  Orders, 


Hdqrs.  District  of  the  Mississippi, 
]s^0>  31.  f New  Madrid , April  10,  1862 

The  several  divisions  of  this  army  will  make  preparations  to  embi 
and  move  down  the  river  in  the  following  order : 

First,  Paine ; second,  Stanley ; third,  Hamilton ; fourth,  1 almi 
fifth,  Plummer ; sixth,  Granger.  . . . „ 

One  battery  of  artillery,  complete,  for  each  division,  and  four  wag( 
to  each  regiment  will  accompany  the  respective  divisions. 

General  Palmer  will  detail  one  brigade  of  his  division  to  const® 
for  the  present  the  garrison  at  this  place,  one  regiment  of  which  t 
be  sent  up  immediately.  The  other  will  remain  for  the  present 
Tiptonville,  to  collect  and  take  charge  of  the  public  property. 

The  commanding  officers  at  Tiptonville,  Island  10,  and  New  Mad) 
will  be  held  responsible  for  the  collection  and  safe-keeping  of  all  pr< 
<3rty  captured  from  the  enemy,  will  have  careful  inventories  made 
it  and  have  a copy  sent  to  these  headquarters, 
i ininnp.l  DissplL  Engineer  Regiment,  will  detai 


iiiiu  nave  (x  1 : 7 , . * 

Colonel  Bissell,  Engineer  Regiment,  will  detail  two  companies  ot 
regiment  to  remove  the  heavy  guns  from  the  main-land,  both  ot 
own  batteries  and  those  of  the  enemy,  as  follows  : * , 

The  guns  opposite  Island  10  will  be  transferred  to  the  island  1 
safe-keeping ; those  below  New  Madrid  to  the  two  redoubts  at  til 

^Immediate  and  careful  inventories  will  be  made  of  the  artillery  aj 
ammunition  of  every  description  by  the  commanders  of  the  two  co 
names,  and  when  completed  the  whole  property  will  be  turned  over 
the  ordnance  officer  at  the  upper  redoubt.  The  engineer  compan 
will  then  build  as  rapidly  as  possible  a sufficient  magazine  to  conta 
all  the  ammunition  within  the  limits  of  New  Madrid  and  at  a*  si 
distance  from  the  shore.  As  soon  as  the  magazine  is  completed 


will  be  turned  over  to  the  ordnance  officer,  who  will  move  all  the  d 
munition  into  it  immediately,  and  the  two  engineer  companies  ^ 


rejoin  their  regiment  at  the  earliest  opportunity.  ^ 

The  sick  of  the  command  who  will  not  be  fit  for  duty  within  n 
days,  together  with  all  the  sick  of  the  enemy  upon  the  opposite  skoi 
are  placed  under  the  general  supervision  of  Brigade  Surgeon  Bry 
of  the  IJ.  S.  Army,  who,  under  the  direction  of  the  commanding  oihj 
in  this  vicinity,  will  transfer  them  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Saint  Lon 
communicating  immediately  with  the  medical  director  at  that  place 

^The  senior  officer  present  with  the  troops  at  Island  10,  New  Madr 
and  Tiptonville  will  assume  the  command  of  the  whole  torces  m i 
neighborhood,  which  shall  constitute  the  District  ot  ^ew  Madrid, I 
which  place  he  will  make  his  headquarters.  One  steamer  will  be  i 
in  his  charge  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  order.  It  he  nei 
others,  he  will  telegraph  General  Strong,  at  Cairo,  for  them. 


Lilyl  lit?  » 111  ^ O'  i -i  * n-rro 

The  troops  will  take  with  them  all  camp  equipage  and  baegJ 


and  not  less  than  four  days’  cooked  rations.  They  will  hold  themself 
in  readiness  to  embark  at  a moment’s  notice.  , 

The  chief  commissary  will  provide,  to  carry  with  this  command, 


AP.  XVIII.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  683 

ss  than  fifteen  days’  rations,  besides  what  are  in  possession  of  the 
oops. 

Commanders  of  divisions  and  the  chief  of  artillery  will  take  care 
at  a sufficient  quantity  of  ammunition  is  transported  with  their 
spective  commands. 

The-  six  companies  of  United  States  Infantry  and  the  Engineer  Beg- 
lent  will  be  assigned  one  steamer  for  their  transportation. 

The  chief  quartermaster  will  leave  one  assistant  at  this  place,  to 
rward  the  remaining  wagons  and  supplies  of  this  command  to  Mem- 
os. 

By  order  of  General  Pope : 

SPEED  BUTLEB, 
Assistant  A djutant-  Genera  l. 


3neral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  Kansas, 

^°*  f Fort  Leavenworth,  April  10,  1862. 

[.  In  pursuance  of  General  Orders,  Ko.  77,  from  Headquarters  De- 
rtment  of  the  Mississippi,  dated  Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  April  6,  1862,  the 
dersigned  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  District  of  Kansas. 

II.  Capt.  Thomas  Moonlight,  Light  Artillery,  Kansas  Volunteers,  is 
reby  appointed  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  of  this  district. 

[II.  The  other  staff  officers  of  this  district  will  continue  as  before. 

S.  D.  STUBGIS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Mississippi 

Saint  Louis,  April  16,  1862. 

ig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  1).  C.: 
bR : I have  the  honor  herewith  respectfully  to  transmit,  for  the  in- 
mation  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  an  official  copy  o f a letter  of  instruc- 
ts to  Brig.  Gen.  J.  W.  Denver,  dated  April  5,  1862;  also  of  one  to 
g.  Gen.  S.  D.  Sturgis,  dated  one  day  later:  these  papers  having 
n called  for  by  the  Secretary  of  War* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  KELTOK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


confederate  correspondence,  etc. 

Headquarters, 

\ Pocahontas,  Ark.,  November  [10],  1861. 
j.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  C.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  First  Division,  Western  Department , Columbus,  Ky. : 
General  : Since  my  dispatch  of  the  night  of  the  5th  I have  con- 
aed  my  steps  of  precaution  and  preparation  for  defense  without  in- 
nission.  Details  in  respect  to  them  are  at  present  unnecessary. 

See  pp.  664,  668. 

)riginal  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  Series  I,  Vol.  III. 


684 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO. 


ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIl'i 


Mv  call  upon  the  militia  for  re-enforcements  has  been  responded  i ; 
with  spirit  and  alacrity,  but,  as  was  to  have  been  expected,  in  a manni 
somewhat  tumultuous,  and  in  no  light  degree  troublesome  in  disposm 
of  the  forces  thus  furnished.  By  last  evening  something  more  thajl 
1 000  men  had  assembled  here,  and  about  an  equal  number  report! 
themselves  in  several  more  distant  neighborhoods  as  assembled  ai 
awaiting  instructions.  By  that  time  I learned  from  my  scouts  that  tl  ; 
enemy  had  ceased  to  advance  and  were  probably  falling’ back  a li t tl  j 
Finding  that  I was  thus  allowed  more  time  for  preparation,  and  th; 
the  militiamen,  as  well  those  who  had  arrived  here  as  those  on  the  wa 
had  left  home  so  hurriedly  as  to  be  very  ill-supplied  with  arms,  &c.,| 


oU  lllllilvvllj  tv  v v » tl  -l-  -t  , ' 

deemed  it  best  to  direct  them  to  return  home,  and  there  organize,  an 
and  prepare  for  service  as  well  and  as  speedily  as  possible,  and  kayn  j 
done  this,  as  they  will  be  able  in  a day  or  so,  and  reported,  to  await  n 
orders,  with  the  exception  of  about  100,  who  are  sufficiently  prepared  hei  ( 
They  have  all  followed  this  direction,  to  an  extent  at  least  to  assure  d 
that  within  a week  from  this  day  I shall  have  within  three  days’  mart 
of  this  place  at  least  3,000,  probably  more,  men  at  my  command,  and  y 
well  prepared  for  service  as  the  means  of  the  country  will  allow  ; 1 
which  I mean  that  while  every  man  will  be  armed  with  some  sort  of. 

gun for  I will  have  no  others — yet  they  will  be  far  from  uniform  m thl 

respect,  and  many  will  be  rather  poorly  armed,  owing  to  the  scam: 
of  guns  of  every  kind,  and  especially  of  good  ones,  m this  part  of  tl 

^Companies  thus  organized  and  prepared  I have  agreed  to  receive  in. 
the  service  for  thirty  days  from  the  time  they  report  to  me,  to  be  su 
iect  to  my  orders  during  that  time.  I adopted  this  course  and  this  ten 
for  these  reasons:  1st,  Within  that  time,  if  at  all,  it  seems  obvious . 
me  I shall  have  to  engage  the  enemy  here  or  hereabouts  , -cl,  It  is  t 
only  source  from  which  I can  calculate  on  re-enforcements  of  any  ki, 
within  that  time;  3d,  Without  such  re-enforcements  the  handful 
troops  I have  here  is  wholly  inadequate  to  resist  such  a force  as  '] 
know  the  enemy  have  in  striking  distance  and  as  there  can  be  no  dou, 
they  will  bring  against  me  if  they  come  at  all ; 4th,  I have  made  neitb 
preparation  nor  calculation  for  a retreat,  that  being  out  of  _the ’flRestuj 
is  it  would  open  our  State  to  invasion,  the  very  thought  of  which  is  11! 
to  be  entertained  for  a moment,  there  not  being  one  among  my  lit 
band  who  does  not  feel  that  in  holding  this  place  lie  is  holding  the  ve 
door  to  his  own  domicile,  within  which  are  wife,  children,  and  fnenj 
and  who  would  not  deem  himself  criminal,  as  well  as  craven,  if  he  urn, 
weiah  his  own  life  against  the  importance  of  maintaining  it;  5th,  wil 
te  that  timi  you  will  be  able  to  order  what  other  and  better  cod 

^OfthiTforces  under  my  command  I briefly  report— for  there  are  so  fi 

of  them  that  a brief  report  will  cover  them  easily— 

1 Mv  own  cavalry  regiment,  seven  companies,  number  460,  a, 
are  stationed  for  purposes  of  observation,  convenience  of  suPP  ies,  & 
between  this  and  Pitman’s  Ferry,  with  several  companies  at  and  m 
theferry,  throwing  forward  scout,  &c.  In  this  service  i is  very  ci 
stantly  occupied  and  has  been  all  summer  and  fall,  until  pretty  w 

US2d  Colonel  McCown’s  five  companies  of  infantry  (raw  troops^  m 

and  officers,  number  378,  indifferently  armed  and.^t9s,1sg^  ythe  sai 

3.  Major  besha’s  four  companies  infantry  number  238,  in  the  sai 

condition  as  McCown’s.  - nmfKr<r(sni 

This  is  my  whole  permanent  force.  In  addition,  for  this  cmeree 


fiAi>.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  685 

have  stopped  here  in  passing  and  retain  for  the  present  Captain 
Roberts’  company,  about  60  men,  nominally  artillery,  but  without  a 
attery,  but  armed  and  pretty  well  drilled  as  infantry,  and  about  lf>0 
bruits  for  the  army,  brought  here  by  Major  McCray  and  Captains 
yhite  and  Kykendall,  and  retained  here  by  me,  as  is  Captain  Roberts7 
ompany ; altogether  about  1,286  men.  Of  these,  owing  to  much  sick- 
ess,  casualties,  necessary  details  for  guards,  nurses,  &c.,  as  you  will 
?adily  apprehend,  I cannot,  as  I have  ascertained  by  careful  exam  in  a 
on,  count  on  more  than  600  for  fighting  service.  All  even  of  these 
uist  be  regarded  as  raw,  inexperienced,  and  poorly  disciplined,  and 
[differently  armed.  I may  say  that  I have  no  artillery,  for,  although 
lere  are  six  pieces— four  iron  6 pounders  and  two  brass  4-pounders— 
ere,  they  were  repudiated  by  General  Hardee  as  worthless,  and  are, 
> far  as  I can  judge,  quite  so  for  any  active  or  reliable  service.  They 
re  so  ill  mounted,  &c.,  that  they  cannot  be  used  at  all  for  flying  artil- 
ry.  In  my  destitution  of  such  things  and  for  this  emergency,  how- 
ler, I shall  do  what  I can  with  them  by  placing  them  in  positions  to 
>ver  the  approaches  to  this  place,*  and  as  Captain  Roberts  is  the  only 
ficer  here  who  knows  anything  at  all  about  artillery,  I have  put  him 
charge  of  them. 

I have  in  the  first  part  of  this  letter  said  all  I need  say  about  the 
nbable  militia  re-enforcements. 

As  to  the  supplies  here,  the  amount  of  which  seems  to  have  been 
'eatly  exaggerated  to  you— mentioned  by  you  in  one  of  your  letters  as 
robably  $500,000  worth — though  I am  satisfied  not  more  than  one- 
df,  perhaps  not  more  than  one-third  of  that,  I have  not  deemed  it 
icessary  or  proper  to  remove  them  lower  down  the  river,  for  the  rea- 
n that  I don’t  intend  to  abandon  the  place,  and  if  we  are  to  perish 
r the  want  of  the  timely  aid  that  ought  to  have  been  given  us  if  re- 
ined here  at  all,  we  will  all,  men  and  supplies,  perish  together;  the 
lemy  shall  never  have  them. 

I have  been  unable  to  hear  from  General  Thompson  since  my  last 
spatch  to  you  of  the  night  of  the  5th,  though  at  that  time  and  the 
ght  after  I wrote  to  him.  My  messengers  ought  to  have  returned 
st  night,  but  I have  uo  news  of  them.  Reports  are  here,  I know  not 
>w  reliable,  that  he  has  either  had  an  engagement  with  the  enemy  at 
near  Bloomfield  or  that  upon  their  approach  he  has  retired  south 
id  east.  If  I don’t  hear  from  him  by  to-morrow  morning  I will  send 
,ain  to  ascertain. 


Inclosed  I send  you  a militia  order  and  the  proclamation  of  the  Gov- 
nor  of  Arkansas.*  To  the  latter  I invite  your  attention.  It  looks 
dl  enough  on  paper  that  I am  to  have  so  large  an  auxiliary  force, 
it  you  need  not  be  told  that  it  gives  nothing  at  all  for  present  pur- 
ges, and  promises  only  what  will  be  received,  if  at  all,  in  small  por- 
'>ns  at  a time  and  a good  while  hence. 


Monday  Morning,  November  11. 

I had  written  so  far  last  night  when  reports  reached  me  that  induced 
1 3 to  pause  until  something  more  reliable  should  come  from  my  scouts 
1 time  for  this  dispatch.  At  1.30  o’clock  this  morning  a dispatch  from 
5y  outpost  at  Pitman’s  Ferry,  20  miles  north,  to  this  effect: 

Hie  scouts  send  in  word  that  they  have  reliable  intelligence  that  there  are  300 
• antry  and  150  cavalry  at  Rives’  Station,  on  Black  River,  35  miles  north  of  Pitman’s 


Not  found. 


€86 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XT!! 

infantry  force— 7,000— at  Greenville,  15  mile? 


Ferry  Also  that  there  is  a stron 
north  of  Rives’  Station. 


ief'-r 


This  is  confirmatory  of  the  previous  reports  during  the  day,  so  fai 
as  it  is  reliable.  Allowance  must  of  course  be  made  for  natural  exagj 
aerations,  &c.,  and  I am  doing  all  I can  to  ascertain  the  truth,  anti 
prepare  as  well  as  I can  for  whatever  it  may  prove  to  be. 

Not  hearing  from  General  Thompson,  I have  dispatched  an  intelh 
gent  and  trusty  messenger  on  the  best  route  to  that  officer  to  lean! 

"'lain  not’  without  hope,  of  course,  that  what  I have  done  and  tin 
views  I here  add  will  meet  your  approval,  viz,  that  what  force  I hav| 
here  is  wholly  insufficient  for  any  useful  purpose  of  either  attack  .0 1 
defense,  but  only  a provocation,  and,  coupled  with  the  supplies  here! 
an  inducement  to  the  enemy  to  attack  us.  It  seems  obvious  to  m| 
mind  that  if  any  force  at  all  is  to  be  kept  here  or  on  this  line  it  oughl 
to  be  at  least  three  if  not  four  times  as  large  as  it  is.  Either  make > ll 
strong  enough  to  sustain  itself  or  abandon  it  altogether.  Arkansal 
has  some  twenty-two  regiments  in  the  field  and  some 
are  in  other  States,  while  next  to  none  are  left  to  defend  her  owl 
frontier  where  most  exposed. 

If  these  views  are  not  approved  I respectfully  suggest  that  I b 
superseded  in  command  over  here  at  once.  It  would  indeed,  it  seem 
to  me,  be  better  to  do  this  anyway,  by  sending  some  one  ot  the  brigil 
to  take  ebarare.  It  is  a brigadier’s  command,  and  should 


(lier-generals  to  take  charge.  It  is  a brigadier’s  command,  and  shout 

be  his  responsibility,  which  I am  daily  growing  more  and  more  did 

trustful  of  my  competency  to  sustain.  Besides,  indications  of  faihn 
health  admonish  me  that  the  public  interests  here  would  be  bettc 
provided  for  by  other  and  abler  hands.  . , T . ..ii 

In  haste,  but  from  careful  consideration  of  all  I have  said,  I ha\ I 

the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  ob®  A Nil, 

Colonel,  Commanding.  ‘ 


Headquarters  Springfield,  Mo.,  November  19, 1861. 

( Via  Little  Bock,  November  26.)  j 


J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I shall  return  to  Arkansas,  put  my  troops  in  "''“ter  qnartefi 
soon,  and  ask  permission  to  come  immediately  to  Richmond,  so  as  tj 
give  to  the  administration  correct  information  regarding ^ affairs  in Alii 
region  before  it  acts  on  matters  here.  The  Federal s left  eight  dafi 
since  with  their  HI  thousand  men,  quarreling  among  themselves,  H 
greatly  injured  their  cause  by  taking  negroes  belonging  toTJniotime, 
General  Bane  went  to  Kansas,  General  Hunter  to  Sedalia,  and  Genen 

S,Sel  *1°  havcfthe  honor  to  be,  with  respect^your  ^ient^semmnt,  | 

Brigadier- Genera  l , Comm  anding. 


Hou.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 


Little  Bock,  November  20,  1861. 


OLi  • • t • Dijii  *J  AliLIIi  • 

Arkansas  is  arming  the  twelve-months’  troops  raised  under  yov 
requisition  to  me  for  McCulloch.  There  is  a battalion  at  this  pom 


r.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  687 

all  send  it  to  Borland’s  command  at  Pocahontas,  where  there  is 
uble.  Must  they  go  to  McCulloch,  as  originally  intended  ? 

' H.  M.  RECTOR. 


Headquarters, 

^ „ Pocahontas , Ark..  November  20,  1861. 

. W.  W.  MiCKAEL, 

A.  A.  G .,  Western  Dept.,  C.  S.  Army , Bowling  GreenyKy.: 

!olonel:  Tours  of  the  4th,  by  mail,  missent  to  Powhatan  and  for- 
ced from  that  office,  was  received  last  night, 
ou  communicate  the  direction  of  General  Johnston  that  I shall 
cL  my  “ surplus  ammunition  and  supplies  to  Memphis.” 
can  briefly  answer  this  by  saying  that  I have  no  surplus  here  of 
ter  class  of  these  stores.  But  it  is  proper  I should  add  that  an 
ggerated  and  somewhat  extraordinary  misapprehension  seems  to 
;t  m tlie  mmds  of  our  generals,  particularly  in  that  of  General 
k,  as  expressed  in  one  of  his  letters,  as  to  the  amount  of  ammuni- 
k and  subsistence  stores  at  this  place,  estimating  it  as  he  does  at 
e half  million  of  dollars.  The  precise  amount  of  either  class  I can- 
ascertain  as  soon  as  it  seems  proper  to  dispatch  this  communica- 
h Dut  1 send  statements  as  soon  as  they  can  be  made  out;  and 
he  mean  time  do  not  hesitate  to  express  the  opinion  that  there  is 
more  than  one-fourth,  even  if  there  be  as  much  as  a fifth,  of  that 
>unt.  ’ 


3 far  from  having  a surplus  of  ammunition  (except  it  may  be  of  some 
or  two  kinds,  for  which  I have  no  suitable  guns),  I am  sorrv  to 
l t0  at  my  suPP!y is  rather  short.  If  all  that  General  Hardee 
here  had  been  kept  here  and  of  good  quality  I should  not  have  had 
ethan  enough;  but  the  nominal  amount  of  that  is  considerably 
iced  by  the  damaged  condition  in  which  a good  deal  of  it  cam6 
’•  onn  KtlH  fu^frJ«st  before  I returned  here,  by  the  shipment  of 
boxes  of  the  best  to  Memphis  by  order  of  General  Hardee 
mbt,  however,  if  this  lot  has  reached  General  Hardee  at  alL  or* 
it  was  probably  very  badly  damaged;  for  although  it  reached 
'.Phis  several  days  before  I left'  there,  it  was  at  the  time  of  my 
mg  still  on  the  wharf  where  it  had  first  been  landed,  without 
Ting  ot  any  kind,  and  exposed  to  several  hard  rains.  The  master 

^ff^r^anafha  Yalle‘y’  who  had  carried  it  there,  informed 
mat  he  had  tried  m vain  to  get  some  attention  to  it  from  the 
termaster  and  ordnance  offices.  I wrote  from  Memphis  to  General 
lee  about  this. 

>eg  leave  to  add  a few  words  about  my  position,  &c.,  here.  I think 
3rai  Johnston  will  concede  that  it  is  a very  precarious  one  in  itself 
l know  it  is  a very  embarrassing  one  to  me.  As  he  is  aware  (at 
late  I so  informed  him  at  Columbus),  the  force  left  here  (i.  e.,  Pit- 
C°  & General  Hardee  was  very  small,  so  small  that, 
have  all  the  while  insisted,  it  was  available  for  no  useful  purpose 
ever,  either  of  attack  or  defense,  against  such  as  the  enemy  cer- 

v?  rliil116  an5  ^0ulm  not  fail  t0  brin£  gainst  me  if  I should 

YA1  Vth  him  at  alL  This  is  obvious  from  the  following  statc- 
Jn  ot  character  and  numerical  strength:  It  consisted,  first,  of 
'i  mounted  companies— nominally  460  men— indifferently  armed 
much  enfeebled  by  the  hardest  and  most  constant  scouting  service 
nich  any  troops  were  ever  subjected,  through  an  exceedingly 


•688 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYH 


ceason  and  on  little  more  than  half  rations  for  man  or  horn 

and®' withfn thehLt few  dIyThTv“addeivkm“  lS further  by  retail 

’inexperienced,  poorly  armed  ad 

iSpnedf  and  without  an  educated  or  experienced  military  man  m 
wliole  command.  Ho  cannon  were  left  me,  or  what  are  no  bettei  tin. 
none-  that  is  six  iron  6-pounders  and  two  brass  4-pounders,  all  ol 
partly  Untied  and  dilapidated,  and  without  eqmpment  or  Iran 
portation  or  active  use,  and  all  rejected  as  worthless  and  cast  afflj 
L (General  Hardee.  Of  the  nominal  force  I have  enumerated,  makn 
by  no  means  an  unfair  allowance  for  sick,  details,  &c.,  *00  would  u 
r.AVpp  the  number  X could  count  upon  for  the  held. 

Thus  situated,  on  the  5th  instant  I found  my  position  threatened  l 
the  enemy  with  some  400  cavalry  and  not  less  (I  had  some  reason  t ) J 
lieve  much  more)  than  3,000  infantry  and  a battery  of  artillery,  report 
«n  good  authority  (sinci  proved  to  be  true)  to  be  within  00  miles  of  i 
ml  marching  rapidly  in  this  direction.  This  has  since  proved  to  ha 
been  one  ofLhe  several  columns  moved  simultaneously  from  Cai 
upon  Columbus,  from  Cape  Girardeau  upon  Bloomfield,  and  fiom  Iro- 

t0  AsnoVafcertTined,  the  late  of  Columbus,  upon A’fS'1)  .ow'far. 
doubtless  the  others  depended,  caused  them  to  fall  back,  how  ta l j 
nofyft  known  with  certainty,  but  supposed  to  b< i to  £e>r 
starting  points ; circumstances  warranting  the  expectation  that  tni 
acutthward  movement  will  be  repeated  as  soon  as  » » 
can  be  again  arranged,  unless  forestalled  by  “ 

winter  weather  as  shall  make  the  roads  impracticable— a con t ingen 
too  uncertain  to  be  relied  upon  where  interests  so  vital  die  at  sUUw 
Thus  situated,  and  feeling  that  this  position  is  the  t 

State— which  in  turn  is  a large  portion  of  the  right  bank  ol  the 
sissippi— and  that  in  holding  it  I was  lioldiug  the  very  door  of 
domhdles  within  which  were  wives,  children,  and  friends,  I dared 
thtak  of'abandoning  it,  although  with  the  force  then  at  ^ 
it  were  little  better  than  madness  to  expect  to  ‘)0r  “XLrt^inon  ftndl 
every  man  of  us  in  a conflict  so  unequal.  T 11  k . , I ^ , 

announced  to  my  men,  and  I have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  1 had  th 

unanimous  and  cordial  concurrence.  t 4nofnnt.lv  railed 

But,  not  to  be  desperate  as  well  as  determined,  I msta  _ y /d  I 
the  only  help  then  possible  in  reach— the  militia  of  the  adjacent  coi 
try.  This  call  was  promptly  responded  to  with  some  spin  , " j 

manner  so  hurried,  inconsiderate,  and  tumultuous  ” -()()  j 

me  an  unorganized  and  generally  unarmed  c>-owd  of  some  l,o00  rt 

within  two  or  three  days.  Finding  this  crowd  unavi ^at Coluinl 
dition  in  which  they  came,  and  the  result  of  the  aflair  . 

having  temporarily  at  least  warded  oft  the  tha^tened  attack  upo 
1 dispensed  with  the  militia  as  such  and  called  for  volunteers,  o 8 
Led  into  companies,  for  thirty  days’  service,  receiving  i «one 
not  properly  organized,  armed  with  serviceable  guns,  suitably  equipp 
clothed? &c.  1 fixed  thirty  days  as  the  term  of  service 

1st,  that  it  would  bring  me  the.  largest  amount  of  force  in  the  sh 
time ; 2d,  that  term  would  cover  the  period  at  which  we  m 
ably  be  attacked,  if  at  all,  as  by  the  middle  of  Decembei  the  weal 


••  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  68$ 

ds,  &c.,  would  have  made  active  movements  of  any  extent  imprac- 
ible ; 3d,  that  within  that  time  General  Polk,  to  whom  I at  once 
patched  an  account*  of  my  situation,  could  issue  such  orders  in 
pect  to  it  as  he  might  deem  best.  Under  this  call  I have  received 
to  this  time  eleven  companies  of  infantry  and  one  of  mounted  gun- 
s,  numbering  together  about  700  men;  and  there  are  reported  to 
as  on  the  way , to  be  here  within  a day  or  so,  some  four  more  com- 
ues,  say  300  men. 

t is  not  for  me  to  do  more  than  thus  make  known  to  General  John- 
i my  situation,  not  doubting  that  he  will  order  what  is  right  to  the 
mt  of  his  power.  But  I trust  it  will  not  be  deemed  out  of  place  to 
to  him  that  my  situation  here  is  very  embarrassing.  It  is  a brig- 
u-general’s  command  and  should  be  his  responsibility,  needing  not 
7 tj16  capability  of  a commander  of  the  qualifications  suited  to  that 
k,  but  the  advantage  to  the  public  service  which  the  prestige  of 
. rank  confers.  I do  not  wish  that  place  for  myself.  I did  once, 
m ad  sincerity  I do  not  now,  greatly  preferring  to  return  to  my 
ment  or  even  go  into  the  ranks.  I hope,  therefore,  some  one  of 
able  rank  will  be  ordered  to  relieve  me  at  once.  The  public  in- 
st  requires  it. 

Yerv  respectfully, 

SOLON  BORLAND, 

Colonel  Cavalry , Commanding » 


cial  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  Div.,  Western  Dept., 

^°;  i Columbus , Ky .,  November  21,  1861. 

iptain  Gray  is  directed  to  remove  the  guns  from  the  fortifications 
sland  No.  10  as  soon  as  he  thinks  best  and  place  them  in  the 
is  under  construction  at  New  Madrid,  and  move  Captain  Stewart’s 
pany  of  artillery  to  that  place  to  man  them. 

7 order  of  Brigadier-General  Pillow,  commanding : 

GUS.  A.  HENRY,  Jr., 

A ssistant  A djutant-  General. 


:ual  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  First  Div.,  Western  Dept., 

No-  36*  ( Columbus , Ky .,  November  22,  1861. 

•lonel  Smith’s  regiment  of  Arkansas  Volunteers  will  be  placed  and 
mped  on  Island  No.  10.  He  will  procure  the  necessary  spades 
*,  ot^er  implements,  and  build  the  battery  laid  off  by  Captain 
, ot  the  Engineer  Corps.  The  work  will  be  constructed  under  the 
tion  ot  Captain  Gray,  who  is  now  at  New  Madrid.  Captain  Gray 
carry  on  both  works  at  the  same  time.  Colonel  Smith  will  make 
equisitions  for  supplies  of  subsistence,  &c.,  upon  Memphis  and  of 
ountry  around.  He  must,  as  far  as  possible,  issue  and  use  beef, 
suppiy  ot  salt  meat  m the  country  being  about  exhausted,  he  can 
salt  meat  two  days  per  week, 
i order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Gideon  J.  Pillow: 

GUS.  A.  HENRY,  Jr., 

; ; A ssistant  A djutant - GeneraL 

* See  Borland  to  Polk,  November  10,  1861,  p.  683. 

44  R R — VOL  VIII 


690 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK., 


KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIll 


Special  Orders, 
No.  234. 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , Vd.,  November  22,  1861. 


7 The  Indian  country  west  of  Arkansas  and  north  of  Texas  is  coi  I 
stituted  the  Department  of  Indian  Territory,  and  Brig.  Gen.  Albej 
Pike  Provisional  Army,  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  same.  T1 
troops  of  this  department  will  consist  of  the  several  Indian  regimen  n 
raised  or  yet  to  be  raised  within  the  limits  of  the  department.  > 

# * * * 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Western  Department, 

Columbus , Ay.,  November  23,  1861. 


General  Thompson  : I 

General  : The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  express  his  gr| 
ification  on  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch,*  and  to  say  that  he  desirj 
you  to  keep  your  command  well  in  hand,  and  to  continue  your  w 
It  New  Madrid,  with  a view  to  holding  that  point  securely  m onr  pel 
session.  He  wishes  me  to  urge  upon  you  the  necessity  of  having  tj 
slaves  now  employed  there  sent  every  evening  to  the  Tennessee  lij 
of  the  river  after  the  completion  of  their  daily  labor.  The  geneii 
wishes  you  to  keep  your  scouts  well  out. 

I am,  general,  ^ gome  one  Q.enerai  pillow’s  staff.] 


Hdqrs.  First  Division  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  New  Madrid , Mo .,  November  23,  1861. 

Col.  W.  G.  Pheelan,  _ . 

Commanding  Second  Regiment , Camp  Blanton , Mo. . 

Dear  Colonel:  Yours  of  this  morning,  by  Major  Powers,  is 
hand.t  I am  sorry  to  hear  so  bad  an  account  of  your  men,  and  noj 
that  you  will  instill  more  patriotism,  patience,  and  obedience  u 
them 5 They  are  not  suffering  more  than  any  of  the  other  regimen 
in  fact  much  less,  because  they  are  as  well  provided  for  and  axe  wit 
a few  miles  of  home,  where  they  can  hear  from  their  fam.lu»  dail 
whereas  the  brave  men  from  Gass,  Bollinger,  Ripley,  Washingto^, 
are  here,  equally  exposed  and  remote  from  their  friend f:  ' UtL  *i 
enlistment  will  now  soon  expire,  and,  in  the  reorganization,  I hope 
we  will  not  find  so  many  home-sick  men.  It  you  have  not  plentj 
wood  and  straw  where  you  are  you  might  move  a few ' m es  to  wh 

such  things  can  be  had;  but  upon  no  consideration  should  you  go 

from  the  west  end  of  the  Blanton  road  I admire  the  patr  otism  tl 
you  and  Kitchen  displayed  in  being  willing  to  sacrifi<»  your  prop 
for  the  public,  but  I cannot  compliment  either  your  disdetion  or  j 
ment  in  pressing  the  occupation  of  Bloomfield  with  ^ 8,oo  ' 
this  time.  As  soon  as  the  fort  is  completed  here  and  the  gian 


* See  Thompson  to  Pillow,  November  16,  1861,  Series  I,  Vol.  Ill,  p 
tNot  found. 


740. 


hap.  XV HI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


691 


f the  enemy  either  made  or  deferred  for  the  winter  I will  endeavor  to 
lave  troops  sent  here,  and  then,  if  I can  get  forage  and  subsistence,  I 
dll  take  the  whole  command  to  Bloomfield,  so  that  I can  drive  in  all 
mall  parties  of  the  enemy  from  the  Saint  Francis  to  Little  River  and 
ccasionally  threaten  their  strongholds  at  Cape  Girardeau  and  Iron- 
bn ; or  if  the  winter  sets  in,  so  that  troops  cannot  be  marched  from 
lie  Cape,  I may  trust  a small  force  at  Bloomfield;  but  now  it  is  eer- 
ily north  of  our  van  of  operations,  and  will  only  tempt  the  enemy 
l stead  of  intimidating  him.  You  have  certainly’ found  out  by  this 
me  that  there  are  many  tories  in  Stoddard  County,  and  the  enemy 
as  no  difficulty  in  finding  out  all  about  your  position  and  strength. 
You  can  inform  your  men  for  me  that  1 am  fighting  for  the  “ cause,” 
ad  not  for  Stoddard  County  alone,  and  that,  if  they  attempt  to  mutiny 
- desert,  it  can  but  result  to  their  injury.  I am  disposed  to  be  as 
nient  as  possible,  and  from  my  very  heart  I sympathize  with  them 
i their  hardships;  but  the  whole  country  is  now  at  stake,  and  the 
3xt  few  days  will  end  the  campaign  for  the  winter,  and  even  now  it  is 
itting  to  be  a war  of  endurance  instead  of  a war  of  guns,  and,  if  our 
en  are  to  be  withered  by  the  first  cold  breeze  and  return  from  the 
ild  the  first  windy  night,  then,  indeed,  will  the  energy  of  the  North 
Jicceed,  and  we  will  have  to  “hang  our  harp  on  the  willow  tree.” 

I will  make  every  effort  to  expedite  the  paying  off  of  the  men  and 
range  for  the  transfer  to  the  Confederate  States;  then  all  who  want 
go  home  can  do  so  and  stay  there.  I send  you  by  Major  Powers  an 
sortment  of  muster  and  pay  rolls.  The  muster  and  pay  rolls  should 
! ma(le  for  the  1st  of  November,  at  which  time  the  Confederate 
ales  commence  paying  us.  The  pay  rolls  will  embrace  the  time  up 
November  1.  I am  printing  a general  order  about  our  settlements, 
licli  will  be  out  soon.  Any  explanation  you  desire  will  be  cheer- 
ily made.  There  will  be  a large  lot  of  goods  here  in  a few  days; 
me  we  have  now.  Make  your  men  cut  lots  of  wood  and  run  large 
mp-fires.  Send  over  the  gunsmith’s  tools  which  you  have  not  issued, 
will  establish  a shop  here.  If  your  doctors  are  giving  leaves  of 
sence  to  men  who  are  not  sick,  or  if  those  who  have  recovered  do 
t return,  report  them  to  me. 

Yours,  truly, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  New  Madrid , J/o.,  November  24,  1861. 
jl.  Solon  Borland,  C.  S.  A., 

Commandant , Pocahontas , Ark. : 

3ear  Sir  : Yours  of  the  17th  instant,  by  Mr.  McDowell,  was  handed 
1 this  day,  and  it  affords  me  much  pleasure  to  accept  your  invita- 
Q and  write  to  you  upon  the  impression  I have  of  the  policy  of  the 
1 miy  at  that  time.  I really  think  that  their  whole  efforts  should  be 
; therefore  will  be)  concentrated  to  the  seaboard  and  the  immediate 
’ley  of  the  Mississippi.  They  cannot  make  their  soldiers  go  on  a 
' iter  campaign  through  a hostile  country  when  they  know  that  we 
1 rQ  the  sympathy  of  the  people  and  every  advantage.  Their  force 
’ 1 be  soldiers  who  will  come  to  stay  and  will  have  to  transport  their 
! ire  subsistence  for  a campaign,  whereas  our  forces,  to  combat  or 


692 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T. 


[Chap.  XYUL; 


out  them  off  would  require  only  a haversack  to  where  the  enemy  would  j 
rpnnire  a wajron.  There  might  be  a column  pass  from  Cape  Girardeaull 
down  to  the  end  of  the  plank  road  and  across  here,  to  endeavor  to  cutj 

down  to  tne  ena  or  F wag  taken  at  the  same  time  and  th| 

boate  o’f  the  United  States  assist  them  here  they  would  be  assuredlj 

came  in  this  evening  from  Fredericktown,  and  report  that  the  troops  I 
^nem-  v ab  gone  from  Irontou,  and  that  it  is  proposed  to  entirely 
are  near  y 8 , ,,ej ;eve  this  latter  part,  although  I thinljj 

Ss  no  rtot^Vhio°tlhne“oa8  HttXnZuntaiS^| 

M aad thus  Irontou  must  be  abandoned.  If  the  winter  is  ope. 
dcst  y , r*  -ij  witVi  niv  cavalry  and  harm  them  all  1 can. 

slUiisaSHSrS 


Jm  bSe  to  “’eland  iron,  under,”  for  I worked  op  tin.  time,  sod  wi 
“wX KX>°5£  will  bold  10,000  men,  .nd  win  bull, 

S;!rt3',SSSS— 

r'iSS  Z " "ooS  b.“pSied“  bS  from  ,00  often,  »d 
is  JSifc & In  r.  ..me  "direction,  I bop.  ~ 0.0  bare  . port. 

"Csrbi“.ir«r.?.fdSSi.. <*  ~m»»>  - 

too  long  a letter,  I remain,  jonra,  moat  THOM1?sos, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


regiment  of  dragoons,  which  i cai 


m. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  St^te  Guard, 
Camp  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  November  24,  1861—9  p. 

Rrip-  Gen  Gideon  J.  Pillow,  Columbus,  Ky.: 

Dear  General  : You  will  find  inclosed  a note  from  Major  Kalfas 


Not  found. 


693 


XV.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

ho  lias  charge  of  my  vedettes  near  the  Cairo  and  Charleston  Railroad, 
Liich  may  be  of  interest  to  you.  The  major  is  a cool-headed  man,  and 
lows  all  the  people  in  Mississippi  County,  and  probably  his  informa- 
>n  is  reliable.  If  a demonstration  is  made  for  us  on  East  Tennessee, 
can  be  but  to  return  as  speedily  as  possible  to  the  march  down  the 
unediate  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  for  the  enemy  cannot  make  a 
nter  campaign  away  from  center  means  of  transportation.  The  fort 
at  is  being  built  here,  with  the  addition  of  a strong  redoubt,  near 
e saw-mill,  will  very  completely  defend  this  place.  The  redoubts  will 
fend  the  bayou  and  from  a column  westward  toward  or  beyond  the 
minary,  to  which  point  the  fort  can  throw  shot  or  shell  without  a 
use  intervening.  The  fort  is  being  built  in  the  corn  field  just  south 
town.  It  you  do  not  get  the  Saint  Louis  newspapers  regularly,  I 
11  make  an  arrangement  to  furnish  you  from  here.  I can" get  them 
)in  Charleston. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

New  Madrid , Mo.,  November  25,  1861. 
pt.  J.  J.  Edson,  Steamboat  Ohio  Belle: 

Sir:  I have  been  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to 
uke  provision  for  moving  the  slaves  belonging  to  the  gentlemen  of 
ssouri  and  Arkansas  to  the  Tennessee  side  of  the  river  each  night  • 
1,  as  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  slaves  and  their  masters 
ould  also  have  sufficient  and  comfortable  quarters,  I conceive  it  to  be 
; duty  to  order  you  to  remain  here  until  the  case  shall  be  laid  before 
3 general  at  Columbus  and  keep  the  negroes  on  board. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  November  25,  1861. 

v.  H.  M.  Rector,  Little  Rock: 

t is  believed  to  be  the  best  policy  to  send  all  the  troops  raised  under 
uisition  from  this  Government  to  General  McCulloch.* 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN 

Secretary  of  War. 


icular.]  Headquarters  Mo.  S.  G.,  November  25,  1861. 

st.  The  Confederate  Government  proposes,  in  accordance  with  the 
1 ns  of  the  treaty  recently  made  between  this  State  and  that  Govern- 
it,  to  receive  into  its  service  as  many  troops  from  Missouri  as  may 
anteer  to  serve  for  twelve  months. 

d.  The  troops  thus  volunteering  will  be  enlisted  as  State  troops, 
remain  under  the  immediate  command  of  Major-General  Price. 

[a.  They  will  be  organized  in  conformity  to  the  laws  of  Congress  and 
regulations  for  the  Confederate  Army  as  follows : t 

1 3 Rector  to  Benjamin,  November  20,  p.  686. 


t Details  of  organization  omitted. 


694 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap.  xvn 


4th.  Election  and  appointment  of  o^cm.—Oompanj  officers  . EaJ 
company  elects  its  captain  ancl  lieutenants.  The  captain  ot  each  oot| 
mnv  selects  the  sergeants,  corporals,  musicians,  and  artificers  from  h, 
company,  and  they  receive  their  warrants  from  the  colonel  upon  his  a J 

PrEeedmental  Officers : The  commissioned  officers  of  each  regime! 
clcct,*the  colonel,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  major.  T I 

The  colonel  appoints  the  adjutant  from  the  lieutenants  ot  the  re  J 
ment,  and  the  sergeant-major  and  quartermaster-sergeant  from  til 

^The6' President  will,  upon  the  colonel’s  recommendation,  appoiil 
whenever  their  services  are  required,  an  assistant  quartermaster  ail 
assistant  commissary,  a surgeon  and  assistant  surgeon,  for  each  re  J 

m<5th.  Whenever  a sufficient  number  of  troops  shall  'c^c  becn  th  j 
enlisted  organized,  armed,  and  equipped  the  muster  rolls  will  be  sel 
to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  the  troops  will  thereby  be  transferred 
the  Confederate  Army.  The  President  will  immediately  com  missil 
the  officers  and  provide  for  and  pay  the  troops.  The  President  will  j 
the  same  time  organize  the  troops  thus  transferred  into  brigades  al 
divisions,  ov'er °whicli  he  will  appoint  brigadier-generals  and  a majJ 

Se6tli.d  TheTerm  of  service  will  begin  from  the  day  of  the  organizatil 
of  the  company  and  will  end  twelve  months  after  that  date.  I 

7th  The  officers  will  be  commissioned  in  the  Confederate^  Army  I 
their  commissions  be  dated  upon  the  day  of  their  transfer  to  till 

Se8thC<W  &c. — Until  the  troops  shall  have  been  transferred  to  tj 
Confederate  States  they  will  be  paid  by  the  f ^te-tlie  < » dei ri 
States  guaranteeing,  however,  that  they  will  be  paid.  As  soon  as  tl 
transfer  shall  have  been  made  they  will  be  paid  and  supplied  j ■ 
Confederate  States.  The  troops  in  the  Confederate  service  are  paid) 

by  tb.  Sttu  t,  the  Secretary  of  « 

C'>Tbeestcretmpay,1a  bounty  of  *39  to  every  non-eommieaioned  offlti 
and  private  who  will  enlist  in  this  service. 

9th.  Each  enlisted  man  will  receive  one  ration  a day  and  an  allc 
nr»f*p  of  $25  everv  six  months  for  clothing.  I 

Each  man  will  be  allowed  10  cents  a mile  for  his  traveling  expel \i 
from  the  place  of  his  enrollment  to  the  rendezvous,  and  also  from 
nl ace  of  his  discharge  to  the  place  where  he  was  enrolled. 

10th  The  cavalry  must  furnish  their  own  horses  and  keep 
serviceable  or  they  will  be  compelled  to  serve  on  foot.  The  non-cd 
missioned  officers  and  privates  will,  however,  be  allowed  40  cents , J 
for  the  use  of  their  horses,  to  be  computed  from  the  day  of  tbei  en 
ment  to  the  day  of  their  discharge,  and  also  foi  every  -0  nine 
travel  between  the  place  of  their  discharge  to  the  place  of  their  enr 
ment!  Horses  Ire lo  be  valued  when  brought  into  th^ervice  an 
killed  iu  action  will  be  paid  for  at  such  valuation.  They  will  not 

taken  from  the  owner  so  long  as  he  remains  m the  service  The 
mander  of  the  company  will,  however,  be  responsible  foi  thei 

keie2th8The  Confederate  States  Government  will  not  accept  any  cava 


695 


!U>.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

r twelve  months  unless  already  fully  armed  and  equipped,  and  as  the 
ate  cannot  arm  and  equip  more  than  one  regiment,  only  one  will  be 
listed. 

13th.  The  artillery  will  be  organized  as  light  batteries  and  not  as 
giments. 

14th.  The  Confederate  States  Government  will  accept  and  fully  arm 
d equip  as  many  troops  as  may  volunteer  for  the  war,  either  as  cav- 
■y,  artillery,  or  infantry. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price: 

HENRY  LITTLE, 

Col.  and  Asst.  Adj.  Gen.,  Mo.  S.  G. 


| Proclamation  to  the  People  of  Central  and  North  Missouri. 

Marshall,  Mo.,  November  26,  1861. 
Fellow-Citizens:  In  the  month  of  June  last  I was  called  to  the 
nmand  of  a handful  of  Missourians,  who  nobly  gave  up  home  and 
nfort  to  espouse,  in  that  gloomy  hour,  the  cause  of  your  bleeding  . 
mtry,  struggling  with  the  most  causeless  and  cruel  despotism  known 
ong  civilized  men.  When  peace  and  protection  could  no  longer  be 
ioyed  but  at  the  price  of  honor  and  liberty  your  chief  magistrate 
| led  for  50,000  men  to  drive  the  ruthless  invader  from  a soil  made 
fitful  by  your  labors  and  consecrated  by  your  homes. 

Co  that  call  less  than  5,000  responded;  out  of  a male  population  ex- 
Ming  200,000  men,  one  in  forty  only  stepped  forward  to  defend  with 
pir  persons  and  their  lives  the  cause  of  constitutional  liberty  and 
man  rights. 

|Mme  allowances  are  to  be  made  on  the  score  of  a want  of  military 
'anization,  a supposed  want  of  arms,  the  necessary  retreat  of  the  army 
ithward,  the  blockade  of  the  river,  and  the  presence  of  an  armed 
jl  organized  foe.  But  nearly  six  months  have  now  elapsed;  your 
ps  have  been  tilled;  your  harvests  have  been  reaped;  your  prepa- 
jions  for  winter  have  been  made;  the  Army  of  Missouri,  organized 
1 equipped,  fought  its  way  to  the  river;  the  foe  is  still  in  the  field ; 

V country  bleeds,  and  our  people  groan  under  the  inflictions  of  a foe 
i rked  with  all  the  characteristics  of  barbarian  warfare ; and  where 
v are  the  50,000  to  avenge  our  wrongs  and  free  our  country?  Had 
000  men  Hocked  to  our  standard  with  their  shot-guns  in  their  hands 
re  would  not  now  be  a Federal  hireling  in  the  State  to  pollute  our 
l.  Instead  of  ruined  communities,  starving  families,  and  desolated 
tricts,  we  should  have  had  a people  blessed  with  protection  and  with 
res  to  supply  the  wants  and  necessities  and  comforts  of  life.  Where 
those  50,000  men  ? Are  Missourians  no  longer  true  to  themselves? 
e they  a timid,  time-serving,  craven  race,  fit  only  for  subjection  to  a 
spot?  Awake,  my  countrymen,  to  a sense  of  what  constitutes  the 
J'nity  and  true  greatness  of  a free  people.  A few  men  have  fought 
ir  battles;  a few  men  have  dared  the  dangers  of  the  battle-field;  a 
: have  borne  the  hardships  of  the  camp,  the  scorching  suns  of  sum- 
Jr,  the  frosts  of  winter,  the  malaria  of  the  swamps,  the  privations 
ndent  to  our  circumstances,  fatigue,  and  hunger,  and  thirst,  often 
jhout  blankets,  without  shoes,  with  insufficient  clothing,  with  the 
a,  wet  earth  for  a bed,  the  sky  for  a covering,  and  a stone  for  a pil- 
j > glad  only  to  meet  the  enemy  on  the  field,  where  some  paid  the 


696  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Cuap.  XVI]* 

noblest  devotion  known  among  men  on  earth  to  the  cause  of  yoi 
country  and  your  rights  with  their  lives. 

But  where  one  has  been  lost  on  the  field  three  have  been  lost  by  d] 
eases  induced  by  privation  and  toil.  During  all  these  trials  we  hajj 
murmured  not ; we  offered  all  we  had  on  earth  at  the  altar  of  our  con 
mon  country — our  own  beloved  Missouri — and  we  only  now  ask  oi 
fellow- citizens,  our  brethren,  to  come  to  us  and  help  to  secure  what  J 
have  gained  and  to  win  our  glorious  inheritance  from  the  cruel  hail 
of  the  spoiler  and  the  oppressor.  Come  to  us,  brave  sons  of  Missouil 
rally  to  our  standard ! I must  have  50,000  men.  I call  upon  you  i 
the  name  of  your  country  for  50,000  men.  Do  you  stay  at  home  to  tall 
care  of  your  property?  Millions  of  dollars  have  been  lost  because  y<d 
staid  at  home.  Do  you  stay  at  home  for  protection?  More  men  hai 
been  murdered  at  home  than  I have  lost  in  five  successive  battles.  11 
you  stay  at  home  to  secure  terms  with  the  enemy?  Then,  I warn  y<| 
the  day  may  soon  come  when  you  may  be  surrendered  to  the  merca 
of  that  enemy  and  your  substance  be  given  up  to  the  Hessian  a| 
jayhawker.  I cannot,  I will  not,  attribute  such  motives  to  you,  eI 

countrymen.  ^ . J 

But  where  are  our  Southern-rights  friends?  We  must  drive  tl 
oppressor  from  our  land.  I must  have  50,000  men.  ^ow  is  the  cnJ 
of  your  fate;  now  the  golden  opportunity  to  save  the  State;  now! 
the  day  of  your  political  salvation.  The  time  of  enlistment  for  ol 
brave  band  is  beginning  to  expire.  Do  not  tax  their  patience  beyol 
endurance ; do  not  longer  sicken  their  hearts  by  hope  deferred,  ih 
begin  to  inquire,  “Where  are  our  friends?”  Who  shall  give  them  j 
answer  1 Boys  and  small  property -holders  have  in  the  main  iougl 
the  battles  for  the  protection  of  your  property,  and  when  they  as; 
“Where  are  the  men  for  whom  we  are  fighting?”  how  can  I,  how  shj 

I,  explain?  c . J 

Citizens  of  Missouri,  I call  upon  you  by  every  consideration  of  mtj 
est,  bv  every  desire  for  safety,  by  every  tie  that  binds  you  to  home  al 
country,  delay  no  longer.  u Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead.  Lea; 
your  property  to  take  care  of  itself.  Commend  your  homes  to  the  p ■ 
tection  of  God,  and  merit  the  admiration  and  love  of  childhood  a! 
womanhood  by  showing  yourselves  men,  the  sons  of  the  brave  and  irj 
who  bequeathed  to  us  the  sacred  trust  of  free  institutions.  Come  to  tl 
Army  of  Missouri,  not  for  a week  or  month,  but  to  free  your  country; 

Strike  till  each  armed  foe  expires! 

Strike  for  your  altars  and  your  fires! 

For  the  green  graves  of  your  sires, 

God  and  your  native  land ! 

The  burning  fires  of  patriotism  must  inspire  and  lead  you  or  alt 
lost ; lost,  too,  just  at  the  moment  when  all  might  be  forever  savj 
Numbers  give  strength.  Numbers  intimidate  the  foe.  Numbers  sa 
the  necessity  often  of  fighting  battles.  Numbers  make  our  arms  in 
sistible.  Numbers  command  universal  respect  and  insure  contiden 
We  must  have  men— 50,000  men.  Let  the  herdsman  leave  his  iol 
Let  the  farmer  leave  his  fields.  Let  the  mechanic  leave  his  shop.  I 
the  lawyer  leave  his  office  till  we  restore  the  supremacy  of  law.  i 
the  aspirants  for  office  and  place  know  they  will  be  weighed  in  the  D 
ances  of  patriotism  and  may  be  found  wanting.  If  there  be  any  crav- 
crouching  spirits,  who  have  not  the  greatness  of  soul  to  respond  to  t 
country’s  call  for  help,  let  them  stay  at  home,  and  let .only  the  brt 
and  true  come  out  to  join  their  brethren  on  the  tented  field. 

Come  with  supplies  of  clothing,  and  with  tents,  if  you  can  proc 


697 


r.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

m.  Como  with  your  guns  of  any  description  that  can  be  made  to 
ng  down  a foe.  If  you  have  no  arms,  come  without  them,  and  we 

I supply  you  as  far  as  that  is  possible.  Bring  cooking  utensils  and 
ious  for  a few  weeks.  Bring  blankets  and  heavy  shoes  and  extra 
l-clothing  if  you  have  them.  Bring  no  horses  to  remain  with  the 
ay  except  those  necessary  for  baggage  transportation.  We  must 
re  50,000  men.  Give  me  these  men,  and,  by  the  help  of  God,  I will 
ve  the  hireling  bands  of  thieves  and  marauders  from  the  State.  But 
lissourians  fail  now  to  rise  in  their  strength  and  avail  themselves  of 

propitious  moment  to  strike  for  honor  and  liberty,  you  cannot  say 

I I we  have  not  done  all  we  could  do  to  save  you. 

kT0U  will  be  advised  in  time  at  what  point  to  report  for  organization 
l active  service.  Leave  your  property  at  home.  What  if  it  be  taken — 
taken  ? We  have  $200,000,000  worth  of  Northern  means  in  Mis- 
ti which  cannot  be  removed.  When  we  are  once  free  the  State  will 
emnify  every  citizen  who  may  have  lost  a dollar  by  adhesion  to  the 
se  of  his  country.  We  shall  have  our  property,  or  its  value,  with 
'rest.  But,  in  the  name  of  God  and  the  attributes  of  manhood,  let 
appeal  to  you  by  considerations  infinitely  higher  than  money ! Are 
a generation  of  driveling,  sniveling,  degraded  slaves  ? Or  are  we 
a who  dare  assert  and  maintain  the  rights  which  cannot  be  surren- 
ed,  and  defend  those  principles  of  everlasting  rectitude,  pure  and 
li  and  sacred,  like  God,  their  author  ? Be  yours  the  office  to  choose 
ween  the  glory  of  a free  country  and  a just  government  and  the 
tdage  of  your  children  ! I will  never  see  the  chains  fastened  upon 
i country.  I will  ask  for  six  and  a half  feet  of  Missouri  soil  in  which 
repose,  but  will  not  live  to  see  my  people  enslaved. 

>o  I hear  your  shouts  ? Is  that  your  war-cry  which  echoes  through 
land  ? Are  you  coming  ? Fifty-thousand  men ! Missouri  shall 
re  to  victory  with  the  tread  of  a giant ! Come  on,  my  brave  boys, 
>00  heroic,  gallant,  unconquerable  Southern  men ! We  await  your 
I ling. 

STERLING  PRICE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

— 

Richmond,  Va.,  November  27,  1861. 

i.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War : 

iR:  It  will  be  unwise  to  refuse  to  receive  into  our  service  any  of  the 
ians  who  may  offer  to  enter  it.  We  have  now  in  the  service  four 
ments,  numbering  in  all  some  3,500  men,  besides  the  Seminole  troops 
other  detached  companies,  increasing  the  number  to  over  4,000. 
additional  regiment  has  been  offered  by  the  Choctaws  and  another 
be  raised  among  the  Creeks.  If  I have  the  authority  I can  enlist 
i the  malcontents  among  that  people.  I can  place  in  the  field  (arms 
ig  supplied)  7,500  Indian  troops,  not  counting  the  Comanches  and 
ges,  whom  I would  only  employ  in  case  of  an  invasion  of  the  Indian 
a try. 

lie  Indian  country  is  of  great  extent,  and  demands  to  be  defended 
inst  the  Indians  of  the  prairie  on  the  west  and  against  the  more 
tinous  marauders  of  Kansas  on  the  north.  This  might  be  an  easy 
but  the  determination  of  the  Northern  Government  not  to  permit 

0 hold  the  country  in  question  is  well  known,  and  the  spring  cam- 

1 will  be  fought  in  large  measure  for  Missouri  and  the  Indian 


698 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO., 


ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVl| 


country-  I wish  to  organize  a force  in  the  Indian  country  that  na  I 
constitute  a respectable  command.  I am  not  desirous  to  be  merely! 
general  of  Indians,  because  a force  of  3,000  or  4,000  irregular  mount# 
troops  is  only  of  value  when  sustained  by  infantry  and  artillery.  Moi| 
over,  to  hold  the  Indian  country  against  the  force  that  will  be  thro vi 
into  it  in  the  spring,  if  it  do  not  come  there  to  winter,  two  or  three  i| 
portant  points  must  be  strengthened  by  field  works,  only  to  be  coi 
structed  by  infantry,  but  which  the  Indian  rifles  will  efficiently  aid 
defending.  It  is  important  that  our  Indians  should  have  our  troops  1 1 
their  side,  that  they  may  not  conclude  tkftt  they  are  fighting  for  us  on^ 
and  not  equally  for  themselves.  „ , J 

Provisions  are  cheap  in  the  Indian  country  and  forage  and  iuel  al 
cheap.  It  is  highly  desirable  to  organize  there  such  a force  as  may  n 
only  suffice  to  defend  the  country  on  its  western  and  northern  frontieil 
but  as  may  be  able  and  ready  to  render  efficient  aid  to  the  officer  1 
whom  the  conduct  of  operations  in  Missouri  may  be  intrusted,  lo  4 
this,  I request  authority  to  receive  into  the  service  an  additional  iorU 
of  Indians,  if  they  offer  themselves  with  arms,  or  as  soon  as  1 may  hajj 


U1  AlJLULctucu  ix  txx^ v ~ 7 _ ~ n ni 

arms  for  them,  not  to  exceed,  with  those  already  m the  service,  7,51 

' « . . />  nr  J 1 ^ 4-  4-V»  r\  waotO  T1 OO  U 


men.  A part'of  this  force  1 propose  to  place  at  the  posts  near  Rl 
River,  and  at  new  posts  to  be  selected  on  the  western  and  northei 
Indian  frontier,  and  to  require  the  utmost  economy  on  the  part  ot  tn# 
quartermasters  and  commissaries.  . I 

I also  request  that  one  of  the  Arkansas  regiments  now  m the  servi 

. - 1 1.1.  „ 1 T 1-v 11  tR  111  rw  A rl  t A UAPP1 TT P 


A CllOU  1CUUCOI  ULMKV  V/O.  ° 4,  . -i  , . ^ iM 

may  be  assigned  to  my  command;  that  I be  to^recewe  J 


111 cX'  y Up  (looluiipu  ~ iri  j T 1 l 

regiment  now  being  raised  by  Col.  Frank  A.  Rector,  and  that  I be  a , 
authorized  to  receive  one  other  infantry  regiment,  to  be  commanded 
raised  by  him,  by  Charles  W.  Adams,  of  Arkansas;  this  and  the  otho 
to  be  infantry,  and  only  to  be  mustered  into  the  service  when  arm*. 
No  more  volunteers  can  be  had  in  Arkansas  unless  arms  are  furmsnl 
them,  nor  ought  the  Government  to  incur  the  expense  of  paying  aJ 
feeding  unarmed  men. 


CLLlllw  uiidi  JJULCU.  uipii*  ^ t _ -|  . 

Colonel  Rector  desires  the  regiment  he  is  raising  to  be  under  i 


command.  Mr.  Adams  can  raise  his  regiment  if  I can  procure  t| 
arms,  as  I hope  to  be  able  to  do,  and  I propose  to  receive  it  by  co^ 
panies,  and  that  the  President  then  appoint  him  colonel.  It  no  m*. 
can  be  done,  I request  permission  to  receive  three  regiments  ot  intaiil, 
by  companies,  as  each  company  presents  itself  with  arms,  or  as  I lia; 
arms  to  supply  it,  and  I also  ask  for  authority  to  receive  two  companl 
of  artillery  when  I shall  have  the  guns  to  furnish  them. 

United  with  infantry  and  artillery  the  Indians  will  prove  valual 
auxiliaries.  A force  in  the  Indian  country,  little  encumbered  w 
wagons  and  always  ready  to  move,  will  be  as  available  for  onensive 
defensive  operations  in  Kansas  or  Missouri  as  if  stationed  in  JNor 
western  Arkansas  or  wintering  in  the  valley  of  the  Arkansas  River. 

I am,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant’ALBERT  piKE? 

Brigadier-General , Provisional  Army , C.  S.  A 


November  28,  1861 


Columbus,  Ky. 

Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price, 

Missouri  State  Guard : 

General  : I avail  of  the  going  of  one  of  your  command  to  writ* 
line  to  say  I have  strengthened  this  position  until  I regard  it  as  s, 
from  any  assault  the  enemy  may  make  against  it. 


j*.  XYin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


699 


[ am  now  concentrating  here  a strong  force  and  am  fortifying  New 
idrid. 

[ have  also  at  my  disposal  the  gunboats  belonging  to  Commander 
)llins’  fleet,  so  that  we  are  getting  into  a position  to  aid  you  above. 

[ shall  be  governed  by  circumstances  as  to  my  movements,  but  feel 
it  you  should  not  allow  the  enemy  to  rest  or  move  from  Saint  Louis 
ithward. 

Che  messenger  will  give  you  further  information  as  to  details. 
iVith  my  best  wishes  for  your  success  in  your  effort  to  break  the  yoke 
the  oppressor,  I remain,  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

L.  POLK, 

Major- General,  Commanding . 


Little  Rock,  November  28,  1861. 

fferson  Davis: 

^ conspiracy  has  been  discovered  in  the  northern  part  of  this  State 
dnst  the  Confederate  Government.  Secret  oaths,  signs,  and  pass- 
es adopted.  The  intention  seems  to  be  to  join  Lincoln’s  army  if 
?ets  into  Arkansas.  Twenty-seven  men  have  been  arrested  and 
*ught  here  to-day  and  now  in  prison.  A hundred  more  will  doubt- 
I*  be  brought  in  a day  or  so.  They  say  there  are  1,700  in  the  State, 
lat  shall  be  done  with  them  ¥ I ask  your  advice  in  the  premises, 
p district  judge  is  not  here.  He  ought  to  be  at  his  post. 

H.  M.  RECTOR, 
Governor  of  Arkansas. 


Richmond,  November  30,  1861. 

g.  Gen.  Ben.  McCulloch, 

Springfield , via  Little  Bock: 

cannot  understand  why  you  withdrew  your  troops  instead  of  pur- 
ig  the  enemy  when  his  leaders  were  quarreling  and  his  army  sepa- 
id  into  parts  under  different  commanders.  Send  an  explanation. 

J.  P.  BEKJAMIK, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , December  2,  1861. 
g.  Gen.  Albert  Pike,  Richmond , Va.: 

ir:  In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  27th  ultimo,  I have  to  say  that 
: Department  makes  no  objection,  but,  on  the  contrary,  cheerfully 
mts  to  your  mustering  into  the  service  as  many  companies  or  regi- 
es of  Indians  as  you  may  be  able  to  find  arms  for;  also  two  regi- 
fls  of  infantry  and  two  companies  of  artillery  in  the  same  manner, 

: oon  as  you  can  procure  the  arms. 

o promise  can  be  made  in  advance  (none  is  ever  made)  as  to  the 
uination  of  colonel  if  the  companies  are  mustered  separately  into 
? rice.  You  will,  of  course,  understand  that  the  troops  as  proposed 
' only  be  mustered  into  service  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Depart- 
>t,  a printed  copy  whereof  I inclose  you,  calling  particular  attention 
he  following  points : 

ff.  That  we  can  at  present  furnish  no  arms,  but  will  cheerfully  pay 


700  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Cuai\  XV] 


at  a valuation  for  all  such  as  are  furnished  by  troops  who  offer  to  enl 

for  the  war.  „ ,,  . 

2d.  That  if  troops  arm  themselves  and  tender  their  services  : 
twelve  months  we  accept  them,  but  do  not  pay  for  the  arms. 

I would  not  be  willing  to  accept  the  Indians,  even  if  offered  for  1 
war,  as  it  would  be  of  little  value  to  put  them  in  camps  of  instruct! 
as  we  do  with  our  own  citizens  under  such  circumstances.  I doi 
not  the  value  of  such  a force  as  you  propose  to  raise,  and  will  be  m 
happy  to  learn  of  your  success.. 


I am,  your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN. 


DUl^i  o , 

Secretary  of  War 


Ool.  W.  G.  Pheelan,  Mo.  S.  G., 

Commanding  Second  Regiment , Camp  Blanton , J\lo.: 

Sir:  By  orders  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  the  embargo  on  all  pr 
uce  and  stock  is  removed.  You  will  therefore  let  the  people  kn 
that  they  can  ship  or  drive  their  produce  or  stock.  *011  w . or~er 
companies  of  Captains  Galbraith  and  McMurray,  belonging  to  1 
First  Regiment  of  Cavalry,  to  report  to  their  regiment  at  this  pla 
The  troops  from  Cairo  have  gone  northward  again,  and  whether  tt 
will  go  after  Price  or  stop  at  Cape  Girardeau  is  not  known.  1 
weather  is  exceedingly  bad  and  many  men  are  sick.  As  soon  a* 
hear  from  Price  I will  prepare  for  winter  quarters.  Let  me  hear  tr 
you,  and  as  soon  as  Kitchen  returns  you  had  better  come  over. 


Yours,  &c., 


M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding 


>s 


Little  Rock,  December  3,  1861 
rr^  t r>  t a atttv.  Se,c,retam  of  War: 


701 


XYin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

iting  trial.  Sixty  have  been  arrested  in  Searcy  County  and  47  in 
d.  The  citizens  have  permitted  them  to  volunteer.  A portion 
to  McCulloch,  others  to  Colonel  Borland,  commanding  at  Poca- 
as.  The  authorities  of  Arkansas  are  asked  to  approve  this  course, 
decline,  unless  sanctioned  by  yourself  or  the  President.  If  sent 
le  army  at  all,  our  opinion  is  they  should  go  south. 

H.  M.  EECTOR, 
Governor  and  President. 


Richmond,  Va.,  December  3,  1861. 

L W.  P.  Harris,  ’ 

Confederate  States  Congress: 

Y Dear  Sir:  Language  was  said  by  Talleyrand  to  be  useful  fbr 
lioncealment  of  one’s  thoughts ; but  in  our  day  it  fails  to  commu- 
te any  thought.  If  it  had  been  otherwise,  the  complaint  in  relation 
leneral  Price  of  which  you  speak  could  not  have  been  made.  The 
missioners  of  Missouri  were  informed  that  when  that  State  offered 
)S  they  would  be  organized  according  to  our  military  laws  and 
rals  would  be  appointed  for  brigades  and  divisions.  Until  then  I 
no  power  to  appoint  generals  for  those  troops.  The  same  state- 
substantially,  was  made  to  the  members  of  Congress  from  Mis- 
who  called  on  me  yesterday.  They  were  also  informed  that, 
conversation  with  informed  persons  and  from  correspondence 
on  file  in  the  War  Department,  I was  convinced  that  it  was  need- 
) the  public  interest  that  a general  should  be  sent  to  the  Arkansas 
Missouri  Division  who  had  not  been  connected  with  any  of  the 
>s  on  that  line  of  operations ; and  to  the  statement  that  the  Mis- 
| troops  would  not  fully  enlist  under  any  one  except  General 
k I asked  if  they  required  their  general  to  be  put  in  command  of 
troops  of  Arkansas,  of  Texas,  and  of  other  Southern  States.  To 
If  these  different  forces  into  harmonious  co-operation  is  a necessity. 
re  sought  to  effect  it  by  selecting  General  Heth  to  command  them 
intonation.  If  it  is  designed,  by  calling  Heth  a West  Point  Cadet, 
Ly  to  object  to  his  education  in  the  science  of  war,  it  may  pass  for 
it  is  worth;  but  if  it  be  intended  to  assert  that  he  is  without 
■ience,  his  years  of  active  and  distinguished  service  on  the  frontier 
issouri  and  the  territory  west  of  it  will,  to  those  who  examine 
e they  censure,  be  a sufficient  answer.  The  Federal  forces  are  not 
i>fter,  as  heretofore,  to  be  commanded  by  path  finders  and  holiday 
3rs,  but  by  men  of  military  education  and  experience  in  war.  The 
st  is  therefore  to  be  on  a scale  of  very  different  proportions  than 
3f  the  partisan  warfare  witnessed  during  the  past  summer  and 
I have  long  since  learned  to  bear  hasty  censure,  in  the  hope  that 
;e,  if  tardy,  is  sure ; and  in  any  event  to  find  consolation  in  the 
ance  that  all  my  ends  have  been  my  country’s. 

With  high  respect, 


JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


j Little  Rock,  December  4,  1861. 

J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Or  dispatch  of  November  30  has  been  received.  It  is  impossible 
^lain  by  telegraph.*  I ask  leave  to  go  to  Richmond  at  once  for 


See  Series  I,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  743. 


702 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvl 

that  purpose.  My  army  are  now  going  into  winter  quarters.  Rothil 
now  can  be  done  on  this  line  until  spring.  I await  answer. 

■Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^.  Mc0ULL00H< 

Brigadier- General 


Richmond,  December  5,  186ll 

General  Ben.  McCulloch,  Little  Bock : 

If  you  think  you  can  safely  leave  your  command,  you  are  authoriJ 
to  come  to  Richmond.  j p BBNJAMIN 

Secretary  of  \Vai\ 


Richmond,  Va.,  December  5,  1861 

Gov.  H.  M.  Rector,  Little  Bock : 

It  is  not  possible,  at  this  distance  and  with  imperfect  knowledge 
the  facts,  to  give  directions  about  the  parties  arrested.  You  must 
your  best  judgment  in  acting  on  the  information 

Secretary  of  Trail 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Gamp  on  Sac  Biver , December  6,  1 S6Jf| 

Brigadier-General  McCulloch, 

Or  other  Officer  Gomdg.  Confederate  Forces  in 

Forthivestern  Arkansas : 

Sir  : The  condition  of  affairs  in  this  State  is  such  that  1 must  no 
my  command  to  the  Missouri  River  at  the  earliest  pra^mablej 
Predatory  bands  of  the  enemy,  under  such  men  as  Lane,  Montgomc 
and  Jennison,  supported  by  the  United  States  forces,  are  not  only  c 
dating  the  country,  but  are  committing  the  most  barbarous  outre 
upon  the  people  of  that  region.  They  at  the  same  time  effectm 
close  the  roads  to  the  thousands  of  recruits  who  would  join  my  ai 

lf  My  advices  from  all  parts  of  the  State  satisfy  me  that  my  numlj 
would  be  indefinitely  increased  if  I could  but  open  the  way  to  the  n I 
My  own  force  is  too  small  to  effect  this  without  incurring  the  gie 
risks  Your  co-operation  would  enable  me  to  do  it  without  nst 
difficulty,  and  we  could  thereby  not  ouly  relieve  that  part  of 
State,  but  would  be  able  to  place  ourselves  m the  very  best  pt« 
for  opening  the  campaign  by  destroying  the  railroads  and  getting  j 

86 fdo)  therefore,  beg  you  to  give  me  your  instant  and  effective  co-o] 
ation  in  a movement  upon  the  Missouri  River  and  also  into  Kan 
if  yon  shall  concur  in  it.  I await  your  answer  very  anxiously. 

I inclose  you  a proclamation  t as  a sample  of  what  is  threatened 
the  enemy  upon  the  Missouri  River,  and  they  seem  to  be  carrying 
their  threats.  I 


See  Rector  to  Benjamin,  December  3,  p.  7 


00. 


t Not  found. 


(p.  XVHL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  703 

| am  transferring  the  State  troops  as  rapidly  as  I can,  and  very  suc- 
sfully,  into  the  Confederate  service. 

am,  with  the  greatest  respect,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

STERLING  PRICE, 
Major-General , Commanding  Mo.  S.  G. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Van  Buren , Ark.,  December  7,  1861. 

laeral  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  8.  Army , Richmond , Va. : 

Ieneral  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that,  having  been  left  in 
imand  of  the  division  by  General  McCulloch,  I have  established  my 
^quarters  at  this  place.  The  prevalence  of  the  small-pox  at  Fort 
jith  prevented  me  from  making  my  headquarters  there.  I have 
;en  every  possible  precaution  to  prevent  this  disease  from  entering 
division,  and  I am  happy  to  state  that  no  case  has  yet  occurred 
mg  the  troops.  The  division  is  divided  into  two  brigades — the  First, 
imanded  by  myself,  is  composed  of  five  regiments  of  cavalry  and 
independent  company;  the  Second,  commanded  by  Col.  Louis 
3ert  (whose  headquarters  are  at  Fayetteville),  is  composed  of  six 
iments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  and  a battalion  of  cavalry,  and 
3e  batteries,  two  four- gun  batteries,  and  one  complete.  My  brigade 
ow  at  its  stations  on  the  Arkansas  River  below  this  and  in  a dis- 
jce  of  60  miles.  The  companies  are  busily  engaged  in  erecting 
(s  for  winter  quarters.  The  Second  Brigade  have  gone  into  winter 
i rters  near  Fayetteville. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

james  mcintosh, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 


December  18,  1861. 

espectfully  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  In  my  opinion  this 
mand,  instead  of  being  put  into  winter  quarters,  would  be  kept  free 
a disease  by  being  ordered  to  the  field  in  Missouri,  where  it  would 
ler  good  service  to  the  cause.  Colonel  McIntosh  is  an  intelligent, 
ve  officer,  and  would  grace  the  commission  of  brigadier-general, 
mel  Hubert  is  also  a highly-intelligent  and  capable  officer.  A com- 
ition  of  the  talents  of  these  officers  as  leaders  would  doubtless  pro- 
a favorable  results. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector -General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

New  Madrid , Mo.,  December  7,  1861. 
p Gen.  M.  L.  Clark,  Mo.  S.  G.,  Richmond,  Va. : 

'ear  General:  There  has  been  a great  deal  of  dissatisfaction 
mg  the  men  you  left  here,  and  upon  the  return  of  Colonel  Ken- 
9y,  who  was  anxious  to  have  some  of  them  go  with  him,  and  on  a 
yesentation  that  you  had  accepted  a position  in  the  Regular  Army, 


704  OPERATIONS  IK  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvni 

they  determined  to  disband.  The  officers  all  seemed  willing  and  a 
ious,  and  I,  not  feeling  willing  or  disposed  to  hold  them  against  th 
desire  when  we  were  all  about  reorganizing,  gave  my  consent,  r 
yesterday  they  scattered  to  the  four  winds.  Kelly,  Peterson,  Wis| 
and  Brannon  remain  with  me.  Some  went.  Frost  and  Bower  and  tl 
majority  have  returned  to  Saint  Louis  County.  The  terms  of  enlis 
ment  of  my  men  are  expiring  each  day,  and,  as  we  have  not  been  a,b 
to  get  a single  official  order  or  instruction  as  to  the  plan  of  reorgamzh 
tiJfl  am  having  great  trouble  to  satisfy  the  men  II  you  can  throl 
any  light  upon  the  subject  I will  be  much  obliged  to  you. 

Believe  me  to  be,  yours,  most  respectfully^ ^ THOMPSON,  « 

Briaadier- General  Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

New  Madrid , Jfo.,  December  7,  1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  Gideon  J.  Pillow,  0.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ky.: 

Dear  General:  Colonel  Gantt  reached  here  last  night,  and  is  nc 
encamping  near  the  fort.  1 will  have  the  big  gnus  placed  to-day. 
am  anxiously  awaiting  the  arrival  of  Governor  Jackson  or  definite  1 
sections  about  our  reorganization.  The  terms  of  enlistment  of  r 
men  are  expiring  every  day,  and  while  there  is  so  much  suspense  mai 
desiring  to  leave  who  would  cheerfully  enlist  if  matters  could  . 
placed  right.  The  rumor  that  General  Price  has  been  superseded! 
producinl  great  dissatisfaction  and  I hope  the  report  ^ untrue.  , 
number  of  outsiders  have  been  here  recruiting  and  -my  officers  M 
been  much  annoyed.  Everything  is  reported  quiet  about  Oharlestd 
I hope  my  men  are  reporting  to  your  satisfaction. 

Yours,  respectfully,  M jBFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding l 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist, 

HiS  Oo^lnd  of  Missouri,  Richmond,  Mo  : 

Sir  • 1 have  been  most  anxiously  waiting  some  defimte  mstructic 
in  regard  to  the  expiration  of  the  terms  of  enlistment  of  the  men  n 
in  the  field  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard,  and  also  about  our  orgam;| 
tion  under  the  Confederate  States.  The  time  of  those  who  answei 
vour  call  is  fast  expiring.  In  fact  every  day  whole  companies  6 
relieved  by  expiration  of  terms,  and  as  many  shouldand  ought  to 
home,  while  others  would  come  under  -Efferent 
efficiency  of  the  force  is  decidedly  below  par.  II  the  present  oigaii 
tffin  Is  to  be  continued  in  the  field  another  proclamation  from  you 
necessary  and  if  a reorganization  is  to  be  had  or  gone  into,  it  sn 
be  done  soon  and  all  at  once  so  that  the  appeals  and  excitement 
he  used  to  better  advantage.  I can  raise  a brigade  without  any  trou 
fallowed  to  manageTt  now ; but  if  separate  companies  and  regime- 
are  allowed  to  brefk  up  and  form  at  different  times,  there  wM^^ 
enthusiasm  and  a great  falling  off  in  numbers.  S 


. XVIII.  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  705 

i sick  and  they  are  dying  by  the  wholesale.  Please  send  me  some 
jrs  on  the  subject  of  reorganization.  • 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

New  Madrid , Mo .,  December  8,  1861 — 10  a.  m. 

I.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  0.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ky. : 
ear  General  : My  dispatches  inform  me  that  two  of  my  men, 
| were  sent  to  take  posts  on  my  courier  line,  have  been  captured 
he  enemy.  Major  Kalfus  has  sent  to  you  a x>lan  and  description 
he  works  at  Cairo,  and  I am  fearful  they  were  sent  by  these  two 
, and  I notify  you,  for  fear  that  other  plans  may  be  sent  you  in 
of  those  captured.  I will  immediately  write  to  Major  Kalfus  to 
the  names  of  persons  bearing  his  dispatch  to  you.  Our  fort  is 
iy  ready. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

New  Madrid , Jib.,  December  9,  1861. 

I W.  G.  Pheelan,  Mo.  S.  G., 

Camp  Blanton , Mo. : 

| ear  Colonel  : Governor  Jackson  is  here,  and  I can  now  begin  to 
| with  some  knowledge  of  the  plan  of  reorganization.  It  is  pro- 
id  that  all  the  able-bodied  men  shall  enlist  in  the  Confederate 
jice,  and  from  among  themselves  elect  their  field  officers  up  to  the 
jnel.  The  balance  are  to  form  themselves  into  new  companies  and 
;inents  of  Missouri  State  Guard  under  the  old  law,  subject  to  be 
ed  out  at  any  time  the  Governor  may  see  fit.  Now,  I want  you  to 
(me  frankly  and  fairly  how  many  we  can  depend  upon  from  Stod- 
L County.  It  is  very  necessary  that  we  should  form  a whole  bri- 
3,  if  possible,  and,  as  the  companies  and  regiments  must  be  full,  I 
rery  anxious  to  know  what  to  rely  upon.  If  it  would  assist  in  the 
aiization,  or  you  think  more  would  be  induced  to  join,  I will  order 
four  command  over  to  this  post,  so  that  you  all  can  have  a show 
le  election  of  field  officers ; for,  if  you  remain  on  that  side  of  the 
up,  you  can  only  form  companies  and  then  will  have  to  be  attached 
ome  other  regiment,  where  the  officers  may  be  already  elected. 
3ably  it  would  be  as  well  to  form  companies  over  there,  and  then 
hem  march  here  before  the  election  of  field  officers.  This  applies 
le  cavalry  as  well  as  to  the  infantry,  and  I really  am  in  doubt  as 
ie  best  plan  to  give  you  all  a fair  show  and  satisfaction.  If  Bloom- 
could  be  left  exposed  for  a week,  without  danger  from  the  enemy, 
add  at  once  order  over  all,  to  be  paid  off  and  reorganize.  There- 
, 1 simply  repeat,  let  me  know  your  opinion  on  the  subject  as  soon 
ossible,  as  there  is  not  much  time  to  lose. 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


45  R R— VOL  Till 


706 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Cuap.  XV 


KtTJST  MlL.  HlST.,  MISSOURI  STATE  GUARD, 

Hdqrs.  1BBI  M,L-  Madridj  A[0  } DecemJ)er  9,  1861 

Mai.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  0.  8.  A.,  Columbus,  Ky. : 

Dear  General:  Governor  Jackson  reached  here  this  evem 
and  *viU  remain  with  me  a few  days  before  he  goes  upto  seejo^ 

would8 send  us^owr^^muSSing^offlce^hnmediately,  as  he  will  be  a 
To  answer  the  ten  thousand  questions  with  which  I am  now  bothe 
‘iiid  can  receive  the  companies  as  they  are  tormeci. 

Ttifnrowsed  to  christen  Fort  Thompson  to-day,  both  for the  p 

yon  are  notified  that  there  is  no  fight  down  here. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  M JEFF>  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier-General , Commandin 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  December  9,  1861 

11  Aiv  Dfar^ir  * Agreeably  to  your  request,  I beg  leave  to  state  t 
ttJfclSSto®  observations  recently  made  by  me  w! 

SsHs=ffla«BiS!|:!l 

tion,  and  still  leave  a sutncie  ,,,  , riove,rumcnt.  It  is  gener 

of  it  now  in  the  possession  of  theFederalGOT  ernme^  gdnIB 

thirty  mortar  rafts,  each  carrying  a 13-tnch  morUr,  wit 
iron  plates  finch  thick,  to  protect  TdteawuTto*™*  oe^ 

position  by  diminutive  tuS  b caliber  The  whole  espedi 

generally  carry  eleven  guns  of  large  c 1 b • manned  by  e 

will  be  thoroughly  equipped,  and  the  norma  ,. 

rienced  sailors  and  officered  by  officerswf  the  Navy.^  ^ > J 

with  the  full  intention  of  tak  g j 90  qoo  men.  I think 

to  be  their  determination,  though  it  cost  Jtywu  men. 

attack  will  be  very  tifi  d with  the  usual  field  works  on 

guns  in  position  for  a horizontal jire^ 

perienced  gunners.  The  P^ngi  S b oats  but  will  be  quite  uncer 

S IS;  a sib  i to.  t.rg.1  tor  ™h3  , 


. XVIII. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  707 

, which  may  have  the  effect  to  demoralize  green  troops.  The  want 
xperienced  officers  seems  to  he  felt  in  the  garrison, 
ort  Pillow  is  a place  of  much  greater  natural  strength  than  Coluin- 
, and  the  batteries  are  well  constructed  and  well  located.  Some 
y guns  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  almost  auy  point  of  the  river 
lin  range.  * 

did  not  see  the  works  on  the  land  front,  but  was  informed  that 
j were  well  placed  and  very  extensive,  requiring  a large  garrison, 
present  garrison  of  Fort  Pillow  is  insufficient  to  man  the  guns  on 
river  front  for  any  protracted  engagement. 

look  upon  this  place  as  one  of  great  importance.  Should  boats  be 
‘ to  get  past  Columbus  they  could  be  very  effectually  stopped  here. 
5 not  so  much  exposed,  or  at  least  the  main  batteries  are  not,  to  a 
tar  fire,  and  it  would  form  an  excellent  rallying  point  to  any  troops 
^ might  meet  with  a reverse  in  front.  It  ought  to  be  commanded 
in  experienced  and  scientific  officer  and  kept  well  provisioned. 

Ttli  regard  to  affairs  in  Missouri,  General  Price  has  advanced 
ard  Sedalia  and  issued  a proclamation  calling  for  50,000  men.  It 
apposed  that  he  will  obtain  them.  If  he  does,  he  ought  of  course 
lake  a demonstration  toward  Saint  Louis,  in  order  to  retain  there 
nich  as  possible  of  Halleck’s  force,  and  at  the  same  time  he  ought 
ill  means  to  attack  and  take  Fort  Leavenworth,  which  contains 
dies  of  every  kind  sufficient  to  winter  his  army,  and  which  are 
nated  by  those  who  transported  them  to  be  worth  $8,000,000. 
ing  taken  Fort  Leavenworth,  and  destroyed  the  Hannibal  and 
it  Joseph  Railroad  before  he  did  so,  he  could  then  with  that  force 
ip  down  through  Kansas  and  exterminate  the  jay  hawking  bands 
/ane  and  Montgomery,  which  he  could  easily  do,  as  he  would  then 
3 them  between  two  fires. 

7 very  prompt  and  energetic  action,  such  as  he  has  heretofore 
bited,  it  is  not  impossible  that  Halleck’s  great  expedition  might  be 
lyzed  ; but  to  do  this  he  must  have  a large  force,  and  to  obtain  this 
“s  been  necessary  for  him,  in  the  proclamation  referred  to,  to  confess 
iresent  weakness. 

hen  we  look  at  the  great  necessity  that  exists  for  troops  in  this 
ition  it  seems  impossible  that  the  recent  movement  of  troops  from 
theater  to  Arkansas  can  be  justified. 

leed  not  tell  you  that  to  lose  Memphis  now  would  be  to  lose  the 
t of  the  Southwestern  States  of  the  Confederacy.  To  prevent  this 
necessary  that  those  States  should  strain  every  nerve  to  re-enforce 
Pillow  and  Columbus  and  that  speedily  and  at  the  same  time 
pthing  now  possible  should  be  done  to  give  heart  and  hope  to  the 
le  of  Missouri. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

H.  M.  FROST. 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  December  11,  1861. 

r-General  Polk  : 

^ ar  Sir  : I have  deferred  writing  a few  days  to  learn  something  of 
ountry  and  of  my  duties  here. 

e fort  is  nearly  completed.  Is  not  so  large  as  I anticipated ; only 
mcient  size  to  contain  buildings  for  a magazine  and  commissary 
s and  quarters  for  about  two  infantry  and  two  artillery  companies, 
than  this  would  be  dangerous,  since  in  case  of  fire  the  soldiers 


708 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap. 


XV] 


would  be  compelled  to  abandon  the  fort.  I have  selected  a spot  jij 
below,  immediately  on  the  bank  of  the  river  and  facing  the  sally-p| 
or  entrance  of  the  fort,  for  the  construction  of  barracks  for  my  co> 
mand  Have  engaged  the  lumber,  and  can  have  them  built  in  a wet, 
It  is  the  best,  I think,  that  can  be  done.  The  position  is  out  of  the  wl 
of  the  guns,  cannot  be  flanked  by  the  enemy,  and  could  afford  him  * 
cover  in  advancing  upon  the  fort.  Shall  I go  on  and  build  them  . I 
It  occurs  to  me  that  another  fort  like  this— a bastion — built  high 
up  the  river,  at  a point  where  an  impassable  swamp  comes  well -nil 
up  to  New  Madrid,  would  be  advisable.  It  would  command  all  i 
weak  points  not  covered  by  the  guns  of  this  fort,  and  the  two,  prope* 
controlled,  would  render  this  a very  strong  point.  . J 

I fear  that  only  a few  of  General  Thompson’s  forces  can  be  lndud 
to  re-enlist  now/  This  will  leave  us  here  almost  alone,  and  that  m 
few  davs.  The  enemy  are  not  ignorant  of  this.  It  is  useless  to  d 
they  are  not  advised  of  matters  here.  These  facts  lead  me  to  cl 
elude  that  we  stand  in  immediate  need  of  additional  forces  here.  II 
regiment  at  Island  No.  10— Colonel  Smith’s— might,  I think,  be  si 
here,  as  that  point  could  not  be  attacked  except  by  way  of  this  placd 
down  the  river.  I can  send  forthwith  for  the  guns  I have  below  sj 
arm  them.  Besides  this,  these  troops  need  drilling  and  rigid  disciplij 
the  requirements  of  the  service  having  kept  them  heretofore  isolatl 
Logan’s  battalion  from  Arkansas  will  soon  reach  Columbus.  It  is  rail 
under  the  order  I obtained  from  you  a few  weeks  since.  Could  it  I 
be  ordered  liereJ?  If  allowed  a preference,  they  would  come,  ltl 
armed.  Colonel  Terry’s  Arkansas  command,  just  organized,  it  j 
otherwise  disposed  of, ‘'might  be  sent  here,  I sent  messengers  to 
kansas  for  a cavalry  regiment,  with  instructions  to  report  to  you 
Columbus.  I fear  it  has  gone  into  service  elsewhere.  I can  soon  h\ 
one  organized  and,  I think,  armed,  yet  not  in  time  to  meet  the  eu 
gency  just  upon  us.  Unless  General  Thompson’s  cavalry  re-enlist 
shall  be  without  this  arm  of  the  service.  Such  a possibility , which  1 11 
is  a probability,  needs  no  comment,  , . f J 

Assistant  quartermaster  and  commissary  for  the  Confederate  for 
here  are  indispensable.  The  Missouri  Militia  are  better  m march 
and  fighting  than  in  army  detail.  I think  it  would  be  to  the  lntered 
the  Confederacy  to  get  accounts  as  little  confused  with  them  as  po| 
ble  Their  facilities  are  fewer,  and  they  necessarily  pay  more  tor  s 
plies  than  Confederate  officers.  In  obedience  to  your  instructions,  I 
quartermaster  and  commissary  of  my  regiment,  who  are  both  Conj 
erate  bonded  officers,  are  acting  as  post  officers  for  the  Confedet 
forces  here.  About  $3,000  placed  in  their  hands  now  would  ein 
them  to  open  a running  account  for  supplies,  forage,  &c.  Wecan 
chase  pork  at  6,  beef  at  5,  and  corn  at  4o  cents.  These  officers  nil 
be  of  service  in  procuring  supplies  for  Columbus.  They  are  ene  gj 

and  competent  business  men.  f r 

The  fort  is  a half  mile  from  town  and  2 or  3 miles  fiom  Geu 
Thompson’s  command.  While  he  and  his  command  are  gaUantoflu 
and  soldiers,  and  while  he  as  a brigadier  and  his  staff  as  officers^ 
in  my  opinion,  highly  essential  to  the  success  of  our  cause  in  Mist 
yet  in  matters  of  discipline  and  drdl,  of  defense  and  fortification, 
all  those  things  which  pertain  to  the  efficient  and  thorough  o, 
ization  of  our  army,  they  are  somewhat  careless  I cannot ; heir 
iug  that  the  responsibility  of  matters  connected  with  the  tort 
rest  upon  me.  I would  feel  better  satisfied  to  take  command  ot 
fort  at  once  and  report  to  General  T.  as  commandant  of  the  po 


XVI1I.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  709 

Id  be  entirely  agreeable  to  him,  I feel  sure.  I make  this  sugges- 
above  because  I am  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  a regulated 
disciplined  force  for  the  task  assigned  us.  As  it  is,  there  is  an  ar- 
ry  company  and  my  command  belonging  to  the  fort,  but  each  inde- 
dent of  the  other,  and  both  at  sea  as  to  orders,  drill,  regulations,  &c. 
tie  ammunition  for  the  guns  sent  from  Columbus  not  received.  Cap- 
Stewart  will  forward  a requisition  for  what  is  necessary,  which  we 
tit  to  have  as  early  as  practicable. 

matters  here  were  under  your  eye  directly,  or  your  knowledge  of 
a did  not  have  to  come  through  channels  necessarily  and  unavoid- 
imperfect,  I should  not  have  made  the  suggestions  above,  and  do 
nth  diffidence,  for  I am  aware  that  it  requires  nice  discrimination 
eep  in  the  bounds  of  propriety  in  such  matters,  and  hope  to  be  par- 
3d  for  anything  I may  have  said  amiss. 

egretting  the  length  of  this  letter  and  promising  brevity  hereafter, 
i,  yours,  &c., 

E.  W.  GANTT, 

Commanding  Twelfth  Arkansas  Regimen * 


Little  Verdigris,  December  11,  1861. 

James  McIntosh, 

Commanding  McCulloch’’ s Division , &c. : 
dlonel  : Yours  of  the  1st  instant,  by  Major  Clark,  is  at  hand, 
mel  Sims7  effective  command  is  with  me,  and  will  go  into  winter 
cters  as  soon  as  the  state  of  affairs  in  this  country  will  permit.  Day 
re  yesterday  we  had  a battle  with  Hopoeithlayohola’s  forces,  about 
0 strong,  and  a part  of  Colonel  Drew’s  regiment  of  Cherokees,  who 
rted  in  a body  the  night  before  and  went  over  to  the  enemy.  Col- 
Drew  and  about  70  men  joined  me.  This  disaffection,  I fear,  is 
i-spread  in  the  Cherokee  Nation,  and  instead  of  withdrawing  troops, 
absolutely  necessary  to  have  additional  white  force.  I hope  you 
send  Colonel  Young’s  regiment  immediately  to  support  Col.  Stand 
ie  or  take  post  at  or  near  Fort  Gibson.  Col.  Stand  Watie,  if  hard 
sed,  will  fall  back  to  that  point.  The  true  men  among  the  Chero- 
must  be  supported  and  protected  or  we  shall  lose  the  Indian  Ter- 

*y- 

Respectfully, 

DOUGLAS  H.  COOPER, 
Colonel , C.  8.  Army , Commanding  Indian  Department. 

am  nearly  out  of  provisions  and  ammunition,  and  shall  fall  back 
u the  Arkansas  slowly  to  mouth  of  Verdigris.  The  battle  com- 
ced  about  1 o’clock  and  lasted  until  the  darkness  compelled  me  to 
draw  my  men  from  the  creek  bottom.  Next  morning  the  enemy 
disappeared.  Their  loss  was  very  heavy. 


Headquarters, 

Pocahontas , Ark.,  December  11,  1861. 
eral  A.  Sidney  Johnston, 

Commanding  Western  Department , Bowling  Green , Ky. : 

Jeneral:  Since  my  letter  of  the  27th  ultimo, * concerning  insurrec- 


Not  found. 


710 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  X\j 


tionary  movements  in  Izard  County  and  other  portions  of  this  St 
the  expedition,  consisting  of  two  companies  of  infantry  , which,  as  1 1 
informed  you,  would  he  sent  to  aid  in  suppressing  those  moveme: 
has  performed  that  duty  and  returned.  As  I had  anticipated 
troubles  in  that  quarter  were  found  to  be  less  serious  than  they  J 
been  represented  to  me,  though  they  were  sufficiently  so  to  reqi 
prompt  attention.  By  the  time  my  expedition  arrived  at  the  seen 
these  troubles  the  loyal  citizens  of  the  several  neighborhoods  had 
ganized  themselves  into  companies  of  Home  Guards  tor  their  own  ] 
tection,  and  had  so  far  regained  the  ascendancy  as  to  leave  but  li 
more  for  the  force  I bad  sent  to  their  assistance  than  to  aid  in  coll 
ins:  the  prisoners  who  were  taken  or  had  voluntarily  given  themsel 
up  As  well  as  I can  learn,  some  40  of  these  prisoners  had  alre 
been  sent  to  Little  Bock  and  some  75  or  80  more  were  confined  m 
iails  of  the  different  counties.  Besides  these,  my  returning  torcc 
ceivedthe  surrender  of  57  prisoners  and  brought  them  to  this  pi 
for  my  disposal.  Upon  inquiring  into  the  character  and  antecedji 
of  those  57  men,  I do  not  find  that  any  of  them  have  been  guilt, I 
such  overt  acts  of  disloyalty  as  would  warrant  any  severity  of  punl 
ment.  The  most  of  them  are  ignorant  men;  and  although  they  a 
continued  to  be,  ever  since  the  accession  of  Arkansas  to  the  boutli 
Confederacy,  Union  men,  in  their  associations,  at  least,  it  not  m tj 
real  sentiments  and  decided  connections,  yet  they  are  not  founcl 
have  engaged  in  any  act  of  open  disloyalty  to  our  Government,  I 
most  of  them,  moreover,  declare  their  innocence  ot  any  such  internal 
alleging  that  if  they  have  done  wrong  at  all  m this  respect  they 
been  misled  by  others,  who  have  made  their  escape  from  the  coun 
and  in  evidence  of  their  present  sincerity  and  their  desire  to  prove  t 
loyalty  to  the  South  they  have  all  voluntarily  taken  the  oath  ot  all 
ance,  and  earnestly  insist  upon  being  permitted  to  enter  the  mill! 

service  in  some  of  our  companies.  , , , , j 

In  view  of  this  state  of  facts,  and  believing  that  it  will  be  both 
and  useful  to  the  public  interest,  I have  granted  permission  for  j 
of  them  as  may  be  found  suitable  in  other  respects  to  be  receive 
recruits  into  the  several  companies ; suitable  arms  for  their  use  M 
furnished  by  the  country  people.  Such  of  them  as  may  be  found  « 
for  the  military  service  and  are  yet  unwilling  to  return  home,  as  al 
them  are,  will  be  disposed  of  in  the  most  useful  and  economical  i 
as  mechanics,  teamsters,  &c.,  as  opportunity  may  oiler. 

From  the  best  information  I can  get,  the  prompt  and  decided  s 
which  have  been  taken  in  this  case,  especially  m the  matter  ot  fl 
ing  the  leaders  entirely  from  the  Slate  and  removing  so  many  of 
rank  and  file  from  the  disaffected  neighborhoods,  have  had  the . e 
to  crush  the  insurrectionary  movement  m all  its  material  elements, 
leave  little  more  to  be  done  in  respect  to  it  than  to  exercise  oi  In 
vigilance  and  discretion  for  a few  weeks  or  months  to  come  in  qu 
the  public  mind  in  those  neighborhoods  where  these  troubles  liav 
isted.  This  I shall  endeavor  to  do,  m co-operation  with  the  btati 

^In  the  hope  that  what  I have  done  in  this  case  will  meet  you} 
proval,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectoBy^y ^™^LAND, 

Colonel,  Commands 


711 


iap.  XYITI  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Camp  New  Madrid, 
December  13,  1861 — 10  a.  in. 
iCaj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  Columbus , Ky.: 

Dear  General  : I inclose  you  a letter  from  the  captain  of  my  scout 
ear  Charleston,  which  is  rather  discouraging,  compared  with  the  events 
l the  evening  before.  My  men  attacked  them,  the  enemy,  before,  and 
nought  in  2 men,  5 muskets,  15  blankets,  &c.;  but  they  paid  me  for  it 
st  night.  Unless  something  unexpected  transpires  between  now  and 
iglit,  I intend  to  take  a moonlight  ride  after  them  myself  and  hope 
len  to  give  a good  account  of  them. 

Governor  Jackson  will  go  on  the  first  boat  to  Memphis  to  get  his 
anily,  and  will  probably  go  direct  from  there  to  see  General  Johnston. 
I send  you  also  a letter  taken  from  one  of  the  prisoners.  It  is  ru- 
ored  here  that  Colonel  Bowen  is  having  a fight.  As  soon  as  my  little 
mnon  arrive  I will  test  their  virtue  on  the  enemy. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

[Inclosnres.] 

East  Prairie,  December  12,  1861. 

eneral  Jeff.  Thompson: 

Dear  General  : I received  yours  of  the  11th,  and  in  reply  can  say 
at  we  are  still  keeping  a sharp  lookout.  The  Northerners  were  out 
‘sterday  scouting  the  country  west  of  Charleston  as  far  as  Bertrand, 
ley  took  12  citizens  prisoners  in  that  vicinity,  and  they  came  in  cou- 
nt with  our  pickets,  6 in  number ; 4 at  one  place,  which  they  captured, 
e other  2 at  another  place,  and  made  figbt,  and  succeeded  in  killing 
Northerner,  slightly  wounding  another,  and  killing  1 horse,  and  made 
eir  escape  into  the  swamp.  Their  forces  amounted  to  200  cavalry 
id  about  the  same  of  infantry.  The  infantry  was  left  at  Charleston 
tdlst  the  cavalry  scouted.  They  say  they  know  that  Jeft*.  Thompson 
in  the  neighborhood  with  at  least  150  men,  and  tell  the  citizens  if 
ey  don’t  tell  where  they  are  that  they  will  burn  the  town  (Charles- 
n)  and  destroy  the  property  of  all  who  harbor  them.  They  say  they 
e going  to  scout  the  country  out  or  run  us  out  of  it.  They  all  went 
tck  to  the  Point  last  evening  except  one  company  of  cavalry,  which 
d their  horses  at  Charleston  and  started,  with  orders  to  go  to  Shelly’s 
ridge  and  thence  to  East  Prairie.  I have  not  heard  of  them  since. 

I send  you  a man  who  says  he  lives  at  Cook’s  farm,  below  Belmont, 
id  was  taken  on  the  Madrid  and  Charleston  road,  8 miles  south  of 
larleston,  and  inquiring  for  some  mill,  where  he  could  get  to  work, 
aving  no  pass,  telling  a crooked  story,  I thought  best  to  send  him  to 

mp. 

Yours,  truly,  &c., 

CHARLES  P.  PRICE, 

Captain  Co.  D,  First  Beg.  Cav .,  First  Div .,  Mo.  8.  G. 


r.  Polk: 

Sir  : I have  just  returned  from  Saint  Louis,  arid  I learned  that  they 
ve  chartered  40  steamboats,  to  be  at  Cairo  on  the  10th  of  this  month ; 
it  the  river  is  so  low  that  they  cannot  get  all  of  their  gunboats  down, 
rey  will  have  some  twelve  or  thirteen  gunboats  and  three  hundred 
ms,  and  they  say  they  can  take  Columbus  with  40,000  men  most  easy. 


712 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO., 


ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


They  will  come  down  to  you.  I think  they  will  have  seventy-five  re 
mentis  or  more.  They  haven’t  over  6,000  at  Camp  Holt.  I don’t  low 
how  many  guns  they  have  there  and  at  Bird’s  Point.  I don’t  know, 
they  won’t  let  me  go  to  their  cannon.  I think  I will  be  able  to  go  wh< 

I please  soon.  . 

I will  get  more  information  soon.  They  are  close  after  me  at 

time.  You  must  excuse  me. 


tl 


Headquarters  Division, 
Van  Buren , Arh. , December  14,  1861 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  G.  S.  Army , Richmond , \ a. : 

General:  I have  to-day  received  a communication  from  Maj 
General  Price,  commanding  the  Missouri  State  Guard,  asking  my 
operation  with  him  in  his  proposed  march  to  the  Missouri  Kiver, 
herewith  inclose  my  answer.  The  facility  with  which  the  enemy  coi 
concentrate  a force  on  the  Missouri  Kiver  renders  such  a project 
this  season  of  the  year  almost  madness.  In  a very  short  time  it  i 
be  nearly  impossible  for  wagons  or  artillery  to  move  over  the  Missoi 

roads.  , ^ , 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  McI^TOSHj 

Colonel,  Commanding 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Division, 

Van  Buren , Arlc.,  December  14,  1861 

Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  ,r.  . . 

Commanding  Mo.  S.  G.,  Camp  on  Sac  River , Missoni  i . 

General  : Y our  communication,  dated  the  6th  instant,  has  j ust  bel 
received.  After  General  McCulloch  ordered  the  troops  of  this  dim 
into  winter  quarters,  some  at  Fayetteville  and  some  on  the  Arkan: 
River,  he  started  for  Richmond,  leaving  the  command  with  me. 
the  same  day  I received  your  communication  a call  for  aid  came  in 
General  Cooper,  commanding  the  Indian  Department,  who  had  j 
had  another  battle  with  Hopoeithlayohola,  and  was  falling  back,  bo 
of  the  Indian  regiments  were  disaffected,  and  nearly  an  entire  regimi 
had  deserted  to  the  enemy.  Under  these  circumstances  I have  be 
compelled  to  send  three  regiments  to  his  assistance.  , 

I am  endeavoring  to  make  the  troops  now  in  this  division  as  effect, 
as  possible,  in  anticipation  of  a call  from  the  Mississippi  River.  A 
phis  is  menaced,  and  a call  has  been  made  on  the  neighboring  Sta 
for  assistance.  The  fall  of  Memphis  would  be  disastrous  in  theextre 
to  our  cause.  Under  all  these  circumstances,  the  want  ot  man}  css 
tials,  the  want  of  warm  clothing  for  our  Southern  tr°o^s,  and,  m 
over,  the  great  distance  to  be  traveled  in  the  depth  of  winter  over 
bleak  prairies  of  Missouri,  I feel  compelled,  although  reluctantly 
decline  to  co  operate  with  you  in  your  proposed  march  to ■ the  Mis® 
Rive*.  Hitherto  whenever  we  have  co-operated,  and  I hav  e bad  a v 
in  the  matter,  it  has  always  been  to  move  forward 
satisfied  that  nothing  but  disaster  would'  attend  a l 

now.  Did  I think  the  good  of  my  country  permitted  this  mo\  e notbi 


r.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  713 

aid  give  me  greater  pleasure  tlian  to  march  to  the  aid  of  men  so  gal- 
Ltly  battling  for  their  country  and  their  homes. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  MCINTOSH, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Van  Burenj  Ark .,  December  14,  1861. 

jneral  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  1 have  just  received 
h inclosed  communication*  from  Colonel  Cooper,  commanding  the 
ices  in  the  Indian  Department.  In  answer  to  his  call  for  aid  I have 
it  seven  companies  of  Young’s  regiment,  five  companies  of  Greer’s 
;iment,  and  Major  Whitfield’s  battalion  of  three  companies.  I have 
o countermanded  the  order  calling  Sims’  regiment  into  winter 
irters,  and  ordered  him  to  report  to  Colonel  Cooper.  With  this 
ce  I think  Colonel  Cooper  will  be  able  to  march  against  Hopoeith- 
! ohola  with  a certainty  of  success.  I have  advised  him  as  soon  as 
s force  is  concentrated  to  march  at  once  and  use  his  utmost  efforts 
destroy  the  enemy.  Hopoeithlay ohola  has  now  2,500  men,  and 
|)bably  more  will  join  him  unless  lie  is  soon  overthrown.  Drew’s 
;iment  of  Cherokees  has  disbanded,  the  greater  number  going  over 
the  enemy.  Hopoeithlayohola  is  undoubtedly  securing  assistance 
m Kansas. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  MCINTOSH, 

Colonel , Commanding . 


Headquarters  of  Division, 

Van  Buren , Ark. , December  15,  1861. 

ueral  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  8.  Army , Richmond,  Va.: 

Ieneral  : I have  the  honor  to  apply  to  be  removed  from  this  sec- 
i a of  the  country  after  the  return  of  General  McCulloch,  or,  if  he  does 
c return,  after  I am  relieved  from  the  command  of  this  division.  In 
mean  time  I will  use  every  possible  means  to  organize  the  different 
1 wtments  of  the  division  and  to  render  the  troops  as  efficient  as  the 
mmstances  will  permit.  It  is  well  known  to  you  that  as  soon  as  I 
1 igned  from  the  Federal  service  I hastened  to  Montgomery,  and  laid 
► ore  the  Department  the  necessity  of  organizing  a force  to  operate 
i*e,  and  I volunteered  for  service.  I had  hoped  that  a position  would 
ire  been  assigned  me,  giving  me  some  command,  but,  notwithstand- 
i my  disappointment,  I cheerfully  came  out  as  the  adjutant-general 
» the  officer  assigned  to  duty  here,  and  labored  faithfully  and  under 
iny  difficulties  to  form  an  army.  During  the  period  I acted  as  adju 
ut-general  the  command  of  several  different  regiments  was  offered 
-me.  At  length  I accepted  one,  and  led  it  through  the  bloody  field 


See  of  December  11,  p.  709. 


714  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV" 

of  Oak  Hills.  My  election  of  colonel  was  confirmed  by  tlie  Depa 
ment.  Since  the  battle  of  Oak  Hills  I have  for  a great  part  of  1 
time  commanded  the  advance  guard  of  our  little  army,  and  I am  nai 
to  say  at  least  won  the  confidence  of  the  people  of  this  State.  I do  ] 
think  any  battle  of  importance  will  be  fought  during  the  next  y 
west  of  the  Mississippi  River.  Probably  none  other  than  a guern 
war  will  be  kept  up.  I therefore  desire  and  respectfully  apply 
service  where  the  tug  of  war  will  be,  and  where  I can  be  of  more  se 
ice  than  here.  Moreover,  I desire  to  be  nearer  the  Department,  whe 
if  I am  fortunate,  I may  at  least  be  heard,  and  have  the  same  chan) 
that  many  of  the  regular  officers  of  the  Army,  younger  in  rank  tl 
myself,-  have  had,  and  rise  at  least  to  their  level.  I hope  my  requl 
will  be  granted. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

veiy  P 3,  3 JAMES  McINTOSH, 

Colonel , Commanding 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  near  Osceola , December  16,  18611 

The  President  op  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  : The  Hon.  William  A.  Harris  will  present  this  letter  to  y 
and  will  also  make  known  to  Your  Excellency  the  present  condition 
affairs  in  this  State.  I have  particularly  instructed  him  to  endeavoi 
impress  upon  you  the  importance  of  the  instant  and  active  co-opo 
tion  of  the  Confederate  forces  in  Northwestern  Arkansas  with  tl 
army.  I have  repeatedly  assured  your  Government  that  such  coj 
eration  would  enable  me  to  take  and  maintain  possession  ot  tin? 
fourths  of  the  State  and  to  gather  around  me  at  least  50,000  recru! 
These  cannot  come  to  me  in  the  present  condition  of  the  State.  M| 
of  them  are  compelled  to  stay  at  home  to  give  whatever  protect! 
they  can  to  their  families  against  the  armies  and  marauding  gail 
which  are  laying  waste  and  desolating  the  State;  and  thousands  \1 
would  gladly  join  the  army,  if  they  could  get  to  it,  are  prevented  li 
doing  so  by  the  extension  of  the  enemy’s  fines  across  the  State  j| 
their  occupation  of  every  approach  to  the  army.  All  that  I can 
under  the  circumstances  is  to  occupy  the  most  threatening  positi 
which  I can  dare  to  assume,  so  as  to  hold  in  check  the  greatest  ] 
sible  number  of  the  enemy  and  so  prevent  them  from  being  employ 
against  us  elsewhere.  It  is  this  consideration  which  leads  me  to  a 
my  present  position,  which  is  one  of  the  greatest  peril. 

I hope  that  Your  Excellency  will  be  pleased  to  order  the  Contedei 
forces  in  Northwestern  Arkansas  to  co-operate  with  me,  and  to  d 
immediately.  I fear  that  our  cause  in  Missouri  may  otherwise  becc 
desperate.  The  enemy  are  not  only  laying  waste  those  parts  ot 
State  which  are  liable  to  fall  into  our  possession  or  which  are  occui 
by  our  friends,  but  they  openly  declare  that  no  crops  shall  be  s 
which  can  possibly  fall  into  our  hands.  It  is  altogether  important  t 
this  work  of  ruin  and  devastation  should  be  speedily  arrested, 
present  winter  is  the  most  favorable  season  for  operations,  and  I ass 
you  that  nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  complete  success  but  the  w 
of  co-operation  between  the  Confederate  and  State  forces. 

Mr.  Harris  will  present  my  views  and  wishes  more  fully  and  pan 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  715 

irly  than  I can  write  them,  and  I commend  him  to  your  fullest  confi- 
ence. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  greatest  respect,  Your  Excellency’s 
bedient  servant, 

STERLING  PRICE, 
Major-General , Commanding  Mo.  S.  G. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Van  Buren , Arlc.,  December  16,  1861. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  8.  Army , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : Since  my  communication  of  day  before  yesterday  I have 
eard  more  of  the  disaffection  of  the  Cherokees  and  of  the  rapidly-in- 
ceasing  force  of  Hopoeithlayohola,  the  Creek  chief.  I have  deemed 
le  troubles  there  of  sufficient  importance  to  send  additional  force,  and 
ill  myself  take  command  and  march  against  Hopoeithlayohola.  I 
tart  to-morrow,  and  will  march  with  upwards  of  2,000  men.  With 
lis  force  and  Colonel  Cooper’s  I hope  soon  to  settle  matters  in  the 
ation.  * 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  MCINTOSH. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  New  Madrid , Mo.,  December  16,  1861. 

[aj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  C.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ky. : 

Dear  General  : I would  be  pleased  if  you  would  send  down  a 
jLUstering  officer  as  soon  as  possible,  with  such  instructions  as  you  may 
e pleased  to  give  him,  in  regard  to  the  matter  upon  which  I conversed 
ith  you  a few  days  since.  I would  draw  your  attention  again  to  the 
ict  that  a transfer  and  reorganization  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard  is 
pt  like  the  formation  of  new  companies,  from  the  fact  that  many  cap- 
|iins  who  cannot  probably  produce  more  than  40  or  50  men  to  the 
jiustering  officer  may  have  absent  on  leave,  or  sick,  or  on  duty  more 
jian  enough  to  make  a full  company.  Therefore  I would  ask  that  you 
ould  either  allow  the  mustering  officer  or  myself  a u margin,”  when 
om  known  circumstances  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  a full  com- 
any  will  be  raised. 

My  instructions  arrived  this  evening  from  Major-General  Price,  and 
b has  been  pleased  to  approve  of  my  conduct  during  the  past  six 
I onths,  and  desires  us  to  enter  the  Confederate  service  as  soon  as 
hssible,  and  the  eloquent  appeals  which  appear  in  his  Camp  Journal 
| ill  certainly  have  great  weight  in  inducing  men  to  re-enlist. 

Many  of  my  men  are  anxious  to  return  home  for  a short  time,  and, 
j»r  fear  of  the  weather  preventing  their  return  in  time,  it  would  be  well 
I you  could  station  another  regiment  here,  even  though  it  be  one  of 
|ie  unarmed  regiments.  They  could  assist  in  building  such  fortifica- 
jOns  as  you  may  desire  to  build  here.  I have  discovered  by  experi- 
pce  that  we  cannot  work  the  negro  and  our  kind  of  soldiers  on  the 
ime  work  at  the  same  time;  and,  as  the  number  of  negroes  which  I 

* See  operations  in  the  Indian  Territory,  November  19,  1861-J  unuary  4, 1862,  pp.  4-63. 


716  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  xvm 


have  been  able  to  collect  in  this  county  is  so  small,  I ordered  them 
all  sent  home  this  evening,  and  more  soldiers  detailed  for  to-morrowl 
Smith’s  regiment,  at  Island  No.  10,  could  be  profitably  employed  herd 
and  Colonel  Gantt  is  anxious  to  have  them. 

A scouting  party  of  the  enemy  (some  hundred  or  more)  came  across 
Jones’  Ford  from  Commerce  last  night,  and  captured  several  citizen, 
and  some  of  my  men,  who  were  at  home.  They  immediately  returne| 
to  Commerce  or  Cape  Girardeau.  I have  not  yet  taken  my  moonligbl 
ride  as  none  of  the  enemy  are  out  of  Bird’s  Point,  and  my  scouts  saj 
they  are  expecting  an  attack  hourly  at  that  point.  1 

Hoping  that  you  will  send  a mustering  officer,  or  send  me  authority 
to  act,  I am,  yours,  most  respectfully,  ^ ^ THOMPSOK? 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding.  I 


Richmond,  Va.,  December  20,  1861. 


General  Sterling  Price, 

Commanding  Missouri  Forces: 

My  Hear  General  : I have  received,  with  much  pleasure,  you 
letter  of  the  10th  ultimo,1 * with  the  inclosed  correspondence.  It  wa 
not  needed  to  make  me  appreciate  the  difficulties  and  embarrassment1! 
under  which  you  have  labored  nor  the  sacrifices  and  devoti#n  d» 
played  in  the  cause  of  Missouri  and  the  South.  lor  all  tins  }ou  hav; 
not  only  my  thanks  and  those  of  the  good  people  of  your  own  Stahl 
but  also  those  of  the  whole  South.  We  here  have  not  forgotten  you 
but,  on  the  contrary,  have  been  most  anxious  to  give  to  Missouri  a] 
the  aid  in  our  power,  and  have  been  hopefully  looking  for  the  tendd 
of  troops  from  Missouri  and  Arkansas,  to  be  organized  into  brigaW 
and  divisions  under  the  laws  of  the  Confederate  States.  We  haye| 
present  no  troops  to  give  you  except  those  under  General  McCullocl 
and  you  are  aware  of  their  condition.  .ml 

I was  sorry  to  learn  from  Colonel  Cooke  that  the  term  of  servica 
your  forces  is  for  so  short  a period  and  that  the  term  of  enlistment  ( 
so  many  is  about  to  expire.  You  know  the  disadvantage  of  sho 
terms  of  service.  Can  you  not  organize  a force  for  the  wai . So  lonj 
as  it  lasts  the  people  of  the  country  in  which  it  is  carried  on  mm 
engage  in  its  and,  until  our  independence  is  recognized  and  peat 
restored,  the  only  question  should  be,  how  can  these  ends  be  best  pr< 

m The  agreement  entered  into  with  General  Fremont  was  very  desixj 
ble  to  us,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  his  removal  has  made  the  co 

^You  may  rest  assured  that  the  welfare  of  Missouri  is : as  dear  to  | 
as  that  of  other  States  of  the  Confederacy  , and  that  I will  do > all  in  m 
power  to  assist  her  in  her  struggle  to  maintain  the  common  caus  . 
to  vindicate  her  freedom  and  sovereignty. 

Accept  my  most  friendly  remembrance  and  assurances  of  my  Dei 

wishes  for  your  success  and  happiness. 


Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours. 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


* See  Series  I,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  734. 


717 


jap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Ieneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Mo.  S.  G., 

No.  136.  f Camp  on  Bear  Creek , December  20,  1861. 
Tlie  army  will  move  to-morrow  morning  at  sunrise.  The  following 
ill  be  the  order  of  march : 

1st.  Eighth  Division,  General  Rains. 

2d.  Third  Division,  General  Price. 

3d.  Second  Division,  General  Green. 

4th.  Sixth  Division,  General  Parsons. 

5th.  Yolunteer  Corps,  Colonel  Little. 

6th.  Fourth  Division,  General  Slack. 

7th.  Fifth  Division,  General  Steen. 

The  Eighth  Division  will  furnish  an  advance  guard  of  200  men,  under 
mrnand  of  a field  officer,  who  will  report  to  the  major-general  com- 
anding,  before  starting,  for  instructions.  The  Fifth  Division  will  fur- 
sh  a like  guard  for  the  rear. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Price. 


Richmond,  Va.,  December  21,  1861. 

| is  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Missouri: 

My  Dear  Sir:  We  are  anxious  that  the  troops  of  Missouri  should 
> tendered  to  the  Confederate  Government,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
ganized  into  brigades  and  divisions  and  general  officers  appointed 
r them,  or,  if  preferable  to  them,  received  as  independent  companies 
battalions,  for  such  further  organization  as  the  interest  of  the  service 
d the  character  of  the  troops  may  indicate.  By  this  it  is  thought 
at  their  efficiency  will  be  increased;  and  that  they  will  be  relieved 
)m  the  anomalous  position  they  now  occupy  as  militia  of  the  Con- 
| derate  States  without  being  a part  of  their  organized  Army. 

This  arrangement  seems  very  desirable  to  me,  both  for  the  sake  of 
ie  Missouri  troops  and  the  advancement  of  our  cause,  and  I hope  it 
11  meet  with  your  concurrence. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Fort  Thompson,  Mo.,  December  21,  1861. 

ajor-General  Polk  : 

Dear  Sir  : Regarding  this  place  as  of  too  much  importance  in  the 
fense  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  to  be  lost  or  jeopardized  (and 
lowing  that  you  so  regard  it),  I cannot  refrain,  at  the  expense,  pos- 
dy,  of  being  thought  obtrusive,  from  giving  a short  statement  of 
ings  as  they  exist  here. 

Our  force  consists  of  two  artillery  companies  (one  of  them  well  drilled), 
i d the  Twelfth  Arkansas  Regiment,  armed  and  equipped.  Of  General 
iLompsoffis  immediate  command  600  or  700  only  are  left.  They  are  a 
’ etched,  ragged,  dispirited  looking  set  of  men;  half  armed,  undis- 
i dined,  careless,  and  inattentive.  There  is  no  Confederate  cavalry, 
ie  garrison  in  the  fort  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  Missouri  pickets.  Of 
lese,  one  entire  company,  while  on  picket  duty  several  days  ago,  left 
1 eir  posts,  disbanded,  and  went  home.  I have  no  sort  of  confidence  in 
lo  vigilance  and  fidelity  of  the  others.  You  can’t  induce  them,  and, 
’iat  is  worse,  the  officers  who  take  charge  of  them,  to  apprehend  any 
( nger.  A feeling  of  too  great  security  has  resulted  in  a consequent 
’nit  of  vigilance  and  attention,  and  these  men  will  soon  disband. 
These  things  are  not  written  to  annoy  or  give  you  trouble  or  uneasi- 


718  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIH 

ness,  but  from  a sense  of  duty.  Based  upon  them  I desire  to  make  the 
following  suggestions,  not  matured,  but  just  such  as  occur  to  me  at  the 
moment : That  Colonel  Smith’s  regiment  be  sent  here  from  Island  No. 
10  and  that  from  200  to  400  horses,  with  cavalry  arms  and  equipage, 
be  sent  from  Memphis  (I  understand  they  can  be  procured  there)  as 
soon  as  possible.  These  to  be  used  by  detachments  from  the  infantry  as 
pickets.  The  soldiers  would  be  delighted  and  benefited  by  the  change. 
This  is  proposed  merely  to  meet  the  present  emergency ; is  suggested 
by  the  scarcity  of  cavalry  in  reach  and  the  poverty  of  means  at  hand 
just  now.  The  horses  and  arms  could  be  used  in  a few  weeks  as  a per 
manant  basis  for  that  number  of  cavalry. 

The  result  proposed  is  to  have  the  pickets  so  arranged  that  we  car 
be  advised  of  the  enemy’s  advance  at  least  twenty-four  hours  before 
the  attack,  and  so  be  able,  even  with  our  small  force  and  imperfecl 
preparations,  to  hold  out  until  we  can  get  re- enforcements  from  above 
As  it  is,  we  may  be  attacked  at  any  moment,  for  I have  no  earthly 
confidence  in  this  mutinous  and  insubordinate  remnant  of  Missour: 

Militia  around  us.  _ A ,, 

It  is  due  to  General  Thompson,  who  is  a brave,  gallant,  and  worthj 
officer,  to  state  that  this  condition  of  things  is  attributable  to  circumi 
stances  over  which  he  has  no  control,  and  could  not  have  been  pre 
vented  by  any  one.  It  is  proper  to  add  that  it  is  by  no  means  impos 
sible  that  my  apprehensions  may  be  groundless,  and  that  I may  err  ii 
my  opinion  in  reference  to  the  fidelity,  &c.,  of  these  men,  and  tha'1 
your  means  of  information  may  be  such  as  to  satisfy  you  of  my  error: 
I hope  this  may  be  so.  Nevertheless,  believing  what  I state  to  b< 
true  and  entertaining  the  apprehensions  that  I do,  I think  it  best  ou 
of  abundance  of  caution  to  advise  you  of  it. 

There  are  reasons  of  smaller  importance  why  these  or  some  troopi 
should  be  sent  here.  General  Thompson  can  furnish  no  detail  fo: 
work  on  the  fort.  The  teams  and  men  of  my  regiment  are  constant^ 
required.  All  the  timber  and  materials  must  be  hauled  by  them.  Thu 
forces  me  to  neglect  the  barracks,  which  a few  days  would  finish 
Winter  is  upon  us  and  we  ought  to  be  housed. 

Can’t  I get  the  powder  and  buckshot  I sent  for  ? Don’t  you  thml 
them  better  in  a close  fight  from  the  fort  ? Can  I get  a few  wagonil 
and  teams  ? 

One  of  my  sentinels  arrested  a Lincolnite.  He  was  two  days  ou 
from  Cape  Girardeau.  Says  they  intend  taking  possession  of  tin 
place  when  Thompson’s  men  disband.  A lady  from  Charleston  oi 
Wednesday  reported  1,000  troops  there;  that  they  were  conversan 
with  matters  here,  and  expressed  the  same  intention.  Latest  account 
are,  all  the  Federal  pickets  drawn  in  from  near  Charleston. 

I hope  in  the  hurried  statement  of  the  facts  above  I shall  not  w 
understood  as  censuring  or  reflecting  upon  any  one;  It  is  quite  foreigi 
to  my  nature  or  purpose. 

In  haste,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ E.  W.  GANTT, 

Commanding  Fort . 


[Deceived  War  Department,  C.  S.  A.,  Dec.  21, 1861.] 

XAst  of  forces  under  command  of  Drig.  Oen.  Den.  McCulloch , commanding 

at  Fort  Smith , Arh. 

P.  O.  Hubert,  Third  Louisiana  Infantry;  strength,  757 ; present,  584 
E.  McNair,  Fourth  Arkansas  Eegiment ; strength,  587 ; present,  39i 


719 


r.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Mitcliell,  Fourteenth  Arkansas  Infantry;  strength,  939 ; present,  891. 
Churchill,  First  Arkansas  Mounted  Eifles;  strength,  882  ; present, 

McIntosh,  Second  Arkansas  Mounted  Eifles;  strength,  722;  pres- 
5,  553. 

3.  Greer,  Third  Texas  Cavalry ; strength,  1,020 ; present,  717. 

3.  Warren  Stone,  Sixth  Texas  Cavalry;  strength,  935;  present,  865. 
Whitfield,  Texas  battalion  cavalry;  strength,  339;  present,  315. 
flcEae,  Texas  battalion  infantry ; strength,  358 ; present,  228. 

Good,  Texas  battery  artillery;  strength,  109;  present,  103. 
jlart,  Arkansas  battery  artillery;  strength,  75;  present,  75. 
,'rovence,  Arkansas  battery  artillery;  strength,  73;  present,  73. 
pennett,  Texas  company  cavalry;  strength,  83;  present,  78. 
line  companies  Arkansas  infantry;  strength,  585 ; present,  585;  now 
ing  organized  into  a regiment. 

pen  companies  Arkansas  infantry ; strength,  650 ; present,  650;  now 

ng  organized  into  a regiment. 

bins,  Texas  regiment  cavalry;  not  yet  reported. 

poung,  Texas  regiment  cavalry;  strength,  850;  present,  850;  not 

; reported. 

:otal  strength  present  and  absent,  8,964;  total  strength  present, 
,76.  7 

Lionels  Sims’  and  Young’s  and  nineteen  companies  infantry  reported 
ee  November  1,  1861. 

FRANK  C.  ARMSTRONG, 
Adjutant- General  of  Division. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  December  25,  1861. 

la.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War: 

JR : I call  your  special  attention  to  the  inclosed  slip,*  containing 
i>ortant  news,  in  the  main  reliable,  from  the  Indian  country, 
do  not  believe  that  Hopoeithlayohola  has  with  him  more  than  2,000 
6,000  men,  but  I suppose  may  have  increased  to  the  latter  number, 
he  dispersion  of  Colonel  Drew’s  Cherokee  regiment  I have  no  doubt 
ruly  reported,  but  I do  not  believe  that  many  of  his  men  have  joined 
malcontents,  and  attribute  the  dispersion  of  the  regiment  to  the 
jictance  of  the  Cherokees  to  fight  against  their  neighbors,  the  Creeks, 
und  that  feeling  strong  among  them  in  October,  when  the  regiment 
; called  together  to  march  into  the  Creek  country  to  the  aid  of  CoJo- 
f McIntosh’s  Creek  regiment,  then  threatened  by  Hopoeithlayohola. 
j‘  adjutant  of  the  regiment  spoke  freely  to  me  of  his  reluctance  to  do 
1 lnd  I did  not  doubt  that  he  only  uttered  the  sentiments  of  the  people, 
he  Cherokees  and  Creeks  are  neighbors,  and  the  former  are  very 
tirous  of  maintaining  their  present  friendly  relations.  They  have 
i ? had  a treaty  between  themselves  by  which  they  can  settle  in  each 
iBr’s  country,  and  many  of  each  nation  are  domiciled  and  married  in 
3 country  of  the  other.  The  Cherokees  naturally  fear  that  if  they 
{ t any  part  of  the  Creeks  the  feud  willdast  between  them  for  many 
E r8  after  our  difficulties  are  settled. 

was  very  reluctant  to  employ  Indians  against  Indians,  and  espe- 


* Not  found. 


720 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 


Hilly  Creeks  against  Creeks,  but  I bad  no  alternative.  When  I was  in 
formed  of  Hopoeithlayohola’s  intentions  to  fight,  I could  do  no  more 
than  request  Colonel  Drew  and  Colonel  Cooper  to  march  to  the  assist 
Lee  of  Colonel  McIntosh;  but  my  reluctance  to  send  Indians  againsl 
Indians  was  lessened  by  the  sanguine  hope  that  the  presence  of  such  I 
force  would  disperse  the  hostiles  without  a fight.  T i«I 

In  May  last  I recommended  the  Government  to  send  into  the  Indiai 
country,  under  command  of  General  McCulloch,  three  regiments  o| 
white  troops,  to  be  united  to  three  regiments  of  Indians.  It  was  palpal 
ble  to  me  that  we  ought  to  give  the  Indians  ocular  evidence  of  ouf 
power  and  means  to  hold  their  country  by  the  actual  presence  of  a bod 
of  our  own  troops.  I never  thought  of  holding  the  country  and  repel 

McCulloch,  brf 


ino-  "dfan  country ; so  that  up  to  this  time  he  has  never  had  a sol 
dier  there,  with  the  exception  of  two  or  three  Texas  regiments  in  fo  ansitl 

and  Colonel  Sims’ regiment,  now  with  Colonel  Cooper.  j 

The  Creek  and  Choctaw  regiments  were  raised  m August  and  th 
Cherokee  regiment  in  October;  but  it  was  a long  time  before  Colomj 
Cooper’s  regiment  was  even  partially  armed.  No  arms  were  fuinishej 
the  others ; no  pay  was  provided  for  any  of  them,  and  with  the  exeed 
tion  of  a partial  supply  for  the  Choctaw  regiment,  no  tents,  clothing,!, 
camp  and  garrison  equipage  were  furnished  to  any  of  them.  I 

Without  any  force  of  our  own  in  the  country  I labored  under  gret 

disadvantages  in  treating  with  the  Indians  and  thesLLLsneciafi 
delav  The  battle  of  Oak  Hills  had,  however,  a great  effect,  especiall 
with  the  Cherokees ; but  it  was  at  the  same  time  unfortunate  that  eve 
after  that  it  was  not  in  our  power  to  place  a force  of  our  own  troops 

ti'l  raised' aCcompany  of  Creeks,  and  placed  it  at  the  North  Fork  vrilad 
to  watch  the  movements  of  the  discontented,  and  authorized  the  Sem 
nole  chief  to  raise  a battalion  of  his  people.  I advised  the  Departing 
and  the  quartermaster  at  Fort  Smith  of  this,  but  no  steps  ue  e 
taken  to  muster  either  into  the  service  or  to  pay  them. 

I employed  an  escort  of  64  men,  which  was  discharged  about  the  20 
of  September,  with  over  $2,000  due  the  men  for  pay.  They  still  <* 
tinue  unpaid,  Treasury  notes  having  been  sent  out  to  pay  them  with 

tUI  had  incurred^debts  for  the  Government  to  traders  and  individuj 
Indians,  and  my  drafts  in  their  favor  on  the  Government  were  protestj 
and  remained  unpaid  until  after  I left  the  Indian  country.  At  Q 
Smith  I received  $20,000  in  Treasury  notes,  and  had  either  to  reni. 
there  anindefinite  time  in  order  to  take  up  the  drafts  or  depositfi 
money  at  my  own  risk  with  an  individual  to  pay  them.  Of  cou 
elected  the  latter.  I do  not  mention  these  circumstances  bj  vaj 
complaint  or  fault  finding,  but  that  the  Secretary  of  War  may  comp 
hend  the  reasons  that  have  gone  so  far  to  produce  not  only  ^conW 
but  suspicion  and  mistrust,  among  the  Indians  Added  to  the 
avoidable  delay  in  completing  the  treaties  and  the  additional  delay 
procuring  their  ratification 'and  the  transmission  of  the  moneys  " 
under  the  treaties,  the  circumstances  that  I have  '“^Tone^moni 
unnaturally  produced  the  impression  that  what  I ‘a'  e «1mi  amou, 
to  nothin"* : that  the  Government  does  not  sanction  what  I hav 
and  that  it  has  not  the  men  or  the  means  to  hold  the  Indian  co 
Emissaries  from  Kansas  have  been  among  the  Indians  since  the  tr 


'*  Xvm-J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


721 


were  made,  to  promise  them  their  moneys  and  to  convince  them 
tne  Confederate  States  cannot  maintain  themselves,  protect  the 
lans,  nor  secure  them  their  moneys ; and  persons  from  some  of  the 
es  have  been  in  Kansas,  holding  a council  with  General  Hunter. 
Kansas  Indians  also  have  been  operating  upon  our  own  Indians 
sowing  discontent  among  them,  until  all  that  was  effected  this 
mier  is  m a fair  way  to  be  overturned. 

he  Congress  has  now  ratified  the  treaties,  with  amendments,  and  has 
ropriated  the  moneys  to  be  paid  under  them.  I have  procured  the 
leys,  for  the  payment  of  the  troops  and  other  expenses  of  the  Quar- 
aaster>s  Department,  and  $25,000  for  the  purchase  of  arms  ; and  as 
1 ?s,  th?  moneys  under  the  treaties  are  ready  to  send  out  to  the 
rmtendent  I wish  to  proceed  to  the  Indian  country.  It  will  be  of 
ise  tor  me  to  go  there  without  the  money.  It  should  be  there, 
to  be  paid  over  the  moment  each  treaty  is  ratified.  This  I 
will  go  a great  way  to  settle  the  existing  discontent,  remove 
>icion,  and  keep  the  Indians  in  our  service.  But  I wish  particu- 
' to  represent  that  it  is  absolutely  indispensable  that  a force  of  our 
troops  should  be  placed  in  that  country,  of  at  least  three  regiments, 
armed  and  efficient.  Since  the  disbanding  of  Colonel  Drew’s  reg- 
it  tnere  are  but  three  Indian  regiments,  averaging,  perhaps,  700 
each,  and  only  partially  and  indifferently  armed.  Of  these  the 
rokee  regiment  of  Col.  Stand  Watie,  composed  of  original  South- 
r*fkts  men,  mostly  lialf-breeds,  and  which  would  cheerfully  have 
fit  the  discontented  Creeks,  has  been  all  the  time  under  General 
ullochs  orders,  and  is,  I think,  on  the  neutral  land  between  Mis- 
1 anti  Kansas.  This  leaves  me  two  weak  regiments  only,  badly 
d and  poorly  supplied  with  ammunition.  I have  received  authority 
you  to  raise  and  receive  two  regiments  of  infantry  and  two  com- 
es ot  artillery  as  soon  as  I can  arm  them ; but  to  raise  these  troops 
be  a slow  process,  and,  unless  arms  are  ready  to  be  furnished  at 
’ alra°st  a attempt.  The  people  of  Arkansas  have  been  so 
t with,  chiefly  by  their  own  authorities,  that  they  will  not  enlist 
ss  they  are  sure  of  arms.  The  Chief  of  Ordnance  has  directed 
batteiies  to  be  furnished  me  at  Memphis,  and  I have  made  a requi- 
a lor  them ; but  I imagine  it  is  quite  uncertain  whether  I shall 
hem  or  the  eight  fortification  guns  for  which  I have  also  asked, 
lope  I do  not  exhaust  the  Secretary’s  patience.  This  detail  was 
ssary  to  an  understanding  of  the  condition  of  things  in  the  Indian 
tty.  It  is  necessary  to  end  the  insurrection  at  once.  Crescit  eundo. 
ows  by  delay  to  apply  the  remedy,  and  cannot  be  put  down  by 
m troops  alone.  With  great  deference  I ask  leave  to  suggest 
teps  necessary  to  end  it. 

regiment  of  infantry  lately  added  to  General  McCulloch’s  com- 
u • Walcl1 1 applied  while  it  was  raising,  may  very  well  be 
, J?y  anci  transferred  to  my  command.  If  it  be  possible  2,000 
1 ol  good  arms  should  be  immediately  placed  at  my  disposal  to  arm 
additional  regiments  of  infantry.  In  the  mean  time  Colonel  Mc- 
|h,  in l command  at  Fort  Smith,  could  be  ordered  to  march  his  corn- 
i ot  five  companies  of  cavalry,  now  in  winter  quarters  on  the  Ar- 
as  Kiver,  into  the  Indian  country,  and  operate  against  the  insur- 
* as  efficiently  as  possible. 

ere  is  no  ammunition  at  Little  Bock  for  cannon  or  small -arms, 
i supply  should  at  once  be  placed  there,  that  it  may  be  at  hand 
leeded.  The  two  batteries  of  field  artillery  and  eight  fortifica- 

46  r r — vol  VIII 


722 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV! 


'»  *»  ?r\”if£Wb?m“n“’ “~t7 S' ?m“ » '-“wi 

W t nfrthis  money  in  New  Orleans  for  bank  notes  of  small  denomul 
part  of  this  m0  < J „ 2 d ls  Without  a supply  of  these  I do  id 
tions,  say  20s,  10s,  5s,  is , zs,  ami  rs  off  at  aU  j also  specia| 

see  how  the  Appropriated  under  the  treaties  may  be  imrj 

request  that  the  moneys  L'l  t0  the  supermtendel 

diately  procured  from  the treasury  ana  se  Orleans,  ay 

The  specie  to  be .provided Loan  I Wsl’ecretery  pleases,  take  ehJ 
a?  \TJZ!  othOT  Moneys,  and  convey  all  to  the  superintendent 
Fort:  Smith  I have  Stances  at  Napoleon  that  can  convey  i 


in  Riclimon(  1 fnr  armointment  may  be  speedily  <1 


;neq^thTmyhr 

posed  of,  and  especially  that  I thin  the  remaining  tb| 


- i i for  IfealieiCneed  can  be  effected  within  the  remaining  tb, 
fi? 'of  this  week  I hS  to  leave  the  city  on  Monday  next.  I am  J 

anxious  todoBO.  ^ obedient  semmnt,^  ^ I 

Brigadier-General , Comdg.  Department  of  Indian  TermtoA 


Hdqrs.  First  Military  District,  Mo.  S.  G., 

Q New  Madrid,  Mo.,  December  26.  186i 

WmfMmtm 

preparation  for  some  purpose,  w ^ submarine  battery. 

immediately  abandoned,  and  great  consternation  pre 


723 


1 i\  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

: had  determined  to  pass  through  my  district  to  induce  the  men  to 
snlist  who  have  not  yet  been  in  the  service,  but  find  it  will  take  me 
ay  from  here  too  long.  I will  endeavor  to  accomplish  the  same  ob- 
t by  proclamations.  I will  endeavor  to  keep  the  field  all  winter. 
Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding . 


December  27, 1861.— For  Benjamin  to  Bragg,  in  reference  to  affairs 
Missouri  and  Arkansas,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  VI,  p.  788.] 


Fort  Thompson,  Mo.,  December  30,  1861. 
>ear  Sir  : The  guns,  32-pounders,  arrived  on  the  Prince.  I would 
nn  her  and  send  up  the  guns  required,  but  Captain  Barney  in- 
ns me  the  platforms  will  have  to  be  entirely  changed  before  the  guns 
t can  be  placed  in  position.  This  would  take  longer  than  I would 
a to  detain  the  boat,  and  to  send  the  guns  without  mounting  these 
Id  leave  the  strongest  bastion,  and  the  one  most  certainly  needed 
aounted,  it  being  in  the  rear  from  the  river.  I therefore  send  the 
fc  back.  The  guns  sent  just  make  up  the  complement  for  the  fort, 
as  the  platforms  for  the  siege  guns  are  already  constructed,  and  as 
are  m position,  I write  this  and  respectfully  and  earnestly  request 
; we  be  allowed  to  keep  them. 

hat  we  are  threatened  here  is  beyond  doubt.  That  it  will  require 
gy , caution,  and  skill  to  prevent  a successful  attack  is  unquestion- 
• Deprive  us  of  these  guns  and  we  are  weakened  that  much.  I 
y not  to  understood  as  detaining  the  guns.  We  could  not  send 
n now  without  leaving  their  place  vacant,  and  I hoped  this  letter 
ht  reach  you  and  be  answered  before  the  change  is  made.  If  I 
uo  answer  by  the  time  the  engineer  is  ready  to  make  the  change, 
guns  shall  be  sent  according  to  instructions.  I hope,  though,  we 
be  able  to  keep  them.  ’ 

le  horses  for  outpost  duty  are  much  needed.  I am  now  sending  the 
es  of  my  own  and  staff.  The  men  of  General  Thompson’s  command 
are  left  refuse  to  go  out.  He  seems  to  place  implicit  confidence  in 
nectiveness  of  his  men  who  have  gone  home  for  this  kind  of  service, 
le  I do  not  dissent  from  it  to  him,  I must  say  to  you,  with  deference 
respect  to  him,  that  I do  not,  cannot,  indorse  or  rely  upon  it.  They 
^aught  up  every  day,  and  they  “take  the  oath”  as  readily  as  they 
lieir  grog.  It  is  unheard-of  to  leave  a port  with  no  other  guard 
ist  surprise  than  the  voluntary  aid  of  men  asleep  at  their  homes, 
st  night  I#ent  out  a small  party  of  cautious,  prudent  men.  They 
ust  in;  report  13  of  Captain  Price’s  men  captured  night  before 
I JS0me  36  miles  from  here.  Two  hundred  Federal  cavalry  near 
lesion.  If  thrown  upon  my  own  resources  I could  keep  very  well 
‘tied  until  the  horses  arrive. 

I is  letter  is  written  very  hurriedly,  but  I hope  I have  made  myself 
< rstood  in  the  little  I have  attempted  to  say. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fort. 


724 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYI 


New  Orleans,  December  30, 1861 
His  Excellency  the  President  oe  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  • Tour  letter  of  the  21st  instant,  forwarded  by  Colonel  Garni 
has  been  received.  With  respect  to  the  matter  of  transferring  t 
Missouri  troops  to  the  Confederate  Government,  I have  to  say  that  t 
measure  has  not  only  my  concurrence  but  my  hearty  approval. 

The  moment  I received  intelligence  that  Missouri  had  been  adrnitt 
a member  of  the  Confederacy  I wrote  to  General  Price,  urging  him 
have  the  transfer  made  at  the  earliest  moment,  and  to  get  the  troo 
“for  the  war”  if  possible.  What  success  has  attended  the  genera 
efforts  I have  no  means  of  knowing,  not  having  heard  iyom i him  sine 
Surrounded,  however,  as  he  is  with  embarrassments  of  the  greati 
magnitude,  his  men  borne  down  by  all  the  hardships  and  privations 
a summer’s  campaign,  discouraged  and  disheartened  as  they  must  f 
SK  been  abandoned  by  every  Confederate  soldier  from 
other  States  and  being  left  alone  to  face  a foe  of  more  than  fi\  e tin 
their  strength,  poorly  clad,  and  suffering  for  the  want  of  a proper  si 
Mv  of  provisions,  I can  scarcely  expect  the  most  favorable  resul 
For  more  than  six  months  the  Missouri  Army,  almost  single  hand 
have  successfully  held  in  check  the  Lincoln  forces  in  our  State.  Fr 
time  to  time  they  have  been  promised  assistance  from  the  Coufederi 
States  but  it  has  not  come-so  far  from  it,  indeed  what  few  Confed 
ate  troops  were  upon  our  border  and  within  the  State  have  been  . wi 
drawn  from  it?  marched  down  to  the  Arkansas  River,  and  put  ,, 
winter  auarters  more  than  two  months  before  winter  had  set  in.  ^ 
the  foot? of  a Southern  soldier  now  treads  the  soil  of  Missouri,  exo 
the  men  under  the  commands  of  Price  and  Thompson. 

General  Price  and  his  men  being  thus  forsaken  by  those  on  wh 
they  relied  for  aid,  their  State  being  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  thiev 
iavhawker  and  murderous  Hessian,  their  towns  and  their  houses 
stroyed  by  fire,  their  property  stolen,  their  country  laid  waste  < 
their  wives  and  children  driven  from  their  homes Pe™h 
q o best  thev  can,  you  may  rely  upon  it,  Mr.  President,  tnat  in 
thus  abandoned,  however  much  they  may  love  the  gallant  chief  v 
has  so  nobly  and  successfully  led  them  to  victory  upon  every  field  J 
however  much  they  may  be  devoted  to  the  cause  tor  which  they  1 
fparlesslv  and  cheerfully  fought,  it  can  scarcely  be  expected  ti 
will  enter  the  Confederate  Army  with  that  alacrity  and  promptrj 
thpv  would  do  under  more  favorable  auspices. 

1 Their  confidence  in  the  good  faith  of  the  Confederate  Govermn, 
has  to  some  extent  been  shaken  in  not  having  received  the  supporj 
the  Confederate  troops  stationed  upon  tlieir  bor<le^uring  the  Munn 
They  have  not  been  able  to  see  why  the  troops  under  < General Me 
loch  did  not  co  operate  with  them  in  their  march  to  Lexington,  am 

^They'believe^that^wittTthe  aid  of  the  Confederate  fo^s  then  in 
State  we  could  have  held  that  place, [ a“d  by  » .do^L?"  Ke  arny 


the  strength  of  our 


army.  Deprived  of  that  support. 


forced  by  theoverwhelming  numbers  of  the  enemy  to  fall  back  u 

"toTetctfron  of  Springfield  by  ^Federal [forces  Ge, 

to^strmnfrhen'hfs'arniy  with'new  recruits^iM'tOT^over  to^the  Con 
erate  Government  his  entire  force,  but  in  this  effort,  as  m the  foil 
be  was  unsupported  by  the  Confederate  troops,  and  doomed 
alternative  of  going  alone. 


e.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  725 

VTiat  success  has  attended  him  I am  unable  to  say.  With  all  my 
ffidence  in  his  energy,  skill,  and  courage,  I cannot  but  feel  the  most 
:ious  solicitude  for  the  safety  of  himself  and  men,  knowing  as  I do 
difficulties  and  perils  by  which  he  is  surrounded, 
t gives  me  no  pleasure  to  recite  these  recurrences,  and  I pray  you 
to  understand  me  as  doing  so  in  any  spirit  of  complaint  against  the 
id  faith  of  the  Confederate  Government  toward  Missouri, 
m imperative  sense  of  duty  to  my  State,  to  General  Price,  and  the 
ve  men  who  have  so  faithfully  served  their  country  under  him  re- 
re,  in  my  judgment,  that  you  should  know  all  the  facts  in  the  case, 
1 1 ask  that  you  will  give  them  the  consideration  due  them, 
hat  General  Price  will  exert  himself  to  the  utmost  in  raising  men 
the  Confederate  service  I have  no  shadow  of  doubt ; but  if  his 
rts  shall  not  be  crowned  with  that  success  we  have  so  earnestly 
ed  for,  it  is  due  to  him  and  to  the  country  that  the  reasons  should 
mown. 

Without  intending  to  have  been  importunate  I have  felt  it  my  duty 
rge  again  and  again,  as  you  are  aware,  the  appointment  of  General 
oe  to  the  chief  command  of  the  Western  Department.  I think  him 
man  for  the  place.  Those  who  have  served  under  him  and  who 
w him  best,  as  well  as  the  whole  country,  believe  him  to  be  the 
a. 

T it  could  be  announced  in  his  camp  to-day  that  he  is  to  command 
re  would  be  one  universal  shout  of  joy,  and  such  an  impetus  would 
pven  to  the  work  of  recruiting  as  nothing  else  can  impart  to  it. 

■ I did  not  feel  so  deeply  impressed  with  the  importance  of  an  early, 
ot  immediate,  appointment  for  the  Western  Department,  I shouid 
press  the  matter  further  upon  your  consideration.  Much,  very 
‘lb  in  my  judgment,  depends  upon  early  action.  I hope  you  have 
ady  been  clothed  with  power  to  make  the  appointment.  If  you 
e not,  Congress  surely  will  not  delay  in  conferring  it  when  interests 
ital  to  the  safety  of  the  country  are  at  stake. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

C.  F.  JACKSON. 


New  Orleans,  December  30,  1861. 

or-General  Price: 

y Dear  General  : The  bearer  of  this  letter  will  hand  you  several 
'atckes  from  Kiclimond,  which  will  acquaint  you  with  what  is  going 
here. 

have  read  the  letter  which  the  President  has  addressed  to  you.  I 
l you  the  one  he  addressed  to  me,  and  likewise  a copy  of  my  answer 
Im.*  I think  the  time  has  come  when  we  should  speak  out  in 
a terms.  I have  endeavored  to  call  the  attention  of  Mr.  Davis  to 
true  condition  of  things  in  Missouri,  and  have  urged  the  necessity 
rompt  action  in  the  premises.  Whether  we  shall  succeed  in  getting 
am  unable  to  say.  Why  it  is  that  he  can’t  give  you  the  appoint 
t at  once  I am  utterly  at  a loss  to  determine.  lie  certainly  had 
contemplation  to  appoint  Colonel  Hetli  to  the  chief  command,  or 
Hunter’s  dispatch  to  me  was  sent  without  authority,  and  this  Mr. 
uter  certainly  would  not  do.  If,  then,  the  President  had  the  power 
opoint  Colonel  Hetli,  I cannot  see  why  he  has  not  the  authority 
ppoint  you.  I am  free  to  acknowledge  there  is  a mystery  about 
- whole  affair  which  I do  not  comprehend. 

1 Davis  to  Jackson,  December  21,  p.  717,  and  Jackson  to  Davis,  December  30,  p.  724. 


726 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap.  XV* 


I hope  all  is  right,  and,  indeed,  I have  the  strongest  faith  that  jl 
will  yet  receive  the  appointment.  I know  how  easy  it  is  lor  the  atf 
and  intentions  of  public  men  to  be  misunderstood,  and  how  common) 
is  for  ill-disposed  persons  to  cry  a man  down  without  any  just  cam  i 
and  therefore  I will  not  censure  the  President  until  I know  he  If 

WT have  been  extremely  unhappy  for  the  last  two  weeks  or  more  abl 
your  condition.  I have  not  been  able  to  see  how  you  and  your  m 
were  to  extricate  yourselves  from  the  perils  which  seemed  to  ha- 
over  vou.  I fear  your  sufferings  have  been  very  great,  but  1 trust  li 
hope  you  are  all,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  yet  out  of  the  hands  of  « 
jayhawkers  and  Hessians.  I have  been  doing  everything  in  my  pou 

to  advance  our  cause.  , I 

General  Shields  has  been  active  and  vigilant  in  pushing  forward  I 
work.  In  ten  days,  more  or  less,  I think  he  will  have  an  amoij 
sufficient  to  pay  off  Thompson’s  men.  As  soon  as  it  is  ready  1 \ 
see  that  they  are  paid,  and  shall  then  repair  to  your  camp  with  I 

least  delay  possible.  J 

The  work  on  our  guns,  all  things  considered,  is  progressing  as  II 
as  I could  expect  it.  Every  shop  in  the  whole  South  is  pressed  m 
work,  and  but  for  the  universal  sympathy  of  the  people  here  for  M 
souri  and  the  desire  of  every  one  to  aid  us  we  should  not  have  big 
able  to  get  our  work  done  in  any  reasonable  time. 

The  single-barrel  shot-guns  1 have  had  converted  into  carbines  g 
mounted  men,  and  will  be  found  to  be  a valuable  weapon.  , 

The  old  rifles  will  be  made  into  Mississippi  rifles  with  a saber  bai 
net— the  best  war  gun  now  in  use,  I think.  They  will  all  be  boxed  j 
forwarded  as  soon  as  they  are  ready;  but  they  will  not  all  be  hmsll 

under  five  or  six  weeks.  T . 

The  people  of  this  city  and  State  excel  any  I ever  knew  m work( 
for  our  cause.  I do  not  know  the  exact  amount,  but  I feel  conhd 
with  what  they  have  already  forwarded,  together  with  the  articles i ti 
are  now  getting  ready  for  your  army,  it  can  hardly  fall  short  ol  *1W, 

0 0 . . „ .~i  'I'll/XT’-  /l/x  ftvprvtnl 


are  now  getting  icauj  ; mi 

in  value.  They  never  tire  or  flag  in  the  good  work.  They  do  every tM 


m value,  luey  uevcr  meui  m uxd  ..  " j 

they  can  to  render  the  soldier  comfortable  or  that  will  encourage  I 

to  perform  his  duty.  T J 

Six  young  ladies  are  now  raising  a subscription  to  purchase  a s\v 
for  you,  and  in  order  that  as  many  as  possible  may  have  a hand  1 
they  allow  no  one  to  give  over  $1.  You  may  therefore  look  out  to, 
beautiful  present  from  the  young  ladies  of  New  Orleans. 

The  news  from  Washington  is  that  Lincoln  has  “backed  down  .| 
given  up  Mason  and  Slidell;  just  what  everybody  here  thought! 
cowardly  scamp  would  do.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe  a decia 
battle  is  near  at  hand  anywhere. 

My  kind  regards  to  all  the  friends. 

Faithfully,  your  frieud,  0 F JACKSOy 


Richmond,  December  31, 186 

Col.  L.  Hubert,  _ ^ . 7 

Third  Regt.  La.  Vols .,  Comdg .,  & Fayetteville , Ark. : 

Sir:  A contract  has  been  entered  into  with  parties  in  Memphis 
work  the  lead  mines  near  Granby,  in  Missouri.  It  is  understoot 
parties  from  Kansas  frequently  visit  that  portion  of  the  country , •« 
is  apprehended  they  may  interfere  with  the  work  of  these  miners 


727 


lp.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

try  off  the  lead.  The  Chief  of  Ordnance  here  has  requested  protection 
• the  work,  and  it  is  estimated  that  a force  of  about  one  regiment  of 
an  try  and  a few  cavalry  will  be  required.  This  is  deemed  an  im- 
rtant  work,  and  as  Granby  (in  Newton  County,  Missouri)  is  only 
ne  60  or  70  miles  from  Fayetteville,  the  Secretary  of  War  desires 
it  you  will  at  once  detail  from  your  command  a force  sufficiently 
ong  to  afford  protection  to  the  miners  and  the  parties  engaged  in 
rking  them  for  the  Government. 

These  instructions  are  not  intended  as  adverse  to  any  movement  that 
ly  be  made  by  General  Price  for  the  protection  of  these  mines,  which, 
already  stated,  are  in  the  State  of  Missouri. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  H.  CHILTON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  January  1,  1862. 
j.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  Mo.  S.  G.,  in  Gamp : 

Dear  General  : The  instructions  from  your  headquarters  and  your 
cular*  were  received,  and  I have  endeavored  as  far  as  possible  to  com- 
' with  your  orders.  I have,  however,  been  very  much  discouraged  by 
i action  of  my  command  and  from  newspaper  rumors.  I am  fearful 
i have  suffered  in  the  same  way.  I endeavored  to  get  all  to  dis- 
id  and  reorganize  on  the  same  day,  each  company  of  men  selecting 
mce  their  new  officers,  and  without  any  cessation  to  go  on  with  our 
)d  work,  but  I could  not  get  a corporal’s  guard  to  agree  to  re-enlist 
hout  first  returning  home  or  taking  the  Christmas  holidays  or  some 
ler  excuse,  and  I had  to  adopt  a plan  to  suit  the  condition  of  things ; 
vas  to  march  each  regiment  to  the  nearest  safe  point  to  the  majority 
their  homes,  and,  setting  different  days  for  them  to  disband,  to  en- 
ivor  to  induce  them  to  re-enlist.  Of  those  disbanded  at  this  place 
i)  few  have  volunteered  up  to  this  time.  The  Stoddard  County  regi- 
nt  disbands  this  day  at  Camp  Blanton,  in  Stoddard  County.  The 
nklin  County  regiment  disbands  on  the  4th  at  Clarkton,  and  the  Rip- 
County  regiment  disbands  on  the  8th  at  Pitman’s  Ferry.  How 
ny  of  these  will  volunteer  it  is  impossible  to  tell,  but  I am  sure  I 
1 have  but  a skeleton  force  until  February  or  March.  The  men  are 
sounder  than  the  officers,  and  if  I could  but  stop  their  croaking  all 
aid  be  well.  I do  not  censure  all,  for  many  of  them  are  patriotic 
ltlemen,  who  are  willing  to  serve  anywhere  or  work  in  any  kind  of 
ness,  but  many  also  who  cannot  be  re-elected,  from  incompeteucy 
ither  causes,  for  the  purpose  of  covering  their  own  defeat,  hunt  a 
usand  excuses,  and  delay  others  who  would  immediately  join, 
am  now  without  an  army,  but  still  have  hope,  and  if  left  single- 
lded  and  alone,  I will  keep  the  enemy  in  my  neighborhood  uneasy 
l on  guard. 

received  a letter  from  General  Jackson  yesterday  from  New7  Orleans, 
says  the  money  is  being  printed  at  the  rate  of  $12,000  per  day,  and 
1 be  ready  in  two  weeks.  I am  making  every  effort  to  have  my  pay 
Is,  quartermaster,  and  commissary  accounts  all  straight  and  square, 
; circumstances  beyond  my  control  have  gotten  them  considerably 
'.fused.  Sickness  and  changes  in  the  heads  of  departments  have 
n the  cause  of  it.  I write  you  this  short  letter  because  I have  an 


Not  found, 


728 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


opportunity  to  send  it,  but  hope  before  long  to  be  able  to  make  you 
full  report  of  the  brigade  under  my  charge. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  ^ JBpp  TH()MI>S0^ 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding.  (,i. 


Field  report  of  the  division  stationed  in  the  western  part  of  Arkansas , commanded  by  C<« 
James  McIntosh , January  1,  1862. 


[Extract.] 


Commanding  offioer. 


.First  Brigade,  Col.  Jas. 
McIntosh,  command- 
ing. 


Troops. 


First  Regiment  Arkansas 


ir8t  Kegimem;  Antausafl  Mounted 
(Churchill). 

Second  Regiment  Arkansas 
(McIntosh). 

South  Kansas-Texas  Regiment  (Greer) . . . 
Fourth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry  (Sims) . . . 
Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry  (Stone) . . . 
Burnett's  company  Texas  cavalry  (Stone) 


Riflemen 

Riflemen 


Total  First  Brigade . 


Second  Brigade,  Col. 
Louis  Hubert,  com- 
manding. 


Hill’s  regiment,  Arkansas  infantry  . 
McNair’s  South  Arkansas  infantry. 
McRae’s  regiment  Arkansas  infantry 
Mitchell’s  Fourteenth  Regiment  Arka 
Rector’s  regiment  Arkansas  infantry . 
Hubert’s  Third  Louisiana  Regiment  . . 

Third  Regiment  Texas  Cavalry  

; Whitfield’s  battalion  Texas  cavalry.. 

Brooks’  battalion  cavalry 

Gaines’  battery  artillery 

Good’s  battery  artillery 

Hart’s  battery  artillery  

Provence’s  battery  artillery 


Total  Second  Brigade . 
Grand  total  (division) 


Total. 

Aggregate. 

800 

845 

820 

862 

960  ! 

1,  003 

677 

713 

880 

927 

79 

83 

4,216 

4,  433 

= = 

- ~ 

690 

738 

680 

725 

600 

646 

880 

930 

500 

544 

690 

733 

750 

796 

280 

297 

300 

316 

70 

74 

100 

105 

71 

75 

70 

73 

. 5, 681 

6,  052 

. 9, 897 

10,  485~ 

— 


Hdqrs.  First  Division  Western  Department,  , 

Columbus , Ky .,  January  3,  1862.  | 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis: 

Being  desirous  to  know  the  exact  state  of  things  in  Missouri  so  f 
as  the  forces  in  the  interest  of  the  Confederacy  were  concerned,  as  a) 
to  know  the  views  and  plans  of  Generals  McCulloch  and  Price,  I se 
a trustworthy  messenger  from  this  post  to  both  of  their  camps  for  tb 
purpose.  That  messenger  has  just  returned,  and  I have  thought  it  be 
to  send  him  without  delay  to  you,  which  I do  on  to-morrow. 

I gave  General  Price  to  understand  that  I regarded  energetic  acti< 
on  his  part  in  keeping  the  enemy  employed  in  Missouri  of  the  highe 
importance  to  the  defense  of  my  present  position,  and  that  I hoped 
would  leave  no  effort  unmade  to  keep  himself  in  the  field  during  tl 
winter.  In  my  letter  to  him  I expressed  the  opinion  that  if  the  Go 
federate  Government  could  help  Missouri  from  the  east  it  must 
through  Columbus,  and  I was  not  without  hope  of  yet  aiding  in  t 
emancipation  of  Saint  Louis  through  this  route.  In  reply  he  has  wntb 


P.  XVIII. ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  729 

at  length,  and  the  letter  is  of  sncli  a character  as  to  induce  me  to 
id  you  a copy  of  it.  You  will  see  he  expresses  himself  very  freely 
his  associate,  General  McCulloch,  and  I am  constrained  to  say  that 
the  information  1 receive  from  that  quarter  (and  I am  hearing  con- 
ntly)  is  in  the  same  vein.  In  a word,  I am  perfectly  satisfied  that 
h force  now  in  McCulloch’s  hands  should  be  controlled  by  some  one 
| o would  co-operate  freely  and  vigorously  with  General  Price,  and 
jit  this  should  be  done  as  early  as  practicable.  So  long  as  the 
ieral  forces  under  Halleck  are  kept  occupied  by  Price  in  Missouri, 
y cannot  co-operate  with  Buell  against  Johnston,  nor  be  concen- 
j ted  against  me  on  my  right  or  left  flank.  I hope,  therefore,  we  shall 
fail  to  occupy  him  fully  with  all  the  resources  at  our  command. 
|ave  sent  General  Price  several  batteries  and  more  or  less  of  arnmu- 
Hon.  Troops  I have  none  to  spare.  This  army  of  McCulloch’s,  as  it 
pears  to  me,  might  be  better  employed  than  in  the  inaction  of  winter 
jirters.  The  courier  who  takes  this  to  you  is  my  courier  to  Price. 

is  a Western  man  of  intelligence,  and  highly  respectable.  He  is 
b a man  of  some  experience,  and  you  may  obtain  from  him  valuable 
prmation  of  affairs  in  Missouri. 

I remain,  faithfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  POLK, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

\ S. — 1 at  this  moment  require  a force  of  10,000  to  occupy  and  hold 
drid  and  Southeastern  Missouri.  I have  only  about  1,500  in  a fort 
ich  I have  built  at  Madrid;  and  I require  a force  of  20,000  between 
p and  Clarksville,  on  the  Cumberland. 

[Inclosnre.] 

Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Springfield,  December  23,  1861. 
jor-General  Polk,  Columbus , Ky. : 

jrENERAL : 1 acknowledge  with  very  great  pleasure  the  receipt  of  your 
er  of  the  4th  instant.  It  was  handed  to  me  yesterday  by  Mr.  Bur- 
1,  who  also  gave  me  the  information  which  you  desired  him  to  com- 
plicate to  me.  I fully  agree  with  you  that  it  is  all-important  that 
! should  be  kept  advised  (so  far  as  it  may  be  safe  or  expedient)  of 
ih  other’s  position,  strength,  and  plans,  and  shall  be  glad  to  aid  you 
(he  accomplishment  of  that  object.  Your  plans  as  made  known  to 
ij  by  Mr.  Burton  meet  my  full  concurrence,  and  I promise  you  my 
pest  co-operation  in  the  execution  of  them. 

> here  are  two  main  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  successful  prosecu- 
u of  the  war  in  this  State,  one  of  which  ought  to  have  been  long 
be  overcome  and  the  other  of  which  ought  never  to  have  existed,  and 
) present  existence  of  both  of  which  is  due  mainly,  if  not  altogether, 

) the  conduct  of  General  McCulloch : 1st,  the  fact  that  the  great 
Jority  of  those  who  desire  to  take  up  arms  on  the  part  of  the  South 
prevented  from  doing  so  by  the  enemy’s  occupation  of  the  State, 
ch  closes  to  them  every  avenue  of  approach  to  my  army ; and,  2d, 
i dissatisfaction  which  General  McCulloch’s  constant  refusal  to  co- 
[ rate  with  us  has  engendered  in  the  minds  of  the  people  of  Missouri, 
i which  leads  them  to  doubt  whether  the  Confederate  Government 
I ly  sympathizes  with  and  desires  to  aid  them, 
he  most  populous  and  truest  counties  of  the  State  lie  upon  or  north 
he  , Missouri  River.  Had  General  McCulloch,  in  response  to  my 


730 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  lvANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVul 


earnest  entreaties,  accompanied  me  to  that  river  immediately  after  tlj 
battle  of  Springfield,  we  could  easily  have  maintained  our  position  the] 
until  my  army  (which  was,  in  fact,  augmented  from  less  than  0,000  1 
more  than  16,000  men  during  the  few  days  we  lay  there)  would  hail 
been  increased  to  at  least  50,000,  and  four-fifths  of  the  State  wou| 
have  fallen  without  a struggle  into  our  possession.  As  it  was,  hoj 
ever  I was  soon  threatened  by  overwhelming  numbers  and  compell| 
to  fall  back  again  to  the  southern  border  of  the  State,  and  thousand 
of  those  who  had  flocked  to  my  standard,  feeling  that  they  had  beil 
betrayed  and  abandoned  by  the  Confederate  Government,  returned  I 
their  homes  discontented  and  disheartened.  I 

Again,  after  the  late  retreat  of  the  enemy  from  the  southwest  I begg<] 
General  McCulloch  to  accompany  me  to  the  Missouri,  and  he  agal 
refused  to  do  so.  I started  thither  with  my  own  army,  and  reached  tl 
Osage  just  as  the  time  of  service  of  three-fourths  of  my  own  men  wl 
expiring  Nearly  every  one  of  them  had  left  his  home  months  befort 
without  an  hour’s  notice,  leaving  their  families  unprotected  and  unprj 
vided  for.  A severe  winter  was  at  hand;  the  men  were  themselvl 
badly  clad,  and  not  one  of  them  had  ever  received  a dime  m paymel 
of  his  services.  Many  of  them  insisted  upon  going  home  for  a fe 
weeks  to  procure  clothing  for  themselves  and  make  some  provision  f:i 
the  comfort  of  their  families,  who  were  exposed  not  onlyto  the  seve:> 
ties  of  a Missouri  winter,  but  to  the  fury  of  an  enemy  whose  barbam 

cannot  be  described.  * 

I could  not  refuse  their  reasonable  request,  and  my  army  became 
small  that  it  would  have  been  highly  perilous  for  me  to  have  cross* 
the  Osage,  threatened  as  I was  from  Kansas,  from  Sedalia,  and  fro 
Rolla.  Knowing,  however,  that  thousands  of  the  people  on  the  noPi 
side  of  the  Missouri  would  come  to  me  even  at  this  season  if  I cou 
but  open  the  way  for  them,  I sent  a detachment  of  1,100  men  to  Le 
ington,  which,  after  remaining  only  a part  of  one  day,  gathered  t 
getlier  about  2,500  recruits,  and  escorted  them  in  safety  to  me  at  C 
ceola.  Could  the  detachment  have  remained  on  the  river  only  a Id 
days  longer  the  number  of  recruits  would  have  been  indefinitely  i< 
creased;  but  the  enemy,  having  gotten  insight  into  the  movemei 
concentrated  their  forces  against  it  and  compelled  it  to  return.  The 
are  many  counties  north  of  the  river  in  which  organized  companies 
from  500  to  1,500  are  now  ready  to  join  and  are  only  waiting  an  opp< 

tllAppreciating  as  I do  the  great  importance  of  this  movement  in  f 
direction  of  the  Missouri,  I wrote  to  General  McCulloch  again  on  tl 
6th  instant,  begging  him  to  co-operate  with  me  m it.  1 receded 
reply  a few  days  ago,  written  on  the  14th  instant  at  Fort  Smith  bj  C 
onef  McIntosh,  who  commands  the  division  m the  absence  of  the  ge 
eral.  He  said  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  grant  my  request,  ^cause 
had  been  compelled  to  send  three  regiments  into  the  Indian  lenity 
and  was  expecting  to  send  others  for  the  defense  of  Memphis,  a; 
because  also  for  the  want  of  clothing  for  his  troops,  and  of  the  g 
distance  to  be  traveled  in  the  depth  of  winter  over  the  bleak  prair 
of  Missouri.”  With  the  co-operation  of  these  troops  I could  not  on 
have  advanced  to  the  river  and  recrmted  my  army  to  any  desinU 
extent,  but  could  have  destroyed  the  railroads,  of  which  the  enein>  ha 
always  had  possession,  and  which  gave  them  an  immense  advanta 
over  us;  and  this  being  done,  we  could  easily  have  driven  the  enei 
into  Saint  Louis  before  the  opening  of  spring,  and  while  accomplisnr 
this  we  would  have  created  a powerful  diversion  m favor  of  our  an 


Ai>.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


731 


Kentucky.  My  troops  and  tlie  people  know  these  facts,  and  the 
lowledge  of  their  existence  creates,  as  I before  said,  the  greatest  dis- 
tisfaction  with  and  distrust  of  the  Confederate  Government.  This 
eling  grows  daily,  and  will  do  us  incalculable  harm  if  it  be  not  speedily 
lieted. 

There  is  not  at  this  time  a single  Confederate  soldier  in  the  State, 
>r  does  there  seem  to  be  any  likelihood  that  one  will  come  into  it 
iriug  Jhe  winter ; whilst  there  are  at  least  50,000  troops  in  it  from 
ansas,  Iowa,  Illinois,  Wisconsin,  Michigan,  Indiana,  and  Ohio.  How 
ug  can  we  be  expected  to  carry  on  this  unequal  contest,  almost  com- 
etely  isolated  as  we  are  from  the  Southern  States  and  surrounded  on 
ree  sides  by  hostile  States,  and  especially  when  it  is  taken  into  con- 
ieration  that  we  have  not  a single  dollar  with  which  to  conduct  the 
jir  ? Something  must  be  done  and  that  speedily.  I have  abandoned 
L hope  of  getting  the  co-operation  of  General  McCulloch.  Your  kind 
Ibter  comes,  therefore,  most  seasonably  and  doubly  welcome. 

We  may  yet  make  this  winter  campaign  result  in  the  deliverance  of 
issouri  or  at  least  in  great  good  to  our  cause.  I will  have  at  least 
: ,000  men  under  my  command  in  a very  short  time,  and  will  gladly 
(dte  with  you  in  a movement  on  Saint  Louis,  as  suggested  by  you.  If 
•u  will  mature  your  platfs  and  communicate  them  to  me  you  will  be 
i conded  in  the  execution  of  them  not  only  by  myself,  but  by  every 
an  in  my  army ; and  whether  we  succeed  in  the  main  object  or  not, 
3 will  accomplish  a great  deal.  Our  people  will  see  that  the  Govern- 
3nt  really  desires  to  assist  them.  Their  way  to  the  army  will  at  the 
me  time  be  opened  to  them  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  enemy’s  forces 
im  the  rest  of  the  State  for  the  protection  of  Saint  Louis,  and  they 
11  come  to  us  from  every  quarter  by  hundreds  and  by  thousands.  I 
i informed,  too,  that  there  are  over  6,000  men  in  Saint  Louis  ready  to 
i ring  to  arms  at  the  first  gleam  of  hope.  I do  therefore  hope  you 
11  find  it  expedient  to  undertake  the  execution  of  your  bold  and  well- 
nceived  plan.  You  will  have  my  hearty  co-operation.  The  bearer, 
r.  Burton,  will  inform  you  more  particularly  of  the  strength  of  my 
my. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  the  greatest  respect,  your  obe- 
ent  servant,  • 

STERLING  PRICE, 

Major- General , Mo.  S.  G. 


Steamboat  Lackland, 
Columbus , January  4,  1862 — 8 p.  m. 
ij.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  C.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ey. : 

Dear  General  : Just  after  parting  from  you  this  morning  I was 
t ken  very  sick  and  compelled  to  come  to  this  boat  to  lie  down.  I 
\ ve  been  in  bed  until  now,  and  therefore  have  not  been  able  to  accept 
uir  kind  invitation  or  embrace  the  opportunity  to  dine  with  you, 
uich  I would  have  considered  an  honor  and  pleasure. 

This  boat  starts  down  to-night  and  I will  go  home  on  her. 

I regret  exceedingly  that  I did  not  have  a private  conversation  with 
ju,  as  our  Missouri  affairs  need  some  particular  attention,  and  I am 
Lrful  that  you  have  been  misinformed  by  some  of  the  parties  who 
l ve  visited  you  lately  as  to  the  true  state  of  feeling  in  my  district. 
Every  good  officer  and  soldier  will  again  enter  the  service  and  are 


732 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARIC.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVffl 


unanimous  in  tbeir  fondness  for  me;  but  officers  who  cannot  be  re 


unanimous  m tuon  wuuucoo  ^ . A * 

elected,  aspiring  men  who  cannot  get  commands,  and  disaffected  so] 
diers  are  all  hunting  excuses  to  cover  up  their  own  defeat,  and  man 
of  them  make  me  their  stumbling  block.  If  I can  have  but  little  er 
couragement  in  the  way  of  outfit— tents  and  arms— I can  have  2,50 
men  in  the  field  by  the  1st  of  February,  and  they  will  be  picked  me 
and  enlisted  “for  the  war” 

The  good  people  of  New  Orleans  have  been  sending  us  many  pm 
ents,  and  I understand  that  there  is  $10,000  in  bank  there  now  t 
be  expended  as  I may  desire  for  my  men.  If  this  is  continued,  whic 
by  honest  efforts  to  deserve  I hope  it  will  be,  we  will  require  tromth 
Confederacy  but  tents  and  arms,  and  then  by  putting  my  headquarter 
again  at  Bloomfield  I can  protect  all  Southeastern  Missouri  and  agar 

keep  10,000  men  watching  me.  , , w 

I may  probably  start  down  to  New  Orleans  on  Monday,  to  retur 
with  Governor  Jackson  and  the  commissioners  who  will  come  to  pa 
my  troops,  as  the  business  which  now  engages  my  attention  is  but 
little  wearisome  detail  settlement,  which  I had  probably  better  let  th 
quartermasters  and  commissaries  do,  as  it  will  learn  them  to  keep  thei 
accounts  straighter  hereafter,  and  as  long  as  I am  about  all  and  everj 
thing,  down  to  feeding  a courier,  is  laid  before  me. 

Should  I start  I will  telegraph  to  you  from  Memphis,  and  it  yo 
disapprove  the  trip  I will  immediately  return. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  ^ JEpp  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General,  Mo.  8.  G.  « 


Headquarters  Division, 

Fort  Smith , Ark.,  January  4,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper,  J7 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Army,  Richmond,  va.: 

General  : The  night  I arrived  in  Fort  Gibson,  C.  N.,  John  Eoss 
the  Ghief  of  the  Cherokees,  held  a council,  and  in  the  most  empkati 
language  expressed  his  determination  to  stand  firm  to  the  GovernmeB 
of  fhe  Confederate  States.  He  stated  that  he  had  made  treaties 
them  and  he  would  live  and  die  by  them.  A day  or  two  before  m 
arrival  serious  fears  were  entertained  that  all  was  not  right,  and  whs 
o-ave  grounds  for  this  fear  was  that  the  flag  ot  the  Confederacy  whic 
floated  over  Fort  Gibson  had  been  reversed. 

I think  the  march  of  our  force  into  the  nation  has  had  a most  happ 
eil'ect.  It  has  shown  them  that  we  are  able  and  willing  to  act  in  the 
behalf,  and  the  result  of  our  short  campaign  has  intimidated  man 
who  probably  meditated  mischief.  I think  John  Ross  is  sincere  an 
is  too  far  committed  now  to  recede.  Colonel  Cooper  has  a force  c 
nearly  3,000  Indians.  He  is  sufficiently  strong  to  protect  the  Territor 
against  any  combination  of  Indians  hostile  to  us.  Trouble  may  an, 
in  the  Cherokee  Nation  between  the  full-bloods  aiid  lialt  breeds,  h 
with  a little  determination  this  can  be  nipped  m the  bud.  Mr.  F 
C.  Armstrong  will  inform  you  tully  upon  the  state  of  affairs  heie  an 
in  the  Indian  Territory. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obediet 

servant,  JAMES  McINTOSH, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


aj*.  XVI3X]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


733 


enerax  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Mo.  S.  G., 

No.  7.  f Camp , Springfield , Mo .,  January  5,  1862. 

The  major-general  commanding  earnestly  hopes  that  no  depredations 
>on  property  by  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  army  occupying  houses  in 
d around  the  city  be  committed  by  them  or  allowed  to  be  committed 
r others. 

Tho  fencing  around  buildings  and  yards,  timber,  &c.,  are  liable  to 
injured  or  destroyed  by  such  an  army  as  his.  Men  frequently  pay 
it  little  attention  to  fruit  and  ornamental  trees  or  shrubbery  or  to 
e value  and  safety  of  yards  and  gardens.  These  are  all  prized  by 
e owners  of  the  property,  and  the  major-general  intends  to  have 
ch  rights  respected  and  protected.  He  calls  the  special  attention  of 
[ officers  and  soldiers  to  the  above,  and  hopes  that  no  such  abuses  as 
ose  enumerated  will  occur  while  his  army  remains  in  Springfield. 

The  attention  of  commanders  of  divisions  and  brigades,  regiments 
d battalions  and  companies,  is  particularly  directed  to  this  order 
d they  will  see  that  it  is  not  violated.  This  order  will  be  read  daily 
the  men  when  in  regimental,  battalion,  and  company  drill,  or  at  roll 
11,  for  one  week.  For  any  infraction  of  it  by  the  occupants  of  the 
Hidings  or  property  the  company  commander  will  be  held  respon- 
ible. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Price : 

WM.  H.  BRAND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


ieneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Mo.  S.  G., 

No.  9.  1 Camp  at  Springfield , Mo,,  January  7,  1862. 

# # # * * * * 

The  major-general  commanding,  desiring  that  none  but  those  belong- 
i g to  the  army  shall  forage  (in  auy  sense  of  the  word)  upon  the  com- 
i inity  at  large,  as  deceptions  of  that  kind  have  been  practiced,  now 
iders  that  all  who  are  not  citizens  of  the  county  or  members  of  the 
my,  or  who  have  not  permission  to  remain  either  in  the  county  or  in 
e army,  do  leave. 

III.  Officers  of  the  army,  especially  the  commanders  of  divisions, 
le  ordered  to  give  notice  of  any  infraction  of  this  order,  and  unless 
tisfactorily  explained  they  will  in  every  case  be  held  responsible 
erefor.  Independent  of  the  officers  of  the  army  and  the  commanders 
i the  respective  divisions,  citizens  of  the  city  of  Springfield  and  county 
i Green  are  earnestly  requested  to  report  any  and  all  violations  of  this 
liblished  order. 

# ####** 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Price  : 

WM.  H.  BRAND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  January  8,  1862. 

iv.  0.  F.  Jackson  : 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,  sent  me  through  the  Hon.  Jno. 
Clark,  together  with  one  addressed  to  himself,  has  been  this  day 


734 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiap.  XVIli 

received.  Viewed  as  a reply  to  mine  of  the  21st,  it  is  most  extraol 
dinary  that  you  should  recite  the  sufferings  and  ask  me  to  appoint  tl 
commander  of  the  militia  over  which  you  had  control,  and  concerninfl 
the  transfer  of  whom  I had  written  to  you,  pointing  out  the  necessitl 
for  their  tender  to  the  Confederate  Government  in  order  that  they  migll 
be  put  on  the  footing  of  other  volunteers  in  the  Confederate  servicj 
that  brigades  and  divisions  might  be  organized,  and  commanding  geil 
erals  be  appointed  for  them.  You  seem  only  to  remember  what  otheil 
have  not  done,  else  in  enumerating  the  privations  of  your  own  milithl 
not  mustered  into  the  Confederate  service,  you  would  have  mentioned 
the  relief  afforded  to  them  by  the  agent  of  the  Confederate  Government 
sent  by  me  with  money  to  cover  more  than  the  objects  you  and  Genera 
Atchison  originally  specified. 

You  speak  of  delay  and  neglect  of  Missouri  by  the  authorities  a| 
Liclimond.  In  what  our  delay  consists  and  wherein  our  neglect  ha| 
been  manifested  you  do  not  state,  but  it  would  seem  to  have  been  i| 
not  appointing  a general  before  we  had  troops  tor  him,  or  in  not  appoint 
ing  him  to  command  your  militia,  and  in  not  having  an  organized  arm) 
in  your  State  when  you  have  not  furnished  to  me  a regiment;  and  noj 
when  we  want  muster  rolls,  to  send  me  only  your  reasons  why  the  Mhj 
souri  Volunteers  may  not  be  willing  to  enter  the  service  of  the  (.'oil 
federate  States  and"  contribute  to  make  up  the  army  which  is  needel 


to  defend  Missouri. 

Though  your  letter  was  written  at  Hew  Orleans,  as  you  do  not  suj 
how  long  you  will  remain  there,  I send  this  to  Memphis,  under  the  ey 
pectation  that  you  will  return  to  that  place  or  to  Missouri,  and  take  thl 
occasion  to  renew  my  request  for  the  tender  of  any  armed  troops  whicj 
you  may  be  able  to  offer  to  the  Confederate  States  for  the  common  d<| 
fense  or  for  the  local  defense  of  Missouri. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

J JEFF  KK SOX  DAVIS. 


Special  Orders,  » Aim',  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  8.  ( Richmond , January  10,  1862. 

#*#•**** 

XIX.  That  part  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  north  of  Bed  ltiver,  tb 
Indian  Territory  west  of  Arkansas,  and  the  States  of  Arkansas  an 
Missouri,  excepting  therefrom  the  tract  of  country  east  of  the  Safi 
Francis,  bordering  on  the  Mississippi  Liver,  from  the  mouth  of  tb 
Saint  Francis  to  Scott  County,  Missouri  (which  tract  will  remain  in  tb 
district  of  Major-General  Polk),  is  constituted  the  Trams-Mississipi 
District  of  Department  Ho.  2,  and  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn  is  assign© 
to  the  command  of  the  same.  He  will  immediately  repair  to  Bowlin 
Green,  Ky.,  and  report  for  duty  to  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  commanc 
ing  Department  Ho.  2. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JXO.  WITHELS, 
Assistant  A dju taut-  General. 


Little  Lock,  January  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk: 

General  McCulloch’s  command  are  in  winter  quarters,  the  cavalr 
in  the  Arkansas  Liver  Valley,  this  side  of  Fort  Smith,  the  infautr 


AP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  735 

id  artillery  at  Cross  Hollow,  in  Benton  County,  70  miles  north  of 
ort  Smith.  This  is  the  latest  intelligence  I have. 

H.  M.  RECTOR, 

Go  vernor  of  Arkansas. 


[January  12,  16,  1862. — For  Benjamin  to  Johnston  and  to  Polk,  in- 
rming  them  of  Van  Dorn’s  assignment  to  the  Trans-Mississippi  De- 
triment, see  Series  I,  Yol.  VII,  pp.  826,  833.] 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  January  16,  1862 — 1 p.  m. 
aj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  C.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ky.: 

Dear  General  : I have  been  busily  engaged  paying  my  men  for 
irvices  prior  to  November  1,  1861.  Since  my  return  home  I have 
sen  many  citizens  from  the  two  upper  counties  of  my  district.  They 
! port  all  quiet.  Great  inducements  are  being  offered  to  my  men  to 
turn  to  their  homes  and  violent  threats  against  those  who  do  not. 
e are  laboring  under  great  difficulties,  but  I am  not  discouraged, 
i though  opposed  by  many  circumstances  which  others  must  assist  me 
| remove. 

As  soon  as  Governor  Jackson  reaches  this  point  I hope  he  will 
i unteraet  the  opposition  to  the  Confederate  service  which  seems  to 
I e vail  among  the  people.  If  I do  not  go  to  Richmond  next  week  I 
11  desire  to  remove  my  headquarters  beyond  the  swamp  in  Stod- 
i rd  County. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier -General,  Mo.  8.  G. 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  January  16,  1862. 

Is  Excellency  C.  F.  Jackson, 

Governor  of  Missouri , Memphis , Tenn. : 

Dear  Governor  : I reached  home  safely  on  the  14th,  and  on  yes- 
ti ’day  commenced  paying  the  men  for  their  services  prior  to  Novem- 
jr  1.  The  $100,000  brought  with  me  will  keep  us  busy  this  week,  and 
hope  that  more  will  be  ready  to  be  forwarded  by  that  time,  as  many 
[rsons  from  a distance  bring  quartermaster  and  commissary  scrip 
ijth  them,  and  are  sadly  disappointed  when  they  have  to  go  home 
* th  but  a portion  of  their  money.  The  whole  expense  of  my  brigade 
dl  exceed  $1,000,000,  and  of  course  what  I brought  is  but  a priming 
1 len  all  begin  to  demand  their  pay. 

There  is  a great  delay  in  the  enlistments  in  the  Confederate  service. 
' liether  it  be  the  fault  of  the  officers  or  the  disposition  of  the  men  or 
jp  hard  wintry  weather  which  prevails  at  present  I do  not  know, 
"mething  must  be  attributed  to  the  inducements  offered  by  the  Fed- 
Bds,  but,  be  it  what  it  may,  things  are  not  going  on  to  suit  me.  We 
some  encouragement  among  the  people.  These  bonds  we  are 
i uing  must  be  made  current,  and  to  do  so  the  Confederacy  must 
3>ume  the  whole  war  debt. 

> have  had  written  on  the  bonds  I have  issued,  u Prior  to  November 


rt  36 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [Chap.  XYIIll 


1,  1861. 


51  ” so  that  they  can  he  distinguished  from  those  issued  for  senaj 
ices  since  November  1,  as  it  is  better  that  they  should  be  distinguishes 
from  each  other,  as  by  not  doing  so  all  may  [be]  considered  below  pal 
whereas  everybody  is  willing  to  take  those  for  expenses  since  the  Cor! 
federaey  assumed  our  debt.  I hope  you  will  instruct  our  commissioner! 
to  make  some  distinguishing  mark  until  the  whole  can  be  made  equalljj 
good,  or  rather  instruct  the  paymasters,  or  we  will  have  lnterminabll 

confusion.  . . . . _ , 

I wish  you  would  make  all  inquiries  necessary  about  repairing  ol 

guns. 

Tours,  most  respectfully,  ^ JEpp  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General.  1 


General  Orders, 


No.  5. 


Hdqrs.  First  Diy.  Western  Dept., 

Columbus , Ky .,  January  16,  1862. 

The  major-general  commanding  has  heard  with  great  satisfactiol 
from  Col.  E.  W.  Gantt  and  has  read  in  the  Saint  Louis  Republican  (I 
the  9th  instant  of  the  daring  and  brillant  feat  of  Lieut.  S.  Swank,  (I 
Captain  Price’s  cavalry,  with  4 men,  in  attacking  a marauding  band  d 

1,300  of  the  enemy. * , . , . 

The  attack  was  successful  to  a degree  rarely  equaled  m the  annai 
of  war  The  enemy  acknowledge  4 killed  and  10  wounded.  He  admit 
his  cavalry  retreated.  Our  men  claim  they  killed  5 on  the  spot  an 
wounded  21,  of  whom  5 soon  died.  Either  statement  makes  heroes  d 
the  brave  men  who  thus  dared  to  meet  an  enemy  with  an  overwhelm^ 
force.  Such  an  example  is  worthy  the  imitation  of  all  Southern  men. 

The  major-general  returns  his  thanks  to  Lieutenant  Swank  and  iij 
men,  Mathew  Wyrick,  George  Holman,  Jo.  Danforth,  and  Alonzo  CM 
for  their  brillant  illustration  of  Southern  valor. 

Let  the  soldiers  of  my  command  defend  Southern  soil  in  imitation  < 
these  brave  Missourians. 

By  command  of  Major-General  WILLIAMg0N> 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  I 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Springfield,  January  17,  1862. 


Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  two  regiments  of 
Colonels  Burbridge  and  Elves;  one  regiment  of  cavairy,  Colonel  Gate, 
two  light  batteries,  one  of  six  pieces,  Captain  Wade;  the  other  of  for 
pieces!  Capt.  8.  Churchill  Clark,  have  been  organized  here  in  conform 
to  tte  laws  of  the  Confederate  States  for  service  in  the  Provision. 
Army.  The  muster  rolls  are  being  rapidly  made  out,  and  will  be  tran 

mitted  to  you  within  five  or  six  days.  . , , 

I have  organized  these  regiments  and  batteries  into  a tempora 
brigade,  under  the  command  of  Col.  Henry  Little,  C.  S.  Army. 


No  report  of  this  affair  can  be  found. 


VP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


737 


I hope  that  it  will  be  the  President’s  pleasure  to  accept  the  transfer 
these  troops  without  any  unnecessary  delay  and  as  tendered  of  this 
te.  The  infantry  regiments  and  the  artillery  companies  are  fully 
jmed  and  equipped.  The  cavalry  regiment  is  well  armed  and  equipped, 
d will  be  completely  armed  and  equipped  by  the  State. 

[ have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ STERLING  PRICE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Missouri  State  Guard. 

P.  S. — Several  other  regiments  of  infantry,  a regiment  of  cavalry  (for 
3 war),  and  several  companies  of  artillery  are  in  a forward  state  of 
listment,  and  I expect  to  have  the  pleasure  of  transmitting  to  you  the 
ister  rolls  of  several  additional  brigades  within  a very  few  weeks. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

STERLING  PRICE, 
Major-General , M.  S.  G. 


Hdqrs.  First  Mil.  Dist.,  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  Neic  Madrid , January  18,  1862 — 9 p.  m. 
j.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  C.  S.  A.,  Columbus , Ky. : 

Dear  General  : 1 sent  you  a message  to-day  by  the  captain  of  the 
Soto,  being  information  which  I gathered  from  the  Chicago  Times 
the  14th  instant,  and  from  Lieutenant  Swank,  who  is  the  officer  who 
> fought  the  Federals  so  bravely. 

f the  information  was  correct  I have  no  doubt  but  that  your  hands 
full  of  business  at  present,  unless  the  rain  for  the  past  twenty-four 
irs  has  compelled  the  enemy  to  retire. 

t is  reported  to-night  here  that  a column  is  at  Benton  on  their  way 
e and  that  another  column  occupied  Bloomfield  yesterday, 
ffiese  reports  need  confirmation  to  me,  but  they  are  currently  be- 
red  at  this  place.  If  true,  I will  also  have  my  hands  full ; for 
lough  the  country  on  both  sides  of  the  swamp  is  full  of  my  men, 
there  has  been  no  organization,  and  all  look  to  me  as  captain, 
mel,  and  general. 

ou  have  probably  heard  that  all  persons  living  within  6 miles  ot 
d’s  Point  (men,  women,  and  children)  have  been  taken  into  the  fort 
l are  guarded  there. 

hould  you  have  a moment’s  leisure  at  any  time  I would  be  very 
teful  if  you  would  write  a word  in  my  favor  to  the  u powers  ” at 
hmond,  as  it  is  almost  impossible  for  me  to  spare  the  time  to  go  to 
hmond,  as  a majority  of  our  Missouri  brigadiers  have,  to  attend  to 
i interests  in  person,  and  the  sooner  the  Missourians  know  who  are 
:be  their  leaders,  the  sooner  they  will  enlist  in  the  Confederate 
I rice. 

know  that  personal  enemies  have  told  you  that  my  popularity  and 
( fiency  are  myths,  but  I am  vain  enough  to  believe  that  you  think 
erwise,  and  as  between  myself  and  the  other  Missouri  brigadiers 
re  is  a little  personal  pride  and  ambition,  and  as  we  all  cannot  be  ap- 
ated  in  the  Confederate  service,  I would  prefer  to  be  one  of  those 
^cted. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General. 


47  r r — VOL  VIII 


738 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Cm 


X Vll 


January  21,  1862.1 

Mem.  [for  General  Polk]: 

I have  visited  Island  No.  10  and  the  positions  in  that  vicinity , a 
agree  with  Captain  Gray  in  the  importance  which  he  attaches  to  the; 

SI  t would  he  well,  in  my  opinion,  to  remove  at  once  to  that  vicinity 
the  troops  and  guns  from  Fort  Pillow  except  a small  battery  and  t; 
men  necessary  to  fight  it,  and  to  strengthen  the  different  points  abd 
the  island  by  the  establishment  of  batteries  at  selected  points,  to  cd 
tain  in  all  from  forty  to  fifty  heavy  guns,  sustain^  by  a land  force  I 
from  4,000  to  5,000  men.  This  done,  and  the  works  pushed  on  t 
completion,  would  greatly  add  to,  if  it  did  not  entirely  insure,  the  ; 

curitv  of  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi*  i-diia-v* 

General  Thompson  thinks  that  the  visit  of  the  General  Polk  to  H 
Madrid  and  her  frequent  appearance  in  that  neighborhood  is  imp  j 
tant  If  I ever  saw  a position  where  steamers  ol  war  could  be  stoppl 
fry1  batteries  it  is  the  one  embraced  in  the  remarks  which  I,  with  gr«| 
diffidence,  have  taken  the  liberty  to  submit. 

' I should  have  done  myself  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  personally,! 
I am  quite  unwell  and  much  debilitated. 


WM.  0.  WHITTLE, 
Commanding  Naval  Forces  Columbus j 


Fayetteville,  Ark.,  January  24,  1862] 


[Major-General  Price:]  . . 

General  - Your  communication  of  the  21st*  was  received  last  mg 
Its  Entente  have  b^n  carefully  considered.  I immediate  y forwari 
vour  letter  addressed  to  Ool.  [James]  McIntosh.  He  will  get  it  tj 
morning  I will  take  immediate  measures  to  have  my  command  fu 
“adv  for  a movement  should  the  colonel  commanding  division  anti 
ize  it  and  will  go  to  your  support  at  any  time  you  ascertain  an  ad  a, 
of  the  enemy.  I will  hear  from  Colonel  McIntosh  by  to-niglit,  if  1 
«rvrmpr  As  soon  as  I do,  I will  send  you  a messenger. 

Be  assured,  general,  that  I have  every  willingness  to  give  you 
suimort  and  will  do  so  cheerfully  if  permitted.  . 

I ’remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  y°«  ^BERT^ 

Colonel  Third  Regiment  La.  Vols .,  Commanding  Brigade 


Should  you  determine  anythin 
for  your  army,  please  dispatch 
smallpox. 


or  relative  to  the  train  now  near  h 
at  once.  There  are  no  new  cases 


Fayetteville,  Ark.,  January  22,  18& 

Maj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price, 

Commanding  Mo.  (r. : 

General-  I have  the  honor  to  respectfully  transmit  a copy’  « 

&^CuuS;in  itL 


f Not  found. 


Ts^Chilton  to. Hubert,  December  6L  1861,  p.  726. 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


739 


ii^es°bjeCt’  gen6ra1’ is  now  to  347186  you  on  the  subject  of  the 

W nmWPm^e  aI1  in  T'“ter  <Juart6r8>  and  the  small  amount  of  cav- 
ickness  J C°mmand  18  not  very  6ffi6i6I*t  at  present  on  account  of 

onr' fn^Thl  ^e’  1 70u1t  resP66tfully  ask  that  some  portion  of 

our  force  be  sent  to  Granby.  It  may,  however,  be  that  the  forces  now 
iere  are  sufficient  for  the  protection  of  the  mines.  You  are  certainlv 
iore  able  to  judge  of  this  than  I am.  certainly 

Should  you  think  otherwise  I will  send  some  troops  up,  although  I 

rjtTadvffied°  S°-  111  tWS  reSpe0t’  geDera1’ 1 

} .,.iave  to  acknowledge  your  communication  of  the  16th  instant  and 

ust  thTtPIwib  do  Ltin-d  exPression  of  «00d  feelings  and  wishes.  I 
ust  that  I will  do  nothing  to  mar  our  pleasant  relations.  The  cases 

small  pox  here  were  all  citizens  and  not  soldiers.  Until  now  the 
sease  has  not  spread.  e 

your  letter  I telegraphed  to  the  medical  purveyor  at 
3rt  Smith  relative  to  vaccine  matter  for  your  army.  His  reply  is 
at  he  will  immediately  give  his  attention  to  my  request.  I have  also 
.sued  orders  to  all  the  surgeons  of  my  brigade  to  save  all  reliable 
mcine  matter  and  to  dispose  of  it  whenever  called  for.  The  medical 

tttofrom  tho  ?™S1?VS  al*°usil,2  his  efforts  to  obtain  reliable 
fw  -I?  inoculation  ot  the  cow  with  real  small-pox  virus.  1 
list  that  with  precaution  the  disease  will  be  arrested  at  once. 

I remain,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Colonel  Third  Regt.  La.  Fete.,  Oomdg.  Second  Brigade. 

*rain  °T  SOme,77  wa?0ns  froin  Fort  Smith  is  arriving  here 
isLned  to  you.  I am  directed  to  furnish  an  escort  to  it,  I would, 

3 that  y°U  lend  an  eSCOrt  t0  meet  the  train  as  far  down 

3 possible,  as  I can  spare  but  a very  small  body  of  mounted  men. 

i °^er?d.to  follow  the  telegraph  road  to  Springfield, 
ns  tram  is  intended  to  bring  a return  load  of  lead  from  Granby^ 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  H.,  Colonel. 


NE]>j  L Sr:ders?  I Hdqrs.  Missouri  State  Guard, 

JNo.  Zb.  f Springfield , Mo .,  January  23,  1862. 

The  volunteer  force  will  be  distributed  until  further  orders  into 
) brigades  and  an  extra  battalion. 

[.The  foll, ’vying  troops  will  constitute,  the  First  Brigade: 
ife1  First  Regiment  Cavalry,  Colonel  Gates. 

I“e  „r8t  Regiment  Infantry,  Colonel  Bin-bridge. 

I he  Second  Regiment  Infantry,  Colonel  Rives. 

Captain  Wade’s  battery. 

Captain  Clark’s  battery, 
iol  Henry  Little  will  assume  command  of  this  brigade,  and  appoint. 
,h  *he  major-general's  approval,  a brigade  staff,  consisting  of-  ^ 

• An  adjutant,  with  the  rank  of  captain. 

An  inspector,  with  the  rank  of  captain. 

An  ordnance  officer,  with  the  rank  of  captain. 


740 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  (Chap-  XVI..I 


4.  A quartermaster,  with  the  rank  of  major. 

5 A commissary,  with  the  rank  of  major. 

6.  An  aXde-camp,  with  the  rank  of  first-lieutenant. 

mACSfoUowing  troops  will  until  further  orders  constitute  tli 

Second  Brigade^ie^s  battalion  of  infantry. 

2 Colonel  Kosser’s  battalion  of  infantry. 

3 Colonel  McCulloch’s  battalion  of  cavalry. 

o,tgt.™,S' 3 r.b, « J 

as  the  exigencies  of  the  service  my  .4^  vohmteers  who  have  n, 

!S3»gt>»*  ■>?*““  - *l">” 

im~t"  - <***  “ ■“‘T 

MVI*  SSHSJKrtS  "!  » eater  th.  Corf 

3^5SS^5SSir»a 

S*  TSSrfl  Army  S"SeCo4de,*te  States  and  ,»,«  thee,  iu  - 

m mmmm 

ini! SSH5S 


741 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

^shall  be  made  be  duly  enrolled  in  bis  brigade  or  battalion.  Any 
tficer  who  shall  presume  to  disobey  this  order  will  be  held  to  a strict 
ceountability. 

I TPJ-  .Th<?  quartermaster,  commissary,  and  ordnance  officer  of  the 
first  Brigade  will  each  take  an  exact  inventory  of  all  the  public  prop- 
rty  within  the  brigade  belonging  to  his  department:  and  after  ob- 
uning  therefor  the  proper  receipts  (in  the  form  required  by  the  Reau- 
dions  for  the  Government  of  the  Armies  of  the  Confederate  States) 
om  the  officers  to  whom  the  same  has  been  delivered,  he  will  receipt 
i due  form  to  the  Quartermaster- General  and  Commissary  General  of 
le  State  for  such  property. 

IX.  No  discharge  will  be  hereafter  granted  to  any  soldier  of  the  State 
uard  upon  the  ground  of  “ re-enlistment  for  twelve  months  or  longer  ” 
rless  he  shall  bring  a certificate  from  the  adjutant  of  one  of  the  bri- 
ides  or  of  the  extra  battalion  that  he  has  been  duly  enrolled  in  such 
igade  or  battalion. 

X.  The  Confederate  Government  will  not  accept  any  additional  com- 
mies of  cavalry  unless  they  enlist  for  the  war. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Price: 

WM.  H.  BRAND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fayetteville,  Ark.,  January  24,  1862. 
aj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price, 

Commanding  Mo.  8.  G.,  Springfield,  Mo. : 

General  : By  instruction  from  division  headquarters  I transmit  to 
| u a telegram  from  the  colonel  commanding.  I will  use  all  efforts  to 
I ready  to  assist  you  whenever  called  upon.  I am  pleased  that  the 
[lonel  commanding  division  authorizes  me  to  move  my  force  when 
| u give  me  information  of  the  enemy  that  will  warrant  me  to  advance 
[)  news  from  below  beyond  what  is  given  in  the  telegram, 
in  haste,  I remain,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ . LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Colonel  Third  Regt.  La.  k ols .,  Commanding  Brigade. 


neral  Price  : 


[Inclosure.] 


Fort  Smith, 

January  24  1862  (via  Fayetteville). 


have  ordered  Colonel  Hubert  to  put  his  brigade  in  immediate  prep- 
iidion  to  move  forward  on  your  call.  If  the  troops  now  at  Rolla  in- 
i'id  an  advance  at  once  I suppose  you  will  be  able  to  ascertain  the 
.*  and  you  can  at  once  call  on  Colonel  Hubert,  who  will  move  to  your 
instance.  The  troops  now  at  Fayetteville  under  Colonel  Hebert, 
[irly  4,000,  can  reach  Springfield  as  soon  as  those  from  Rolla  can 
Iso. 

ten  do  not  inform  me  of  the  strength  or  condition  of  your  command, 
lould  know  both,  in  order  to  justify  me  in  the  responsibility  of  taking 
h step.  I will  at  once  order  some  of  the  regiments  from  Texas  to  the 
>nt  in  anticipation  of  active  operations  in  Missouri. 

am  now  engaged  in  carrying  into  effect  important  orders  received 
m the  headquarters  of  the  Army  ; but  if  you  are  in  danger  I will  be 
v n you  with  the  advance  of  our  troops.  I hope  you  will  use  your 
1 lost  endeavors  to  have  all  the  flour  prejjared  you  can. 


742  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvm 


ThP  weather  may  prevent  either  of  these  movements.  If  a sever* 
snow-storm  should  take  place,  I do  not  think  the  Federals  could  ad 
vance  I am  expecting  in  a short  time  the  arrival  of  other  o&cerf 
here  superior  in  rank  to  myself,  and  they  will  expect  an  efficient  fore, 
here  to  operate  with.  However,  whenever  I think  it  necessary  for  thn 
division  to  act.  I will  assume  the  responsibility. 

Colonel  Hebert’s  brigade  comprises  the  greatest  and  most  efficien 
part  of1  my  command.  I know  the  importance  of  holding  Springfield 
and  I know  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  urge  you  to  strengthen  it  by  every 
means  in  your  power  now  while  you  have  J“*^MoIsraK)B5> 

Colonel , Commanding  Division,  i 


Headquarters  New  Madrid,  Mo., 

January  24,  1862 — 9 p.  m.  i 


[Gr::  SIB : I have  just  learned  from  my  pickets  that  a large  force  cl 
infantov  and  cavalry  reached  Charleston  at  12  o’clock  a.  m.  of  to-daj 
Their  destination  may  he  here.  If  it  is,  and  as  large  jj 

their  progress  must  necessarily  be  slow,  and  you  shall  be  advmea  l 
.w  tirnA  Tf  a small  force,  they  had  better  stay  away.  New  Madn 
is  not  “taken”  yet,  and  allow  me  to  say  if  it  is,  the  announcement  o 
it  in  the  papers  shall  not  be  so  tame  as  that  I read  to  day. 

Very  respeotfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  ^ GANTT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


New  Madrid,  January  24,  1862. 


Col.  Sol.  G.  Kitchen,  Clarlcston: 

tvt-ax.  cm  onpt  • The  enemy  are  making  a demonstration  froi 

■*»"  “ b“1^°iCuS 

to  fortify  Bloomfield,  in  which  case  I will  be  a ter  them  myscl  . 

Let  no  personal  prejudice  interfere  ^S^I.^mpSON, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


New  Madrid,  January  24,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  0.  8.  A.,  Columbus,  Ky.: 

r'-ciT\n?T?  at  • The  enemy  are  in  motion  on  our  side  ot  the  n 
A cou^eHu^fn  from  the  plank  road  reports  2,000  men  advancing  . 
OlarkSn  They  cannot  reach  there  before  to  morrow  night.  I ™ 


(af.  xviii  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  743 

ive  400  or  500  men  there  to  hold  them  in  check  until  the  movement 
i this  side  of  the  swamp  is  developed.  You  will  hear  from  Colonel 
antt  that  a large  force  is  said  to  be  at  Charleston,  but  as  I have  not 
bard  from  there  for  some  hours  I do  not  think  they  have  started  in 
lis  direction.  There  can  be  no  active  service  before  Monday  morn- 
g,  and  as  I am  on  the  qui  vine  I will  keep  you  posted. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF,  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier-  General , 


New  Madrid,  January  25,  1862 — 8 p.  m. 
aj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  Columbus , Ky.: 

Dear  General  : I send  you  a Eepublican  of  the  22d,  in  which  you 
11  find  a plan  of  campaign  laid  down  which  shows  the  importance  of 
3W  Madrid.  The  movement  is  certainly  being  made  to  get  this  point 
hi  if  you  have  steamboats  enough  to  make  it  safe  and  will  cross  a 
hge  force  to  make  a demonstration  from  Belmont  it  may  delay,  if 
i t divert  them,  whereas  you  can  cross  your  men  back  again  when 
cessary.  The  fort  here  will  be  held  to  the  last  extremity,  but  I may 
I ve  to  take  my  little  force  to  the  plank  road,  as  I out  of  the  fort  wiil 
I Jeff.  Thompson , and  in  it  I will  be  but  one  man. 

If  you  have  heard  or  now  believe  in  this  movement  being  made 
[ease  send  for  several  steamboats  to  make  the  negro  property  safe 
ien  I can  get  more  men. 

After  reading  the  Eepublican  please  send  it  to  the  Appeal,  Memphis, 

; the  person  from  whom  I received  it  was  taking  it  there. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier-  General . 


Headquarters, 

New  Madrid , Mo.,  Jamuary  26,  1862. 
bj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  Columbus , Ky.: 

Dear  Sir  : Accounts  from  Charleston  report  the  enemy  at  that 
I ice  as  late  as  3 o’clock  yesterday  evening.  Their  force  is  reported 
i large,  consisting  of  infantry  and  cavalry.  No  artillery  as  yet  so 
i pickets  inform  me.  ’ 

Hie  reported  demonstration  towards  Clarkton  is  confirmed.  I do 
! ' regard  it  as  of  much  significance.  A mere  contest  with  Colonel 
* :chen  about  a lot  of  sugar. 

Jolonel  Gee’s  regiment  (Arkansas),  by  the  blundering  of  Captain 
^an,  has  been  ordered  to  Bowling  Green.  I learn  there  was  almost 
> mversal  desire  among  the  men  and  officers  to  be  sent  to  this  com 

md. 

'olonel  Dawson’s  (Arkansas)  regiment  will  fall  to  pieces  unless 
| ered  away  from  there, 
need  a steamboat  here  badly. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


744 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS., 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvni 


Headquarters, 


New  Madrid , Mo .,  January  27 


1S62. 


Maior-General  Polk,  Columbus , Ey.: 

Dear  Sir  : My  pickets  came  from  within  3 miles  of  Charleston  since 
6 clock  vesterday  evening,  the  26th.  A strong  force  of  infantry  and 
cavalry  there.  Re-enforcements  from  Bird’s  Point  coming  in  all  day  ;| 
wagons  and  teams  being  pressed  at  Charleston  Citizens  near  there 
think  this  place  is  to  be  attacked.  I have  the  Eleventh  and  Twelfth  > 
Arkansas  Regiments  and  two  artillery  companies  to  meet  this  force! 
should  it  come.  General  Thompson  can  raise  near  100  men,  no  more. 
This  point  is  regarded  as  so  important,  that  it  will  be  held  or  youi 
forces  here  annihilated.  We  are  in  good  spirits ; not  uneasy  or  insen- 
sible of  the  importance  of  our  task  if  attacked.  Could  a few  men  and, 
grins  (small-arms)  be  spared  from  Fort  Pillow  ? ...  » 

g Bo  farther  news  from  Clarkton.  My  opinion  unchanged  in  refer 

ence  to  that  officer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  ^ GABTT 

Colonel,  Commanding  Post.  : 


P.  S._My  pickets  from  Sikeston,  just  in,  report  500  cavalry  there 
this  morning. 


Headquarters, 

New  Madrid , Mo.,  January  28,  1862. 

Major-General  Polk,  Columbus , Ey. : 

Dear  Sir  : Reports  from  my  pickets  up  to  12  o’clock  to-day.  Enem, 

still  at  Charleston  and  Bertrand.  Paqi, 

The  direct  road  from  Charleston  here  next  to  impassable.  Road  Iiod 
Sikeston  here  good.  Road  from  Sikeston  to  Charleston  very  bad.  lr 
formation  obtained  by  my  scouts  to-day  leads  them  to  conclude  tha 
the  enemy  are  rebuilding  the  railroad  from  Charleston  to  Sikeston. 
sent  this  evening  a party  of  well-mounted  men  to  aseertainthe  trutJ 
of  it.  We  are  pushing  on  our  works  with  renewed  vigor.  W ant  oi 
steamboat  retards  us  some. 

I will  endeavor  to  keep  you  advised  of  matters,  and  without  any  d 
sire  of  reputation,  but  with  an  honest  purpose  to  serve  my  country  an 
humanity,  I will  make  the  best  of  the  means  afforded  me. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ga^tT 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard, 

Camp  at  Springfield,  January  28,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond , Ya. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  muster  rolls  of  tw 
regiments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  two  compames ( 
artillery,  mentioned  in  my  communication  of  the  17th  instant,  have  th 
day  been  forwarded  to  General  Samuel  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspect 
General,  C.  S.  Armv,  by  the  hands  of  Col.  Thomas  L.  Snead. 


:haf.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  745 

Colonel  Snead  has  been  engaged  from  the  beginning  in  the  formation 
ind  organization  of  these  troops.  He  is  fully  acquainted  with  their 
>rganization,  and  for  this  especial  reason  has  been  directed  to  bear  the 
nuster  rolls  to  Richmond  and  act  for  the  State  in  transferring  them  to 
he  Confederate  Government.  His  statements  concerning  the  army 
ts  strength,  and  condition,  as  well  as  the  prospects  of  the  campaign^ 
nay  be  relied  upon.  I have  fully  communicated  my  views  to  him,  and 
nstructed  him  to  present  them  to  the  President  and  yourself. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

STERLING  PRICE, 

Major- General,  Commanding  Mo.  S.  G. 


Fayetteville,  Ark.,  January  29,  1862. 
laj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  Springfield: 

General  : I write  but  a hasty  note.  You  will  excuse  me  for  doing 
°*  I,hav?  been  Preparing  my  troops  to  give  you  assistance,  and  in- 
ended  to  leave  here  to-morrow  with  some  of  my  cavalry  to  pay  you  a 
apid  visit.  At  the  same  time  I would  have  advanced  some  troops  on 
be  way,  but,  general,  at  8 a.  m.  to-day  we  have  here  eight  inches  of 
now  and  a heavy  fall  still  going  on.  It  is  of  course  impossible  for  me 
a move  my  command. 

As,  general,  I intend  to  do  all  things  practicable  to  assist  you,  I still 
equest  that  you  do  me  the  kindness  of  keeping  me  informed. 

With  high  respect,  I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  Dist.,  Dept.  No.  2, 

J Little  Bock , Ark.,  January  29,  1862. 

I.  The  undersigned,  by  order  of  the  President,  assumes  command  of 
le  Trans-Mississippi  District,  which  comprises  the  States  of  Missouri 
ad  Arkansas,  except  that  portion  of  them  lying  between  the  Saint 
rancis  and  Mississippi  Rivers,  as  far  north  as  Scott  County,  Missouri: 
ie  State  of  Louisiana,  as  far  south  as  Red  River  and  the  Indian  Ter- 
tory  west  of  Arkansas.  Headquarters,  until  otherwise  directed,  at 
ocahontas,  Ark. 

Commanders  of  troops  in  the  service  of  the  Confederate  States- 
ithin  this  district  will  at  once  make  a report  of  the  strength  and  con- 
fa011  of  their  commands,  accompanied  with  a written  report  in  full 
everything  relating  to  the  supplying  of  the  troops,  their  wants,  their 
ms  and  equipments,  their  clothing,  ammunition,  and,  in  a word,  of 
erything  that  might  be  considered  useful  to  be  known  at  liead- 
larters. 

II.  All  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  soldiers  belonging  to 
>e  troops  of  this  district,  now  on  furlough,  are  hereby  ordered  to  re- 
rn  immediately  to  their  regiments.  The  sick  alone  are  excepted. 

| ^ hoped  that  this  order  will  be  considered  a sufficient  guarantee 
at  there  is  a necessity  for  the  immediate  services  of  every  soldier  in 
e district,  and  that  those  to  whom  it  relates  will  respond  with  cheer- 
mess  and  alacrity  to  it. 

III.  The  following  officers  are  announced  as  staff  officers  at  head- 
larters : 


746  OPERATIONS  IN  MO,  ARK,  KANS,  AND  IND.  T.  (0h«  xvra. 


Mai  W.  L.  Cabell,  chief  of  quartermaster  department. 

Mai  A M.  Haskell,  inspector- general. 

Mai*.  R.  W.  Key  worth,  chief  of  subsistence  departmen  . 

Cant  W N.  R.  Beall,  assistant  adjutant- general. 

Sursr*.  J.  J.  Gaenslan,  medical  director. 

First-Lieut.  Clement  SuUvane^au^de^camp.^f  ^ ^ departmoutg 

wSZSSSSto  the  chief  in  the 

Major-General. 


, r f a*  dtotsion  of  Confederate  forces  commanded  by  General 

Abstract  from  ^/Jbc^mtcrndm  ^ ^ 


Present  for 
duty. 


Commands. 


<1® 


! 122  I 2,991 


First 
Second  (Col 


(Col.  James  McIntosh’s)  Brigade  * j 229  3*, ' 

i (Col.  Hubert’s)  Brigade  t - I 


939 


Total  . 


351 


3,  575  j 

5,  192 


4, 51  j 

6, 1S1 


8,  767 


10,87 


Near  Fort  Smith. 


t Near  Fayetteville,  Bentonville,  and  Caneville. 


Organization 


of  McCulloch’s  division , January  31,  1862 


First  Brigade . 

Col.  James  McIntosh, 


let  Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles,  Col.  T.  J. 

Churchill.  ^ , _ 

M Arkansas  Mounted  Rifles,  Col.  James 

4th  [9thl  "Texas  Cavalry,  CoLW.  B.  Sims. 
6th  Texas  Cavalry,  Col.  B.  W.  Stone. 
South  Kansas-Texas  Regiment,  Col.  it. 

Lamar  Cavalry,  Capt.  H.  S.  Bennett. 


Second  Brigade. 


Col.  Louis  Hubert. 


4th  Arkansas,  Col.  E.  McNair. 

14th  Arkansas,  Col.  M.  C.  Mitchell. 

16th  Arkansas,  Colonel  Hill. 

17th  Arkansas,  Col.  Frank  Rector. 

21st  Arkansas,  Col.  D.  McRae.  J 

1st  Arkansas  Battalion,  Maj.  W.  1^ 
Brooks.  . 

3d  Louisiana,  Col.  Louis  Hebert. 
Texas  Cavalry,  Col.  W.C.  Young. 
Texas  Mounted  Rifles,  Maj.  J.  W.  Win 

Artillery  Battalion  (4  companies),  Cft{ 
W.  R.  Bradfute. 


_ i oco  Oonfederate  Government  calls  upon  Arkana 

foreleven  regiments  “ for  the  war.”  See  mmsition  of  this  date  np< 
the  several  Confederate  States  in  Series  I , ] 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va.,  February  3,  18W- 

ISSiSiars 


TAP.  XVTII]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


747 


iree  years  or  during  the  war,”  and,  in  accordance  with  its  provisions 
have  been  instructed  by  the  President  to  make  a call  on  the  several 
tates  for  a number  of  men,  to  be  enlisted  for  the  war,  sufficient  to  fill 
p a quota  equal  to  6 per  cent,  on  the  entire  white  population.  Under 
lese  instructions  the  number  of  troops  required  from  your  State  would 
e about  71,000  men,  or  eighty-nine  regiments,  of  800  men  on  an  average, 
nder  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  Missouri  is  placed  and  the 
ifficulties  which  embarrass  her  authorities  I cannot  hope  that  you  will 
e able  at  present  to  meet  the  requisition,  which  it  is,  however,  mv  dutv 
D make.  9 J J 

I therefore  respectfully  call  on  Your  Excellency  to  raise  and  have 
ustered  into  the  Confederate  service  the  above-named  number  of  regi- 
ments, or  so  many  thereof  as  it  may  be  possible  for  you  to  obtain. 
hese  regiments  will  be  called  into  camps  of  instruction,  which  you  are 
1 vi ted  to  select.  They  will  there  be  clothed,  subsisted,  and  armed  at 
■^hex^ense  Confederate  States.  Each  man  will  receive  a bounty 
$50  when  mustered  into  service,  as  well  as  transportation  from  his 
>me  to  the  place  of  rendezvous. 

It  is  earnestly  hoped  that  Your  Excellency  will  spare  no  effort  to  have 
)ur  troops  ready  for  the  field  by  March  15,  at  which  date  it  is  con- 
lently  believed  you  will  be  joined  by  the  forces  of  your  sister  States 
such  numbers  as  will  enable  us,  by  conjoint  effort,  to  drive  the  in- 
aders  from  the  soil  of  Missouui. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Richmond , February  5,  1862. 
aj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  Springfield , Mo.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letter  of  17th 
dimo.  I am  much  gratified  to  learn  that  you  are  proceeding  success- 
illy  m the  effort  to  organize  troops  for  service  under  the  Confederacy 
; d have  already  a brigade  under  Col.  Henry  Little. 

The  President,  whose  intention  it  has  always  been  to  secure  your 
• rvices  in  the  common  cause  as  soon  as  a number  of  troops  could  be 
ustered  m from  Missouri  sufficient  to  form  a division,  at  first  thought 
1 tendering  you  the  nomination  of  commander  of  the  brigade  already 
j}rmed  as  a preliminary  to  the  further  nomination  to  command  a divis- 
n as  soon  as  another  brigade  could  be  formed,  but  he  has  been  ar- 
uted  by  the  fear  that  your  removal  from  the  command  of  the  State 
! )0I)S  before  the  transfer  was  complete  might  have  the  effect  of  break- 
llP  your  present  forces  before  your  new  command  was  organized. 

I have  to  request  that  at  your  earliest  convenience  you  forward  to 
13  (an(l  if  will  bo  held  confidential  if  you  wish  it)  a list  of  the  officers 
' your  State  troops  competent,  in  your  opinion,  to  command  brigades, 

' the  order  of  their  merit.  It  is  a most  difficult  and  thankless  task  to 
Meet  commanders,  and  at  this  distance  from  the  scene  of  action  we 
entirely  at  a loss  how  to  determine  on  the  capacity  of  those  recom- 
i aided  for  high  military  commands. 

You  seem  from  the  terms  of  your  letter  to  be  under  some  misappre- 
Jnsion  when  you  say  that  you  hope  the  transfer  of  the  troops  already 
iigaded  will  be  accepted  without  any  unnecessary  delay.  The  troops 
P already  accepted  at  the  instant  you  have  them  mustered  into  serv- 


748 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  .T.  [Chap.  XVIIll 


ice 


we  require  nothing  further,  but  in  order  to  secure  the  return  ol 

1 ,,  .1  * °T\  u.  T f A TIVT 


we  requxie  — - „ 

the  muster  rolls  to  this  Department,  I have  generally  refused  to  fur  : 
nish  the  commissions  for  the  regimental  staff  until  I had  the  mustej  « 

10  You  are  aware  that  under  our  organization  each  regiment  is  entitlec 
to  the  following  staff,  viz : one  assistant  quartermaster,  one  assistan 
commissary,  one  surgeon,  one  assistant  surgeon,  one  chaplain,  and  om 
adiutant.  We  are  in  the  habit  of  nominating  these  on  the  recommen 
dation  of  the  colonels  of  the  regiments,  and  as  fast  as  regiments  ar< 
formed  the  colonels  ought  to  consult  their  regiments  and  send  me  ;l 
list  of  the  staff  they  desire  to  have  nominated.  . 

We  are  making  every  effort  to  raise  for  your  aid  such  a lorce  in  Ar 
kansas,  Texas,  Northern  Louisiana  as  shall  be  able,  when  combined  wita 
your  own  troops,  to  make  a vigorous  campaign,  commencing,  if  possible 
by  10th  to  15th  next  month. 

I am,  your  obedieut  servaut,  } p BENJAM1N) 

Secretary  of  War . 


Little  Kock,  February  6,  1862. 


Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

General  Van  Dorn  has  called  upon  me  for  8,500  men;  if  armed,  fo 
twelve  months;  if  not,  for  the  war.  I see  that  Congress  has  grra 
authority  to  subsist  meu  before  the  organization  [of]  companies.  Wii 
you  give  instructions  to  this  effect  to  your  quartermasters  in  Arkansa 
at  once  ? It  is  almost  indispensable.  Those  going  for  the  war  evpec 
the  bounty  to  be  paid  at  once.  Can  it  be  so  paid  and  where.  W 
these  facilities  we  can  furnish  the  men  desired  speedily ; without  them 
the  process  will  be  tedious. 

Answer  at  once.  H.  M.  RECTOB, 

Governor  of  Arkansas* 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  7.  f 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  Dist.,  Dept.  No.  2, 

Jacksonport,  Ark.,  February  6,  1862. 

General  B.  McCulloch,  commanding  Confederate  forces  near  For 
Smith,  Ark.,  will  order  two  regiments  of  infantry,  two  regTments 
cavalry,  and  one  battery  of  artillery  to  proceed  at  once,  bjJJe  ““ 
practicable  and  direct  route,  to  Pocahontas,  Ark.,  where  said  troop 
will  be  stationed  for  the  present. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Earl  Van  Dorn ^ ^ R 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  District,  Dept.  No.  2, 

Jacksonport , February  7,  1802. 


General  Sterling  Price,  . 

Commanding  Missouri  Troops , Springfield: 

Dear  General  : I am  sorry  that  I am  compelled  to  pos^one  ® 
visit  to  your  headquarters.  I learn  this  morning  that  the  enemy  hai 


!hap.  XVIH.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE, 


749 


aken  possession  of  Greenville  in  such  close  proximity  to  my  depot  and 
>ase  of  operations  that  I must  stay  here  to  look  to  it.  It  is  said  that 
k regiment  of  infantry,  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  a section  of 
itrtillery  are  there  as  an  advance  guard  to  other  troops  moving  down 
“rom  Fredericktown,  and  that  it  is  the  intention  to  fortify  at  that  point, 
must  not  let  them  make  a lodgment  so  near  to  me.  I have  ordered 
>ack  Colonel  McCarver’s  Arkansas  regiment  to  Pitman’s  Ferry ; hav& 
udered  down  Col.  M.  C.  Mitchell’s  regiment  from  the  neighborhood 
>f  Yellville,  Colonel  Le  Moyne’s  regiment  from  Little  Rock,  and  will 
; a tker  together  such  troops  as  I can  in  this  vicinity  to  oppose  this 
ttempt  of  the  enemy  to  seize  so  desirable  a position." 

I shall  order  General  Pike  to  take  position  in  Lawrence  County 
tear  you,  say  Mount  Vernon,  with  instructions  to  co-operate  with  you 
a any  emergency.  He  has,  as  he  told  me,  about  8,000  or  9,000  men 
nd  three  batteries  of  artillery.  Three  of  his  regiments  are,  I believe, 
whites.  The  others  half-breed  Indians,  &c.  All  true  men,  he  says. 

I will  try  to  raise  an  army  here  (Jacksonport).  McCulloch  and 
Iclntosh  I will  move  to  Pitman’s  Ferry  and  Poplar  Bluff.  I hope  you 
dll  be  enabled  to  increase  your  command  to  13,000  or  15,000  men  by 
lie  20th  of  March,  when  I desire  to  open  the  campaign,  and  earnestly 
ope  that  I can.  I have  called  on  Arkansas  for  10,000  men,  say  I get 
,000.  I have  called  on  Louisiana  for  several  regiments,  say  I get 
liree  (2,500.)  I have  called  on  Texas;  several  fine  regiments  there 
jlready  organized,  armed,  equipped,  and  disciplined.  One  on  Red 
fiver  of  1,100  men  en  route  to  join  me;  say  from  Texas  2,000  men  by 
le  20th . McCulloch’s  will  have  10,000.  This  will  give  me  here  5,000  -j- 
,500  + 2,000  + 10,000=  19,500.  Artillery  added,  say  20,000.  You  will 
ave,  I hope,  15,000  ; Pike,  10,000.  With  these,  can  we  not  hope  to 
ike  Saint  Louis  by  rapid  marches  and  assault  ? But  we  will  speak 
irther  of  this  when  I have  the  opportunity  to  visit  you. 

So  many  mistakes  have  occurred  during  this  war  by  the  similarity 
f flags  that  I have  had  a battle-flag  made,  one  of  which  I send  you 
>r  our  army.  Please  have  one  made  for  each  regiment  of  your  army, 

> be  carried  in  battle. 

Hoping  soon  to  have  an  opportunity  to  see  you,  I am,  general,  very 
ncerely  and  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EARL  VAN  DORN-, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  District,  Dept.  No.  2, 

Jacksonport , Ark.,  February  7,  1862. 

ol.  W.  W.  Mackall, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Bowling  Green , Ky. : 

Sir:  I learned  this  morning  by  scouts  that  a column  of  the  enemy, 
nsisting  of  one  regiment  of  infantry,  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and 
section  of  artillery,  had  reached  Greenville,  an  advanced  guard  of 
her  troops  marching  from  Fredericktown.  This  point  is  so  near  my 
‘pot  and  proposed  base  of  operations  that  I have  thought  it  necessary 
turn  back  Colonel  McCarver’s  battalion  of  six  companies  here  en 
ute  for  Memphis.  The  depot  was  too  imminently  threatened  to  be 
ft  unguarded.  I trust,  therefore,  that  General  Johnston  will  approve 
my  act  and  allow  this  battalion  to  remain  here.  I had  no  other 
oops  immediately  available.  I have  ordered  General  McCulloch 


XVI12. 


750  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  I.  S0”*’ 

down,  but  it  will  be  two  or  three  weeks  before  his  command  can  reach  J 

bel?  Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient^nt,^  I 

Major - General . 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Pocahontas , ArJcr  February  14,  186^. 


Mai.  Gen.  Sterling  Price, 

Commanding  Army  of  Missouri:  ,. 

General:  I 5awe  the  honor  to  acknowledge  tlie  receipt  , 


^bv^htiXof  OolonSTa^lor'lyiur'aide-de-camp.  ‘I  send  orders. 


infantry  now  in  process  of  organization,  also  by  two  or  three  batter«*| 

General  McCulloch,  with  the  cavalry,  will  come  here,  where  I J 
from  Texas,  Arkansas,  and  Louisiana;  I hope  12,001 
S 15000  men  or  more.  1 hear  of  active  measures  being  taken 
Arkansas  ^ comply  with  my  call  for  10,000  men.  Louisiana  will 
nroluiblv  SMid^e  LOOO,  Texas  3,000  or  4,000.  This  will  give  me  wit 
MfPnllocb’s  cavalry  and  some  other  troops  here  and  coming,  say  18,00  j 

™,IiS(HW»cimm»a  beiag  l.ttifM  to.  «l«»«  » — 

•X”££TSfK  o.V ™ bf iu.  1.1 l of  April  i - 1»J* 
h.ii  » i .Tll  first  mu,  general,  my  plan  for  the  campaign 
sonri  • afterwards  what  I desire  should  be  your  plan  of  action.  It  w 
mv  wish  toTee  and  consult  with  you  on  this  subject  in  person  ; but 
En”~,B  not  leave  here,  at S 


found  1 coma  nor  icavene^,^  ^ been  better  discusseJ 

compelled  to  put ; in  wntog  what  won  Taylor  to  destroy  thi 

personally.  I shall,  however,  insriu^  u.«  ernitents  should  b 


S~h t the  event  of  his  being  arrested,  for  its  contents  should  b 

kTdMiTnyattemptinegf‘aSaint  Louis.  As  soon  as  I can  get  my  win, 
ready  to  march  from  Pitman’s  Perry  1 intend  putting  your  colum 
In  motion  toward  Salem,  in  Dent  County,  covering  your  object  b 

between ^£dein<an™]^)tMT,aEaving^IronU)n  to  my'right.^These'movi 

ililf  taSS  on^aiCrfrorSe^li: 

lfolla  and  fronton  will  be  destroyed,  thus  throwing  the  enemy  upo 
am  wagon  roads  a nd  preventing  him’  from  re-enforcing  the  city  soo 
enough  to  oppose  us  there. 


iap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  751 

This  seems  to  me  the  movement  best  calculated  to  win  us  Missouri 
id  relieve  General  Johnston,  who  is  heavily  threatened  in  Kentucky, 
nee  in  the  city  of  Saint  Louis,  the  railroads  leading  to  it  from  the 
tst  should  be  at  once  destroyed  by  our  cavalry  as  far  as  practicable j 
so  the  road  to  Cairo.  We  should  fortify  opposite,  on  the  Illinois  side, 
he  city  once  ours  the  State  is  ours,  and  the  armies  of  the  enemy  on 
3r  soil  and  in  Kansas  would  supply  us  with  arms  for  her  people,  who 
ould  gather  to  our  standard  from  the  west  and  north. 

Flour,  salt,  and  a little  bacon  in  our  wagons,  and  beef  cattle  driven 
ith  us,  should  be  our  commissariat.  Grain-bags,  to  contain  two  days7 
tions  of  corn,  to  be  carried  on  our  troopers’  saddles,  and  money 
ir  paymaster’s  department,  and  sufficient  ammunition  our  ordnance 
apartment. 

Being  between  Ironton  and  Kolia,  if  we  are  immediately  threatened 
i either  hand  we  can  strike  with  our  whole  force  to  the  right  or  to  the 
ft,  as  might  seem  most  advisable,  taking  the  two  armies  in  detail, 
we  were  repulsed  from  Saint  Louis,  or  if  we  found  it  not  advisable 
practicable  to  attempt  it,  we  could  attack  the  enemy  in  the  field 
wards  Kolia  and  Sedalia,  passing  up  the  river,  and  gathering  together 
ir  friends  in  that  section  of  country  to  re-enforce  us. 

This  is  as  much,  general,  as  I can  now  write,  as  I desire  to  send  off 
airiers  early  in  the  morning  to  Generals  McCulloch  and  Pike  and 
Lionel  Hubert ; but  I hope  to  see  you  before  the  1st  of  April,  when  1 
ill  confer  fully  with  you  upon  the  subject. 

Now,  with  this  plan  in  view,  I do  not  think  it  advisable  to  disturb 
ie  enemy  or  alarm  him  any  more  than  is  necessary  until  we  are  ready 
march.  But  if  in  the  mean  time,  with  the  force  at  your  disposal,  you 
ink  it  perfectly  practicable  to  strike  him  a blow  at  Kolia,  secure  his 
ms,  and  check  his  intention  of  advancing  for  a while,  it  is  well  to  do 
|.  Having  done  this,  pause  where  you  are,  and  call  in  recruits  from 
at  section  of  country  and  north,  and  watch  closely  the  enemy  to  the 
irthwest,  and  maneuver  your  column  over  the  country  between  Kolia 
id  Springfield  until  I am  in  readiness  with  my  column  to  join  you  at 
near  Potosi.  Pike  can  aid  you  in  this,  but  he  should  not  go  too  far, 
he  would  leave  Western  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the 
unties  west  of  you  exposed  too  much  to  the  half-savage  enemy  in 
ansas. 

if  I could  enter  more  fully  into  this  subject  and  set  forth  the  ad- 
mtages  which  it  presents  to  my  mind,  1 think,  general,  that  I would 
tve  your  hearty  co-operation  in  the  campaign  in  Missouri.  I am  truly 
‘voted  to  the  interest  of  the  whole  Confederacy,  and  look  to  the  whole 
Id  of  operations  from  the  Potomac  to  the  plains  of  New  Mexico  for 
y study,  and  pray  God  to  guide  me  in  the  true  paths  to  victory  and 
y country’s  independence. 

I sincerely  hope  that  if  you  attempt  this  move  you  may  add  new 
urels  to  the  wreath  already  encircling  your  brow,  and  that  Missouri 
ay  again  boast  of  having  struck  another  gallant  blow  for  her  liberty 
i(l  the  vindication  of  her  rights. 

I send  you  copies  of  letters  I had  sent  to  Generals  McCulloch  and 
ike.*  1 send  them  in  the  morning  orders  to  move,  as  I have  already 
ated,  and  to  hurry  the  troops  on  to  you.  I have  taken  it  for  granted 
at  you  can  supply  these  re-enforcements  from  the  country  around 
>u  by  purchases.  I have  been  informed  by  Colonels  Snead  and 
lylor,  as  well  as  by  other  reliable  gentlemen,  that  the  counties 

* Not  found. 


752 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS. 


AND  IND.  T.  [Chaf.  XVH 


around  you  are  rich  in  everything  in  the  way  of  provisions  need, 
bv  an  army.  Let  me  know  as  soon  as  possible  what  you  will  requir 
Ihavea  depot  at  Jacksonport,  and  can,  I hope,  supply  you  with  mat 
things  you  ’may  want.  Please  keep  me  advised  of  your  movemen 
and  intentions,  as  well  as  of  the  movements  and  strength  of  the  enem 

a°  / have^ordeml1  a^ine  of  expressmen  from  Memphis  to  Sprmgflel 
By  it  regular  communications  may  be  made  twice  a week.  Send  speci 

letter,  general,  and  believe  me,  ve 
truly  and  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


EARL  VAN  DORN,  I 

Mninr.  Cpmeral.  I 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  McCulloch’s  Div.,  C.  S.  A.,  1 
^ Fayetteville , Ark.,  February  15,  1862. 

Oenesral  Sterling  Price,  , r 

Commanding  Mo.  S.  G.,  Springfield , Mo. : 

General:  I have  delayed  answering  your  last  communication  ai 
have  detained  your  messenger  for  the  reason  that  I rested  und 
orders  from  headquarters  of  division  not  to  make  a movement  witho 

orders. 


^General  Van  Dorn  has  assumed  command,  and  has  gone  to  Pod 
genera  nnj  Tim  rtrnhnhlv  met  vou  at  Spuni 


hontTas  his^he^quarters,  ank  he  has  probably  met  you  at  Sprir 
held  bv  this  time  It  is  by  his  orders  that  I have  to  await  orders, 
amof  course,  making  all  efforts  to  place  my  troops  in  complete  rea- 
ness  but  I am  in  want  of  small-arms.  I get  more  men  than  I c 
arm,’  and  if  you  have  any  to  spare  I would  like  to  have  some  500 

6°i>un,ore  have  relied  me  that  you  are  falling  back  from  Springfle 
! piacTno  See  in  the  rumor,  because  I think  that  you  would  ha 

"^"Ir^ml^eXve^  respectfully,  yo- obemen^servant, 

Colonel  Third  Regt.  La.  Vole.,  Comdg.  Second  BrigaM 


Payetteville,  Ark.,  February  16,  1862—8  a.  m 

General  Ben.  McCulloch,  Fort  Smith , Arlc. : J 

General  : I have  just  now  sent  a messenger  to  you  with  a com 
nicatfon  from  General'  Price,  stating  that  he  had  "ghGng  ^t 
days  without  sleep  or  eating,  and  though  the  enemj  was  betw< 
17 boo  nrul  20  000  strong  he  expected  to  whip  them,  ana  it  uoi 
Hdbert^T Mimmand  would  reach  him  in  time  he  would  take  everyth, 

^^e Colonel 'lias  left  this  morning,  and  ordered  all  of  his  forces  * 
to  Concentrate  on  the  Telegraph  road,  some  10  miles  on  the  other 
of  Cross  Hollow. 

Respectfully,  j A<  LANDRY; 

Aide  to  Colonel  Hebert , Commanding  Second  Bngad( 


p.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  753 

Fayetteville,  February  1 G,  18G2 — 4 p.  m. 
neral  McCulloch: 

from  an  official  dispatch  just  received  from  General  Price  he  is 
v within  3 miles  of  the  Arkansas  line.  He  has  fought  the  enemy 
three  days.  He  is  short  of  rations  and  his  men  haye  not  had  sleep 
two  days  and  nights.  He  begs  for  re-enforcements,  not  doubting 
n to  whip  the  enemy,  who  are  17,000  strong.  Colonel  Hebert  left 
3 morning.  I leave  with  my  detachment  immediately  for  the  scene 
action. 

CHAS.  A.  BRUSLfi, 
Captain , Commanding  Detachment . 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  20,  1862. 

* Excellency  C.  F.  Jackson,  Memphis , Tenn.: 

)ear  Governor  : Colonel  Pheelan  took  down  500  of  your  guns  to  be 
3red,  and,  with  100  taken  down  by  Major  Rapley  some  time  ago,  wo 
:e  600  now  in  Memphis  or  New  Orleans.  If  these  guns  are  to  be 
aired  as  badly  as  those  which  were  repaired  for  the  Arkansas  troops 
ould  prefer  them  as  they  are,  even  without  bayonets.  Those  of  the 
kansians  have  nearly  all  burst,  the  cylinder  has,  blown  out,  or  some- 
ug  else  has  happened,  which  has  left  them  entirely  useless.  I hope 
i will  state  these  facts  to  those  superintending  the  work,  as  they  are 
y making  traps  for  our  own  men. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  , 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Pocahontas , February  22,  1862. 

R.  W.  Keyworth  : 


Iajor  : I wrote  you  yesterday,  informing  you  of  General  Van  Dorn’s 
ire  for  you  to  remain  at  Jacksonport  until  further  orders. 

^ease  forward  the  supplies  for  General  Price’s  army  to  Buffalo  City, 
other  nearest  point  to  him  accessible  by  steamer,  as  soon  as  you  can, 
1 take  measures  to  receive  return  freight  of  forage, 
f you  have  any  certain  information  of  General  Price’s  movements, 
ase  forward  it  as  soon  as  practicable. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Pocahontas , February  22,  1862. 

lonel  McCarver, 

Fourteenth  Arkansas  Regiment : 

Colonel  : The  general  commanding  desires  that  you  will  come  to 
s point  without  delay  and  assume  command  of  the  troops  in  this 
inity,  including  those  of  your  present  command,  and  those  arriving 
48  R R— vol  VIII 


'54 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV: 


here  under  the  orders  which  have  been  already  issued  by  him  a 
under  the  call  of  the  Governor  of  this  State. 

You  will  please  designate  a proper  officer  to  muster  into  service  sn) 
troops  as  may  assemble  here  in  obedience  to  the  Governor’s  call. 

During  the  temporary  absence  of  the  general  commanding  he  rel 
upon  your  vigilance,  good  judgment,  and  firmness  to  guard  the  int 
ests  of  the  Confederacy  in  this  region.  You  will  please  continue 
carefully  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  make  the  best  dispc 
tions  in  your  power  for  the  protection  of  the  people  and  property  pla( 
under  your  care,  and  in  no  event  will  you  abandon  this  post  unless  3; 
are  driven  back  by  a superior  force. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

’ D.  H.  MAURY, 


Assistant  Adjutant- General] 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  February  23,  1862] 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  | 

Comdg.  First  Division , Department  of  the  West,  Columbus , Ky. | 

Dear  General  : I am  informed  by  General  McCown  that  you  < 
sired  his  brigade  to  move  down  at  once  to  Island  No.  10.  I beg 
remark  it  might  be  dangerous  to  divide  the  forces  under  your  comma 
before  the  Avorks  at  that  island  shall  have  been  put  in  a defensible  c< 
dition  and  before  we  are  ready  to  abandon  Columbus  in  pursuances 
what  has  already  been  determined  on  that  subject ; hence  the  necessj 
of  hurrying  the  construction  of  the  works  at  Island  No.  10  and  4 
New  Madrid ; meanwhile  all  the  necessary  preparations  can  be  mai 
for  the  rapid  evacuation  of  Columbus  at  the  proper  time.  I 

The  next  most  important  question  is,  where  shall  we  collect  the  W 
ance  of  the  forces  at  Columbus,  which  is  not  to  form  a part  of  the  g 
rison  at  Island  No.  10.  Shall  this  be  done  at  Union  City,  HumboldtJ 
Jackson,  or  shall  it  be  collected  temporarily  at  that  island,  dependj 
on  Avater  transportation  alone  as  far  as  Memphis,  to  effect  a juncti: 
with  Buggies’  forces,  now  at  Corinth  and  Grand  Junction,  for  ulteij 
operations? 

I am  not  sufficiently  well  acquainted  'with  the  nature  of  the  roads 
Western  Tennessee  and  with  the  means  of  transportation  at  our  cc 
mand  to  be  able  to  answer  these  queries ; hence  I would  be  most  hap 
to  have  your  views  on  the  subject.  The  great  point  is,  as  I u riders* 
it,  to  be  able  to  support  in  time  the  garrison  at  Island  No.  10  if 
tacked  only  by  a force  equal  to  our  own,  or  to  be  able  to  keep  open  fl 
communications,  either  by  water  or  railroad,  with  the  States  of  M 
sissippi  and  Alabama,  if  attacked  by  an  overwhelming  force,  Avh 
might  endanger  not  only  the  safety  of  the  garrison  referred  to,  \\ 
especially  of  its  supporting  force,  intended,  after  having  been  din: 
out  of  Western  Tennessee,  for  the  defense  inch  by  inch  of  the  tj 
States  already  mentioned. 

Before  concluding,  I must  call  your  attention  to  the  necessity 
making  the  works  at  Island  No.  10  and  at  NeAV  Madrid  as  strong 
circumstances  will  permit  and  to  be  armed  with  the  heaviest  guns  tl 
can  be  spared  for  this  purpose. 

I Avould  advise  the  gorges  of  the  Avorks  at  the  latter  place  to  be  \r< 
saded  merely,  so  that  our  gunboats  may  fire  into  them  from  the  it 
if  they  were  taken  by  the  enemy.  Three  works,  with  strong  proti 
for  500  men,  about,  each,  may  be  required  at  that  place,  two  on  1 


755 


AP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

krer  and  one  a little  in  advance  of  the  others;  the  crernaillere  lines  on 
e right  and  rear  of  Island  No.  10  must  be  provided  with  small  redans 
r a few  siege  guns.  The  navigation  of  Black  Bayou  must  be  ob- 
ructed  so  as  to  prevent  the  enemy’s  barges  from  getting  into  Reelfoot 
ike,  the  shores  of  which,  between  the  two  crernaillere  lines,  must  be 
3ll  guarded,  and,  if  needs  be,  properly  defended. 

The  island  opposite  Tiptonville  must  be  examined  to  determine  if  it 
n be  advantageously  fortified.  I would  advise  the  garrison  of  Fort 
llow,  excepting  a strong  guard,  to  be  sent  for  the  present  to  New 
adrid  or  Island  No.  10.  All  the  heavy  ordnance  not  required  at  these 
ro  points  should  be  sent,  when  removed  from  Columbus,  to  Fort  Pil- 
w or  to  any  other  point  on  the  river — above  and  not  too  far  from 
emphis — which  could  be  held  by  a small  garrison. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , G.  S.  Army. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Mo.  S.  G., 

No.  47.  j Camp  on  Cove  Creek , Ark.,  February  23,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  D.  M.  Frost  is  assigned  to  duty  as  the  commander  of  the 
;venth  Division,  in  place  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  McBride,  resigned.  He 
11  remain  in  command  of  the  division  until  it  contains  twenty  com- 
mies, when  an  election  of  a brigadier- general  will  be  ordered.  General 
rnst  will  also  have  the  command  of  the  Third  Brigade  of  Missouri 
olunteers. 

Bv  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Price: 

WM.  H.  BRAND, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* Jacksonport,  February  24,  1862, 
(Received  Murfreesborough,  February  27,  1862.) 

>1.  W.  W.  Mackall, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Price  and  McCulloch  are  concentrated  at  Cross  Hollow,  12  miles 
im  enemy’s  advance,  on  Sugar  Creek,  near  Missouri  line.  Whole 
rce  of  enemy  from  35,000  to  40,000  ; ours  about  20,000.  Should  Pike 
able  to  join,  our  forces  will  be  about  26,000. 

I leave  this  evening  to  go  to  the  army,  and  will  give  battle  5 of 
I urse,  if  it  does  not  take  place  before  I arrive.  I have  no  doubt  of  the* 
1 suit.  If  I succeed  I shall  push  on. 

EARL  YAN  DORN, 

Major- General. 


RCULAR.]  HDQRS.  TRANS-MlSSISSIPPI  DISTRICT, 

Jacksonport , Ark.,  February  24,  1862. 

In  consequence  of  the  recent  movements  of  the  enemy  it  is  recom- 
onded  that  the  troops  called  out  by  the  proclamation  of  the  Governor 
the  State  of  Arkansas  should  rendezvous  as  follows  : 

Those  organized  in  the  counties  south  of  Arkansas  Riv  er  and  east 


Copy  sent  to  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army. 


756 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYr 

of  the  Fulton  and  Little  Rock  Eoad,  to  repair  to  Little  Rock;  tho 
from  the  counties  north  of  Arkansas  River  to  repair  to  Little  Roc 
Jacksonport,  and  Pocahontas,  as  circumstances  may  indicate  to  ‘ 
best ; while  all  who  are  within  reach  of  the  army  in  the  field  shou 
rally  to  its  standard.  Companies  should  move  to  the  rendezvous 
soon  as  organized,  either  singly  or  in  battalions,  each  company  beii 
provided  as  soon  as  possible  with  two  baggage  wagons  and  provisio 
for  at  least  ten  days.  The  senior  officer  of  the  Confederate  service  j 
duty  at  the  rendezvous  or  an  officer  designated  by  him  will  superb 
tend  the  mustering  into  service  and  the  organizing  of  the  troops.  Eve 
man  should  come  well  supplied  with  arms,  and  with  ammunition, 
possible;  and  the  utmost  energy  is  expected  from  all  in  this  g re 

emergency.  . « , ■ , 

The  enemy  has  invaded  your  State.  His  army  is  powerlul,  ci 
ciplined,  flushed  with  success,  and  he  comes  with  hatred  in  his  hea. 
He  seeks  to  subjugate  your  soil,  to  desolate  your  homes,  and  to  wre 
from  you  and  degrade  all  you  hold  dearest  in  life. 

You  must  arm,  organize,  and  rush  to  meet  him.  All  who  claim  ma 
hood  should  now  attack  this  insolent  invader  or  forever  renounce  t 

respect  of  men  and  the  love  of  women. 

F EARL  VAN  HORN, 

Major-General . 


Headquarters  Mo.  S.  G., 
Camp  on  Cove  Creelc , Ark.,  February  25,  1862 J 

His  Excellency  C.  F.  Jackson, 

Governor  of  Missouri : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  lay  before  you  an  account  ot  the  circuj 
stances  surrounding  my  command  within  the  last  two  weeks,  comp* 
ling  me  to  evacuate  Springfield  and  retreat  beyond  the  State  line  iu'j 
the  territory  of  Arkansas,  the  intelligence  of  which  has  no  dou| 
reached  you. 

About  the  latter  part  of  December  I left  my  camp  on  Sac  River,  Sai 
Clair  County,  fell  back,  and  took  up  my  quarters  at  Springfield,  for  t 
purpose  of  being  within  reach  of  supplies,  protecting  that  portion! 
our  State  from  both  Home  Guard  depredations  and  Federal  invasid 
as  well  as  to  secure  a most  valuable  point  for  military  movement.  J 
Springfield  I received  from  Grand  Glaze  considerable  supplies  of  clot] 
ing,  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  and  having  built  huts,  our  soldie 
pwere  as  comfortable  as  circumstances  would  permit.  I am  pleased  i 
say  few  complaints  were  either  made  or  heard.  Missouri  having  be 
admitted  as  an  equal  member  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  having  ij 
command  much  augmented  by  recruits,  I was  enabled  to  raise  at 
equip  about  4,000  men  for  the  Confederate  service.  A brigade  of  the 
consisting  of  two  regiments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  of  cavalry, 
two  light  batteries  of  artillery,  have  been  tendered  the  Confedera 
Government. 

About  the  latter  part  of  January  my  scouts  reported  that  the  enei 
were  concentrating  in  force  at  Rolla,  and  shortly  thereafter  they  occ 
pied  Lebanon.  Believing  that  this  movement  could  be  for  no  otb 
purpose  than  to  attack  me,  and  knowing  that  my  command  was  mac 
quate  for  such  successful  resistance  as  the  interest  of  my  arm;y  andt 
cause  demanded,  I appealed  to  the  commanders  of  the  Confedera 


P.  XVllI.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  757 

ops  in  Arkansas  to  come  to  my  assistance.  This,  from  correspond - 
je,  I was  led  confidently  to  expect,  and,  relying  upon  it,  I held  my 
fition  to  the  very  last  moment,  and,  as  the  sequel  proved,  almost  too 
g,  for  on  Wednesday,  the  12th  February,  my  pickets  were  driven  in, 
1 reported  the  enemy  advancing  upon  me  in  force.  No  resource  was 
w left  me  except  retreat,  without  hazarding  all  with  greatly  unequal 
mbers  upon  the  result  of  one  engagement.  This  I deemed  it  unwise 
do.  I commenced  retreating  at  once.  I reached  Cassville  with  loss 
worthy  of  mention  in  any  respect.  Here  the  enemy  in  my  rear 
nmenced  a series  of  attacks  running  through  four  days.  Eetreating 
I fighting  all  the  way  to  the  Cross  Hollow,  in  this  State,  I am  re- 
3ed  to  say  my  command,  under  the  most  exhausting  fatigue  all  that 
Le,  with  but  little  rest  for  either  man  or  horse  and  no  sleep,  sus- 
ned  themselves  and  came  through,  repulsing  the  enemy  upon  every 
lasion  with  great  determination  and  gallantry.  My  loss  does  not 
;eed  4 to  6 killed  and  some  15  or  18  wounded.  That  of  the  enemy 
know  to  be  ten  times  as  great. 

Jol.  Henry  Little,  commanding  the  First  Brigade,  with  Cols.  B.  A. 
res  and  J.  Q.  Burbridge  of  the  infantry,  and  Col.  E.  Gates  of  the 
/■airy,  covered  this  retreat  from  beyond  Cassville  and  acted  as  the 
iT  guard.  The  colonel  commanding  deserves  the  highest  praise  for  un- 
iting watchfulness  and  the  good  management  of  his  entire  command, 
eartily  commend  him  to  your  attention.  All  these  officers  merit 
I should  receive  the  thanks  of  both  Government  and  people.  To  all 
i officers  and  men  of  my  army  I am  under  obligations.  No  men  or  offi- 
s were  ever  more  ready  and  prompt  to  meet  and  repel  an  enemy, 
lovernor,  we  are  confident  of  the  future. 

STEELING  PEICE, 
Major-General , Commanding  Mo.  S.  G. 


neral  Polk  : 


Jackson,  February  26,  1862. 


Slew  Madrid  all  important.  In  my  opinion  must  be  watched  and 
d at  all  costs.  All  troops  at  Fort  Pillow  but  mere  guard  should  be 
nsferred  there  with  utmost  celerity.  If  satisfied  of  the  movements 
the  enemy  on  New  Madrid,  place  should  be  re-enforced  at  once  to 
possible  extent  from  Columbus.  Eegiment  at  Trenton  could  be  sent 
ire  as  well  as  some  gunboats. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Western  Department, 

Columbus , Ky.j  February  26,  1862. 

1.  E.  W.  Gantt, 

Commanding  at  New  Madrid: 

¥our  notes  of  the  24th  and  25th  received.  I have  ordered  Colonel 
’ alker’s  regiment  up  to  your  support  from  Fort  Pillow ; also  a good 
irt  of  the  regiment  of  Colonel  Baker  from  the  same  place. 

1 send  you  the  ammunition  and  caps  you  ask  for.  I will  send  addi- 
t nal  ammunition  on  the  boats  that  are  to  follow  for  your  heavy  guns. 
Ivill  also  see  to  giving  you  such  other  support  from  the  gunboats  as 
ny  be  practicable.  Your  position  is  a strong  one,  which  you  have 


758  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  XVIlJ 

well  studied,  and  I have  no  doubt  of  tlie  vigor  and  efficiency  of  yoi 
defense.  Keep  me  informed. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  POLK 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Western  Department, 

Columbus , Ky.,  February  26,  1862.1 

Flag-Officer  Hollins:  j 

I have  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  is  preparing  an  attack  <1 
New  Madrid.  1 desire  you  would  stop  three  of  the  gunboats  at  tb 
place  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  land  force  in  the  contemplati 
attack 

General  McOown  will  be  in  command  so  soon  as  his  force  can  real 
there. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  rULK, 

Major-  General , Commanding \ 


P S — I desire  one  of  the  gunboats  to  cruise  up  and  down  the  riv 
to  keep  the  way  open,  and  to  that  end  have  addressed  a note  to  Col 
modore  Whittle. 


Udqrs.  First  Division,  Western  Department, 

Columbus,  Ky.,  February  26,  18t>2.j 

Colonel  Kennedy: 

Your  note  by  the  Admiral  received.  I have  caused  the  Simonds « 
be  dispatched  by  telegraph  from  this  place  to  come  forward  as  rapid 
as  possible  to  you  with  the  guns.  I will  send  you  some  guns  also  no 
this  place,  together  with  an  ample  supply  of  ammunition,  tou  aij 
rush  up  the  work  night  and  day,  and  write  me  full  particulars  ot  }o] 
progress  by  every  opportunity.  I will  have  the  guns  manned  as  raj 
idly  as  you  can  get  them  up  and  as  we  can  send  the  artillerists  to  yc 
Again  I repeat  you  must  push  the  work,  but  do  not  fail  to  do  it  m i 
orderly  and  effective  manner. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  1 UL1A, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


New  Madrid,  Mo., 
February  26,  1862—11.30  a,  in 

Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  Pocahontas , Arh.: 

General  : I send  you  a communication  from  General  Polk.  A ®| 
umn  of  20,000  is  reported  as  marching  on  this  post  trom  Lomm® 
and  we  will  expect  them  by  Friday.  I will,  after  showing  a little  fig, 
cross  the  plank  road  and  get  my  men  together  at  Clarkton. 

1 myself  will  go  over  to  see  you  unless  the  enemy  pushes  a colm 
through  Bloomfield  and  I have  to  fight  them  there.  I design  rcspoi 
iug  to  your  call  to  rendezvous  at  Pocahontas,  and  will  let  my  peo] 


iap.  XVIIl.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


759 


now  it  as  soon  as  the  Legislature  of  Missouri  adjourns.  The  Legisla- 
lre  is  to  meet  here  on  Monday  if  we  are  not  driven  away  before  then, 
he  greater  portion  of  my  district  is  in  your  division,  and  I will  report 
) you  as  soon  as  I cross  the  plank  road. 

Yours,  most  respectfully, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

\ Brigadier- General.] 


Headquarters, 

New  Madrid,  Jfo.,  February  27,  1862. 
lajor-General  Polk,  Columbus , Ky. : 

Dear  Sir  : My  scouts,  just  in  half  hour  by  sun  this  evening,  report 
ie  enemy  advancing  from  Benton.  They  have  ten  pieces  of  artillery, 
ne-half  dozen  6-pounder  guns,  two  mortars,  and  two  12-pounder  guns, 
neiny  still  coming  in  to  Benton.  They  have  1,000  cavalry. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 
Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

If  my  scouts  are  not  unnecessarily  excited,  their  advance  is  beyond 
uestion.  I have  great  confidence  in  the  men  sent. 


Headquarters, 

New  Madrid , Mo .,  February  27,  1862. 


rigadier- General  Polk,  Columbus  : 

Dear  General  : At  the  date  of  this  note  the  enemy  are  posted  as 
dlows : At  Benton,  five  Indiana  regiments,  four  pieces  of  artillery, 
ad  two  companies  of  cavalry;  at  Commerce,  12,000  troops,  with 
Cillery  and  transportation.  I am  further  informed  that  5,000  more 
ill  be  landed  at  Commerce  to-day.  Those  at  Benton  await  the  arrival 
[ the  troops  at  Commerce,  when  they  are  to  march  against  this  place, 
uch  is  to-day  their  determination.  Events  transpiring  may  change 
leir  programme.  We  are  safe  here  beyond  a doubt.  While  Island 
o.  10  holds  back  their  gunboats  this  place  is  secure.  Our  troops  are 
i fine  spirits  and  will  make  a splendid  defense.  Walker’s  and  Baker’s 
^giinents  here.  Also  General  McCown,  with  a portion  of  his  division, 
eneral  Thompson,  with  100  men,  left  to-day  for  Sikeston.  You  shall 
3 promptly  advised  of  things  here. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 

Colonel , Commanding . 


Island  10,  February  27,  1862 — 9 o’clock. 

eneral  Leonidas  Polk, 

Commanding , Columbus , Ky. : 

General:  I have  guns,  but  no  gunners.  The  men  of  my  division 
a detail  (ordnance,  &c.)  please  send  down,  as  I need  them.  I need 
immanders.  Colonel  Gantt,  now  in  command  at  New  Madrid,  is  a 
ood  commander.  Col.  Marsh  [L.  M.]  Walker,  a graduate  of  West 


60 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xm 


Point,  is  a good  soldier,  but  lias  not  rank.  Capt.  S.  P.  Bankhead  i| 
also  a reliable  man  and  a well-instructed  soldier. 

I make  these  suggestions  for  the  information  of  yourself  and  General 
Beauregard.  I must  have  reliable  men  to  command  and  with  ranlj 
Colonels  do  not  like  to  be  under  their  equal  in  rank. 

Respectfully  submitted.  j p MoCOWR, 

Brigadier- General.  I 


Island  No.  10, 

February  27,  1862 — 12  o’clock.  I 
General  Leonidas  Polk,  Commanding: 

General  : My  attention  having  been  drawn  to  New  Madrid,  I hal 
not  carefully  examined  matters  here.  I find  that  little  or  nothing  hal 
been  done  by  Captain  Gray.  Colonel  Kennedy  has  pushed  matterfi 
however,  and  has  five  guns  mounted  in  the  upper  battery,  on  the  easj 
shore,  and  seven  on  the  lower,  on  the  same  shore.  He  (Colonel  Kennedy 
says  he  will  get  five  more  up  to-morrow.  Nothing  was  done  on  tli 
island  until  yesterday.  I have  ordered  the  siege  battery  there.  L po 
examination  I believe  that  the  upper  battery  is  not  equal  to  whatij 
expected  of  it.  Every  hour  I can  get  is  of  great  importance.  I tear  I 
will  have  to  defend  this  place  with  the  bayonet  unless  I can  get  time 
If  the  gunboats  pass,  New  Madrid  is  gone,  unless  the  gunboats  of  Con 
modore  Hollins  can  defeat  them.  Ten  guns  lost  holding  Columbus  j 
day  or  two  ago,  so  more  would  be  well  expended. 

Tours,  sincerely,  j.  p.  Mc0OWN, 

Brigadier- General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Western 
Columbus , Ky., 


Department, 
February  28,  1862. 


Brigadier-General  McCown, 

Commanding , Few  Madrid: 

General  : On  your  return  from  New  Madrid  on  the  evening  of  th 
26th  I informed  you,  as  you  will  remember,  that  I had  received  n 
structions  from  General  Beauregard  that  New  Madrid  must  be  hel 
at  all  events,  and  that  in  pursuance  of  those  instructions  I had  ordere 
Colonel  Marks’  brigade  to  proceed  to  New  Madrid,  which  order  he  rt 
ceived.  I informed  you  at  the  same  time  that  I had  ordered  Colom 
Neely’s  brigade  to  proceed  to  the  same  place.  I informed  you  also  tlirf 
I would  send  you  artillerists  from  this  post  to  man  the  guns  bein 
placed  in  position  at  Island  No.  10  as  rapidly  as  they  could  be  sparedj 
that  the  post  for  the  present  had  been  put  under  the  orders  of  Colone 
Kennedy,  Louisiana  Volunteers,  under  whose  command  you  might  plac 
so  much  of  a supporting  infantry  force  as  the  existing  emergency  migU 
require.  I informed  you  also  that  all  the  force  from  Fort  Pillow,  cor 
sisting  of  Walker’s  and  Baker’s  regiments,  excepting  a strong  guard  t 
take  care  of  the  post,  had  been  ordered  to  New  Madrid,  and  that  sue 
other  troops  of  the  new  levies  as  could  be  spared  would  be  sent  to  yon 
command:  also  that  the  entire  force  at  New  Madrid  and  Island  #< 
10  had  been  placed  under  your  command  by  direction  of  General  Beai 
regard,  whose  instructions  in  regard  to  the  importance  of  holding  JNe 
Madrid  I strongly  impressed  upon  you.  I likewise  informed  you  tna 


XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


761 


>rtion  of  Commodore  Hollins’  fleet  would  be  placed  at  your  disposal, 
>e  employed  at  whatever  point  you  might  think  best.  Being,  as  you 
| perfectly  familiar  with  all  the  localities  and  their  approaches  and 
tossession  of  the  views  and  instructions  of  the  commanding  general, 
el  it  would  be  injudicious  to  hamper  your  actions  by  insisting  on 
lils.  You  are  therefore  at  liberty  to  consult  your  own  judgment  in 
>osing  of  the  respective  force  under  your  orders, 
think  it  proper  nevertheless  to  say  that  you  should  by  all  means 
be  a sufficient  amount  of  your  force  of  all  arms  so  as  to  make  sure 
Hew  Madrid. 

will  send  you  down  a battery  of  siege  guns,  with  a company  to  man 
o be  used  in  the  defense  of  ^ew  Madrid.  It  will  go  to-day,  with  the 
?ssary  ammunition.  I will  also  send  you  this  evening  several  other 
panies  of  artillerists  for  Island  No.  10. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  POLK, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Western  Department, 

Columbus , Ky.f  February  28,  1862. 

*adier-General  McCown, 

Commanding , New  Madrid  : 

ENERAL : I wrote  you  at  large  to-day  in  a dispatch  sent  you  by 
tain  Cummings,  in  command  of  General  Beauregard’s  signal  coin- 
y,  in  which  dispatch  I gave  you  my  views  and  instructions.  This 
will  have  received  before  this  reaches  you.  You  will  ere  this  re- 
e also  a full  supply  of  ammunition  of  all  sorts.  I send  you  to-night 
e guns  ; these  are  those  from  the  fort,  the  best  we  have,  and  1 hope 
will  get  them  up  speedily.  I send  you  to-night  also  a large  lot  of 
les  and  shovels.  I would  turn  out  full  details  from  all  your  regi- 
es, and  work  as  many  as  you  have  tools  for  all  night,  and  day  and 
it,  until  the  work  is  finished.  By  pushing  matters  you  can  accom- 
h this.  Again  I repeat,  work  your  regiments  day  and  night  until 
armament  is  complete. 

our  artillery  companies  go  down  to-nigh*t.  I should  like  to  have 
gunboats  come  up  so  as  to  cover  the  retreat  of  our  transports,  pro- 
d you  have  no  immediate  prospect  of  an  attack.  If  they  could 
e up  to-night  the  work  would  be  finished  to-morrow.  I shall  get 
ugh  with  the  dismounting  the  fort  to-morrow.  All  the  ammunition 
stores  will  be  removed,  and  I hope  also  the  guns.  I am  glad  to 
b from  Captain  Barrow  that  you  have  twelve  guns  mounted  on  the 
lessee  shore.  He  informs  me  also  that  you  will  have  five  other 
3 s mounted  before  morning.  These,  with  the  four  siege  guns  which 
lar  are  in  position  on  the  island,  will  give  you  twenty-two;  a very 
i»ectable  force.  I think,  too,  you  will  not  be  disturbed  until  you  get 
i others  on  the  island  and  the  floating  battery  in  place, 
eep  me  constantly  advised. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  POLK, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

• S. — I shall  send  to  you  Brigadier-General  Stewart,  and  will  en- 
?^or  to  have  other  brigadiers  appointed  for  you.  I acknowledge  the 
J ipt  of  yours  on  that  subject,  also  those  by  Captain  Barrow. 


762 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xv| 


Island  No.  10,  February  28,  1862 


[Major-General  Polk:] 

General:  Will  you  at  tlie  proper  time  order  the  companies! 
Colonel  Clark’s  regiment  to  report  here  for  duty.  From  all  the  I 
formation  I can  get  between  20,000  and  30,000  men  are  at  Benton  cj 
Commerce  and  will  advance  upon  New  Madrid.  I have  five  reguM 
at  New  Madrid.  The  work  thrown  up  there  is  for  2,000  men.  1 1 
pushing  forward  another  work.  To  hold  the  place  I have  to  depd 
much  upon  the  assistance  of  the  gunboats.  I wish  much  that  Genejl 

^ T 1,1 ^ Trio  if  HTlllC!  Til  £1.0  A mil  fit.  tlA  lipln  fl 


Beauregard  would  pay  me  a short  visit.  This  place  must  be  field  i| 

..  . i 1 1 ,1  J J-T-  - , . r.  T nVinll  n/lf  -rrr!-4-||B 


or  that  falls;  that  must  also  be  held  or, this  falls.  I shall  act  with 
the  energy  I have. 

Please  send  this  to  General  Beauregard. 

Yours,  sincerely,  j P.  McCOWK, 

Brigadier-  Gen  era  t 


Island  No.  10,  February  28,  186i| 
Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  Commanding: 

General:  I received  yours  of  this  date.  It  was  upon  reflect! 
and  consultation  with  the  commodore  and  Colonel  Gantt  that  I plaj 
the  troops  under  my  command  as  I have.  I so  disposed  of  them  | 

the  following  reasons:  _ . , . I 

1st.  The  work  constructed  at  New  Madrid  can  only  contain  11 
regiments.  The  work  that  I am  having  constructed  near  the  bal 
is  about  the  same  capacity,  both  are  near  the  bank  of  the  river  a 
can  be  flanked  by  gunboats,  the  plain  being  level.  All  extra  troi 
only  mask  the  fire  of  the  gunboats.  So  strongly  am  I impressed 
this  view  of  the  case  that  I shall  only  leave  four  regiments  tbi 

unless  differently  instructed.  I 

2d  Should  this  place  fall  or  should  the  enemy’s  gunboats  pass  1 
point,  New  Madrid  could  not  be  held  six  hours  unless  Commodore  B 

lins  could  defeat  them.  i . 

3d  I can  re-enforce  New  Madrid  promptly  from  this  place. 

Commodore  Hollins  has  five  gunboats  here  and  at  New  Madrid.  I 

Now,  as  to  the  condition  of  this  place,  only  one  gun  was  mourn 
when  Colonel  Kennedy  arrived  here.  We  now  have  five  m the  up 
battery,  seven  lower  down,  and  three  between  the  two.  The  si 
battery  is  on  the  island.  I shall  move  it  to  New  Madrid  as  soon  j 
can  get  two  guns  on  the  point  of  the  island.  I send  you  informal 
that  leads  me  to  suppose  that  they  intend  to  shell  the  field  works  < 
The  enemy  is  in  force  at  Benton  and  I believe  will  advance. 

I could  not  leave  our  small  intrenchments  and  fight  without  a m 
larger  force,  nor  can  I stop  the  gunboats  with  certainty  without  t 
to  prepare.  The  guns,  ammunition,  &c.,  have  been  brought  d( 
without  any  person  knowing  what  was  on  each  boat. 

The  Prince  sank  just  above  New  Madrid  about  three  hours  sii 
The  fiat  with  Captain  Stewart’s  battery  sank;  all  except  ammunii 

^ The  boat  that  brought  up  the  laborers  from  Fort  Pillow  brouglr 
tools.  I have  but  few  tools  to  work  with. 

If  the  river  rises  much  more  the  battery  (upper)  will  be  under  wa 
but  one  magazine  here,  that  one  with  water  in  it,  built  below  the  r 
level. 


ip.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  763 

dy  position  is  critical.  If  it  is  possible  General  Beauregard  should 
ae  and  see  how  matters  stand  here. 

Yours,  &c., 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General . 


Headquarters, 

New  Madrid , Mo .,  February  28,  1862 — 8 p.  m. 
tjor-General  Polk:] 

)ear  Sir:  My  reports  from  Sikeston  here  have  been  every  two 
irs.  The  entire  force  of  the  enemy  now  at  Benton  is  estimated  at 
1)00.  Some  seem  to  have  been  sent  through  from  Kentucky,  so  my 
ss  inform  me.  Their  largest  gun,  a siege  mortar,  requires  twenty- 
: horses;  the  others  are  either  12  or  6 pounder  guns. 

Vhen  I wrote  to-day  at  10  o’clock  I informed  you  Thompson  had 
n cut  off.  At  the  date  of  this  writing  it  seems  that  he  left  Sikeston 
n a.  m.  The  enemy  came  in  at  8 a.  m.  His  force  was  65  men  and  a 
I of  those  little  brass  concerns.  My  picket  just  in  informs  me  that 
force  in  Thompson’s  rear  is  only  100,  and  that  he  had  possession  of 
>ies’  Pass;  also  that  he  heard  the  general’s  little  guns  just  before 
ring.  If  so,  he  has  cut  them  off  instead  of  they  him. 
have  just  written  up  to  General  McCown  to  suggest  some  changes 
»ur  mode  of  defense,  which  I will  write  to  you. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  GANTT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Post. 

[ave  I written  to  you  that  General  Pope  commands  the  expedition? 


Headquarters  McCulloch’s  Division, 

March  1,  1862. 

leral  Van  Dorn: 

ir:  I have  ordered  the  command  to  be  ready  to  march  as  soon  as 
[ arrive,  with  six  days’  cooked  rations,  and  will  notify  General 
3e  to  be  ready  also.  We  await  your  arrival  anxiously.  We  now 
e force  enough  to  whip  the  enemy. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

ben.  McCulloch, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Effective  total  of  McCulloch1  s division , at  StricJcler’s , March  2,  1862. 

* art’s  (infantry)  brigade 4,637 

rr’s  (cavalry)  brigade 3,747 

Total 8,384 

rtillery  (Hart’s,  Gaines’,  Good’s,  and  Provence’s  batteries),  18  guns. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Boston  Mountains , March  3,  1862. 

Gen.  Albert  Pike: 

eneral:  I am  instructed  by  Major  General  Van  Dorn  to  inform 
« that  he  will  move  from  here  to-morrow  morning  with  the  combined 


764 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


forces  of  Generals  Price  and  McCulloch  in  the  direction  of  Payed  , 
ville  He  wishes  you,  therefore,  to  press  on  with  your  whole  font 
alone  the  Cane  Hill  road,  so  as  to  fall  in  rear  of  our  army.  I 

You  will  please,  during  your  march,  keep  out  your  scout  s,  especial,  l 
toward  your  left.  Your  troops  will  march  light  and  be  ready  for  n : 
mediate  action.  Your  baggage  train  will  follow  your  column  slowll 
making  marches  of  not  more  than  5 or  6 miles  per  day . bhould  ytl 
have  passed  Evansville  before  this  dispatch  reaches  you,  please  chan  J 
direction  at  once  and  get  into  the  Cane  Hill  road.  It  is  expected  till 
you  will  make  such  efforts  as  will  insure  your  being  in  position,  arl 
send  two  couriers  per  day  to  keep  the  general  commanding  informed 
your  position  and  progress. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours,  ^ MAUEY 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  \ 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Boston  Mountains , Arh .,  March  3,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Pike, 

Commanding  Indian  Brigade: 

General  : This  morning  I sent  you  instructions  concerning  the  mo\ 

inent  of  your  brigade.  j 

The  general  commanding  desires  that  you  will  hasten  lip  uitn  « 
possible  dispatch  and  in  person  direct  the  march  of  your  command,  1 
eluding  Stand  Watie’s,  McIntosh’s,  and  Drew’s  regiments. 

The  route  indicated  ihis  morning  in  the  order  to  you  and  to  thol 
colonels  is  such  that  they  may  not  reach  their  position  by  the  time  (l 
sired.  lam  therefore  directed  to  modify  those  orders,  so  that  50 
command  will  be  near  Elm  Springs  (marching  by  the  shortest  rdulj 
day  after  to-morrow  afternoon. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn:  ^ MAURY 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General: 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  Distrkjt, 

Boston  Mountains,  March  3,  18b— 


Colonels  Drew,  McIntosh,  and  Stand  Watie: 

Colonels:  Major-General  Yan  Dorn,  commanding  the  Confederj! 
forces  in  this  vicinity,  directs  me  to  inform  you  that  you  will  move  alo 
the  road  from  Evansville  to  Fayetteville,  so  as  to  be  within  o or  6 mi 
of  Fayetteville  to  morrow  evening  and  in  rear  ol  our  army,  wmen  ^ 

move  from  here  in  the  morning.  m 

You  will  during  vour  march  keep  out  scouts  toward  youi  lett  cs] 
cially,  and  you  will  report  at  once  to  Brigadier-General  McIntosh, 
S.  Army,  your  progress  and  your  position.  Y ou  will  march  light,  r . 
for  immediate  action,  and  you  will  leave  your  heavy  baggage  o lo|p 

you  slowly.  , , .,  , 

You  will,  if  possible,  procure  corn  on  the  road  or  lia\  e it  hauiui 

your  halting  place  (after  you)  to-morrow  night. 

Send  a special  courier  at  once  to  report  to  General  Yan  Dorn  au  U 


S’.  XVin.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  765 

1 1 Price’s  headquarters  your  receipt  of  this  order  and  your  present 
* ition. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  March  3,  1862. 

I Excellency  0.  E.  Jackson,  Governor  of  Missouri: 
overnor  : You  will  find  inclosed  an  act  which  we  have  passed  this 
8.  I hope  it  will  suit  your  convenience  to  meet  at  Carutliersville, 
;ording  to  this  programme  (adjourned  to  some  other  point),  when  it 
l j be  safe  to  transact  business. 

he  enemy  are  in  plain  sight  of  these  headquarters,  and  therefore  I 
i e no  time  to  write  now. 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier-  General . 

[Inclosure.J 

New  Madrid,  Mo.,  March  3,  1862. 
fhereas  the  forces  of  Abraham  Lincoln  are  making  such  demonstra- 
• ls  this  day  that  it  is  deemed  unsafe  and  inexpedient  for  the  Legisla- 
n of  Missouri  to  assemble  and  transact  business  in  this  town  agree- 
l(r  to  adjournment  at  Carrsville  November  7,  1861 : 
jherefore  we,  officers,  privates,  and  citizens  of  the  First  Military 
itrict,  Missouri  State  Guard,  assuming  the  responsibility  (and  pledg- 
i]  ourselves  to  support  with  our  lives  those  who  conform  with  this  act), 
[hereby  declare  the  General  Assembly  of  the  State  of  Missouri  is 
j mined  to  meet  at  Carutliersville,  Pemiscot  County,  on  Thursday, 
t'ch  6,  1862. 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier-  General . 


o this  was  added  about  sixty  signatures. 

A.  G.  S.,  Glerh. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  4,  1862. 

leral  Leonidas  Polk: 

eneral  : Colonel  Richmond  can  give  you  all  the  news  and  my 
ivs.  Two  companies  of  cavalry  arrived  to-day.  I can  now  make 
Oise  of  them  on  the  Missouri  shore.  A level  plain,  with  perpendicu- 
ij banks,  offers  no  shelter  for  the  horses.  I am  virtually  besieged. 
I enemy  is  encamped  in  force  [within]  3 miles  of  New  Madrid.  My 
jj ition  is  critical  in  the  extreme.  I fear  the  gunboats  may  pass 
*nd  10.  In  that  event  New  Madrid  falls,  unless  the  fleet  of  Com- 
i lore  Hollins  can  defeat  them. 

ime  is  what  I most  want,  unless  I had  force  to  fight  them  in  the 
f|u  field.  I will  do  all  I can  and  trust  Providence.  Colonel  Jordan 
ij  Colonel  Richmond  can  give  you  all  necessary  information.  You 
3 judge  what  is  best  to  do. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General . 


766 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVj| 


1862, 


New  Madrid,  Mo.,  March 

General  Leonidas  Polk,  Commanding : I 

General  : Colonel  Richmond  left  here  last  evening.  At  12  ojol 
last  night  the  enemy  drove  in  our  pickets  at  the  upper  fort  at  til 
place.  The  guards  at  the  lower  fort  repulsed  them  easily.  This  guaj 
was  from  Colonel  Scott’s  regiment.  Artillery  was  then  opened  upi 
us.  Our  gunboats  returned  the  fire  and  soon  drove  them  back.  I 
attack  was  made  by  infantry  upon  our  works.  ™AOCir 

If  30  000  or  10,000  men  could  be  thrown  promptly  to  Point i Pleas* 
the  force  in  my  front  could  be  defeated  and  captured.  I throw  c| 


this  suggestion.  JL  auuui  ax  — ' , A 

No  10  and  defeat  Commodore  Hollins,  that  force  would  be  cut  oft  fol 
Tennessee.  If  such  an  enterprise  was  undertaken  the  transports  N 
rying  the  troops  should  rendezvous  at  Tiptonville.  The  sooner  und- 
taken  the  easier  performed. 

I send  this  by  Captain  Lewis. 

Yours,  &c.,  j p MoCOWN, 

Brigadier- General 


suggestion.  I admit  that  if  their  gunboats  should  pass 


Isla 


^ p The  Federal  troops  were  cheering  for  General  McClernand  1; 

Two  Federals  were  wounded  and  are  prisoners.  Number  of  artici 
were  taken,  blankets,  &c. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  5,  1862—9  p.  m 


Mai.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk:  t 

General:  I am  .just  from  New  Madrid.  The  pickets  have  b( 
fighting  all  day.  The  enemy  was  in  line,  only  out  of  range  ot  our  gu 
One  piece  (6-pounder)  was  advanced  to  within  400  yards  of  our  pick 
I directed  the  pickets  not  to  notice  it.  I shall  risk  nothing  in  the  oj 
field  with  mv  small  force. 

Guns  are  being  rapidly  mounted  at  this  place.  Gun-carriages,  ami: 
eition,  &c.,  came  here  in  such  confusion  that  it  is  difficult  to  find  a 

that  Battery  No.  1 will  be  next  to  useless. 

Guns  of  all  kinds,  forty-seven  guns.  All  I fear  is  that  the  Fede 
gunboats  may  close  their  ports  and  run  past.  We  have  not  a sm 

raigMcefvedyour  telegram  of  3d  instant.  New  Madrid  must  be  in  ■ 
possession.  To  hold  this  without  New  Madrid  would  require  a mi 

larger  force  than  I have.  _ . . _ 

If  New  Madrid  is  in  our  possession  and  we  can  keep  back  the  8 
boats,  a force  could  be  landed  near  Point  Pleasant  and  the  force  in 

Thavenof6  yet  been  able  to  turn  my  attention  to  Tiptonville.  I 
island  opposite  that  place  is  under  water.  , p 

It  is  useless  to  deny  that  my  condition  is  critical  in  the  extreme, 
shall  do  all  in  my  power.  My  command  is  in  fine  spirits. 

Yours,  &c.,  T p mcCOWN,  _ 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding 


p.  XYHL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  767 

Bough  sketch  of  Island  No.  10. 

\ 

I 


Other  posts,  artillery,  four  guus— four  64-pounder  siege. 

'he  above  was  just  brought  in  by  Capt.  E.  A.  Lewis  from  General 
I Down.  He  reports  heavy  cannonading  at  New  Madrid,  as  he  thinks, 

in  8 a.  m.  till  2 p.  m. 

ED.  PICKETT,  Jr., 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Camp  Clarkton,  Mo.,  March  5,  1862. 

. Jason  H.  Hunter,  Camp  Kitchen , Mo.  : 

>ear  Colonel  : I have  got  to  this  end  of  the  road,  but  must  go 
nediately  to  Jacksonport,  and  will  not  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
f . I desire  that  you  should  fall  back  to  this  place  with  your  infant- 
fto  assist  in  the  organization  down  here,  and  also  to  assist  to  con- 
ict  a work  at  this  place  for  the  defense  of  the  plank  road.  I hope 
re  will  be  no  misunderstanding  about  the  guns  and  the  other  things 
ween  Walker,  Kitchen,  and  yourself,  but  that  all  things  will  go  on 
moniously  and  brotherly.  The  balance  of  our  force  is  at  the  other 
of  the  plank  road,  but  Ward’s,  Harris’,  Holmes’,  and  Liles’  infant- 
vill  be  here  to-day.  There  is  no  special  news  from  Madrid.  The 
rrny  are  there  in  force,  but  will  not  fight  for  a day  or  two. 

Yours,  &c., 


M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier- General,  Missouri  State  Guard. 


Camp  Clarkton,  March  5,  1862. 

iieral  J.  P.  McCown, 

Commanding  New  Madrid , Mo. : 

•ear  Sir  : I find  there  are  none  of  the  enemy  on  this  side  of  the 
ike,  and  the  coast  is  entirely  clear  to  Cape  Girardeau.  The  force 
Pt  was  at  Greenville  some  say  [has  gone]  to  Ironton,  but  the  news- 
|>ers  say  it  is  for  Pocahontas.  I will  start  for  Jacksonport  in  a few 
jrs.  I have  placed  the  guns  at  Little  River  at  Weaversville  and  I 
| e two  here,  therefore  the  plank  road  is  safe  for  the  time  being,  and 
- uy  misfortune  should  happen,  the  refugees,  if  any,  can  find  refuge 
je.  I will  start  a cavalry  expedition  up  to  Cape  Girardeau  or  Green- 
1b  on  the  8th  (if  not  too  late),  and  will  draw  some  of  the  forces  away 
■jfl  you.  My  officers  are  confident  they  can  spike  the  guns  and  burn 


Pi 


768 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  IChap.  xvnl 


the  public  stores  there  by  the  10th  or  11th  instant.  I listen  anxious  , 
for  your  guns.  We  are  building  a bn^eJ^ad  atTthis  place. 

Brigadier- General,  Missouri  State  Guard. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  5,  1862. 


General  McCown, 

Madrid  Bend  (via  Union  City),  Tenn. : J 

Construct  levees  of  sand  bags  and  earth  around  the  two  upper  bJ 
teries  and  bail  out  the  water.  Do  this  immediately.  Burn  down  till? 
portion  of  New  Madrid  which  affords  protection  to  the  enemy  s shall 
shooters.  This  peremptory. 

Your  dispatch  by  Captain  Lewis  received.  POLK  ] 


Union  City,  March  6,  1862.! 


General  Polk: 

The  following  by  Captain  Lewis  12  o’clock  p.  m.  5th  : 


General  Cheatham  from  General  McCown: 

The  enemy  is  drawn  up,  camped  from  Hunter’s  and 

it  — rtiirl  l-i  Anr  -mnn 


and  the  bayou  to 


brickehous“  on^road'to  old  encampment,  and  how  much  farther  in  the  woods  I dc 

at  New  Madrid. 

ED.  PICKETT,  Jr., 
Colonel . Commanding 


Union  City,  March  6,  1862 


General  Polk:  .1 

Colonel  Vaughan  is  ready  to  start,  but  a very  intelligent  courier  j 
in  from  Island  No.  10,  with  General  McCown’s  dispatch,  reports  it 
possible  to  move  an  army  from  here  to  the  island  by  the  land  rouj 
the  lower  ferry,  Stone’s,  is  now  about  300  yards  wide,  and  water  ns 
rapidly.  The  boat  can  carry  only  from  25  to  o0  men,  and  on  the  ot) 
side  of  the  lake  the  road  is  in  very  bad  condition.  Distance  about! 

miles.  There  is  no  way  of  . ED  PICKETT,  Jr., 


l &1  nnwtvnn.n.dino 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  6,  1862—12  m 


Col.  Ed.  Pickett,  Jr., 

Commanding  Post , Union  City : 

Colonel  : The  courier  is  just  in,  and  I hasten  to  reply. V ^ 
McCown  is  now  at  New  Madrid.  He  sent  a messenger  to  Union  C 
yesterday  with  dispatches  to  General  Beauregard  and  one  again  t 


* Incomplete. 


769 


1AP.  XVIII. ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

orning.  The  enemy  are  in  large  force  back  of  New  Madrid  (in  sight). 
3veral  of  them  have  been  killed  and  captured.  They  are  reported  to 
f 25,000  strong.  General  McCown  is  expecting  an  attack  at  any  nio- 
ent.  We  are  endeavoring  to  get  matters  so  arranged  as  to  keep  back 
ieir  gunboats.  We  will  have  at  this  place  and  on  the  island  forty-five 
ms  in  position  by  to-morrow  morning.  We  have  five  gunboats  at 
ew  Madrid.  General  McCown  must  have  re-enforcements  from  some 
tarter . If  we  can  keep  the  enemy’s  boats  back,  our  force  can  hold 
it  lor  some  days  at  Madrid.  With  au  additional  force  of  15,000  or 
',000,  the  general  thinks  he  can  bag  the  entire  army  or  crush  them, 
e are  in  excellent  spirits  } the  boys  all  confident  and  freezing  for  a 
jht,  but  we  must  have  re-enforcements. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  F.  MARKS, 
Commanding  on  Main-land . 


* Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  7,  1862. 

meral  McCown, 

Island  No.  10,  or  New  Madrid : 

Your  dispatch  of  the  5th,  by  Captain  Lewis,  just  received.  Change 
e position  of  the  Belmont  gun  if  you  deem  it  necessary.  Contrive 
t have  the  bridge  across  the  plank  road  destroyed  at  'all  hazards, 
m must  rely  upon  General  Thompson  and  the  Missourians  for  this 
d the  sort  of  service  you  wish  performed  by  Lewis  and  his  company, 
irow  out  large  advance  pickets  at  night  as  near  as  possible  to  the 
emy.  If  possible,  build  the  salient  in  advance  of  your  two  works  so 
; to  have  it  flanked  by  the  firing  from  them.  This  you  may  have  to 
j at  night. 

[f  the  plank  road  is  destroyed  Sigel’s  force  cannot  reach  you. 
Economize  powder  and  shot,  and  tell  Hollins  to  do  the  same.  I have 
jit  you  600  spades  by  the  Hartford  City,  and  will  send  others  across 
m Union  City.  There  was  700  guns  in  boxes  sent  from  Columbus  to 
i'W  Madrid  to  Colonel  Gantt.  Let  me  know  if  they  came  to  hand. 

1 1-ve  all  heavy  guns  of  every  caliber  that  you  do  not  want  sent  down 
: Fort  Pillow  immediately. 

Have  levees  built  around  Batteries  No.  1 and  2,  with  stakes,  sand 
2gs,  and  earth.  Have  just  given  orders  to  have  1,000  negro  men 
fissed  and  put  to  your  assistance  from  the  river.  The  Manassas  will 
: with  you  perhaps  to-morrow.  I have  no  fears  of  the  enemy  trying 
: run  the  gauntlet  with  his  gunboats,  and  we  all  believe  you  can  hold 
} position. 

L.  POLK, 
Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  7,  1862. 

- neral  Leonidas  Polk,  Commanding : 

General  : Yesterday  the  enemy  appeared  at  Point  Pleasant.  At 
i request  Commodore  Hollins  sent  two  gunboats  to  remove  all  means 
3 crossing  from  the  Missouri  shore.  Several  shots  (6-pounders)  were 
p1  at  the  Kentucky.  The  gunboats  soon  removed  the  annoyance, 
"ould  I fail  to  hold  New  Madrid,  it  would  require  10,000  men  to' main- 
49  r r — vol  VIII 


770  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 


tain  mv  position  in  the  bend,  unprotected  by  works  as  it  is.  I coiil 
skier  New  Madrid  of  great  importance.  I shall  not  relinquish  I 
without  a struggle.  We  have  fifty  guns  of  all  sorts  mounted  at  [Is: 
and!  10  and  on  shore  opposite,  including  siege  guns  and  floatn^  bal 
terv  The  carriages  for  many  of  our  best  guns  can  t be  found.  Wlier 
are  they  ? The  guns  mounted  are  not  all  protected  by  works.  - ■ 
A captain  in  Colonel  Travis’  regiment  was  seriously  wounded  yesteil 

dai  have  not  been  able  yet  to  send  any  force  to  TiptonviUe  except 
small  force  of  cavalry.  Can’t  the  force  m my  front  at  New  Madri 
be  cut  to  pieces  or  captured  ? All  I can  do  is  to  hold  what  I have  anl 

risk  nothing. 

Yours,  &c.,  j P McCOWN, 

Briaadier-  General.  || 


Union  City,  March  7,  1862—10  p.  m.  | 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  Commanding , &c.: 

Captain  Tobin’s  battery  is  without  men  or  horses  at  all  adequatl 
He  isP  therefore  sent  by  me  for  the  purpose  of  having  such  of  his  mej 
horses  &c.,  as  are  at  Humboldt  or  elsewhere  on  the  road  immediate 
forwarded  here.  Captain  Tobin  will  himself  represent  his  condition  j 
vou.  I think  it  of  the  utmost  importance  that  his  battery  should  11 
placed  in  a condition  for  service  or  sent  away  from  this  post.  I 

A countryman  from  Hickman  to-day  represents  that  there  were  rj 
ports  there  to  the  effect  that  the  Federate  were  expected  to  occujj 
Hickman  to-morrow  or  next  day.  Lieutenant  Kelly  0ust  b1)’ 
reports  that  he  heard  no  such  rumors,  and  Lieutenant  Blake  (of  L 
lard’s  scouts)  has  sent  me  no  such  information.  Lieutenant  Llal 
writes  by  Lieutenant  Kelly  of  the  express : 


No  troops  can  get  from  Charleston  to  Madrid  unless  they  (the  enemy)  have  repair 
the  road.  Bertrlnd,  some  5 or  6 miles,  is  as  far  as  they  can  go,  m consequence  ot  hij 
water. 


The  express  to  Island  10  was  started  from  this  post  under  commarl 
of  Lieutenant  Garrett,  of  Logwood’s  battalion,  on  the  morning  of  tl 
6tli  and  up  to  this  time  there  has  been  no  return  from  the  island,  a 
the* cause  is  as  yet  unknown.  I have  taken  measures  to  ascertain  1 
I have  used  all  the  means  at  my  command  for  the  purpose  of  nnpm 
ing  slaves  for  Island  10,  but  have  not  succeeded  to  any  considerah 
extent.  I have  now  8 here  who  came  in  to-day,  and  some  20  oi  80  wg 
promised  Lieutenant  Garrett  to  be  forwarded.  , 

1 All  the  cavalry  at  this  post  have  been  used  as  express  scouts  ai 
pickets,  some  35  in  number,  and  all  the  field  officers  dismounts 
Maior  Winfield  being  only  one  for  duty  not  m command,  and  lie  1 
been  sent  on  the  reconnoitering  party.  Besides,  I have  not  though^ 
prudent  to  weaken  Lieutenant-Colonel  Logwood  or  Lieutenant-Color 
Miller  further.  Slaves  are  scarce  in  the  region  assigned  me  by  yo 

order  as  the  sphere  of  operations.  uionri  in  sir 

1 believe  it  impracticable  to  send  loaded  wagons  to  Island  10.  b»« 

attempt  to  put  through  four  clays’  rations  tor  oOO,  irrespe ;ctrve  of  t 


iuXofslami^sedby  met  The  express  which  arrived! 
twenty  minutes,  and  was  then  resumed  and  continued  less  vigoi 


Chap.  XVIII]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  771 

until  4 o’clock,  after  which  slow  cannonading  was  heard  till  dark  and 
a lew  reports  after  dark. 

1 inclose  a dispatch  * received  by  a messenger  from  Island  10  at  10.40 
p.  m.,  and  reports  having  heard  cannon  and  musketry  at  New  Madrid 
all  day. 

I send  this  by  Captain  Tobin. 

With  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  PICKETT,  Jr., 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend,  March  7,  1862—10  p.  m., 
(Deceived  at  Union  City,  March  8—6  p.  m.) 
Major- General  Polk,  Commanding : 

Houses  burned  and  torn  down,  as  occasion  required.  Captain  Hallum, 
Fifth  Regiment,  wounded  yesterday ; also  3 men  on  the  Polk  and  1 
jcout.  A lively  skirmish  yesterday  evening. 

A heavy  demonstration  this  afternoon  on  New  Madrid.  Were  driven 
lack  by  Captain  Bankhead’s  guns  and  the  gunboats. 

The  enemy  has  established  a battery  at  Point  Pleasant  of  small  rifled 
pins.  The  river  would  be  closed  if  New  Madrid  was  abandoned.  A 
arge  force  would  be  required  to  hold  Island  10  if  New  Madrid  was  in 
he  hands  of  the  enemy.  It  is  necessary  to  hold  the  place  until  forces 
tre  thrown  here  to  defeat  the  enemy.  The  quicker  the  better.  I see 
10  other  course  to  pursue.  If  I had  20,000  more  men  such  would  be 
ny  course. 

McCOWN. 

N.  B. — Shall  I look  for  re-enforcements?  I want  as  commanders 
rudeau,  Marsh  Walker,  and  Gantt.  It  is  important. 


Clarksville,  March  7,  1862. 

0 General  Van  Dorn  : 

1 am  requested  by  telegraph  from  General  Beauregard  to  write  you 
) join  your  forces  with  his  on  Mississippi  River  if  possible. 

ISHAM  G.  HARRIS, 

Governor  of  Tennessee. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  8,  1862 — 10  p.  m. 

lajor-General  Polk: 

General  : Your  telegrams  of  5th  and  7th  noted.  Every  effort  is 
*ing  made  to  redeem  the  Battery  No.  1.  Ordnance  was  sent  here  from 
olumbus  in  such  confusion  that  I don’t  know  what  I can  spare.  1 
tall  exercise  my  best  judgment  in  all  matters.  u Peremptory ” orders 
» save  a battery  from  overflow  might  require  all  my  force  for  weeks, 
he  enemy  is  erecting  a battery  at  Point  Pleasant,  A gunboat  went 
>wn  to  shell  them  out,  I have  not  heard  the  result.  I have  not  yet 
aced  the  salient  in  advance  of  the  works  at  New  Madrid.  The  posi- 


Not  found, 


772 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T. 


[Chap.  XVI.IL 


tion  it  would  occupy  is  raked  by  the  gunboats.  I ha\e  not  force  ft 
occuov  it.  I shall  erect  it  as  soon  as  I can.  . i 

From  what  I learn  I fear  the  enemy  can  get  guns  down  as  low  a| 
Tintonville  on  the  Missouri  shore.  The  railroad  to  Sikeston  is  being 

SHF SSJKS  “ fifflSSi 

ss  r.g 

He  occupies  a position  from  which  he  can’t  retreat.  In  m } humbld 
opinion  it  is  the’place  to  inflict  a great  overthrow  upon  the  enemy.  I 

you.  I am  ^eternnned  to  hoM  my  pomtio 

8*55  “hl^^good11^  We"  have  fifty  guns,  alj 
told,  mounted.  Some  of  our  best  guns  have  no  carnages. 

I will  dispatch  as  often  as  possible. 

Yours,  &c.,  J.  P.  McCOVra, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


(Copy  sent  to  Generals  Bragg  and  Beauregard.) 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  8,  1862.  j 

General  McCown,  m 

New  Madrid  (via  Union  City),  lenn. : 

Use  gunboats  in  keeping  river  open  below  New  Madrid  in  case  «| 

necessity.  G T BEAUREGARD. 


Hqdbs.  Fikst  Gkand  ^Zhom^l,TMarclT 1862.: 
BG^22.-nCd5o°yr  the  bearer,  Captain  Bradford,  with  a <b! 

terfby  yot  gunboat  o?  drive  them  away,  so  as  to  keep  the  nver  opc 
beT°haveUdirected  Captain  Bradford  to  examine  the  ferries  across i tl 

Respectfully , your  obedient  servant,  L poLK) 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


773 


"MAI*.’  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

P.  S. — You  will  find  an  order  constituting  Gantt  and  Walker  brigadier- 
generals  by  direction  of  General  Beauregard.  Their  appointments  will 
loubtless  be  confirmed  by  the  War  Department.  You  will  dispose  of 
hem  as  you  think  best. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  9,  1862 — 11  p.  m. 
Jeneral  Leonidas  Polk,  Commanding : 

General  : I send  a copy  of  a communication  from  Commodore  Hol- 
ms. The  enemy  is  erecting  works  at  Point  Pleasant.  Their  force  is 
iieavy.  Time  will  wear  out  my  command.  The  force  in  my  front  can 
>e  cut  to  pieces  and  captured  if  a strong  force  is  promptly  thrown 
lere.  If  I should  have  to  give  up  New  Madrid  it  would  require  a 
tronger  force  than  I have  to  hold  this  bank  of  the  river. 

I believe  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  pass  Island  10.  My  command 
3 in  good  spirits. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General, 

[In  closure.] 


Flag-Ship  McRae, 

New  Madrid , March  9,  1862. 
General  McCown,  Commanding  Forces  : 

General  : The  report  of  the  commanders  of  the  gunboats  Polk  and 
’ontchartrain  convince  me  that  unless  a force  can  be  landed  either 
t Point  Pleasant  or  this  side  of  it  and  the  enemy  driven  from  that 
lace  the  navigation  from  below  will  virtually  be  cut  off*.  The  gunboats 
an  drive  them  from  the  bank  while  they  are  firing,  but  they  fall  back 
ut  of  reach  and  advance  again  as  soon  as  the  gunboats  leave.  The 
tiemy  are  said  to  have  moved  a large  force  to  that  place.  I should  say 
hat  unless  large  re-enforcements  are  sent  to  you  to  meet  the  enemy 
ow  in  our  front  we  shall  either  be  compelled  to  leave  this  place  or 
ive  up  our  communication  in  transports  from  Tipton ville  to  this  place. 

I would  suggest  planting  a good  heavy  battery  on  the  Tennessee 
ide  to  shell  them  in  conjunction  with  the  river  battery  in  the  gunboats; 
lis  may  obviate  the  difficulty  until  your  re-enforcements  arrive,  and  if 
on  have  a mortar,  it  could  be  used  to  great  advantage, 
i I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  N.  HOLLINS, 

Flag-Officer. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  10,  1862— noon. 

eneral  Polk  : 

From  the  best  information  I can  obtain — notwithstanding  Captain 
ray’s  assurance  to  the  contrary— I am  inclined  to  believe  that  the 
lemy  may  be  able  to  occupy  some  point  on  the  Missouri  shore  (Rid- 
e’s Point)  below  Tiptonville,  at  least  with  light  guns.  The  Federals 
re  fortifying.  All  quiet.  If  the  gunboats  stop  to  attack  No.  10  I will 
ipture  them.  All  I fear  is  their  running  past.  Commodore  Hollins 
ives  me  the  most  hearty  co-operation. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General . 


774  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  1ND.  T.  [Chav.  XVIII.  | 

Union  City,  March  10, 1802. 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk: 

Major  Winfield  returned;  reports  it  impracticable  to  send  troops; 
across  from  Union  City  to  Island  10.  Judge  Botwick  states  that  troops i 
can  be  landed  at  Mrs.  Meriwether’s,  below  and  out  of  sight  of  Point 
across  a fine  ridge  road  to  Island  10,  thence  landed 
at  New  Madrid,  unknown  to  the  enemy.  Reliable  parties  leport  thirty 
transports  loaded  with  troops  passed  Paducah  Thursday  down  the! 

river* 

All  quiet  at  Hickman.  No  enemy  in  sight.  , ri- 

Small  scouting  parties  of  the  enemy  5 miles  southeast  ol  Clinton 

yesterday.  ED<  pI0KETT?  jR>? 

C\n<m.vn  mulimi. 


Island  10,  March  10,  1862. 


GenerCom^.NKrrt^i^»,  Western  Department , C.  8.  Army: 

General-  Major  Meriwether  has  informed  you  of  the  cause  of  ayl 
not  proceeding  to  join  you  under  your  last  order  from  Columbus.  Gen- 
eral McCown,  Captain  Harris,  Colonel  Jordan,  and  Major  Menwetheij 
all  thought  I should  remain,  and  I was  anxious  to  do  all  in  ln5'  P®'' 
to  push  the  defenses  to  completion  We  have  now  some  Ttymm i gunj 
in  Position  including  the  siege  battery  and  naval  battery,  lhe  iatteii 
Is  now  placed  on  thf  north  side  of  the  island,  in  a fine  place  to  guard 

the  north  channel.  The  Belmont  is  on  the  “f “epeHijl 
to  your  orders.  Each  day  puts  us  m a more  efficient  state  lor  repelling 
flip  CTimboats  and  I believe  they  can  hardly  pass,  not  certainly  lll(tajy 
toef if  oufeannoneers  are  proportionably  good  to  the  situation  of  the 

We  have  now  five  batteries  on  the  main  land.  One  njipei  battery, 
the  Redan  No  1 has  six  guns.  The  river  is  at  an  extreme  high  s < 
of  wfter  and  connecl  with  the  hike,  making  our  flanking  arrangement^ 
on  the  ri-ht  perfect.  It  prevents  the  battery  being  very  efficient,  but 
the  gunstnPbe  fired.  It  was  never  intended  to  use  this  battery  i 
highest  stage  of  the  river,  but  the  men  to  fall  back  to  the  other  bat 

lrrp  line  if  the  enemy’s  fire  gets  too  severe  for  them. 

Our  batteries  2, “f  and  4 have  eight  rifled  32s,  one  8-inch  Columbiad 

«skissu«;* 

“*S  I went  to  Feint  Pl«..»nt 

village  of  Point  Pleasant  , and  placed  two  of  ^aptam  Stewart  m 

"S  ZZ  SS 

Captain  Carter,  of  the  gunboat,  who  was  the  . 8 


«AP.  XVlll.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


775 


revent  the  enemy  going  ahead  until  next  morning,  when  the  gunboats 
Hivoyed  the  steamer  Mears  past  Point  Pleasant  to  New  Madrid,  open- 
ig  fire  at  the  same  time  on  the  enemy’s  batteries.  At  12  o’clock  in 
le  day  (Sunday)  we  reached  there  with  the  two  light- battery  guns 
oove  mentioned.  Our  first  shot  from  the  Parrott  gun  scattered  the 
lemy  from  their  work  and  they  ran  in  various  directions.  We  con- 
nued  firing  some  fifteen  or  twenty  shots  with  both  pieces,  driving 
levy  man  of  them  away  from  the  two  earthworks  they  were  throwing 
p.  The  distance  across  at  this  stage  of  water  to  Point  Pleasant  vil- 
ge  or  to  the  enemy’s  batteries  is  about  miles.  At  low  water  boats 
ill  be  obliged  to  run  very  close  to  their  works,  and  if  they  be  per- 
itted  to  put  up  strong  embankments  and  to  hold  them  we  shall  be 
oubled  much.  The  lake  and  swamps  west  of  New  Madrid  are  now 
lly  3J  to  6 miles,  and  if  we  had  a force  of  10,000  or  12,000  men  we 
)uld,  I believe,  capture  or  destroy  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  before 
tey  could  be  re-enforced.  They  have  a large  artillery  force,  but  the 
>untry  is  such  that  without  preparation  it  cannot  be  used  to  great 
Ivantage. 

This  morning  Captain  Johnston,  with  two  pieces  of  his  siege  battery 
4-pounders),  proceeded  to  the  point  opposite  the  village  of  Point 
leasant,  6 miles  from  Island  10  (by  a good  road),  to  endeavor  to  dis- 
dge  the  enemy.  I am  afraid  their  works  have  progressed  too  far  for 
5 from  this  side  to  do  much.  The  gunboats  are  all  that  can  do  them 
irm,  except  from  an  attack  in  their  rear  by  land. 

We  are  very  short  of  Eeed  shot  for  our  rifle  32s — only  50  rounds  to 
ich.  We  have  but  few  wheelbarrows,  and  greatly  in  want  of  axes. 

I am,  general,  in  great  haste,  very  respectfullv, 

A.  B.  GBAY,  C.  S.  A., 

Chief  Engineer  Island  10. 


Jackson,  March  10,  1862. 

eneral  Leonidas  Polk: 

If  negroes  ordered  to  McCown  are  not  with  him,  please  have  as 
any  collected  as  possible  and  sent  him  immediately. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGABD. 


Humboldt,  March  11,  1862. 

flonel  Pickett  : 

Send  the  following  to  McCown  : 

[ am  sending  you  1,300  negroes.  They  will  be  wit  h you  in  two  days.  I am  sending 
io  a regiment  of  Alabama  troops  of  thorough-drilled  artillerists  from  General  Bragg’s 
namand  from  Pensacola.  I hope  your  gunboats  may  be  able  to  clear  the  Missouri 
are  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  of  light  guns  as  successfully  as  their  boats  cleared  the 
ne  shore  of  ours  above  Columbus.  Captain  Champneys,  who  is  with  me,  says  he 
raished  from  Columbus  an  ample  supply  of  spikes  for  all  the  guns  at  New  Mad- 
l and  on  the  island,  which  I hope  you  may  never  have  to  use.  It  is  satisfactory  to 
ow  that  you  have  them.  I do  not  at  all  believe  the  enemy  will  attempt  to  run  past 
u.  On  the  subject  of  re-enforcements,  T refer  you  to  General  Beauregard’s  eommu- 
•ation  forwarded  yesterday.  With  your  gunboats  and  heavy  guns  in  Fort  Tliomp- 
i we  believe  you  may  keep  at  bay  50,000  men.  If  you  have  any  guns  you  do  not 
'end  to  mount,  let  them  be  sent  to  Fort  Pillow  as  speedily  as  possible. 

5Tour  dispatch  of  the  10th  just  received.  Don’t  believe  the  enemy  can  establish  a 
ttery  at  Riddle’s  Point  that  can  harm  you. 

L.  POLK, 

Major- General  Commanding. 


776 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  X VIIll 
Bichmond,  Ya.,  March  11,  1862.JI 

Gov.  H.  M.  Eector, 

Little  Loch,  Arh. : 

Send  orders  in  my  name  to  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Bust  to  take  the  fielc 
at  once,  assuming  command  of  any  Arkansas  troops  ready  for  servicer 

and  press  on  to  re-enforce  General  Van  Dorn* 

■ J.  P.  BEN J AMDs, 

Secretary  of  War . I 


Actual  strength  present  of  McCulloch’s  division,  March  11,  1862. 


Commands. 


First  (Greer’s)  Brigade  . 
3d  Texas  Cavalry . 


9th  Texas  Cavalry 
11th  Texas  Cavalry. 


Total 


Second  (Churchill’s)  Brigade: 

Churchill’s  regiment 

Embry’s  regiment 

Hubert’s  regiment 

Hill’s  regiment 

McNair’s  regiment 

McRae’s  regiment 

Mitchell’s  regiment 

Rector’s  regiment 

Whitfield’s  battalion 

Hart’s  battery  


Total 

Grand  total. 


Remarks  on  brigade  reports. 


520 


175 

252 


947 


279 

155 

260 

282 

352 

168 

189 


Both  men  and  horses  in  dreadful  condition. 
About  seven  companies  of  this  brigade  are  missj 
ing  and  supposed  to  he  with  the  train. 


Two  of  the  commands,  Stone’s  regiment  an 
Brooks’  battalion,  are  with  the  trains. 


297 


271 

306 

352 

178 

199 


111 

53 


120 

55 


1,849  |1,  947 


2,  894 


Missing. 

3 guns,  3 caissons,  no  ammunition. 


Humboldt,  March  12,  1862. 


General  Beauregard,  Jackson: 

A messenger  just  in  from  General  McCown  states  the  enemy  ha\ 

^ -V  -r-  Tif  1 • J1  A ^ s\-p  Pai  Tlf  T^l  AO  QQ11 T AJ] 


il  lllub^ullCUl  JU.OU  All  AAV'-iLi  ^ . -r^1  . 

moved  down  from  New  Madrid  to  neighborhood  of  Point  Pleasant, 


cuiiet  at  our  forts.  Our  gunboats  keeping  the  enemy  from  establish  in; 
Toils  on  the  river.  Estimated  force  15,000  with  seventy  pieces  o 
light  artillery.  Fifty-two  heavy  guns  mounted  at  Island  10  and  Madia 

B My  heavy  baggage  will  all  be  sent  off  to-morrow.  Five  days’ ration 
distributed  to  the  command,  100  rounds  of  ammunition  to  the  mfantiy 
200  to  the  artillery.  All  will  be  in  hand  day  after  to-morrow  morning 
Generals  Clark  and  Cheatham  placed  each  m command  of  Iorst  m 
Second  Divisions,  composed  of  two  brigades  each,  each  brigade  ha^ 
ing  a battery  attached.  Orders  givep  for  concentrating  at  Craml.Tum 
tion  same  amount  of  ammunition  as  now  distributed  for  a 1 
Will  give  accurate  information  as  to  ammunition  and  supplies  ot 
force  on  the  river  in  a day  or  two.  POLK. 


General  Rust  so  ordered  in  Special  Orders,  No.  58,  A.  and  I.  G.  O.,  of  March  13, 186! 


iap,  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


777 


Madrid  Bend,  March  12,  1862. 

lol.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Adjutant- General,  Jackson , Tenn.: 

Colonel:  I received  yours  of  March  10.  As  soon  as  I can  deter- 
line  the  guns  required  here  I shall  forward  the  remainder  to  Fort 
*illow.  As  soon  as  a gunboat  opens  fire  upon  the  enemy  they  di  sap  - 
ear,  but  return  as  soon  as  the  boat  leaves.  They  are  fortifying  Point 
Peasant.  I have  placed  two  24-pounder  siege  guns  and  a company 
f cavalry  opposite  that  point. 

The  river  is  now  falling.  I am  making  every  effort  to  save  battery 
To.  1.  1 have  not  constructed  any  works  in  front  of  my  works  at  New 

ladrid  as  yet.  The  reasons  that  have  influenced  me  in  not  advancing 
ly  works  are  that  a gunboat  in  the  mouth  of  the  bayou  and  one  below 
tie  work  covers  all  the  ground — cross-fire  in  front  of  the  work.  The 
alien t proposed  to  be  erected  in  advance  of  the  two  works  would  inter- 
ire  with  this  fire.  Also,  the  position  the  work  would  occupy  is  also 
nder  the  fire  of  the  boats.  Another  reason,  it  would  require  more 
roops  to  occupy  it.  I now  have  five  regiments  at  the  two  works  in 
trew  Madrid.  I must  not  be  too  weak  on  this  side  of  the  river.  I keep 
Iransports  there  all  the  time.  If  they  assault  the  works,  I believe  they 
ill  be  repulsed  with  loss  with  the  co-operation  of  Commodore  Hollins, 
lere  I desire  to  say  that  Commodore  Hollins,  as  well  as  all  his  eom- 
land,  have  given  me  the  most  hearty  support  in  everything.  I feel 
onfident  of  defeating  the  enemy’s  gunboats  if  they  stop  to  fight $ if 
key  run  past,  I shall  endeavor  to  pass  them  in  a crippled  state  to 
5 ;>m m odore  Hollins. 

Tbe  enemy  are  still  receiving  re-enforcements,  and  will  be  able  to 
ring  24-pounders  from  Sikeston. 

Assure  the  general  that  I shall  do  all  in  my  power  to  hold  the  enemy 
i check,  but  shall  risk  nothing  on  rash  enterprises. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  12,  1862. 

lag-Officer  Hollins, 

New  Madrid  (via  Union  City),  Tenn. : 

General  Lovell  wishes  services  of  Manassas  ram  at  mouth  of  river, 
’an  you  not  send  it  without  prejudice  to  our  defenses  % 

Thanks  for  efficient  [aid]  before  New  Madrid. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGARD. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren,  March  12,  1862. 

lol.  B.  W.  Stone,  Commanding , Lee’s  Creek: 

Colonel  : The  general  commanding  desires  yon  to  send  all  of  your 
Dree,  except  your  regiment,  and  a section  of  artillery  to  join  the  army 
t its  encampment  on  the  Frog  Bayou  road,  about  7 miles  from  this  town. 
He  desires  you  to  keep  pickets  on  all  avenues  leading  in  this  direc- 
ion,  and  also  to  keep  scouting  parties  constantly  out  in  the  direction 


778 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  fCHAP.  XVII 


of  the  enemy  at  such  distance  as  will  insure  a good  knowledge  of  hi 
movements  and  timely  warning  of  his  approach. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  13,  1862 — 9.10  a.  m. 

General  : Brigadier-General  McCown  left  this  place  for  New  Madri 
at  12  m.  last  night.  This  morning  at  daylight  the  fight  commenced  i| 
earnest.  A courier  has  just  arrived  by  land  from  opposite  Madrid,  whl 
confirms  that  the  enemy  are  attacking  our  works  with  infantry  anl 
artillery.  The  firing  is  very  rapid  and  distinct,  and  is  plainly  hear 
from  this  point.  There  has  been  two  distinct  attacks,  lasting  abou 
an  hour  each,  with  half  hour  cessation  intervening.  A third  attac 
is  now  being  made,  as  the  roar  of  artillery  plainly  indicates.  Of  cours 
I may  be  mistaken  as  to  the  amount  of  infantry  engaged,  but  the  ba. 
has  opened  and  General  McCown  will  give  them  a splendid  fight. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  most  respectfully, 

H.  S.  BRADFORD, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.  I 


Madrid  Bend,  March  13,  1862 — 4 p.  m. 

Col.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : Commodore  Hollins  says  that  he  cannot  dispense  witj 
the  Manassas.  Let  General  Lovell  know  it.  Batteries  were  planted 
last  night  and  opened  at  daylight  against  the  lower  fort.  Dr.  W.  9 
Bell,  medical  division,  both  legs  shot  off.  One  man  killed  and  on| 
wounded  when  I left,  as  far  as  I know. 

I think  the  object  is  to  cut  regular  approaches. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier- General. 


Humboldt,  March  13,  1862. 

General  McCown,  Madrid  Bend: 

Russell’s  brigade,  composed  of  Russell’s,  Vaughan’s,  and  Freeman1, 
regiments,  will  move  at  once,  via  Memphis,  to  Tiptonville,  to  your  sup 
port.  I am  instructed  to  say  that  these  are  all  the  re-enforcements  li» 
can  afford  to  send  you,  and  trust  they  may  prove,  under  the  directi oi 
of  your  skill  and  judgment,  adequate  to  your  wants.  I sent  you  Firs 
Alabama  Regiment  two  days  ago;  they  are  Bragg’s  best  artillerists 
I send  you  the  Gordon  Grant  tug  boat,  to  act  as  scout  boat  from  Tip 
ton vi lie  or  New  Madrid  down  the  river.  Captain  Champneys  inform; 
me  he  sent  five  32-pounder  carriages  from  Memphis  up  to  you.  Il< 
lias  ordered  other  supplies,  such  as  you  directed.  He  goes  this  even 
ing  back  to  Memphis  to  take  them  immediately  up  if  they  have  no 
been  sent.  I send  you  a first-rate  man  for  post  commissary  at  Madrit 
Bend,  who,  together  with  Meriwether,  should  keep  you  well  supplied 
Tidmarsh  1 think  the  best  man  there  is  in  the  ordnance  department 
give  him  charge  of  all  the  heavy  guns.  Allison  will  look  after  tin 


IAP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  779 

fice  and  the  small-arms.  After  Champneys  lias  done  what  you  want 
3U  can  send  him  to  me.  Dyer  will  take  care  of  the  quartermaster’s 
ipartment.  Ask  Hollins  to  furnish  you  with  a convoy  for  Russell’s 
dgade  up  to  Tiptonville  past  enemy’s  batteries. 

L.  POLK. 

Colonel  Pickett  will  send  this  off  immediately. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  13,  1862 — 11.30  p.  m. 

eneral  Polk: 

General  : 1 this  moment  arrived  from  New  Madrid.  The  enemy 
i-enforced  and  rapidly  pushing  their  advance  against  our  works, 
hey  have  8-inch  and  24-pounders.  Our  gunboats  are  not  sufficiently 
•otected  for  such  heavy  metal.  Upon  consultation  with  Commodore 
ollins  and  General  Stewart  I gave  the  order  to  evacuate  the  place, 
y boat  (Mohawk)  was  hit  in  going  to  Fort  Thompson.  The  enemy’s 
litteries  are  not  below  Tiptonville.  As  soon  as  New  Madrid  is  evacu- 
led  the  commodore,  Hollins,  will  drop  down  to  Tiptonville  and  keep 
lie  river  open  below.  As  soon  as  I have  my  forces  disposed  to  pre- 
set the  enemy  crossing  from  New  Madrid  I will  try  and  send  part  of 
y re-enforcements  back.  1 have  already  organized  the  citizens  into 
police  force.  A large  body  of  troops  arrived  to-day,  supposed  to  be 
►inmanded  by  Sigel. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier- General. 


Jackson,  [March]  13,  1862. 

eneral  Leonidas  Polk: 

Send  immediately  one  of  smaller  brigades  to  Major-General  Mc- 
iwn,  without  field  battery,  with  supply  ammunition.  Inform  him  no 
ore  troops  can  be  sent. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Jackson,  March  13,  1862. 

eneral  Leonidas  Polk: 

Suspend  movements  of  troops  to  support  McCown,  Hold  entire 
immand  in  readiness  to  march  at  instant  notice.  Enemy  # * 

* * * landing  at  McWilliams’  Landing,  near  Savannah. * 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  14,  1862 — 8 a.  m. 
General  Leonidas  Polk:] 

General  : From  the  best  information  I can  obtain  1 am  satisfied 
tat  the  enemy  is  building  the  railroad  from  Sikeston  to  New  Madrid, 
everything  has  been  quiet  to-dav. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier- General. 


Portion  omitted  illegible. 


780 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 

Jacksonport,  March  14,  1862 — 10  p.  m. 

(Received  Clarksville,  March  17,  1862.) 

General  Van  Dorn  : 

1 have  just  received  dispatch  from  Colonel  McCarver,  stating  th 
he  had  received  reliable  information  that  the  enemy,  between  6,000  ai 
7 000  left  Greenville,  Mo.,  to  attack  Pocahontas.  They  have  two  b& 
teries  of  artillery  and  two  regiments  of  cavalry.  Should  Colonel  M 
Carver  fall  back,  will  dispute  every  foot  of  this  river  from  this  plac 

W.  L.  CABELL. 


Richmond,  March  14,  1862. 
Gov.  H.  M.  Rector,  Little  Rock,  Ark.: 

The  Secretary  of  War  requests  you  will  send  the  following  to  Gel 

eral  Van  Dorn,  viz : . , , . ^ 

Cols.  T.  J.  Churchill  and  Albert  Rust  have  both  been  appoint* 
brigadier-generals  and  ordered  to  report  to  General  Van  Dorn.  Th< 
take  rank  in  the  order  they  are  herein  named,  i.  e.,  Churchill  senic 
Their  appointments  and  orders  sent  by  mail  to-day 


S.  COOPER 


Adjutant  and  Inspector- General,  a 


Brig. 


Gen. 


War  Department,  0*  S.  A., 
Richmond , Va.,  March  14,  1862. 

Albert  Pike, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Indian  Territory , Fort  Gibson , Ind.  T. : 

Sir  : The  money  appropriated  in  December  last  by  Congress  for  t 
Indian  service  and  sent  through  you  to  the  superintendent  was  accoi 
panied  by  tabular  statements  and  a letter  of  instruction  from  the  A< 
ing  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs  as  to  the  time  and  manner  of  i 
disbursement,  &c.  As  set  forth  in  those  documents,  none  of  this  mon 
was  to  be  paid  out  by  him  until  the  ratification  on  the  part  of  the  se 
eral  tribes  concerned  in  the  treaties  as  amended  by  Congress  e-xce 


that  appropriated  to  purchase  uniforms,  &c.,  for  the  Principal  Chief, 
the  Creeks  and  to  meet  certain  current  and  conti 


itingent  expenses  of  t 

superintendency  and  agencies  and  a sufficiency  of  both  of  the  fir 
items  under  the  treaties  made  with  the  Reserve  and  Comanche  India: 
to  compensate  Charles  B.  Johnson,  contractor,  tor  finding  them. 

Two  letters,  bearing  upon  the  points  here  suggested,  from  the  supc 
intendent  to  the  Acting  Commissioner  of  Indian  Affairs,  have  bet 
submitted  to  me  for  consideration.  Inclosed  you  will  find  copies 
the  same,*  to  which  it  is  proper  your  attention  should  be  directed,  ai 
in  relation  to  which  you  will  please  report  to  this  Department. 

Truly  and  respectfully,  T p BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  14,  1862. 
General  Leonidas  Polk  : 4 

The  First  Alabama  Regiment  is  here,  with  mumps  and  measles.  Nc 
Madrid  was  abandoned  last  night,  the  execution  of  which  was  not  sat 


Not  found. 


781 


af.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

etory  to  me  from  a want  of  discipline  of  the  troops.  The  guns  left 
ere  rendered  useless  to  the  enemy.  I am  enforcing  discipline  with  a 
rong  hand.  I am  sending  down  all  the  boats  I can  spare.  Every- 
dug  was  tumbled  down  here  in  such  confusion  that  it  required  time 
» hnd  what  is  here.  Orders  not  through  me  to  persons  has  increased 
te  confusion.  I hope  soon  to  get  matters  in  some  order.  I find 
fleers  acting  under  other  authority  than  mine.  Dr.  Bell  died  last 
ight, 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Humboldt,  March  15,  1862. 

rig-General  McCown, 

New  Madrid  Bend , care  Colonel  Pickett : 
i Congratulate  you  on  having  retired  your  troops  safely  from  New 
[adrid,  as  announced  in  yours  of  the  14th. 

You  say,  u I find  officers  acting  under  other  authority  than  mine,”  and 
rders  “not  through  me  to  persons  has  increased  the  confusion.”  In 
our  reply  you  will  please  state  to  me  who  these  officers  and  what  these 
rders  are.  I am  not  aware  of  the  existence  of  the  one  or  the  other. 
41  officers  at  the  post  commanded  by  you  will  report  to  you  for  orders 
nmediately. 

I have  heard  the  gunboats  have  attacked  you  and  hope  you  have 
iade  successful  resistance. 

Hope  you  have  received  dispatch  from  General  Beauregard,  order- 
lg  retiring  all  infantry  to  Fort  Pillow  except  what  was  necessary  to 
iipport  the  guns — say  three  regiments,  to  be  left  under  General  L.  M. 
Valker.  Same  dispatch  goes  by  the  hands  of  special  messenger. 
Colonel  Pickett  will  send  this  immediately. 

L.  POLK, 

Major-  General. 


[Jackson,  Tenn.,]  March  15,  1862. 

General  McCown, 

New  Madrid , care  Colonel  Pickett , Union  City  : 

I came  here  to  advise  with  General  Beauregard  as  to  what  you  should 
o in  view  of  the  evacuation  of  New  Madrid. 

We  have  agreed  on  the  course  which  he  has  sent  you  through  his 
djutant- general . I have  to  add  that  if  Bankhead’s  battery  has  been 
3ft  I have  another  to  give  him  as  soon  as  he  shall  arrive. 

L.  POLK, 

Major- General. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  15,  1862. 

Jolonel  Pickett: 

Please  dispatch  by  express  the  following  to  General  McCown : 

I General:  The  general  commanding  fully  approves  the  projected  evacuation  of 
our  position  of  New  Madrid,  and  trusts  that  it  has  already  been  safely  accomplished ; 
f determined  on,  that  step  determines  an  immediate  reduction  of  your  force  to  the 
lumber  necessary  to  the  efficient  service  of  the  batteries  at  Island  No.  10  and  Madrid 
lend,  with  an  infantry  support  and  reserve  of  three  regiments,  under  the  command 
f Brigadier-General  Walker,  to  whom  you  will  assign  the  command  and  honor  of 
lefending  that  Thermopylae  of  the  Mississippi  Valley. 


782 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


You  will  also  leave  a light  battery  of  six  guns.  It  is  suggested  that  one  of  1 
infantry  regiments  shall  be  stationed  on  Island  No.  10;  the  other  on  the  main-la] 
Two  of  the  light  guns  also  to  be  with  the  troops  on  the  island.  General  Trade 
will  remain  with  General  Walker  in  charge  of  the  batteries  as  chief  of  artilleris 
and  from  his  past  distinguished  services  and  skill  the  general  confidently  expects  i 
guns  will  be  served  with  all  possible  efficiency  and  honor  to  the  country. 

The  remainder  of  your  command  you  will  withdraw  to  Fort  Pillow  with  [all]  p 
sible  celerity  by  water  from  Tiptonville,  where  ample  transportation  will  be  s< 
you.  Should  an  unfortunate  casualty,  however,  leave  you  unprovided  with  sufficn 
transports  for  all  your  troops  at  once,  you  will  send  as  many  as  practicable  to  F 
Pillow,  with  orders  that  the  transports  shall  return  for  the  remainder  with  least  p 
sible  delay,  leaving  sixty  days’  provisions  for  the  garrison,  and  an  ample  supply 
ammunition  for  a prolonged,  desperate  defense,  including  about  300  rounds  of  smi 
arms  ammunition  for  each  infantry  soldier.  You  will  reserve  the  remainder  of  y( 
supplies,  if  practicable ; otherwise  destroy  what  cannot  be  removed  in  the  m 
effectual  way  practicable.  Transports  at  all  times  will  be  left  at  Tiptonville  for  1 
removal  of  the  garrison  just  prescribed  should  General  Walker,  or  officer  in  co 
maud,  at  any  subsequent  time  determine  further  defense  of  this  position  fruitless, 
without  possible  beneficial  issue.  Should  this  final  evacuation  become  plainly  pro] 
and  necessary,  before  the  troops  retire,  all  the  guns  must  be  bursted  or  thrown  ii 
the  ri  cer,  if  practicable  ; if  not,  they  must  be  spiked.  Should  it  be  deemed  of  servi 
you  are  authorized  to  leave  with  General  Walker  one  company  of  cavalry  ; the  otl 
companies,  including  the  squadron  of  Logwood’s  battalion,  will  be  sent  to  F< 
Pillow. 

A copy  of  this  letter  will  be  left  with  General  Walker.  Captain  Harris  will  be  8( 

to  Fort forthwith,  and  if  you  deem  the  services  of  the  other  engineers  i 

required,  you  will  detach  them  also. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 
Assistant  Adju tan t-  G en erali 


Humboldt,  March  (15?),  18G2.I 

General  McCown,  Madrid  Bend : 

You  will  send  all  the  transports  you  have  at  the  island  that  you  <1 
not  actually  need  down  below  to  Tiptonville.  You  will  also  dire! 
Allison,  ordnance  officer,  to  ship  in  one  of  these  boats  down  to  Meij 
phis  all  saddlery,  harness,  cartridge-boxes,  cap-boxes,  and  other  or 
nance  stores  that  you  do  not  actually  need.  You  will  also  send  t 
the  extra  light  field  guns  and  the  extra  field-gun  carriages,  balls,  ai 
other  ammunition,  all  extra  quartermaster  stores,  such  as  blacksmith 
and  carpenters’  tools,  and  in  short  everything  not  necessary  for  tl 
defense  of  your  position.  You  will  also  organize  from  among  the  ci 
zens  of  Madrid  Bend  a party  of  scouts,  to  scout  up  and  down  held 
Tiptonville  on  the  river  and  to  arrest  all  suspicious  persons. 

L.  POLK, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  15,  1862. 

General  McCown,  care  Colonel  Pickett  : 

Send  down  immediately  to  Fort  Pillow  all  the  negro  force  ii' 
required  by  you,  with  all  the  extra  tools,  and  also  Captain  Harris, 
Engineers. 

G.  T.  BEAUKEGABD. 


Jacksonport,  March  15,  1862. 

General  Van  Dorn  : 

The  enemy  under  General  Steele  is  advancing  on  Pocahontas  with 
force  variously  estimated  from  5,000  to  12,000.  1 shall  send  all  tl 


783 


IAP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


oops  1 have  here  to  re-enforce  Colonel  McCarver.  I have  called  on 
ic  people  on  this  river  to  rally  to  this  place.  The  steamers  are  now 
11  up.  Should  the  enemy  take  Pocahontas  I shall  clear  the  river  of 
oats  of  every  kind  and  make  a stand  at  every  point.  The  high  water 
as  retarded  the  enemy’s  march.  1 wrote  to  Colonel  McCarver  to  get 
eneral  Jeff.  Thompson  to  unite  with  him  if  possible.  I have  had  all 
le  stores  brought  away  from  Pocahontas  and  will  protect  them 
eneral  Rust  telegraphed  me  to  send  all  the  Arkansas  troops  that 
ere  armed  to  Clarksville,  I could  not  do  it.  I have  but  four  com- 
mies here,  and  Locke’s  regiment,  who  were  taken  with  the  measles  at 
le  rate  of  thirty  a day.  The  streams  are  all  so  high  that  his  regiment 
ould  be  of  no  service  up  there.  I shall  keep  them  here.  Will  tele- 
raph  again  soon. 

W.  L.  CABELL. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , Arh.,  March  15,  1862. 

ilonel  Greer, 

Commanding  Cavalry  Brigade , McCulloch's  Division: 

ColoNel  : The  general  commanding  requests  me  to  direct  vou  to  re- 
ive Colonel  Stone’s  regiment  at  Oliver’s  Store,  on  Lee’s  Creek,  at  the 
ot  of  Boston  Mountains,  with  that  regiment  under  your  command 
liich  is  at  present  in  the  best  condition  as  regards  number  of  men, 
ndition  of  horses,  &c. 

You  will  cause  Major  Crump’s  and  Major  Brooks’  battalions  to  re- 
ovc  at  once  to  the  camp  of  the  army  on  Frog  Bayou. 

You  will  please  to  keep  the  pickets  on  all  avenues  leading  in  this 
rection,  and  also  keep  scouting  parties  constantly  out  in  the  direc- 
)ii  of  the  enemy  at  such  distance  as  will  insure  a good  knowledge 
his  movements  and  timely  warning  of  his  approach. 

The  officer  whom  you  may  select  for  this  post  should  distinctly  un- 
rstand  that  he  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  holding  of  his  posi- 
>n,  where  he  will  have  at  command  a section  of  artillery  in  addition 
his  own  regiment;  and  it  will  be  his  duty  to  semi  out  the  pickets 
d scouts  as  above  directed. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn : 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


sneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Mo.  S.  Guard, 

No.  74.  f Camp  near  Van  Buren,  Arlc.,  March  15,  1862. 

I.  All  telegraph  wires  beyond  Lee’s  Creek  will  be  taken  down  at  once, 
d the  telegraph  wires  from  Van  Buren  to  Clarksville  will  be  com- 
bed as  soon  as  possible. 

II.  This  army  will  be  encamped  on  the  Frog  Bayou  road  to  Van 
1 Ten.  All  wagon  trains  belonging  to  it  will  report  at  the  encampment 
1 soon  as  possible.  Ammunition  for  the  command  will  be  sent  to  the 
campment  as  soon  as  possible,  under  charge  of  commissioned  officers, 
e quartermaster  department  will  at  once  have  sufficient  transporta- 

t n organized  for  hauling  provisions  and  forage,  &c.,  for  the  army. 

Al.  General  Green  and  Colonel  Stone,  with  their  commands,  will 
-<e  position  on  the  Telegraph  road  to  Lee’s  Creek.  Tliev  will  permit 


784  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Giiai*.  XYIT 


no  stragglers  from  the  army,  hut  will  send  all  such  to  report  to  the 
respective  commanders  at  the  camp  ol  the  army  on  the  Frog  ±>ayc 

r°iy.  Major  Savery,  Mo.  8.  G.,  is  appointed  provost-marshal  of  th 
v.  He  Avill  make  his  station  at  Van  Buren,  and  will  at  once  pr 


army,  ne  wm  , — ~ , .s  m 

ceed  to  organize  a proper  provost  guard,  making  application  to  the* 
headquarters  for  such  details  of  officers  and  men  as  he  may  require.  I 
Commanders  of  divisions  and  brigades  will  comply  with  the  aboil 
order  issued  from  general  headquarters. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Price : ^ ^ BRAND, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Van  Buren,  Ark.,  March  16,  1862. 

General  Beauregard, 

Care  of  Gov.  Isham  G.  Harris , Memphis  : 

I will  unite  all  of  my  troops  at  Pocahontas  as  soon  as  possible.  1 w| 
probably  have  about  20,000  men  there  about  the  7th  of  April;  may! 

Your  letter  did  not  reach  me  until  a few  days  since,  on  my  retiu 
from  the  battle-field  at  Elkhorn.  It  is  said  that  the  enemy  m Arkans 
have  fallen  back  toward  Springfield.  I will  communicate  with  y< 
often.  I will  start  in  a day  or  two  for  Pocah°^as£  D0RK 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  16,  1862—10.30  a.  m. 
General  Leonidas  Polk:  J 

General:  Captain  Cummings  established  a signal  station  at  B: 
terv  No.  1 last  night.  Pie  unfortunately  used  a white  flag.  1 so 
discovered  it  and  ordered  the  battle-flag  substituted.  Captain  Buck* 
who  commands  Battery  No.  1,  allowed  a tug  with  a white  flag  to  I 
near  his  battery.  The  overflow  prevented  my  communicating  prompt 
with  Captain  Pucker.  General  Trudeau  went  to  the  boat  and  t 
plained  their  mistake ; informed  the  enemy  that  we  did  not  wish 
communicate  with  them.  Captain  Kucker  told  the  officer  that  lie,  . 
the  contrary,  was  ready  for  action.  I regret  the  affi 

Brigadier-  General . 


2 p.  m.— Shelling  us.  No  damage  done.  We  have  not  replied 

boats-  J.  P.  Mod., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Madrid  Bend, 

March  16,  1862—9  p.  m.  (Received  March  17.] 
Major-General  Polk: 

The  mortar  boats  have  been  shelling  us  all  day.  They  opened  soi 


785 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

uns.  No  person  hurt.  I have  just  returned  from  Tiptonville,  and 
dll  endeavor  to  carry  out  your  orders  without  friend  or  foe  lmow- 
i g it. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General . 


Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  16,  1862. 

Taj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk: 

General  : I received  your  dispatch  with  Colonel  Jordan’s  letter.  I 
ill,  if  possible,  execute  your  instructions.  My  experience  in  that  line 
takes  me  tremble  for  the  result.  The  gunboats  are  now  off  the  point 
ropping  down. 

Bespectfully,  yours,  &c., 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Brigadier-  General. 

(Copy  to  General  Beauregard.) 


March  17,  1862.  (Deceived  7 p.  m.) 

olonel  Pickett  : 

Over  600  shot  and  shell  thrown  at  us  yesterday.  No  person  hurt, 
hey  will  soon  open  for  to-day. 


McCOWN. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  17,  1862 — 6 p.  m. 

olonel  Pickett: 

Three  gunboats  lashed  together  dropped  down  to  range  of  Battery 
o.  1.  Opened  heavy  fire  upon  it — mortar  boats  [3]  and  other  gun- 
)ats  at  long  range.  The  battery  has  returned  the  fire  splendidly, 
ieutenant  Clark  and  2 men  killed;  10  wounded.  Captain  Bucker, 
olonel  Steedman,  General  Trudeau  have  behaved  gallantly,  as  well  as 
1 the  men.  Don’t  know  what  damage  done  them.  Yet  firing. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  17,  1862. 

ol.  Thomas  Jordan: 

Dear  Colonel:  Nearly  ever  since  my  arrival  here,  over  two  weeks, 
have  had  the  enemy  in  my  front  and  flank. 

I am  satisfied  that  the  force  at  New  Madrid  is  not  less  than  30,000 
en,  or  maybe  thirty  regiments,  with  artillery  and  cavalry. 

General  Sherman  (“Cump”),  I believe,  commands  the  force  with  the 
set.  Over  600  shot  and  shell  were  thrown  at  us  yesterday.  They 
ill  soon  have  heavy  guns  in  New  Madrid.  They  are  building  a rail- 
ad  to  that  place  from  Sikeston.  The  gunboats  of  Commodore  Hol- 
is  have  done  all  they  could.  I abandoned  New  Madrid  because  it 
volved  a constant  loss  of  life  to  hold  it.  It  was  of  no  use,  with  Point 
50  R r — yol  VIII 


786 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Ciiai\  XVir 


Pleasant  in  their  hands,  except  to  make  a landing  for  offensive  actioi 
I could  not  do  that  with  my  force.  Excuse  haste. 

Yours,  sincerely,  j.  p.  McCOWX 


Loss  at  New  Madrid : Dr.  Bell,  Lieutenant  Bobinson,  artillery,  killed! 
Captain  Hallutn  wounded,  neck  (dead,  I hear),  and  8 men. 


Jackson,  March  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk: 

What  does  McCown  mean  by  his  doubts'?  Would  it  not  be  well  t 
leave  to  his  judgment  when  to  execute  the  movement  decided  upon 
Have  you  given  orders  to  provision  Fort  Pillow  for  two  or  three  month 

for  5,000  men?  a t BEAUREGARD 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  17,  1862. 1 


General  Polk  : 


I have  sent  the  following  to  General  McCown : 


In  face  of  exigencies  yon  must  exercise  your  own  judgment  as  to  reduction  of Torj 
hitherto  directed,  hut  cannot  understand  why  you  should  tremble  for  result.  Wha 
obstacles  intervene  to  withdrawal  as  instructed  ? ABD 


Humboldt,  March  17,  1862. 

General  McCown,  Madrid  Bend:  I 

Tour  dispatch  of  16th,  in  which  you  say  you  tremble  for  the  result  I 
attempting  to  execute  General  Beauregard’s  orders  for  retiring  ot  cel 
tain  troops  from  Madrid  Bend,  is  received.  On  consulting  with  tb 
general  it  is  agreed  that  it  shall  be  left  to  your  judgment  as  to  when  t 
execute  the  movement.  I have  heard  from  Hickman  that  the  firm 
commenced  this  morning  at  11  o’clock  and  had  nearly  ceased  at  2 p.  n 
Do  not  think  you  have  much  to  apprehend  from  the  mortars,  lfi 
affair  of  the  white  flag  was  a blunder,  but  I would  not  mind  it. 


Li  till  U1  Lite  VY  7 . , 

Congratulate  you  on  your  appointment  as  major-general. 


L.  POLK. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 


Van  Buren , March  17,  1862. 


General  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Army:  1 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  President  will  1 
pleased  to  confer  the  rank  of  colonel  and  lieutenant-colonel  m the  Br. 
visional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States  upon  wich  of  theiollowi  i 
named  officers : Capt.  W.  R.  Bradfute, colonel;  Capt.  W.  N.  K.  Bea 
colonel ; Capt.  Philip  Stockton,  colonel  5 Lieut,  L.  L.  Lomax,  lieute 


787 


ir.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

t-colonel;  Lieut.  M.  M.  Kimmel,  lieutenant-colonel;  Lieut.  E.  C. 
•mstrong,  lieutenant-colonel ; Lieut.  Ed.  Dillon,  lieutenant-colonel ; 
3ut.  Charles  Phifer,  lieutenant-colonel. 

[ need  not  remind  you  that  all  of  these  gentlemen  have  been  for 
my  years  in  the  military  profession.  But  I desire  most  earnestly  to 
press  upon  you  the  necessity  for  my  having  out  here  experienced 
d educated  officers  of  rank  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  use  their  infor- 
ition  and  attainments  to  good  effect. 

[n  the  recent  operations  against  the  enemy  on  Sugar  Creek  I found 
3 want  of  military  knowledge  and  discipline  among  the  higher  officers 
be  so  great  as  to  countervail  their  gallantry  and  the  fine  courage  of 
fir  troops.  I have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  could  I have  substi- 
,ed  some  of  the  officers  above  named  (who  exerted  themselves  most 
bly  to  insure  the  success  of  our  arms  on  the  bloody  field  of  Elkhorn) 
some  of  the  highest  commanders,  my  orders  would  have  been 
>mptly  and  intelligently  carried  out  and  the  enemy’s  army  put  to 
er  rout. 

These  gentlemen  have  been  most  faithfully  serving  our  cause  since 
jy  left  the  Army  of  the  old  United  States,  but  they  are  in  false  posi- 
ns,  without  a degree  of  rank  commensurate  with  their  value  and 
vices,  and  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  endeavor  to  use  their  experience 
the  best  advantage  unless  this  is  remedied. 

' cannot  convey  to  you  a correct  idea  of  the  crudeness  of  the  material 
:h  which  I have  to  deal  in  organizing  an  army  out  here.  There  is  an 
solute  want  of  any  degree  of  sound  military  information,  and  even  an 
Lorance  of  the  value  of  such  information.  Nowhere  in  the  Confeder- 
r is  it  more  important  that  educated  officers  should  be  placed  in  high 
fitions  than  in  the  district  I have  the  honor  to  command. 

Che  greatest  need  I have  is  for  good  brigadiers,  and  I therefore  hope 
i will  urge  immediate  action  upon  the  recommendation  1 made  by 
sgraph  for  promotions  to  this  grade.  I inclose  a copy  of  those  nomi- 
ions,  and  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major- General. 


Van  Buren,  Ark.,  March  17,  1862. 
neral  A.  Sidney  Johnston,  O.  S.  A. : 

am  at  Van  Buren  with  the  army,  preparing  to  march  to  Pocahontas. 
11  get  off  by  the  22d,  and  will  reach  Pocahontas  by  the  7th  or  8th  of 
ril  with  15,000  men.  I will  operate  to  assist  the  army  on  the  Mis- 
i sippi.  It  is  reported  that  the  army  of  the  enemy  have  left  Arkansas 
Springfield.  I will  know  positively  to-morrow  or  next  day.  The 
mtry  in  this  vicinity  will  no  longer  support  an  army, 
lave  any  troops  been  ordered  to  report  to  me  other  than  those  called 
« by  me  from  the  States  of  Arkansas,  Louisiana,  and  Texas  ? 

EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General . 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , Ark.,  March  17,  1862. 
j.  W.  R.  Bradfute,  O.  S.  A.: 

Jajor  : The  general  commanding  desires  you  to  proceed  at  once  to 
i : advanced  post  at  Lee’s  Creek  and  assume  command  of  the  forces 


788 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV 


there  until  the  field  officers  belonging  to  that  station  can  rejoin 
Please  use  every  effort  to  procure  accurate  intelligence  of  the  positi 
and  movements  of  the  enemy  and  to  communicate  promptly  with  t3 
office  respecting  them.  Colonel  Greer  will  furnish  you  with  an  esc< 
and  the  quartermaster  with  transportation  and  anything  else  you 
quire  for  the  proper  execution  of  these  orders. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

’ ’ D.  H.  MAURY, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Organization  of  the  First  Division , Army  of  the  West , Maj.  Gen.  SterU 
Price  commanding , March  17,  1862.* 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Henry  Little. 

17th  Arkansas,  Colonel  Rector. 
21st  Arkansas,  Colonel  McRae. 

1st  Missouri. 

2d  Missouri. 

3d  Missouri. 

Gates’  cavalry. 

Wade’s  battery. 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Louis  Hebert. 

4th  Arkansas,  Colonel  McNair. 
14th  Arkansas,  Colonel  Mitchell. 
16th  Arkansas,  Colonel  Hill. 

3d  Louisiana. 

Whitfield’s  cavalry. 

MacDonald’s  battery. 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Steen. 

Missouri  Infantry,  t 
Brooks’  cavalry. 

Clark’s  battery. 


Fourth  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green. 

Missouri  Infantry. t 
McCulloch’s  cavalry. 

Lucas’  battery. 

Cavalry  Brigade. 

Col.  E.  Greer. 

Crump’s  cavalry. 

Greer’s  (3d  Texas)  cavalry. 
McIntosh’s  cavalry. 

Artillery  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  D.  M.  Frost. 

Bledsoe’s  battery,  4 guns. 

Gaines’  battery. 

Good’s  battery,  6 guns. 

Gorham’s  battery,  4 guns,  iron. 
Guibor’s  battery,  6 guns. 

Hart’s  battery,  4 guns. 

Kelly’s  battery,  5 guns,  iron. 
Kneisby’s  battery,  5 guns,  iron. 
Landis’  battery,  4 howitzers. 
Provence’s  battery,  6 guns. 

Teel’s  battery,  4 guns. 

Champion’s  cavalry. 


Pocahontas,  Ark.,  March  17, 1862 
Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  0.  S.  A.,  in  Camp : 

General  : I would  be  pleased  to  receive  from  you  orders  or  instri 
tions  in  regard  to  the  organization  of  volunteers  to  the  Confeder. 
service  from  my  brigade  of  the  Mo.  S.  G.  We  are  now  all  in  your  dn 
ion,  and  have  now  about  1,000  enlisted,  embracing  infantry,  caval 
and  artillery.  Although  I have  no  legal  command  yet,  these  all  rec< 
nize  me  as  their  leader,  and  the  majority  of  them  are  in  active  servi 
although  many  of  the  companies  are  not  full  and  have  had  no  elect] 

* As  announced  in  Special  Orders,  No.  24,  of  this  date,  from  headquarters  Tr£ 
Mississippi  District. 

t To  be  organized  by  General  Price. 


iap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


789 


f officers.  I have  been  allowing  each  of  my  old  officers  a fair  oppor- 
mity  to  raise  a company  for  himself,  and  therefore  have  quite  a num- 
er  of  squads,  which  are  doing  effective  service  without  any  extra 
jpense  for  officers,  with  the  distinct  understanding  that  they  shall  be 
msolidated  to  elect  officers  when  I see  proper.  If  there  is  to  be  any 
»rmal  turning  over  to  the  Confederacy  of  these  troops,  I am  anxious 
) know  when  and  how. 

Yours,  most  respectfullv, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier -General,  Mo,  S.  G. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  18,  1862. 

'ajor-General  Polk: 

The  following  dispatch  has  been  sent  General  McCown : 

The  general  approves  your  dispositions  for  defense  of  Madrid  Bend  and  Island  10, 
it  wishes  you  to  resume  the  command  there  as  a major-general’s  command.  It  is 
id  [some]  of  your  transports  were  left  at  Madrid  Bend;  if  so,  how  manv?  They 
ust  never  fall  in  enemy’s  hands.  Some  of  them  might  he  sunk  to  obstruct  channel 
iar  Missouri  shore. 

THOMAS  JORDAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  March  18, 1862. 
eneral  McCown,  Commanding  Island  10  : 

If  driven  from  your  post,  guns  will  be  spiked  ; also  a shot  driven  in 
ich ; load  and  wedge  shell,  fuze  down,  so  guns  will  burst.  Even  if  Fed- 
*al  gunboats  pass  your  batteries,  transports  cannot  so  long  as  batteries 
?e  held  and  bravely  worked,  nor  can  enemy’s  army  cross  river.  But 
w could  be  crossed  by  gunboats.  These  can  be  easily  repulsed  by 
‘.solute  attacks.  Post  must  be  held  if  possible.  Few  men  to  do  it. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


ajor-General  Polk: 


Union  City, 

March  18,  1862 — 5.40  p.  m. 


Captain  Elliott,  of  Thirty-first  Tennessee  Volunteers,  left  Tiptonville 
; 8.30  a.  m.  General  McCown,  with  eight  regiments,  left  Tiptonville 
st  night  on  eight  transports ; three  transports  there  loading  with  ar- 
llery  and  ammunition,  and  are  to  leave  to-night. 

Last  night  the  enemy  planted  a battery  opposite  Tiptonville.  Our 
inboats  silenced  it  this  morning.  Blake  reports,  5 p.  in.,  from  a very 
3od  source,  that  Northern  cavalry  will  occupy  Hickman  to-morrow. 
One  gun  bursted  yesterday  on  a" Yankee  gunboat;  killed  6 wounded 


ED.  PICKETT,  Jr., 

Commanding. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , Arlc.,  March  18,  1862. 

eneral  A.  Sidney  Johnston:* 

Sir  : I have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you  that  the  entire  army  I 
* Similar  letter  of  same  date  to  Secretary  of  War. 


790 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  IIANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIE 


marched  against  the  enemy  some  days  since  is  now  m camp  a few  mile) 
from  this  place,  and  that  I shall  march  in  a few  days  tor  Pocahontas,  t| 
make  a iunction  with  whatever  force  that  may  be  assembled  at  tka 
place.  It  is  my  intention  then  to  fall  upon  the  force  of  the  eneiny  li 
the  vicinity  of  Hew  Madrid  or  Cape  Girardeau  and  attempt  to  reliev| 
General  Beauregard,  and,  if  practicable,  I shall  march  on  Samt  Louis 
and  thus  withdraw  the  forces  now  threatening  this  part  ot  the  btate  c| 
Arkansas.  The  army  cannot  be  subsisted  here  any  longer,  neither  d 
I think  that  the  enemy  can  make  any  serious  demonstration  from  her,. 

until  later  in  the  spring.  . . „ ,, 

I send  several  thousand  cavalry  off  in  a few  days  via  Forsyth,  oj 
White  River,  to  burn  up  the  depots  of  the  enemy  at  Springfield,  an] 
to  destroy  his  immense  trains  which  go  to  and  fro  nearly  unguardeu 
Thev  will  then  join  me  at  Pocahontas.  I shall  order  Pike  to  operat 
in  the  Indian  country  west  of  this,  to  cut  off  trains,  annoy  the  eneml 
in  his  marches,  and  to  prevent  him  as  far  as  possible  from  supplyin 
his  troops  from  Missouri  and  Kansas ; he  cannot  supply  them  here. 

I have  debated  this  movement  in  my  own  mmd  and  think  that  it  i 
the  best  I can  make.  I attempted  first  to  beat  the  enemy  at  Elklion 
but  a series  of  accidents,  entirely  unforeseen  and  not  under  my  contrc 
and  a badly-disciplined  army,  defeated  my  intentions  The  death  | 
McCulloch  and  McIntosh  and  the  capture  of  Hebert  left  me  withoi 
an  officer  to  command  the  right  wing  (which  was  thrown  into  utto 
confusion),  and  the  strong  position  of  the  enemy  the  second  day  le 
me  no  alternative  but  to  retire  from  the  contest.  A heavy  blow  m 
struck  them,  however,  and  they  are  somewhat  paralyzed,  1 ska 
march  to  another  field  before  they  recover,  and  before  their  re-enforc; 
ments  arrive,  which  they  are  daily  expecting.  If  I give  battle  to  ttj 
troops  near  Kew  Madrid,  I relieve  Beauregard.  If  I find  this  not  a< 
visable  or  practicable,  I shall  march  boldly  and  rapidly  toward  San 
Louis,  between  Ironton  and  the  enemy’s  grand  depot  at  Rolla.  I thin 
I shall  accomplish  something  in  that  direction.  I shall  at  all  oven] 
task  my  bumble  abilities  to  their  utmost  to  achieve  some  success  ■ 
our  cause,  and  I earnestly  hope  that  I may  be  successful. 

I shall  not  be  able  to  make  my  report  of  the  battle  of  Elkhorn  n 
some  time,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  I have  of  getting  subordma 
reports.  Our  loss  was  not  as  heavy,  however,  as  I had aE 
as  was  reported  to  me,  not  being  more  than  800  or  1,000  killed  ai 
wounded  and  between  200  and  300  prisoners.  The  enemy’s  loss  w; 
about  800  killed  and  1,000  or  1,200  wounded  and  about  300  prisoner 
We  also  took  two  batteries  of  artillery,  one  of  which  was  destroyed  t 
fire  (burnt  up).  The  enemy’s  position  was  a strong  one,  but  we  dro\ 
him  from  it  and  slept  on  our  arms  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  secor] 
day  we  found  him  at  daylight  in  a new  and  stronger  position,  to  t 
rear  of  his  first,  about  2 miles  off.  From  all  the  circumstances  wki( 
surrounded  me  I determined  to  withdraw.  I therefore  made  a demo 
stration  in  front  to  cover  the  movement  and  put  the  army  on  the  roa 
Huntsville,  toward  the  east,  and  retired  with  a heavy  heart,  but  wi 
a determination  to  recover  as  soon  as  possible  and  fight  again,  l v. 
not  defeated,  but  only  failed  in  my  intentions.  I am  yet  sanguine 
success,  and  will  not  cease  to  repeat  my  blows  whenever  the  opport 

nity  is  offered.  , _ . 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  I am,  your  obedient 

Major-  General. 


AP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


791 


March  19,  1862. 


pi.  Ed.  Pickett,  Jr.: 

Commenced  shelling  the  various  batteries  about  2 o’clock.  The 
lemy  are  10  miles  below  Riddle’s  Point,  on  Missouri  shore.  A battery 
low  Point  Pleasant.  Our  gunboats  have  gone  below.  Communica- 
pn  cut  off  to  Tiptonville  from  below.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  keep 
it  of  range.  My  force  is  small  to  defend  such  an  extended  line  on 
e lower  bend;  it  shall  be  done  if  possible.  Our  gun  Belmont  burst 
-day;  nobody  hurt;  it  was  on  the  island.  General  Trudeau  seems 
be  a favorite  with  the  artillerymen.  It  would  in  that  case  be  un- 
rtunate  for  him  to  leave.  He  has  concluded  to  remain  till  I can 
jar  from  Jackson.  His  objection  to  remaining  is  that  he  is  not  in  the 
mfederate  Army.  If  he  is  to  go  I would  like  to  have  the  aid  of  an 
:perienced  artillerist. 

L.  M.  WALKER. 


Richmond,  Va.,  [March]  19,  1862. 

jeneral  Earl  Yan  Horn: 

All  the  troops  called  by  the  Department  from  Arkansas  and  Texas 
ad  those  called  by  Hebert  from  the  coast  are  ordered  to  you.  None 

her. 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  19,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn: 

Too  late  for  movement  on  New  Madrid,  which  is  in  possession  of 
lemy,  but  if  at  any  time  you  can  join  your  forces  with  mine  it  will  be 
k,st  to  do  so. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren,  March  19,  1862. 

ff.  T.  J.  Churchill, 

Commanding  Cavalry  Brigade : 

Colonel  : The  general  commanding  desires  that  you  will  proceed 
Lth  your  brigade  and  Gates’  battalion  of  cavalry  as  rapidly  as  possi- 
e to  Forsyth,  on  White  ^iver.  You  will  inarch  without  tents  and 
ith  only  sufficient  wagons  to  carry  the  rations  of  your  men.  You 
ill  leave  your  wagons  at  Porsyth,  march  upon  Springfield  by  a forced 
arch,  and  endeavor  to  capture  and  destroy  the  stores  of  the  enemy 
. that  place. 

Should  you  not  be  able  to  accomplish  the  seizure  of  Springfield,  you 
ill  nevertheless  endeavor  to  destroy  the  trains  of  the  enemy  north  or 
lutli  of  that  point. 

After  accomplishing  all  that  you  can  against  the  enemy  in  that 
cinity  you  will  rejoin  your  wagons  and  proceed  by  the  quickest  and 
ist  route  to  Pocahontas. 

The  quartermaster  and  subsistence  department  will  furnish  such 
mds  as  you  may  require  of  them  for  purchase  of  your  supplies  of 
rage,  subsistence,  stores,  &c.,  and  such  other  supplies. 


792 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND. 


T.  [CiiAr.  XVII 


While  you  are  preparing  your  command  for  this  expedition  you  wi 
take  post  at  or  near  Horse" Head.  Send  your  baggage  to  J aeksonpor 
to  join  you  at  Pocahontas,  sending  a proper  guard  with  it.  It  is  e< 
pected  that  you  will  be  ready  to  march  on  this  expedition  by  the  23 

instant.  . _ _ , , I 

You  will  please  take  every  pains  to  insure  absolute  secrecy  as  to  tl 

object  and  destination  of  your  command. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yours,  MAURY 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Missouri  State  Guard,  I 
Camp , Van  Buren , Arh.,  March  19,  1862. 1 


Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  value! 
• ^14-imA  T-f.  Ttrrmlrl  liQVfi  mp.t  with  earlier  a 


2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 


communication  of  the  5th  ultimo.  It  would  have  met  with  earlier  a 
tention  but  that  circumstances  surrounding  me  since  its  reception,  ei 
this  well  known  to  you,  have  forced  the  delay.  I 

In  accordance  with  your  request  I herewith  give  the  names  ot  ofli 
cers  in  the  State  Guard  competent  to  command  brigades ; they  ai 
named  in  order  of  their  merit,  as  estimated  by  me  : 

1.  Col.  Henry  Little,  commanding  brigade,  reported. 

Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green,  commanding  Second  Division. 

Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Steen,  commanding  Fifth  Division. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  M.  Parsons,  commanding  Sixth  Division. 

Brig  Gen.  D.  M.  Frost,  commanding  Seventh  Division. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  Y.  Slack  and  Edwin  W.  Price  I prefer  not  1 
classify.  The  first,  because  severely  wounded  in  the  engagement  < 
the  7th  and  8th  instant ; the  second,  because  now  a prisoner  of  wa 
having  been  captured  some  weeks  since  when  on  his  return  to  the  aria 
from  North  Missouri  with  recruits.  Besides,  he  is  my  son.  Both  ai 
officers  of  marked  gallantry  and  energy.  I commend  to  your  consider* 
tion,  as  chief  of  artillery  in  this  division,  Brig.  Gen.  M.  Lewis  Clark. 

The  larger  part  of  the  State  Guard,  I think,  will  enlist  in  the  Coi 
federate  service,  and  to  the  promotion  of  this  object  I shall  direct  ever 
practicable  energy.  My  men,  numbers  of  them,  would  have  entere 
that  service  before,  but  were  determined  first  to  know  who  was  to  con 
mand  them.  From  a telegram  from  a friend  of  the  6th  I learn  that  m 
nomination  as  a major-general  in  the  Confederate  service  was  that  da 
confirmed  by  the  senate.  I have  no  official  knowledge  of  the  fac 
About  5,000  of  my  command  have  been  sworn  into  the  Confederal 
service,  and  I now  feel  assured  that  the  bulk  of  the  remainder  will  fo 
low  their  example  when  they  know  my  appointment  has  been  made. 

With  such  additions  to  my  force  as  I am  led  to  believe  will  shortJ 
be  made,  although  not  officially  advised  of  them,  I do  not  question  m 
ability  to  penetrate  aggressively  the  heart  of  Missouri. 

My  report  of  the  battle  of  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  instant  will  be  mac 
up  at  the  earliest  moment  and  submitted  to  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  V an  Don 
through  whom  the  Government  will  receive  all  needful  information. 

I have  the  honor,  sir,  to  remain,  most  respectfully,  your  obediei 

servant’  STEELING  PKICE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Mo.  8.  G. 


793 


AP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

pecial  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Trans-Miss.  Hist., 

No.  81.  ) Dept.  No.  2,  Van  Buren , Arlc .,  March  19,  1862. 

[ # * * # * # * 

VI.  The  First  Division  of  the  Army  of  the  West,  nnder  command  of 
!aj.  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  Confederate  Army,  will  be  ready  to  march 

1 the  25th  instant. 

The  commanders  of  brigades  will  take  active  measures  to  place  their 
mmands  in  efficient  order.  They  will  at  once  make  requisition  for 
pessary  supplies  of  ordnance  and  subsistence  for  fifteen  days,  for 
ansportation  and  for  other  quartermaster  stores. 

The  First  Brigade  will  move  on  the  25th  instant,  the  Artillery  Brigade 
11  move  on  the  26th  instant,  the  Second  Brigade  will  move  on  the 
th  instant,  the  Third  and  Fourth  Brigades  will  move  on  the  28th  in- 
ant. 

####### 

VIII.  All  troops  now  attached  to  the  army  who  were  called  out  for 
e emergency  will  be  relieved  from  further  duty  with  it  at  once  and 

2 pair  to  their  homes,  where  it  is  desired  they  will  immediately  organize 
•to  companies  for  the  Confederate  service,  and  report  to  Jacksonport, 
rk.,  for  further  orders. 

# # # # # # # 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn: 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  20,  1862. 

jeneral  Walker,  Madrid  Bend: 

All  of  the  transports  you  have  above  New  Madrid  not  absolutely 
pessary  to  you,  which  are  cut  off,  you  will  sink  on  the  flats  or  bars  in 
e neighborhood  of  the  island,  so  as  to  obstruct  the  channel.  If  not 
< it  off*,  dispose  of  them  to  best  advantage. 

L.  POLK. 


Jackson,  March  20,  1862. 

eneral  J.  P.  McCown: 

You  will,  if  practicable,  send  a regiment,  two  pieces  of  field  artillery, 
id  some  cavalry  down  the  Tennessee  side  of  the  river  as  far  as  the 
^iemy  have  sent  troops  on  the  Missouri  side,  and  take  a position  in  his 
ont  wherever  formed,  to  prevent  his  making  reconnaissance  on  this 
le  of  the  river.  The  gunboats  must  co-operate  with  you.  I again  re- 
lat  my  conviction  that  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  hold  Island 
» and  Madrid  Bend  to  the  last  extremity.  It  is  the  key  of  the  Missis- 
ppi  Valley. 

L.  POLK. 


Jackson,  March  20,  1862. 

eneral  J.  P.  McCown,  Island  10: 

I have  just  heard  that  the  enemy  are  attempting  to  cut  a canal  from 
ie  Mississippi  River  into  Reelfoot  Lake  above  the  island.  It  is  proper 


794 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvd 

YOU  should  know  this.  If  they  go  into  the  lake,  and  you  manage  tl 
matter  with  your  usual  energy,  they  may  he  caught  in  their  own  traj 

L.  POLK, 

Major-General , Commanding  First  Grand  Division . 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  20,  [1862 J— 5.15  p.  m 

Col.  Ed.  Pickett,  Jr. : 

Firing  not  so  brisk  to-day.  Has  ceased.  I am  almost  entirely  sati| 
fied  the  enemy  has  received  infantry  re-enforcements  from  above.  Ox 
gunboats  are  of  no  service  to  ns ; they  are  6 miles  below  Tiptonville,  wit 
the  transports  and  wharf-boats.  The  provisions  for  this  garrison  ai 
with  them,  but  there  are  some  to  be  obtained  m this  bend.  I wouJ 
like  to  have  some  more  ammunition  for  rifled  cannon.  Ho  means  J 
communicating  with  our  gunboats  by  land  or  water.  The  enemy  a 
moving  down  continually  below  Point  Pleasant.  I exjiect  to  hear 

them  at  Gayoso  next.  L M WALKER,  ; 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. ; 

PS I suppose  these  telegrams  go  through  from  you.  I would  111 

you  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  if  one  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  sank  beld 
Hickman.  It  is  so  reported.  She  left  here  crippled  by  Rucker ^s  ba 
tery.  Said  battery  is  much  in  water  and  river  rising.  The  reliel  wa< 
waist  deep  to  get  to  it. 

Yours,  &c.,  WALKER. j 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  21,  1862—6  a.  m.j 

Col.  Ed.  Pickett,  Jr. : 

Ho  firing  last  night.  Gunboats  in  same  position  this  morning, 
want  the  general  to  understand  that,  our  gunboats  having  taken  po 
tion  down  the  river  not  accessible  to  me,  this  bend  is  entirely  cut  d 
and  that  I will  defend  it  until  the  general  orders  otherwise.  The  ge| 
eral  will  have  to  open  the  way.  He  must  not  expect  any  ot  the  coi 

mand  to  be  saved.  L ^ WALKER, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Give  me  anything  from  Hickman  that  you  can  get.  I hear  they  a 
landing  troops  6 miles  above  this  on  Kentucky  side. 


Jackson,  March  21, 1862. 


General  McCown: 

Even  should  enemy  effect  crossing  (scarcely  probable),  you  can  st 
defend  position  of  batteries  for  many  days  with  proper  detached  he 


The  country  looks  to  you  for  a determined  defense  of  your  positic 
Meanwhile  Port  Pillow  will  be  made  ready.  Glean  the  country  1 
provisions.  Husband  ammunition.  & T BEAUEEGAItD. 


HP.  xvni.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  795 

Madrid  Bend,  March  21, 1862. 
d1.  Thomas  Jordan,  Jackson , Tenn.: 

Colonel:  P arrived  here  this  morning.  Found  all  going  on  well, 
meral  Walker’s  arrangements  are  satisfactory — as  good  as  can  he 
ade  with  his  force.  I have  left  General  Walker  in  immediate  com- 
and.  The  enemy’s  forces  on  the  other  side  are  much  scattered.  If  a 
rce  was  sent  to  their  rear,  via  Greenville,  Ark.,  [it]  would  relieve  the 
essure  on  this  command,  and,  if  strong  enough,  capture  the  forces 
uth  of  Saint  John’s  Bayou.  Bead  my  last  dispatch. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 

Major - General. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  [March]  21, 1862. 

meral  McCown: 

Send  the  negroes  from  your  post  to  Fort  Pillow  by  the  shortest  route 
i d with  the  greatest  dispatch.  Furnish  them  with  three  days’  ra- 
il* 

L.  POLK, 

Major-  General. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  troops  at  Madrid  Bend , March  21,  1862. 


Troops. 


'it  Alabama  Regiment 

it  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and  Mississippi  Regiment 

4h  Regiment  C.  S.  Volunteers 

Ill  Regiment  Tennessee  Volunteers 

ih  Regiment  Tennessee  Volunteers 

• ps  heavy  artillery 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  pres- 
ent. 

Aggregate  pres- 
ent and  ab- 
sent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

31 

437 

683 

751 

33 

382 

536 

772 

24 

447 

668 

745 

33 

341 

531 

6b5 

25 

302 

402 

467 

32 

298 

405 

455 

178 

2,  207 

3,  225 

3,  855 

I ote. Return  gives  no  commander,  and  signed  by  E.  T.  Ereeman,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general. 

I airy  companies  scattered  and  no  reports  received. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , Ark .,  March  21,  1862. 

lig.  Gen.  Albert  Pike: 

GtENERAL:  I am  instructed  by  General  Yan  Dorn  to  acknowledge 
bi  receipt  of  your  report  of  the  operations  of  your  command  in  the 
Ittle  of  Elkhorn,  and  to  express  his  satisfaction  at  learning  that  you 
tve  arrived  safely  with  your  troops  in  the  Indian  Territory.  He  has 
b'ected  the  supplies  for  you  at  Fort  Smith  to  be  sent  to  you  at  North 
I rk,  and  has  ordered  the  chief  commissary  to  transfer  to  you,  for  the 
bnefit  of  your  command,  the  flour  contract  made  by  him  with  parties 
j Texas 

Woodruff’s  battery  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  you  at  this  place, 
id  I send  you  authority  to  add  to  your  command,  if  you  need  them, 
to  of  the  regiments  now  en  route  from  Texas  to  this  army. 

The  general  commanding  has  decided  to  march  with  this  army  against 
le  enemy  now  invading  the  northeastern  part  of  the  State.  Upon  you, 


796 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYll 


therefore,  will  devolve  the  necessity  of  impeding  his  advance  into  th 
region.  It  is  not  expected  that  you  will  give  battle  to  a large  fore 
but  by  felling  trees,  burning  bridges,  removing  supplies*  of  forage  ai 
subsistence,  attacking  his  trains,  stampeding  his  animals,  cutting  < 
his  detachments,  and  other  similar  means,  you  will  be  able  matenal 
to  harass  his  army  and  protect  this  region  of  country.  You  mu 
endeavor  by  every  means  to  maintain  yourselt  m the  territory  mol 
pendent  of  this  army.  In  case  only  of  absolute  necessity  you  im 
move  southward.  If  the  enemy  threatens  to  march  through  the  Indu 
Territory  or  descend  the  Arkansas  River  you  may  call  on  troops  tro 
South  western  Arkansas  and  Texas  to  rally  to  your  aid.  You  may  rewai 
your  Indian  troops  by  giving  them  such  stores  as  you  may  think  prop 
when  they  make  captures  from  the  enemy,  but  you  will  please  endeav 
to  restrain  them  from  committing  any  barbarities  upon  the  wounde 
prisoners,  or  dead  who  may  fall  into  their  hands.  You  may  purcha 
your  supplies  of  subsistence  from  wherever  you  can  most  advant 
geously  do  so.  You  will  draw  your  ammunition  from  Little  Rock  • 
from  New  Orleans  via  Red  River.  Please  communicate  with  the  ge 
eral  commanding  when  practicable. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I).  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren , Ar/u,  March  21,  1862.  | 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

I march  my  First  Brigade  toward  Jacksonport,  Ark.,  to-morro 
All  the  troops  here  will  march  in  a few  days  to  the  same  pomt.  I w 
probably  have  on  White  River  by  the  10th  or  12th  ot  April  20,000  m 
£ more  and  about  seventy  pieces  of  artillery..  It  was  my  intent , 
to  attack  tlie  forces  near  New  Madrid  and  Point  Pleasant  from  t 
north,  by  Greenville.  What  do  you  now  advise » There  is  an  army 
about  20,000  men  of  the  enemy’s  north  of  this,  in  Arkansas,  but  th 
cannot  be  subsisted  long,  nor  dol  think  they  can  do  much  harm  in  tl 
west.  We  cannot  subsist  here.  1 think  it  is  more  important  to  sa 

^A^swOTine^atonce,  please.  I start  for  Little  Bock  the  day  after  1 
morrow.  [EARL  VAN  DORN.] 


General  Orders, 


No.  9. 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren,  Ark.,  March  21,  1802. 

* * * * * .*  * 

IX.  All  persons  connected  with  the  military  service  of  the  Con  e 
erate  States  in  this  district  are  forbidden  to  publish,  ^o^seorpe 
to  be  published,  any  statements  respecting  operations  or  movement 
troops)  whether  past  or  proposed.  AH  telegraphic  operators  are  c, 
tioned  against  transmitting  dispatches  respecting  the rndrt ,y 
meats  and  events  of  the  district  which  do  not  come  from author* 
sources  and  are  not  sent  as  official  communications  And  al  edi« 
of  newspapers  are  earnestly  and  respectfully  requested  to  exercise  ca 


iaf.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  797 

d scrutiny  over  their  publications,  that  nothing  maybe  published 
liich  can  convey  aid  or  comfort  to  our  enemies,  or  suggest  to  them  the 
bsition,  condition,  or  designs  of  our  armies. 

III.  The  burning  of  mills,  workshops,  barracks,  store-houses,  stables, 
' any  other  buildings  in  regions  of  country  which  it  may  become  neces- 
,try  for  our  troops  to  retire  from  temporarily  is  forbidden. 

The  attention  of  all  commanders  is  called  to  the  orders  prohibiting 
te  troops  from  depredating  in  any  manner  upon  the  property  of  the 
tizens  in  whose  vicinity  they  march  or  encamp.  Any  officer  or  sol- 
er  who  may  injure  or  take  fencing,  stock,  poultry,  forage,  or  any  other 
.’operty,  without  proper  authority  and  right,  will  be  at  once  taken  in 
targe  by  the  provost-marshal  and  dealt  with  according  to  his  offense, 
uartermasters  and  commissaries  will  be  careful  to  pay  fair  prices  or 
give  exact  and  proper  receipts  for  forage  and  other  supplies  which 
may  become  necessary  to  procure  for  the  use  of  the  army,  and  the 
•oper  disbursing  officer  will  pay  the  money  on  these  acknowledg- 
ents  when  presented  for  payment  with  as  little  delay  and  inconven- 
nce  to  the  holder  as  possible. 

IV.  The  general  commanding  finds  it  necessary  to  remind  the  troops 
the  Articles  of  War  respecting  safeguards,  which  provides  that  any 

■freer  or  soldier  who  disregards  and  violates  a safeguard  given  by  the 
oper  authority  for  the  protection  of  persons  or  property  shall  be  tried 
Y a court-martial,  and  if  convicted  shall  suffer  death. 

V . Commanding  officers  will  have  read  to  the  troops  of  their  command 
e Rules  and  Articles  of  War  at  least  once  a month. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn: 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  March  22,  1862. 

(3neral  McCown: 

Van  Dorn  proposes  to  attack  enemy  in  reverse  at  New  Madrid.  Be 
« good  cheer  and  hold  out. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Jackson,  March  22,  1862. 

^neral  McCown,  Madrid  Bend: 

You  must  be  aware  that  you  cannot  at  this  moment  be  re-enforced. 
)ur  command  forms  the  garrison  of  that  key  to  Mississippi  Valley, 
bun  try  expects  you  to  defend  that  post  of  honor  to  the  last  or  until 
b can  relieve  you  by  a victory  here,  then  to  attack  in  force  your 
rversary.  Meanwhile  Pillow  is  being  put  in  fighting  order  for  an- 
ther stand,  if  need  be.  Send  names  of  our  boats  above  New  Madrid, 
be  them  if  necessary  to  obstruct  channels  in  front  of  Island  10. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General , Commanding . 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  March  22,  1862. 
bneral  Walker,  Madrid  Bend: 

Hereafter  make  all  reports  direct  to  these  headquarters. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


798 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap,  xvn 


Jackson,  March  22,  18C2. 1 

General  Walker,  Madrid  Bend , 

Care  Colonel  Pickett , Union  City , Tenn.  • 


It  is  reported  enemy  is  attempting  to  float  boats  into  the  lake  oJ 

L . , “i  a J 1 _ U-  TTnn  TTAm<  +1  / ll  / 1 J 


your  flank.  Took  out  and.  meet  the  attempt  Us^you^fleld^gun^ 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Van  Buren,  March  22,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  Sterlino  Price: 

General:  I leave  this  evening  on  the  steamboat  Lelia  lor  Litt 
Dock  and  White  River,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  the  new  levies  <| 
troops  now  assembling  there  and  to  prepare  for  the  reception  ol  yoij, 

C°Special  Orders,  Ho.  28,  makes  provision  for  the  march  of  your  bi 
gade  from  this  point.  Please  direct  your  march,  via  Clarksville,  Dovel 
and  Springfield  (Conway  County),  toward  Batesville,  on  White  Rive 
Expressmen  will  meet  you  on  this  road  with  instructions  which  wil 
control  you  in  the  further  march  of  your  column.  The  troops  of  tl 
advance  post  in  Boston  Mountains,  on  Lee’s  Creek,  should  not, 
course,  be  relieved  until  the  last  moment,  and  when  relieved  shouj 
march  with  Greer’s  cavalry  as  the  rear  guard  of  the  army.  It  is  ot  t 
greatest  importance  that  the  troops  of  your  command  should  read 
White  River  at  the  earliest  possible  date.  . , 

Please  assume  command  this  evening,  and  control  matters  m th 
vicinity  preparatory  to  your  march.  Please  also  leave  scouts  wh«, 
you  march  to  watch  the  enemy  and  to  report  to  you  any  moveme 
they  may  make.  If  any  important  movement  is  made,  please  advr 
me  of  it  by  express  to  Jacksonport  and  by  telegraph  dispatch  to  D 

AI°'have  directed  the  staff  officers  here  and  at  Port  Smith  to  tal 
active,  energetic  measures  for  the  removal  of  a^P®kllc  property 
places  of  safety.  I hope  this  will  be  accomplished  by  the  time  that  t 
last  brigade  of  your  division  is  ordered  to  march. 

I understand  that  several  cavalry  regiments  are  now  on  the  marj 
from  Texas  to  join  this  army.  I have  directed  General  Pike  to  assur 
command  of  two  of  them.  The  others  I have  directed  to  join  the  arn 
via  Little  Rock,  with  the  exception  of  all  who  may  be  within  50  mil 
of  this  place : they  will  join  Greer’s  brigade  at  Ozark. 

I hope,  general,  you  will  have  a prosperous  march,  and  that  you  w 

soon  recover  from  your  wounds.  , . 

Very  respectfully  and  sincerely,  general,  I am,  your  friend  and  ot 

dient  servant,  [D_  H MATJBT,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


General  Orders, 
No.  1. 


Hdqrs.  First  Div.  Army  of  the  West 
, Camp  Ben.  McCulloch,  Ark.,  March  22,  1862. 

I The  undersigned  assumes  command  of  the  First  Division  of  t 
Army  of  the  West,  by  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  command, 
the  district. 


AP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  799 

II.  The  commanders  of  the  brigades  constituting  this  division  will 
ike  immediate  report  to  these  headquarters  of  the  strength  and  eon- 
tion  of  their  respective  commands. 

III.  The  following  officers  are  announced  as  staff  officers  at  division 
adquarters : 

Thos.  L.  Snead,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general. 

Maj.  John  Eeid,  commissary  of  subsistence. 

Maj.  James  Harding,  acting  quartermaster. 

Dr.  William  NT.  Snodgrass,  acting  medical  director. 

Henry  M.  Clark,  acting  medical  inspector. 

Robt.  C.  Woods,  aide-de-camp. 

Clay  Taylor,  aide-de-camp. 

STERLING  PRICE, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  23,  1862. 

pferal  G.  T.  Beauregard: 

General:  I hope  Van  Dorn  will  act  promptly.  I am  not  despond- 
? yet.  I know  my  position.  One  gunboat  has  sunk  on  a bar  just 
yond  range.  They  are  either  trying  to  raise  her  or  removing  the 
ns.  Fire-rafts  cannot  be  placed,  as  our  batteries  are  under  fire, 
hen  we  reply  it  is  slowly,  waiting  till  they  are  where  we  want  them. 
Save  sent  to  Pillow  for  200  rifle  shot. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , March  23,  1862 — 6 p.  m. 

neral  Beauregard, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Mississippi  : 

General  : My  effort  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  the  enemy  above 
3 resulted  as  follows,  which  I believe  to  great  extent  reliable,  viz : 
insports,  13;  mortars,  12;  gunboats,  7;  tugs,  5;  12  additional  gun- 
its  looked  for;  5,000  infantry  on  transports;  120  men  on  each  gun- 
it;  7 empty  coal-barges.  On  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant  10,000 
antry  landed  at  Hickman.  One  of  their  gunboats  towed  up  beyond 
ckman  badly  disabled.  No  danger  I think  on  the  side  of  Reelfoot 
Jke.  The  river  and  water  in  lake  have  been  rising  for  several  days 
1 1 still  rising.  Reported  that  the  rivers  above  are  rising. 

STo  change  in  the  conduct  of  their  gunboats  to-day.  Shelling  at  in- 
I vals. 

L.  M.  WALKER, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend , March  23,  1862. 
neral  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Jachson , Tenn.  : 

General  : Firing  has  almost  ceased  this  evening.  Federal  troops 
■ moving  down  the  river  from  New  Madrid.  Gunboats  still  go  up  to 


800 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


Tiptonville  in  the  night.  A good  deal  of  sickness  in  the  comman 
Steamers  here  are  the  Grampus,  Mohawk,  Kanawha  Valley,  and  Chai 
nion.  small  boat  Red  Rover  with  floating  battery,  Ohio  Belle,  Simone 
Yazoo  De  Soto,  Mears,  and  Admiral.  The  small  boats  used  as  watc 
boats,  &c. ; the  large  ones  as  hospitals.  ^ p McCOWN, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters,  Madrid  Bend , March  23,  1862. 
Col  Thomas  Jordan,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : I first  came  here  on  the  25th  ultimo,  returned  to  Coin 
bus  on  the  night  of  the  26th,  and  was  back  on  the  27th  These  dat 
are  from  memory.  My  papers  are  with  the  fleet  below  Tiptonville 
On  the  1st  of  March  the  enemy  appeared  on  Madrid  plain  and  clro 
in  our  scouts.  On  the  2d  March  a skirmish  occurred  withm  1 mile 
New  Madrid.  New  Madrid  was  evacuated  on  the  night  of  the  14 
instant.  The  gunboats  appeared  above  us  on  the  15th  and  have  be 

111  The^xiat^attacked  Battery  No.  1 on  the  17th.  We  have  been  uml 

left ' IshmdS10Cat  10  o’clock  at  night  after  the  repulse  of  the  gr 
boats  on  the  17th.  I arrived  at  the  fleet  on  my  return  from  F< 
Pillow  on  the  evening  of  the  20th,  landed  below  Riddle’s  Point,  on  Tt 
nessee  shore,  and  made  my  way  here  on  the  21st.  _ w J 

On  my  first  arrival  here  five  guns  were  mounted  in  Battery  No 
and  seven  in  Battery  No.  5 on  main  shore  No  guns  were  mounted  j 
the  island.  When  I left  for  Fort  Pillow  four  guns  were  mounted 
the  main  shore,  protected  by  parapet  of  earth  and  nineteen  guns  on 

island  also  protected  [by]  parapets  of  earth.  Batteries  No.  1 and 
were  alone  finished  (earthworks).  A redoubt  is  being  about  finished! 

protect  the  batteries  on  main  shore.  • i 

1 I send  inclosed  a report  of  Captain  Gray,  engineer.  On  my  arrij 
at  Island  10,  Colonel  Kennedy  reported  to  me  less  than  300  negroj 

and  tools  not  sufficient  to  work  them. 

The  redoubt  was  laid  off  and  under  construction  when  I left  j 

Pillow.  The  batteries  were  nearly  complete. 

Respectfully  submitted.  j p.  ]yjcc0WN, 

Major-General , Commanding 


[Inclosure.] 

Engineer  Office,  Island  10,  March  24, 1862 

Memorandum  of  batteries  at  Island  No.  10,  Madrid  Bend,  with  guns  mounted. 


ON  THE  MAIN-LAND. 


Batteries. 

Number  of  guns. 

Caliber. 

3 8-inch  columbiads. 

No.  1,  the  Redan  Battery 

No.  1 

4 high  barbette  carriages 

3 smooth-bore  32s. 

3 rifle  32s,  1 smooth-bore  32. 
3 rifle  32s.  , , v. 

3 rifle  32s,  1 8-inch  Columbia 
1 rifle  32,  3 8-inch  columb: 
3 smooth-bore  32s« 

No.  3 



3 high  barbette  carriages 

4 high  barbette  carriages. . - ...... 

7 barbette  carriages  (2  high,  5 

medium). 

Total 

24  guns. 

— 

801 


jiAP.  XVIII. ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


Memorandum  of  batteries  at  Island  No.  10,  fc. — Continued. 


OX  THE  ISLAND. 

Batteries. 

Number  of  guns. 

Caliber. 

>.  1,  Belmont  Battery 

h 

).  3 

6 medium  barbette 

4 3 barbette,  1 center-pintle 

2 8-inch,  4 smooth-bore  32s. 

3 smooth-bore  32s,  1 rifle  24. 

2 rifle  24  s,  1 8-inch,  2 smooth-bore 
32s. 

2 8-inch  howitzers. 

2 8-inch  howitzers. 

).  4 

2 siege  carriages 

i.5 

2 siege  carriages 

Total 

19  guns. 

Note.— The  Belmont  heavy  rifle  32,  while  being  fired  at  the  enemy 
ji  the  21st  instant,  burst  at  the  third  fire,  injuring  no  one.  An  8-inch 
•lumbiad  was  at  once  mounted  in  its  place. 

In  the  Redan  Battery,  No.  1,  but  three  guns  were  used  against  the 
tack  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  during  the  bombardment  of  Island  No. 
'•  This  battery,  commanded  by  Captain  Rucker,  has  six  guns.  The 
ree  smooth-bore  32s  were  not  fired  only  the  three  8-inch  columbiads. 
le  three  latter  guns  in  the  redan  and  one  other  similar  in  Battery 
3.  5 have  been  mounted  and  ready  for  action  for  some  two  months 
«t.  The  four  8-inch  columbiads  are  guns  that  I brought  down  from 
e naval  floating  battery  and  mounted  them  immediately.  Thirty-five 
ins  have  been  mounted  on  platforms  and  in  batteries  since  the  1st  of 
arch  by  the  Engineer  Corps,  including  the  sappers  and  miners.  The 
val  floating  battery  was  placed  by  us  in  position  on  the  north  side  of 
e island  and  now  mounts  nine  guns,  making  in  all  fifty-two  guns  in 
sition  at  the  present  time. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

A.  B.  GRAY, 

Captain,  C.  S.  Army , Chief  Engineer  Island  10. 


[March  23, 1862. — For  communications  from  Generals  Johnston  and 
eauregard  to  General  Yan  Dorn,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  X.] 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  24,  1862. 
lj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn,  C.  S.  A.,  in  Camp: 

General  : I have  come  to  this  place  to  find  where  my  stores  and 
jjmitions  have  been  scattered  to.  The  evacuation  of  Madrid  has  con- 
bed  everything,  and  although  I still  hold  the  plank  road  and  have 
1»00  men  near  by,  yet  my  stores  are  scattered  from  Memphis  to  Poca- 
tntas.  I have  command  of  Crowley  Ridge,  and  to-morrow  will  send 
iteamboat  to  Hornersville,  to  ply  upon  the  Saint  Francis  and  Little 
ver,  so  that  I can  at  any  time  sustain  or  remove  my  men  at  your 
alers. 

This  will  be  carried  to  you  by  Lieut.  Col.  Drake  McDowell  (who  has 
^n  one  of  my  aides),  who  can  give  you  a more  detailed  statement  of 

a airs. 

Yours,  most  respectfullv, 

M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 
Brigadier -General , Commanding  Mo.  S.  G . 


51  R R— VOL  VIII 


802 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIU 


Special  Orders,  I Headquarters  Missouri  State  ^24*1862. 


No.  1.  y . ' . i 

I The  troops  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Missouri  Volunteers,  having, 
been  transferred  to  the  Confederate  Army,  that  brigade  ceases  to  exist, 
and  those  officers  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard  who  were  assigned  to 
duty  with  it  will  report  at  once  for  orders  to  the  commanding  officers* 
of  their  respective  divisions.  # * * 


By  order  of  Major-General  Pricey  ^ LOUGHBOROUGH, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

March  25,  1862 

Mai.  Gen.  Sterling  Price: 

General  • The  general  commanding  directs  that  the  troops  of  yom, 
coS“heretofo?e  ordered 

on  Des  Arc.  The  road  diverges  to  Des  Arc  at  Spnngheld.  It  will  m 
necessary  for  timely  instruction  to  be  given  to  the  quartermaster  t(l 
change  the  points  of-deposit  of  supplies  along  the  route  from  that  point 
to  Des  Arc. 


S J3ULO.  , 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


?D.  H.  MATJBY,  I 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississtppi  Distbiot, 

Little  Rock,  March  25,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Albert  Bust: 

General:  I am  instructed  by  Major-General  Van  Dorn,  command 
t],is  district,  to  say  that  he  desires  you  to  assume  command  of  th 
trfons  in  the  region  of  country  about  the  Lower  Arkansas  from  Clarks 
Sto  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  about  White  Kiverfrom  Des  Arc  tj 

itYouwUl  proceed  at  once  to  organizing  regiments  from  the  compa4] 
organized. 1 The  companies  now  at  Little  Kock  will  be  sent  to  Deva  j 
Bluff  under  the  command  of  Col.  James  P.  Major,  where  the  organize 
tion  will  take  place.  The  companies  north  of  the  Arkansas  Rn  er,thd 
were  formerly  ordered  to  proceed  under  the  command  of  Colonel  M.ijo 
to  Tacksonport,  will  proceed  under  his  command  to  Des  Arc,  wlier 
they  will  be  organized  into  regiments  and  battalions  under  your  due 

tl0n  I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  sciwant^  ^^ 


The  companies  organized  under  the  call  of  Governor  Rector  for  th 
Confederate  service,  and  heretofore  directed  to  proceed  to  J^o“Por 
under  the  control  and  supervision  of  Col. . James  P .5^0  , 
directed  to  change  their  march  to  Des  Arc,  on  \V  lute  Bi\  ei. 

1 Colonel  Major  wiU  make  the  necessary  arrangements  to  cairy  at 

^IMe* companies8 now  at  Little  Rock  will  proceed  at  once  to  Derail 
Bluff  where  they  will  go  into  camp,  be  armed,  and  await  ordeis.  Co 
onXjor ^till  Juperintend  and  control  this  movement  also  and  w 
take  the  necessary  measures  for  the  prompt  execution  o 
and  for  the  proper  care  of  the  men. 


LP.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  803 

G-eneral  Rust,  after  assuming  command,  as  heretofore  directed,  will 
ise  all  the  Arkansas  troops  who  may  report  to  him  to  be  organized 
o regiments  after  their  arrival  on  White  River. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Little  Bock,  March  25,  1862. 

L Henry  Little, 

Commanding  First  Brigade , First  Division : 

Colonel:  Instead  of  marching  upon  Jacksonport,  as  heretofore 
lered,  you  will  please  proceed  with  your  command  to  Des  Arc. 

The  roads  diverge  at  Springfield,  and  you  will  send  your  agents  ahea  d 
have  supplies  provided  at  points  in  the  road  between  Springfield  and 
s Arc  instead  of  Springfield  and  J acksonport  or  Batesville. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Little  Bock , March  25,  1862. 

Ij.  W.  L.  Cabell,  Chief  Quartermaster: 

t is  now  decided  to  make  Des  Arc,  in  place  of  Jacksonport,  the  point 
Rendezvous  and  of  deposit  of  supplies. 

leep  the  present  force  at  Pocahontas,  with  supplies  for  thirty  days, 
ect  the  force  there  to  make  as  much  display  of  strength  as  possible! 
ve  every  thing  so  arranged  that  in  the  event  of  its  being  necessary 
y can  certainly  fall  back  on  Jaeksonport  without  being  cut  off. 
ve  thirty  days7  supplies  for  the  troops  now  at  Jacksonport,  and  let 
balance  of  every  sort  of  supplies  be  collected  at  Des  Arc. 

>y  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn : 

D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Army  op  the  Mississippi, 

Corinth , Miss.,  March  26,  1862. 

i.  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk, 

Commanding  First  Grand  Division,  Army  of  the  Mississippi : 

General  : You  will  order  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall  to  repair  forth- 
rh  to  Madrid  Bend,  to  relieve  Maj.  Gen.  J.  P.  McCown  of  the  com- 
1 °f  tliat  P°st  and  of  all  the  troops  there  collected,  as  well  as  at 

suid  No.  10. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


804 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVin 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  1st  Gr’d  Div.,  Army  of  the  Miss., 

No.  445.  £ Corinth , Miss.,  March  26,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall  is  hereby  ordered  to  proceed  to  Madrid 
Bend  forthwith,  and  relieve  Maj.  Gen.  J.  P.  McOown  of  the  commam 
of  all  the  Confederate  forces  there  and  at  Island  No.  10. 

Mai.  Gen.  J.  P.  McCown  is  ordered  to  report  at  these  headquarter 
as  soon  as  he  is  relieved  by  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall.  He  is  ir 
structed  to  communicate  in  writing  to  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall  hi 
plan  of  defense  of  Madrid  Bend  and  Island  10,  together  with  the  orderfe 
and  instructions  he  has  received  in  relation  thereto  and  all  such  info] 
mation  as  may  be  important  to  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall  as  his  sue 
cessor  to  the  command. 

Bv  order  of  Maior-General  Polk : 
y J GEOEGE  WILLIAMSON, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District. 

Jacksonport , March  28, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  J.  Churchill: 

General  : The  general  commanding  directs  me  to  inform  you  the 
it  is  of  the  very  greatest  importance  you  should  reach  Des  Arc,  o 
White  Eiver,  at  the  earliest  possible  day,  and  you  will  therefore  pm 
forward  to  that  point  with  all  your  available  force  by  the  best  an 


quickest  route. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ S ’ D.  H.  MAUBY, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Jacksonport,  March  29,  1862. 

General  A.  Sidney  Johnston: 

Your  order  received.*  Will  be  executed  as  promptly  as  possible, 
go  this  evening  to  see  General  Beauregard  at  his  request  and  to  pr 
pare  army  on  the  march  to  Des  Arc.  E AEL  VAS  D0M. 


Madrid  Bend,  March  29, 1862 — 12  o’clock. 
Col.  Thomas  Jordan,  Corinth , Miss. : 

It  is  said  that  the  enemy  are  cutting  away  from  the  foot  of  Island1 
to  Saint  John’s  Bayou  (said  to  be  progressing  rapidly)  for  their  boat 
Bombardment  slowly  continues.  One  of  our  gunboats  came  up  1 
Tipton  last  night.  Eired  at  seventeen  times. 

J.  P.  McCOWN, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Ten  Miles  below  Tiptonville.  on  Mississippi  Eiver, 

March  31,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  Jordan,  Adjutant- General : 

I reached  here  at  10  a.  m.  to-day.  The  river  rising.  I am  forced 
await  transportation  of  Commodore  Hollins. 


Of  March  23.  See  Series  I,  Vol.  X,  Part  H,  p.  354. 


p.  XVHL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  805 

Please  say  to  General  Beauregard  I liave  seen  the  gunboats.  They 
i worthless  for  offense  or  defense.  The  guns  are  fine.  Get  them 
ced  at  Fort  Pillow — the  officers  and  crew  of  the  boats  to  man  them, 
possible.  Secure  the  guns  at  all  events. 

would  not  give  the  price  of  the  wood  which  the  boats  burn  for  their 
•sent  service. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  MACKALL, 

Brigadier-  General, 


. Thomas  Jordan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 


Fort  Pillow,  April  1,  1862. 


Jolonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  the  general,  in  reply  to  your 
imunication  of  the  21st  March — * 

st.  That  the  artificial  defenses  of  the  position  of  Island  No.  10  and 
drid  Bend,  when  I first  reached  there,  consisted  of  two  batteries  on 
main-land,  now  designated  as  No.  1 and  NTo.  5,  about  1J  miles 
xt,  in  which  were  mounted,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  two 
ich  columbiads  and  four  smooth-bore  32-pounders.  Soon  after  my 
ival  seven  other  guns  were  mounted  in  the  same  batteries  by  the 
ipany  of  sappers  and  miners  who  were  sent  with  me  from  Colum- 
, Ky.,  making  in  all  thirteen  guns.  A few  more  guns  could  have 
n mounted  in  these  batteries,  but  I thought  it  best  to  give  them 
icient  distance  to  admit  of  the  construction  of  traverses  and  to 
id  placing  too  many  guns  in  any  one  battery, 
he  platforms  of  the  upper  battery,  No.  1,  are  from  3 to  9 inches 
)w  high-water  mark. 

a addition  to  these  batteries  a cremaillere  line  had  been  located  and 
tially  constructed  from  Battery  No.  1 to  a bayou  leading  into  Beel- 
; Lake  and  a heavy  abatis  felled  in  front  of  it.  This  line,  when 
ipleted,  was  designed  to  guard  against  the  approach  of  the  enemy 
land  from  Hickman  and  other  points  up  the  river,  which  could  be 
e at  ordinary  stages  of  the  river  but  not  during  the  prevalence  of 
h water.  The  ground  upon  which  this  line  was  located  is  subject  to 
rflow  and  is  now  under  water. 

1.  The  means  for  constructing  works,  I was  informed  by  Captain 
by,  of  the  Engineers,  at  Madrid  Bend,  when  I arrived  there,  were 
be  insignificant,  consisting  of  only  a few  laborers  and  about  20 
ies  and  shovels. 

I.  At  the  time  of  my  departure  for  Fort  Pillow  thirty-nine  guns, 
sisting  of  the  Belmont  and  twelve  other  rifled  guns  (mostly  32- 
nders),  ten  8-inch  columbiads,  and  sixteen  smooth-bore  32-pounders, 
e mounted  in  eight  different  batteries,  including  the  two  (NTo.  1 and 
5)  above  mentioned.  Five  of  these  batteries  are  on  the  main  land 
three  upon  Island  NTo.  10.  Two  other  3-gun  batteries  on  the  rnain- 
1 were  nearly  ready  to  receive  their  guns. 

i addition  to  the  erection  of  these  and  other  batteries,  two  of  which 
e intended  to  be  on  the  island  in  positions  selected  by  Captain 
y and  myself,  it  was  contemplated  to  construct  two  redoubts,  one 
ffie  main-land  and  the  other  on  the  island,  of  sufficient  capacity  for 
5e  regiments.  These  redoubts  were  located  and  the  construction 


Not  found. 


806 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVE 


of  the  one  on  the  main-land  commenced  a day  or  two  before  I left  tl 

requested  Captain  Gray,  however,  to  change  the  location  of  the  oi 
on  the  island  to  a position  I thought  rather  preferable  to  the  one  V 
had  marked  off,  which  he  said  he  would  do. 

4th.  No  works  had  been  erected  or  guns  planted  at  or  near  Tipto 
ville.  I made  a hasty  examination,  in  company  with  Captain  Gray, » 
the  proposed  location  of  the  cremaillere  line  from  Tipton  ville  to  tl 
lake  and  gave  him  my  views  in  regard  to  it,  and  to  the  best  posith 
for  a battery  at  Tiptonville  in  the  event  the  construction  of  such  wor] 
should  be  determined  on.  , J ^ „ 

It  was  Captain  Gray's  intention  to  complete  the  cremaillere  line  fro 
Battery  No.  1 to  the  bayou  as  soon  as  the  fall  in  the  river  would  acln 

°f5th.  The  capacity  of  the  batteries,  in  the  condition  in  which  I k 
them,  though  not  complete,  I judged,  from  the  three  days  firing 
witnessed  of  the  enemy's  gun  and  mortar  boats,  was  sufficient,  wi 
the  aid  of  the  floating  battery  of  nine  guns,  to  successfully  resist  the 
attacks  and  prevent  them  from  passing  down  the  river. 

I do  not  know  what  progress  has  been  made  in  the  completion  ot  tJ 
batteries  and  the  construction  of  other  works  or  what  is  their  prese 

defensive  capacity.  . , , _ i 

A more  detailed  report  will  be  furnished  the  general  if  he  desires  I 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedie 

servant,  D B HARRIS, 

Captain,  Engineers 


Osceola,  Ark.,  April  1. 


1862, 


Officer  Commanding  C.  S.  Army,  Island  Ao.  10 : 

General  : I have  reached  this  point  en  route  for  my  command 
carry  out  your  request  to  attack  the  enemy  in  the  rear  at  New  Madri 
but  I have  heard  that  my  men  have  destroyed  the  plank  road  and  hi 
for  Pocahontas.  I will  nevertheless  proceed  on  my  journey  until, 
am  satisfied  the  report  is  true,  and  if  it  is,  I will  myself  follow  theij 
if  not,  I will  carry  out  your  wishes.  Youx  orders  sent  to  Newton  ±Co,| 
Osceola,  will  be  forwarded  to  me. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  ^ JpFF  THOMPSOh, 

Brigadier- General,  Mo.  S.  G. 


Osceola,  Ark.,  April  1, 1862J 
Brigadier-General  Villepigue,  C.  S.  A.,  Fort  Billow : 

General  : I learn  upon  my  arrival  at  this  place  that  my  men  c 
stroyed  the  plank  road  on  Sunday  last  and  have  left  for  Pocahontt 
Ark.  I will  nevertheless  continue  my  intention  of  going  to  Horne 
ville,  and  if  the  report  I hear  is  true  I will  see  that  the  road  is  eHe 
ually  destroyed,  and  then  take  my  steamboat  (the  Conway)  and  proce 
to  ioin  my  command.  You  will  please,  therefore,  let  the  comman 
at  No.  10  know  that  I cannot  make  the  demonstration  requested  a 
promised. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  ^ ^ THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General,  Mo.  8.  G- 


hap.  XVlll. ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


807 


Osceola,  Ark.,  April  1, 1862. 
rigadier-General  Ylllepigue,  C.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Fort  Pillow : 

General  : Please  allow  me  to  suggest  that  it  would  be  expedient 
> station  a signal  officer  at  this  place,  who  will  be  able  to  bring  in 
eamboats  when  necessary.  This  is  the  only  point  where  information 
m reach  the  Mississippi  River  direct  from  Crowley  Ridge,  and  as  it 
ill  probably  soon  be  a place  of  considerable  military  moment,  it  may 
P necessary  to  communicate  through  this  channel,  which  is  several 
iys  quicker  than  any  other.  Canoe-men  will  have  to  be  employed, 
ho  cannot  stop  a steamboat,  but  they  can,  if  necessary,  go  all  the 
ay  to  the  fort,  and  it  will  expedite  matters  to  arrange  a private  signal 
hich  boats  will  understand  and  observe. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


M.  JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier-General,  Mo.  S.  G . 


\ Headquarters, 

Madrid  Bend , April  1,  1862. 

)1.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Adjutant-  General , Army  of  the  Mississippi,  Corinth : 

Colonel  : 1st.  I reached  this  place  yesterday  morning.  An  hour 
ter  my  arrival  General  Trudeau  announced  his  intention  of  leaving 

d left. 

2d.  Finding  Major-General  MeCown  preparing  to  leave,  I asked  him 
remain  another  day.  He  assented,  but  during  the  afternoon  again 
oposed  to  go,  and  finding  that  his  company  was  engaging  both  his 
ae  and  mine,  I consented. 

3d.  Brigadier-General  Gantt  handed  me  his  resignation  immediately 
:er  my  arrival. 

1th.  Brigadier-General  Walker  is  absent  sick. 

5th.  I sent  for  Colonel  Steedman.  He  is  absent  in  the  country  sick. 
3th.  The  return  of  the  troops  handed  me  gives  present  for  duty 
:75  rank  and  file.  The  following  memoranda  I got  from  Major- 
ineral  MeCown,  and  find  I cannot  take  the  “ present  for  duty”  as  a 
jasure  of  the  force : 


MEMORANDA. 

Colonel  Brown’s  Fifty-fifth  Tennessee  Regiment— bnt  few  arms.  Those  in  the  re<*- 
imt  different  kinds,  but  pretty  good.  The  colonel  says  fifty  are  wanted. 

Seventh  Arkansas,  Colonel  Smith — all  sorts  of  arms.  Every  variety  country  guns, 
orty- sixth  Tennessee  Regiment,  Colonel  Clark — only  two  companies  aimed  (400 
' duty,  160  armed).  v 

ourth  Arkansas  Battalion,  Major  McKay  commanding — badly  armed, 
wo  companies  cavalry,  Wheeler  and  Hudson. 

Th.  The  ordnance  officer  states  that  there  are  on  an  average  125 
inds  for  each  gun. 

hh.  The  commissary’s  return  has  not  yet  been  received.  There  are 
provisions  on  the  island.  It  is  supplied  from  the  Tennessee  shore, 
ave  ordered  there  enough  for  twenty  days. 

>th.  How  far  examination  will  confirm  the  returns  of  troops  and 
nitions  remains  to  be  seen. 

0th.  Yesterday  the  enemy  fired  half-hour  shells  during  the  day 
1 ten  in  rapid  succession  at  night.  General  MeCown  estimates  the 
«ce  across  the  river  at  30,000. 


808 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chav.  XVH 


11th.  I could  get  the  steamers  down  the  river,  hut  one  accidei 
would  give  a transport  to  the  enemy  and  ruin  me.  I will  sacrifice  ti 

^ 12th.  ^1  venture  no  remarks  about  my  prospects.  I give  things  . 
they  presented  themselves  on  yesterday.  « fl 

13th.  Please  send  me  a cipher,  unless  satisfied  of  the  satety  ot  ti 

northern  line. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


W.  W.  MACKALL, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Corinth , Miss .,  April  2,  1862 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Mackall, 

Commanding  at  Madrid  Bend , Tenn. : 

General  : The  bearer,  Capt.  B.  J.  Butler,  is  authorized  to  vis 
Madrid  Bend,  to  offer  you  his  services  for  the  purpose  of  endeayorn 
to  save  the  boats  now  cut  off  at  Madrid  Bend  by  the  enemy’s  batten 
below  that  point.  You  will  send  down  in  said  boats  all  the  guns,  ca 
riages,  chassis,  material,  corn,  &c.,  you  may  not  require  m the  defen 
of  your  position.  It  is  preferable  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  those  o 
iects  in  an  endeavor  to  save  them  than  to  leave  them  where  they  ai 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  and  to  be  destroyed  by  the  tore 
A few  days  ago  I gave  Captain  Fleming  a letter  to  you  to  the  sar 
purport  as  the  above,  not  being  then  aware  that  General  Polk  b. 
already  authorized  Captain  Butler  to  examine  into  the  matter  for  t 
purpose  indicated  above ; hence  he  has  priority  ot  claim,  and  Capta 
Fleming  can  assist  him  in  the  above  undertaking  should  he  be  willii 

to  serve  under  the  directions  of  Captain  Butler. 

I remain,  dear  general,  very  resPectMly,^^ 

General . Second  in  Command. 


Hornersville,  Mo.,  April  3,  1862 — 4 p.  m. 

Commanding  Officer  Island  Ko.  10: 

General:  I reached  this  place  this  morning,  and  find  that  my  m 
have  started  for  Pocahontas,  under  the  order  of  Map  Gen  Garl  V; 
Dorn.  They  first  attempted  to  destroy  the  plank  road,  hut  how  ette 
ually  it  was  done  I cannot  accurately  learn.  The  enemy  are  n 
attempting  to  repair  it,  and  the  time  of  completion  w,ll  depend  up, 
the  manner  of  destruction.  Therefore  I can  be  relied  on  for  no  demc 
stration  in  the  enemy’s  rear  until  I let  you  know  again. 

Yours,  most  respectfully,  ^ JEFF.  THOMPSON, 

Brigadier- General,  Mo.  8.  G. 


Headquarters, 
Madrid  Bend,  April  3,  1862. 

Col.  Thomas  Jordan,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Since  my  letter  of  April  1 (not  numbered)  I haJ® 
an  effort  to  find  out  what  was  at  my  command.  Reports  of  this 


ap.  XVIH.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  809 

g give  me  2,273  infantry,  rank  and  file.  Deduct  the  necessary  guards 
r batteries,  and  it  would  be  difficult  for  me  to  assemble  1,000  in  less 
an  three  or  four  hours,  the  circuit  from  Battery  N'o.  1 to  Tiptonville 
,ipposmg  my  right  and  rear  to  be  safe)  being  25  miles.  Under  this 
ute  of  things  I see  but  little  prospect  of  their  landing  in  such  a small 
jrce  that  I may  hope  to  strike  the  decisive  blow  suggested  to  Maior- 
[meral  McOown.  J 

Yesterday  about  1 o’clock  a.  m.  the  guns  in  Battery  ]Yo.  1 were 
iked.  It  was  under  water  and  watched  by  two  sentinels,  the  guard 
mg  placed  on  a breast-height  running  from  the  battery  to  the  lake. 
:iere  was  no  contest.  If  not  a surprise,  the  enemy  spiked  the  guns 
d left  before  the  guard  could  get  in.  I have  required  Colonel  Steed- 
in,  to  whose  regiment  the  battery  was  intrusted,  to  investigate  the 
air.  He  has  probably  the  best  regiment  under  my  command.  I 
:pe  to  be  able  to  bore  out  the  vents  to-night. 

To-day  the  mortar  firing  of  the  enemy  has  been  brisk;  so  much  so, 
it  the  floating  battery  had  to  loose  her  moorings. 

[ learned  from  Commodore  Hollins  and  Major-General  McCown  that 
s battery  continues  to  be  under  the  orders  of  the  commodore,  or  I 
uld  have  removed  her  fine  armament  to  the  shore.  Any  one  shell 
ling  on  it  will  sink  or  blow  it  up. 

Douid  the  new  gunboats,  if  worth  anything,  take  its  armament,  or, 
LI  better,  bring  with  them  a fine  armament  from  the  gunboats  of  the 
vy,  there  is  yet  a possibility  of  getting  command  of  this  river,  now 
all  practicable  purposes  closed  to  us. 

Ammunition  for  guns  and  small-arms  will  not  exceed  half  the  amount 
l ordered.  I have  twenty  days’  provisions  on  the  island,  but  no 
tenuity  of  man  has  been  able  to  discover  what  remains ; but  I do  not 
ubt  the  supply  will  suffice. 

Che  enemy’s  transports  are  collected  in  large  numbers  above  the  Bend 
s evening,  and  something  may  be  attempted. 

Please  say  this  to  the  general:  My  guns  may  give  him  time  below, 
•len  the  enemy  cross  the  game  is  practically  up. " It  takes  an  army  to 
: end  the  ground.  One  good  regiment  would  be  better  than  the  force 
ach  I have.  It  never  had  any  discipline.  It  is  disheartened— apa- 
dic.  bo  report  my  best  officers.  I cannot  rely  on  sentinels  or  guards. 
.11  him  I do  not  say  this  to  save  myself  from  future  censure  or  to  worry 
K \ only  wan*  him  to  understand  that  if  the  enemy  land  this  wiil 
>a  beleagured  place,  which  will  not  hold  out  ten  hours  in  my  opinion. 
Ye  have  no  guns  heavier  than  8-inch  columbiads.  We  can  reach 
ther  gunboats  nor  transports. 

ask  for  neither  re-enforcements  nor  aid  of  any  other  kind.  I know 
t each  place  is  thought  by  the  local  commander  of  supreme  impor- 
ce.  Having  placed  my  condition  fully  before  the  general,  I am  satis- 
will  judge  of  the  value  and  his  capacity  to  support  the  place  best 
his  stand  point.  ^ 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  MACKALL, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

\ S. — Major-General  McCown  left  copies  of  seven  or  eight  letters 
1 telegrams  from  Generals  Beauregard  and  Polk,  but  neither  order 
. tetter  books  nor  copies  of  his  instructions  to  this  command.  I 
dose  a report  of  Captain  Sheliha,  staff  engineer. 


810 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV. 


[Inclosuxe.J 

Headquarters,  Madrid  Bend , April  3, 1862.1 

Maj.  H.  B.  Davidson,  Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

Sir  : Having,  in  compliance  with  orders  received,  examined  the  b -. 
teries  erected  tor  the  defense  of  Island  No.  10, 1 have  the  honor  to  d 
port : 


A.— BATTERIES  ON  TENNESSEE  SHORE. 


Number  of  battery. 

Guns  mounted.  j 

8-inch  columbiads. 

8-inch  howitzers. 

32s,  rifled. 

32s,  smooth. 

ri 

<L> 

2 

’H 

m 

CM 

24s,  smooth. 

Carriages. 

Remarks. 

6 

4 

5 

2 

17 

2 

4 

1 

2 

2 

1 9 

Columbiad 

1 traverse  circle  missing. 
Carriages  work  badly,  workmen 
work. 

To  be  mounted  to-day. 

3 

3 columbiads,  1 bar- 
bette. 

3 columbiads,  2 bar- 
bette. 

Barbette...... .... 

t 

1 

2 

.... 

1 

Total 

Grand  total 

3 



3 

2 

~51~ 

12 

4 

13  | 16  | 2 

4 

Battery  No.  1,  which,  under  command  of  Captain  Rucker,  did  sn< 
excellent  service  during  the  engagement  on  the  17th  instant,  will  on 
be  fully  serviceable  again  after  the  water  will  have  fallen.  Its  gui 
spiked  by  the  enemy,  are  being  unspiked.  The  rat-tail  files  have  be« 
removed  out  of  two  of  the  vents. 

Three  powder  magazines  on  the  Tennessee  shore  afford  ample  roc 
for  the  ammunition  on  hand.  They  require  strengthening  on  the  to; 


Jhap.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  811 

leither  is  a sufficient  arrangement  made  for  j>re venting  tlie  moisture  in 
lie  ground  from  leaking  through  the  walls. 

Service  magazines  near  to  the  batteries  are  entirely  missing,  neither 
s the  ordnance  department  provided  with  a laboratory  or  a suitable 
dace  for  the  protection  of  ordnance  stores. 

Island  No.  10  has  no  magazine  at  all.  The  undersigned  found  five 
segs  of  powder  protected  by  tarpaulins.  The  order  for  the  immediate 
jonstruction  of  a magazine  has  been  given  at  once. 

The  place  has  no  bomb-proof  and  the  men  are  entirely  unprotected 
igainst  the  shells  of  the  enemy.  They  imagine  themselves  safe  in  some 
imall  rooms  that  have  been  built  in  the  traverses  of  Batteries  B,  Nos. 

5 and  3,  and  which  originally  were  intended  for  service  magazines. 

The  ordnance  department  is  well  supplied  with  solid  round  shot, 
'rape,  and  cannister,  but  there  is  not  the  fifth  part  of  ammunition  on 
land  that  would  be  required  by  the  columbiads  and  rifled  pieces  during 
n engagement  lasting  over  two  days.  Powder  for  cartridges  and  the 
harges  of  shells,  shell  and  fuse  plugs  and  Reed  balls  are  very  much 
ranted. 

The  right  flank  of  the  position  is  partially  protected  by  a line  en 
remaillere  extending  from  the  Mississippi  River  to  Black  Bayou.  It 
3 1,200  yards  long,  not  finished  yet,  and  at  the  present  moment  sub- 
aerged.  The  high  stage  of  the  water  and  Reelfoot  Lake  form,  there- 
ore,  the  only  protection  to  the  right  for  the  present  moment;  a protec- 
ion  that  will  be  weakened  considerably  by  the  falling  of  the  water. 
The  water  batteries  on  the  main  shore  and  the  island  will  be  able  to 
eat  the  enemy’s  boats  back  by  daylight.  Whether  they  will  be  able 
r not  to  prevent  them  from  passing  by  during  a dark  and  boisterous 
ight  the  future  alone  can  disclose. 

The  left  flank  has  some  protection  by  the  batteries  from  Nos.  6 to  12, 
ut  mainly  by  the  strong  current  of  the  Mississippi  River. 

The  road  from  this  point  to  Tiptonville  is  practicable,  but  to  any 
oint  on  the  shore  below  Tiptonville  entirely  impassable,  on  account  of 
le  high  water. 

A glimpse  at  the  map  being  sufficient  to  give  a correct  idea  of  the 
atteries,  their  ranges,  &c.,  the  undersigned  has  the  honor  to  give  here 
is  views  with  reference  to  what  he  considers  the  only  chance  for  hold- 
lg  the  position  against  an  attack  by  land  either  from  the  direction  of 
[ickman  and  Union  City,  which  may  be  expected  as  soon  as  the  water 
ill  have  fallen  enough  to  render  approaches  from  that  side  practicable, 
r against  an  enemy  that  have  landed  from  the  Missouri  shore. 

This  morning’s  report  shows  the  strength  of  the  command  to  be,  infan- 
cy, 2,273  men,  of  whom  about  400  [are]  without  arms;  heavy  artillery, 
fty-one  guns,  1,166  men;  light  artillery,  Captain  Stewart’s  battery; 
ivalry,  two  companies;  sappers  and  miners,  one  company;  seven 
ansports,  of  which  two  are  used  as  hospitals ; one  floating  battery, 
mtaining  eight  8-inch  columbiads  and  one  32-pounder,  rifled. 

The  enemy’s  force,  according  to  the  best  information  received,  con- 
sts  of  seven  gunboats,  four  mortar  boats,  five  transports,  two  tugs, 
ine  batteries,  erected  between  New  Madrid  and  Andy  Riddle’s,  con- 
fining about  twenty-five  guns,  varying  in  caliber  from  32s  to  rifled  12s, 
id  from  20,000  to  25,000  men,  encamped  along  the  river  in  rear  of  these 
atteries. 

The  whole  line  from  Battery  No.  1 around  the  peninsula  to  Tipton- 
Ile  is  24  miles  long,  13  of  which  afford  good  landings  to  the  enemy ; 
asides,  a line  4 miles  long  has  to  be  guarded  to  the  right. 

The  floating  battery  placed  just  below  the  island  could  render  the 


812  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVIII 

greatest  service  if  it  was  not  liable  to  be  sunk  by  the  first  bomb  shel 
striking  it  fairly.  The  five  gunboats  lying  below  Tiptonville  can 
although  carrying  very  fine  guns,  render  no  assistance  whatever. 

The  troops  of  this  command,  with  the  exception  of  a very  small  por 
tion  are  lacking  some  of  the  most  essential  qualities  of  a soldier 
vigilance  and  self-reliance.  Discipline  and  system  seem  to  be  unknowi 

“I  ^self-evident  that  a line  20  miles  long  cannot  he  guarded  effi 
ciently  by  a force  not  greater  than  the  command  occupying  this  positioi 

at Should  the  enemy  make  a feint  at  one  point  and  effect  a,  landing  a 
another,  long  hours  would  elapse  before  a small  column  co.uld  be  formei 
ami  led  against  the  advancing  enemy. 

But  the  only  chance  for  saving  this  much-important  position  seem: 
to  be  to  attack  the  enemy  and  repulse  them  as  soon  as  ianded. 

Although  advocating  this  course  by  all  means  (even  with  the  smal 
force  at  present  here),  success  seems  to  be  beyond  reach,  it 

1.  Strong  re-enforcements  of  well-disciplmed  troops  should  not  arriv 

1U  ^^lie^iavigation  of  the  river  once  more  opened  was  not  to  be  kep 
open  by  efficient  gunboats  that  would  watch  the  enemy  and  enabl 
thus  the  commander  of  this  post  to  keep  his  forces  concentrated  nea 
his  right  flank,  from  where  the  greater  danger  may  be  expected. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  yours,  very  respectfully,^^ 

Captain  and  Staff  Engineer 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  6,  1862. 

Mai.  W.  L.  Cabell,  Quartermaster: 

Major:  General  Van  Dorn  directs  that  you  send  at  once  by  th 
fastest  boat  all  the  corn  you  can  possibly  raise,  as  there  is  not  on 
bushel  here  and  the  First  Brigade  will  be  here  to-day  or  to-morrov 
Thehgeneral  is  surprised  to  And  no  corn  here,  as  he  tad  given  instraJ 
tions  two  or  three  times  to  have  a supply  at  this  place.  Also  sen 
Captain  McGivern  to  this  place  as  soon  as  he  can  leave  Jacksonport.  I 

I am,  very  respectfully,  WM.  p>.  BEALL,  ! 

Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General* 


Special  Orders 
"No.  41. 


Hdqbs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  7,  1862. 

I The  First  Brigade  of  General  Price’s  division  will  embark  f( 
Memphis  to-morrow  morning.  On  arriving  in  Memphis  Colonel  Littli 
commanding  the  brigade,  will  establish  his  camp  m the  vicinity  ot  th. 

city^wl  await  further  orders  from  General  Sterlin^  Pr^  He  w 

refer  to  Major  Haskell,  inspector-general  of  this  district,  for  any  1 
formation  concerning  a place  of  encampment  and  supp  1 

gade  which  may  be  necessary.  TTolen: 

h II.  Oapt.  F.  Thyssens,  aide-de-camp,  will  proceed  at  once  to  Heie  i 

Ark.,  and  will  make  a reconnaissance  of  Crowley’s  Kidge  as  f 


hap.  XVIII.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


813 


ithin  8 or  10  miles  of  the  town,  in  order  to  select  a proper  site  for  bat- 
3ries  to  defend  the  approach  to  it.  He  will  observe  and  report  how 
reat  a force  will  be  necessary  to  hold  the  ridge  against  an  enemy  ap- 
roaching  the  town  and  any  other  matters  relating  to  the  defensible 
ature  of  the  position.  After  completing  the  reconnaissance  he  will 
3pair  to  Memphis  and  await  the  arrival  of  the  general  commanding. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Horn  : 

D.  H.  MATTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.  • 


Bes  Arc,  April  8,  1862. 

General  Cooper: 

A portion  of  the  Missouri  troops  desire  to  continue  in  the  service  as 
[issouri  State  Guards  for  ninety  days  longer,  under  their  own  officers, 
hall  their  services  be  accepted  ? They  are  good  troops,  but  I doubt 
le  propriety  of  retaining  them  in  Confederate  service  as  State  troops, 
nd  would  not  advise  it. 

Please  answer  as  soon  as  convenient,  as  the  troops  are  now  embark- 
lg  for  Memphis. 

EAEL  YAN  DOEN, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Des  Arc , April  8,  1862. 


ol.  J.  J.  Clarkson: 


Colonel:  After  organizing  and  fitting  out  your  command  as  author- 
ed by  Special  Orders,  No.  27,  March  20,  it  is  desired  that  you  will 
take  your  way  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  route  between  Leaven- 
orth  or  Independence  and  Santa  Fe,  or  other  points  in  New  Mexico, 
nd  use  your  utmost  efforts  to  interrupt  and  capture  the  supply  trains 
f the  enemy  in  that  department,  to  cut  off  their  mails,  and  annoy  them 
y every  other  means  in  your  power.  When  practicable  you  will  bring 
[iy  stores  or  property  you  may  capture  into  the  Confederate  States 
mits ; otherwise  you  will  destroy  them. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn  : 

D.  H.  MATTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


eneral  Orders,  > Hdqrs.,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office,  Mo., 

No.  27.  J Des  Arc , ArJc .,  April  8,  1862. 

The  resignation  of  Sterling  Price,  major-general  of  the  Missouri 
tate  Guard,  has  been  received  and  is  hereby  accepted,  to  take  effect 
*om  this  date.  The  Commander-in-Chief  takes  this  occasion  to  express 
is  sincere  regret  to  the  Missouri  State  Guard  at  the  loss  of  so  gallant, 
sperienced,  and  distinguished  an  officer  from  their  councils,  and  to 
acourage  them  in  such  a performance  of  their  duties  in  the  future  as 
ill  keep  bright  the  fame  they  have  so  nobly  won  under  his  leader- 
lip. 

By  order  of  the  Governor : 

WAEWICK  HOUGH, 
Adjutant- General  of  Missouri. 


814  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYIHi 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Missouri  State  Guard, 

No.  79.  J Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  8,  1862.  1 

Soldiers  of  the  State  Guard: 

I command  you  no  longer.  I have  this  day  resigned  the  commissio]| 
which  yonr  patient  endurance,  your  devoted  patriotism,  and  you - 
dauntless  bravery  have  made  so  honorable.  I have  done  this  that  I 
may  the  better  serve  you,  our  State,  and  our  country — that  I may  till 
sooner  lead  you  back  to  the  fertile  prairies,  the  rich  woodlands,  an<  j 
majestic  streams  of  our  beloved  Missouri — that  I may  the  more  ceil 
taiiily  restore  you  to  your  once  happy  homes  and  to  the  loved  one  j 
there. 

Five  thousand  of  those  who  have  fought  side  by  side  with  us  undel 
the  Grizzly  Bears  of  Missouri  have  followed  me  into  the  Confederatl 
camp.  They  appeal  to  you,  as  I do,  by  all  the  tender  memories  of  thl 
past,  not  to  leave  us  now,  but  to  go  with  us  wherever  the  path  of  dutl 
may  lead,  till  we  shall  have  conquered  a peace  and  won  our  independ] 
ence  by  brilliant  deeds  upon  new  fields  of  battle. 

Soldiers  of  the  State  Guard ! Veterans  of  six  pitched  battles  ami 
nearly  twenty  skirmishes!  Conquerors  in  them  all!  Your  country! 
with  its  “ ruined  hearths  and  shrines,”  calls  upon  you  to  rally  onc<] 
more  in  her  defense,  and  rescue  her  forever  from  the  terrible  thraldom 
which  threatens  her.  I know  that  she  will  not  call  in  vain.  The  insoj 
lent  and  barbarous  hordes  which  have  dared  to  invade  our  soil  and  t<| 
desecrate  our  homes  have  just  met  with  a signal  overthrow  beyond  th<j 
Mississippi.  Now  is  the  time  to  end  this  unhappy  war.  If  every  man 
will  but  do  his  duty,  his  own  roof  will  shelter  him  in  peace  from  tin 
storms  of  the  coming  winter. 

Let  not  history  record  that  the  men  who  bore  with  patience  the  pri 
vations  of  Cowskin  Prairie,  who  endured  uncomplainingly  the  burning 
heat  of  a Missouri  summer,  and  the  frosts  and  snows  of  a Missouri 
winter;  that  the  men  who  met  the  enemy  at  Carthage,  at  Oak  Hills 
at  Fort  Scott,  at  Lexington,  and  in  numberless  lesser  battle-fields  ii 
Missouri,  and  met  them  but  to  conquer  them ; that  the  men  who  foughil 
so  bravely  and  so  well  at  Elkhorn  ; that  the  unpaid  soldierly  of  Misj 
souri  were,  after  so  many  victories  and  after  so  much  suffering,  une 
qual  to  the  great  task  of  achieving  the  independence  of  their  magnifi 
cent  State. 

Soldiers ! I go  but  to  mark  a pathway  to  our  homes.  Follow  me ! 

STEELING  PEICE. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office,  Mo.  S.  G., 

No.  26.  J Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  8,  1862.  j 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  M.  M.  Parsons  is  hereby  specially  detailed  to  the  com- 
mand of  all  tbe  Missouri  State  Guard  now  in  the  field,  and  will  im- 
mediately organize  them  into  companies,  battalions,  and  regiments, 
according  to  law. 

II.  The  army  corps  to  be  thus  organized  will  consist  exclusively  oi 
infantry  and  artillery. 

III.  The  general  commanding  will  report  as  soon  as  practicable  the 
entire  force  in  the  Missouri  State  Guard  now  remaining,  rank  and 
file. 

By  order  of  the  Governor : 

WAEWICK  HOUGH, 
Adjutant- General  of  Missouri. 


815 


ap.  XYIIL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


3ently  organized  at  DevalFs  Bluff  and  of  such  others  as  may  here- 
;er  be  added  to  them.  J 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn : 


D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


I.  The  above-mentioned  troops  will  be  immediately  organized  into 
Missouri t)attallonSj  and  reg^nts,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  State 

II.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shields  is  hereby  detailed  as  inspector  to 
ster  and  report  the  troops  to  these  headquarters. 

V.  Generals  of  divisions  will  report  immediately  the  entire  force  of 
ir  respective  commands. 

• ^vision  quartermasters,  or,  in  their  absence,  regimental  quarter- 
ns, will  immediately  report  all  horses,  mules,  wagons,  tents,  camp 
-ipage,  and  other  property  in  their  respective  commands  and  be- 
fng  to  the  State  of  Missouri.  They  will  also  especiallv  report  all 
te  property  which  has  been  transferred  to  the  armies  of  the  Confed- 


te  States. 


L division  ordnance  officers  will  forthwith  report  all  arms,  ammu- 
on,  and  artillery  now  belonging  to  the  State  of  Missouri,  and  also 
arms,  ammunition,  and  artillery  which  may  have  been  transferred 
be  Confederate  Army. 

II.  Generals  of  division  will  cause  the  pay  rolls  of  their  respective 
mands  to  be  made  out  and  certified  to  without  delay,  as  the  funds 
their  payment  are  daily  expected. 

In*  d?s.ePh  Kelly  will,  until  further  orders,  assume  command 
ae  Sixth  Division  of  Mo.  S.  G. 

y order  of  M.  M.  Parsons,  brigadier-general,  commanding  Mo.  S.  G.  : 

AUSTIN  M.  STANDISH, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

. __  _ Des  Arc.  Ark April  9,  1862. 

A.  M.  Haskell,  Inspector-General : 

ake  every  effort  to  get  some  of  the  captured  arms  for  my  command 
ay  arms  you  can  get ; also  all  the  ammunition  you  can.  Send  to 
eral  Beauregard  in  my  name.  Keep  him  informed  of  all  arrivals  of 
ps  from  here.  Inquire  if  it  will  be  necessary  for  me  to  send  over 
wagons  and  teams  and  how  many.  Send  more  steamboats.  I am 
mg  too  slowly.  Show  this  to  Adams.  Impress  the  quartermaster 
emphis  with  the  importance  of  preparing  forage  for  me. 


EARL  VAN  DORN, 

Major-General. 


816 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYID 


Headquarters  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  M.  Frost,  Commanding : . 

General:  If  the  infantry  brigades  can  arrive  here  any  sooner  b; 
passing  yours,  please  inform  them  of  the  general’s  wish  for  them  to  d 
so.  It  is  of  the  very  greatest  importance  that  the  troops  should  read 
their  destination  at  an  early  day. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn:  ^ Mygj>y 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  46.  f 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Mississippi  District, 

Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  10,  1862. 


* ^ 

III  In  consequence  of  the  Governor  of  Missouri  having  assumed  th1 
control  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard  and  its  organization,  it  is  herebj 
relieved  from  further  duty  with  this  army,  and  will  report  for  orders  t 

His  Excellency.  i 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn:  ^ 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Oedees,  ) Hdqes.  Trans-Mississippi  District 

^0.  48.  ] , Des  Arc , Ark.,  April  11,  1862. 

The  maior- general  commanding  this  district  has  ascertained,  in  a 
interview  with  Governor  Jackson,  of  Missouri,  that  it  was  not  His  E: 
cellency’s  intention,  by  his  order  of  the  8th,  to  assume  control  ov<| 
the  troops  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard,  now  in  this  army.  Therefor) 
paragraph  III  of  Special  Orders,  No.  46,  is  hereby  revoked. 


By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Yan  Dorn 


D.  H.  MAURY, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APPENDIX 


Embracing  communications  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  proper  sequence* 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 
Saint  Louis , November  20,  1861. 
jeneral  McClellan,  General-in-Chief. 

(For  the  President  of  the  United  States,  Washington,  D.  <7. :) 

No  written  authority  is  found  here  to  declare  and  enforce  martial  law 
] this  department.  Please  send  me  such  written  authority,  and  tele- 
; aph  me  that  it  has  been  sent  by  mail. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Louis,  November  25,  1861. 

fig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

? Adjutant- General  of  the  Army,  Washington , L>.  C.  : 

[General  : My  telegram  of  the  20th  November  to  General  McClellan, 
Eking  for  written  authority  from  the  President  to  declare  and  enforce 
Eirtial  law  in  this  department,  still  remains  unanswered. 

It  is  not  intended  to  either  declare  or  enforce  martial  law  in  any  place 
here  there  are  civil  tribunals  which  can  be  intrusted  with  the  punish- 
1 -nt  of  offenses  and  the  regular  administration  of  justice.  But  in 
ime  places  there  are  no  such  tribunals,  and  it  devolves  upon  the  mili- 
p to  arrest  and  punish  murderers,  robbers,  and  thieves,  and  martial 
v already  exists  in  these  places.  In  this  city,  for  example,  it  has  ex- 
iled tor  months,  but  by  what  legal  authority  I am  unable  to  ascertain. 
I the  absence  of  the  proper  civil  tribunals  it  is  impossible  to  entirely 
G$pense  with  it,  but  I intend  to  restrict  it  as  much  as  possible.  The 
Etnmissioners  appointed  by  the  President  have  requested  me  to  bring 
uore  them  certain  persons  and  papers  stated  in  sworn  affidavits  to  be 
jcessary  for  them  to  prosecute  their  investigations  into  certain  alleged 
Duds.  There  are  no  civil  authorities  here  to  do  this.  On  their  appli- 
thon  I sent  the  telegram  referred  to.  From  a full  investigation  of 
t s question  I am  satisfied  that  the  President  has  power  to  confer  this 
thority,  and  I feel  unwilling  to  act,  as  requested  by  the  commission 
B(j  as  the  public  good  seems  to  require,  without  it.  ft  certainly  is  not 
Qht  to  leave  a public  officer  in  a position  where  his  duty  requires  him 
t exercise  an  authority  which  his  superior  can,  but  is  unwilling  to, 
" ifer  upon  him. 

52  R R — VOL  VIII 


817 


818 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  xvm. 


I desire  an  immediate  answer,  either  authorizing  or  refusing  to  au- 
thorize me  to  exercise  this  power. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

y ’ H.  W.  HALLECK. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 
Saint  Louis,  November  26,  1861. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  the  Army , Washington,  D.  C. : \ 

My  telegram  of  the  20th.  asking  for  written  authority  of  the  President 
to  enforce  martial  law  in  this  department,  is  still  unanswered.  It  is  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  enable  me  to  procure  evidence  required  by  com- 
mission of  investigation.  If  this  authority  be  refused  I shall  not  exer- 
cise it,  no  matter  how  much  the  public  service  may  suffer. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major - General. 


Saint  Louis,  December  10,  1861.  i 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

General-in-Chief  of  the  Army , Washington , D.  C.  : 

General:  Since  my  last  (Ho.  4*)  I have  very  little  to  report.  By 
latest  advices  Major  Bowen,  with  re-enforcements?  had  driven  Turner 
as  far  south  as  Texas  County.  I sent  particular  directions  not  to  ven- 
ture too  far,  lest  he  might  be  cut  off.  A number  of  prisoners  of  war, 
among  them  several  of  Price’s  officers,  have  been  taken  in  the  vicinity 
of  Sedalia.  It  is  rumored  that  the  expedition  to  Marshall  and  Waverly 
has  been  successful,  but  I can  get  no  official  information,  although  i| 
have  repeatedly  asked  for  it  by  telegraph.  Persons  here  from  Saint 
Joseph  say  that  General  Prentiss’  column,  in  Clinton,  Platte,  Clay, 
and  Ray  Counties,  is  scattering  the  insurgents,  but  I can  get  no  infor- 
mation whatever  from  him,  either  as  to  the  strength  or  disposition  ol 

his  forces.  , ....  , Pij- 

It  was  my  intention,  on  learning  that  the  expedition  sent  north  lrom 
Sedalia  was  successful,  to  co-operate  with  General  Prentiss  by  pushing 
forward  a force  to  Lexington  about  the  time  he  reached  the  other  side 
of  the  river,  and  thus  scatter  or  capture  the  large  band  of  insurgent^ 
in  that  place.  But  as  these  commanders  seem  determined  to  keep  me 
in  ignorance  of  all  their  movements  I can  form  no  effective  plan  oi 
co-operation.  Everything  here  is  in  such  total  disorganization  anu 
there  is  such  a general  lack  of  discipline  that  officers  systematically 
neglect  to  answer  either  telegrams  or  letters  of  instruction. 

for  this  reason  I am  unable  to  get  reports  from  many  parts  ot  the 
department,  although  repeated  orders  to  that  effect  have  been  sent.  I 
hope  in  time  to  establish  a more  stringent  system  of  discipline  and 
accountability. 

We  have  many  regiments  here  ready  to  take  the  field,  but  they  nave 
no  arms,  and  the  arms  of  some  of  those  sent  out  are  totally  worthless. 
It  is  roughly  estimated  that  30,000  troops  in  this  department  are  with- 
out efficient  arms.  I learn  indirectly  that  several  thousand  have  within 
the  last  few  days  been  sent  to  Cairo.  Why  this  should  be  done  without 
giving  me  any  notice  is  certainly  very  unaccountable.  Moreover,  m 


* See  p.  408. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


AT.  XVIII.] 


819 


f view  of  present  emergencies,  those  arms  were  much  more  necessary 
Ire  than  at  Cairo. 

|[  am  satisfied  that  the  authorities  at  Washington  do  not  understand 
b present  condition  of  affairs  in  Missouri.  The  conduct  of  our  troops 
: ring  Fremont’s  campaign,  and  especially  the  course  pursued  by  those 
;der  Lane  and  Jennison,  has  turned  against  us  many  thousands  who 
re  formerly  Union  men\  A few  more  such  raids,  in  connection  with 
h ultra  speeches  made  by  leading  men  in  Congress,  will  make  this 
■ite  as  unanimous  against  us  as  is  Eastern  Virginia. 

Ct  may  be  supposed  by  some  that  the  number  of  organized  Missouri 
giments  in  this  department  indicates  a different  feeling.  It  should, 
jwever,  be  remembered  that  nearly  all  of  these  so-called  Missouri 
qiments  are  composed  of  foreigners  or  men  from  other  States.  From 
dispassionate  examination  of  this  matter  in  all  its  bearings  and  after 
;i versing  with  leading  men  from  all  parts  of  this  country  I am  satis- 
i l that  the  mass  of  the  people  here  are  against  us,  and  that  a single 
ise  step  or  defeat  will  ruin  our  cause. 

Jan’t  we  get  some  arms  soon?  I cannot  move  without  them.  Win- 
* is  already  upon  us,  and  I fear  much  longer  delay  will  render  it 
ueedingly  difficult  to  operate,  and  yet  a winter  campaign  seems  ab- 
lutely  necessary  to  restore  our  lost  ascendency  and  the  quiet  of  the 
Iite. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General, 


Lancaster,  Ohio,  December  12, 1861. 
nj or- General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis , Mo.: 

Iear  Sir  : I believe  you  will  be  frank  enough  to  answer  me  if  you 
pm  the  steps  I took  at  Sedalia  as  evidence  of  a want  of  mind. 

[they  may  have  been  the  result  of  an  excess  of  caution  on  my  part, 
r I do  think  the  troops  were  too  much  strung  out,. and  should  be  con- 
mtrated,  with  more  men  left  along  to  guard  the  track.  The  animals, 
■tie  especially,  will  be  much  exposed  this  winter. 

set  a much  higher  measure  of  danger  on  the  acts  of  unfriendly  iu- 
[fitants  than  most  officers  do,  because  I have  lived  in  Missouri  and 
I South,  and  know  that  in  their  individual  characters  they  will  do 
ere  acts  of  hostility  than  Northern  farmers  or  people  could  bring  them- 
»res  to  perpetrate.  In  my  judgment  Price’s  army  in  the  aggregate  is 
63  to  be  feared  than  when  in  scattered  bands. 

write  to  you  because  a Cincinnati  paper,  whose  reporter  I im- 
> soiled  in  Louisville  for  visiting  our  camps  after  1 had  forbidden  him 
Eve  to  go,  has  announced  that  I am  insane,  and  alleges  as  a reason 
It  at  Sedalia  my  acts  were  so  mad  that  subordinate  officers  refused 
obey.  I know  of  no  order  I gave  that  was  not  obeyed,  except  Gen- 
*1  Pope’s,  to  advance  his  division  to  Sedalia,  w hich  order  was  counter- 
traded  by  you,  and  the  fact  communicated  to  me. 
bese  newspapers  have  us  in  their  power,  and  can  destroy  us  as  they 
use,  and  this  one  can  destroy  my  usefulness  by  depriving  me  of  the 
< fidence  of  officers  and  men. 

will  be  in  Saint  Louis  next  week,  and  will  be  guided  by  your  com- 
aids  and  judgment. 

I am,  &c., 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Brigadier- General. 


820 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


Saint  Louis,  December  14, 1861. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Pope, 

Commanding  La  Mine  Cantonment , Mo. : 

General:  Your  several  letters  on  plans  of  campaign  and  criticisoi 
on  the  selection  of  La  Mine  Crossing  for  a cantonment  have  been  r I 
ceived,  and,  although  very  long,  have  been  attentively  perused  an 

dUYour  plans  of  campaign  may  be  well  adapted  to  the  positions  an 
numbers  of  the  enemy  as  reported  to  you,  but,  judging  from  the  inform; 
tion  I am  hourly  receiving  from  other  parts  of  the  State,  I do  not  thin 
I would  be  justified  in  adopting  them,  nor  do  I think  you  would  hart 
proposed  them  if  you  had  been  fully  advised  on  the  subject.  IS  eve 
theless  I am  very  glad  to  receive  your  suggestions. 


teiess  JL  am  very  hirtU  Awv;l'v  p v' ~ — . T , ~ , 

In  regard  to  the  selection  of  La  Mine  Crossing  I have  a few  remarl 

x - - ~r  r»  1 J 1 . AT  TTA1 


to  make  When  I arrived  here  I found  the  three  divisions  of  yoi 
command  at  Sedalia,  Syracuse,  and  Tipton-28  miles  apart  and  not 
sustaining  distance.  You  yourself,  as  well  as  others,  represented 
me  that  these  three  places  were  each  and  all  unfit  tor  a cantonmen 
having  no  timber  in  their  vicinity  for  making  huts,  the  watei  beir 
very  bad  (causing,  as  you  said,  much  of  the  sickness  in  camp),  ai 
being  exposed  to  the  cold  and  piercing  winter  winds  which  sweep jM 
these  prairies.  All  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  men  must  suff 
terribly  in  tents,  and  all  accounts  agreed  that  the  only  place  forputtiil 
them  was  in  the  vicinity  of  Otterville  and  La  Mine  Crossing.  On  t 
reports  I sent  Brigadier-General  Sherman  to  examine  into  this  matte 
and  he  expressed  the  decided  opinion  that  La  Mine  Crossing  was  tl 
proper  place  for  the  troops,  all  things  considered,  and,  indeed,  coj 
menced  moving  them  to  that  place  without  consulting  these  heat 
quarters.  His  orders  were  countermanded,  and  I sent  Lieutenaij 
Colonel  McPherson  to  examine  into  this  matter.  His  report  has  bed 

t Lnve  not  acted  hastily  in  this  matter,  but  have  taken  the  best  a 
vices  I could  get.  Your  letter  of  the  12th  differs  from  all  these  advice 
and,  indeed,  from  the  impression  I received  from  ray  conversation  wi 
you.  You  certainly  objected  then  to  Sedalia  on  account  of  its  exposui 
its  bad  water,  and  want  of  timber  for  hutting.  I would  remark  I 
reply  to  one  of  your  observations,  that  I have  never  ordered  the 
drawal  of  troops  from  Sedalia;  on  the  contrary,  I have  directed  th 
they  be  left  there  till  the  last.  Moreover  La  Mine  has  not  been  d 
termined  on  as  a permanent  station  for  your  command.  On  the  co 
trary,  I have  distinctly  stated  that  the  troops  might  be  required  to  lea 
that  place  at  a moment’s  warning.  « 

Your  criticisms  ou  the  difficulty  of  defending  Syracuse,  Tipton, , & 
from  La  Mine  I do  not  fully  understand.  If  your  troops  were  at  Sed. 
as  you  propose,  would  they  not  he  required  to  pass  through  La  Mine 
succor  the  places  mentioned?  Why,  then,  could  they  not  act  with  me 
efficiency  for  that  purpose  from  the  former  than  the  latter  place  . 

General,  your  letters  indicate  a decided  spirit  of  fault-finding  and 
a desire  to  place  yourself  in  a position  by  various  and  conflicting : so 
gestions  to  be  able  to  say,  in  case  of  any  disaster,  that  you  advised  d 
ferently.  I am  willing  to  believe,  however,  that  such  was  not  yo 

intention.  finally  ascertained  that  your  estimates  of  the  enem 

forces  were  correct,  I may  very  well  be  blamed  for  notpermPing 
to  attack  and  disperse  them  as  you  propose;  but  my  advices  from t 
sources  differ  very  materially  from  your  estimates.  Price  has  neai 


821 


hAp.  XYin.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

ouble  the  force  you  estimate,  and  I think  you  do  not  fully  appreciate 
lie  character  and  effect  of  the  gatherings  at  Lexington  and  lower  down 
he  river.  I think  they  would  form  a dangerous  force  in  your  rear  if 
,ou  were  to  move  south.  It  is  much  better  to  break  them  up  first.  It 
> always  a fatal  error  to  underestimate  your  enemy.  I therefore  think 
ou  had  better  look  out  well  for  your  own  security  than  to  advance  now 
pon  the  Osage.  After  we  have  scattered  the  insurgents  on  the  river 
inis  may  be  practicable,  should  the  enemy  not  place  himself  in  a more 
jivorable  position  for  striking  him. 

Yours,  in  haste, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

r Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  December  25,  1861. 

rig.  Gen.  John  Pope, 

Commanding , the.,  Otter  mile , Mo. : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  21st,  in  answer  to  mine  of  the  14th,  is 
iceived.  I remarked  in  that  letter  that  I was  willing  to  believe  that 
| our  correspondence  relating  to  La  Mine  Cantonment,  &c.,  was  not 
ritten  in  the  spirit  of  fault-finding,  although  it  was  calculated  to  give 
lat  impression.  I am  satisfied  from  your  letter  that  such  was  not  your 
oject.  I shall  always  be  happy  to  receive  suggestions  as  to  operations 
- dispositions  of  any  kind,  but  to  criticise  them  after  they  are  ordered 
oes  not  accord  with  my  ideas  of  military  discipline  and  subordination, 
our  disavowal  of  such  intention  of  course  entirely  removes  the  im- 
ression  made  by  your  letters. 

You  are  under  a misapprehension  as  to  my  want  of  confidence  in  you. 
y assigning  you  to  the  largest  command  and  the  most  important  posi- 
on  in  this  State  should  be  sufficient  proof  of  the  contrary.  But  you 
‘fer  to  two  facts  as  indicative  of  such  want  of  confidence  on  my  part : 
t,  that  General  Sherman  was  authorized  to  assume  command  "tempo- 
trily,  if  he  deemed  it  necessary;  and,  2d,  that  my  order  putting  you  in 
le  command  of  the  district  “expressly  states  that  [I]  you  are  to  do  so 
mply  because  [IJ  you  are  senior  officer,”  &c. 

In  regard  to  your  first  alleged  cause  of  complaint  I will  remark  that 
) the  time  General  Sherman  received  his  orders  you  were  on  leave  of 
)sence  in  Saint  Louis ; and,  moreover,  that  if  you  had  been  present  you 
ere  then  in  command  of  only  one  division,  and  not  of  tfie  entire  force 
that  district.  General  Sherman  was  your  senior  officer  and  was  en- 
ded to  command  you.  I revoked  the  authority  given  to  him,  and 
aced  you  in  command  of  three  divisions,  and  the  most  important  mili- 
ry  district  in  the  State.  Was  this  an  evidence  of  a want  of  confidence 
you? 

Again,  with  regard  to  your  second  cause  of  complaint  you  have  not 
>rrectly  stated  the  purport  and  language  of  my  orders  of  December  2. 
there  direct  you,  “as  the  ranking  officer,”  to  “take  the  general  com- 
and  of  all  the  troops  in  the  district,”  &c.  I use  no  such  language  as 
•at  stated  in  your  letter,  that  you  are  to  do  so  “simply  because,”  &c., 
)r|  will  the  words  used  by  me  bear  such  a construction.  It  is  precisely 
ie  form  commonly  used  in  such  orders.  If  you  had  not  been  the  rank- 
g officer  you  would  not,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  have  been  en- 
ded to  such  command.  I cannot  conceive  how  you  can  construe  such 
1 order  into  a reflection  on  you  or  an  insinuation  as  to  your  personal 
opacity. 


822 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND  T.  [Chap.  XVII 


I have  no  desire,  general,  to  prolong  this  correspondence,  nor  do 
intend  to  resume  it.  I have  thus  far  given  to  you  the  fullest  confidenc 
and  will  do  to  you,  and  every  other  officer  in  my  command,  full  and  qi 
tire  justice.  At  the  same  time  Ido  not  intend  that  you  shall  misunde 
stand  my  own  position.  I am  acting  under  orders  from  my  superior 
which  I intend  to  obey,  but  which  1 am  not  at  liberty  to  communicate 
others.  I hope,  therefore,  you  will  extend  to  me  that  charity  and  coi 
sideration  which  I extend  to  those  placed  over  me.  I am  not  always 
liberty  to  adopt  the  suggestions  of  others  even  though  I may  appro\ 
them.  Other  circumstances,  not  known  to  the  party  making  the  su 
gestions,  may,  and  often  do,  prevent  their  adoption.  Nevertheless 
shall  always  be  happy  to  receive  them  and  will  give  them  due  consi 
eration. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ’ H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General , Commanding.  | 


Saint  Louis,  December  31, 1861. ! 
Brigadier-General  Pope,  Otterville  : 

General  : I send  herewith  the  proceedings  of  a military  commissicji 
ordered  by  Colonel  Deitzler,  First  Kansas  Begiment,  for  the  trial  < 
certain  prisoners  at  Tipton,  Mo.,  within  the  limits  of  your  command.! 

In  the  first  place,  a military  commission  can  be  ordered  only  by  tl 
General-in-Chief  of  the  Army  or  by  a general  commanding  a deparl 
ment,  consequently  all  the  proceedings  of  the  commission  ordered  1 
Colonel  Deitzler  are  null  and  void.  The  prisoners  are  therefore  in  prj 
cisely  the  same  position  as  if  no  trial  had  taken  place. 

In  the  second  place,  military  commissions  should,  as  a general  rul 
be  resorted  to  only  for  cases  which  cannot  be  tried  by  a court-marti 
or  by  a proper  civil  tribunal.  They  are,  in  other  words,  tribunals  < 
necessity,  organized  for  the  investigation  and  punishment  of  offense 
which  would" otherwise  go  unpunished.  Their  proceedings  should  1| 
regulated  by  the  rules  governing  courts-martial,  so  far  as  they  may  1; 
applicable,  and  the  evidence  should  in  all  cases  be  fully  recorded. 

^Prisoners  of  war,  properly  so  called — that  is,  men  duly  enrolled  ar 
commissioned  in  the  service  of  an  acknowledged  enemy — are,  so  far  s| 
the  military  authorities  are  concerned,  to  be  treated  in  the  manner  pr 
scribed  by  the  usages  and  customs  of  war.  They  are  entitled  to  tl 
rights  of  war ; but  this  fact  does  not  exempt  them  from  punishment  1 
the  civil  tribunals  for  treason  to  the  Government.  But  treason  is  e 
offense  technically  defined  by  the  Constitution,  and  is  not  triable  1 
a military  commission ; nor  will  such  tribunal  try  or  punish  a soldi 
duly  enrolled  and  mustered  into  the  enemy’s  sendee  by  proper  autlio 
ity  for  taking  life  in  battle  or  according  to  the  rules  of  modern  wa 
fare.  But  it  is  a well-established  principle  that  insurgents  and  m 
rauding,  predatory,  and  guerrilla  bands  are  not  entitled  to  this  exem 
tion.  Such  men  are,  by  the  laws  of  war,  regarded  as  no  more  nor  le 
than  murderers,  robbers,  and  thieves.  The  military  garb  and  nan 
cannot  change  the  character  of  their  offenses  nor  exempt  them  fro 
punishment.  Moreover,  if  a prisoner  of  war  has  committed  acts  : 
violation  of  the  laws  of  war,  such  as  murder,  robbery,  arson,  &c.,  tJ 
fact  of  his  being  a prisoner  of  war  does  not  exempt  him  from  trial  ai 
punishment  by  a military  commission.  In  such  cases  the  charge  shou 
be  “ violation  of  the  laws  of  war,”  and  not  violation  of  the  “ Buies  ai 


iaf.  xvm.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  823 

rticles  of  War,”  wliicli  are  statutory  provisions,  modifying  the  laws  of 
ar  only  in  the  particular  cases  to  which  these  provisions  apply.  In 
I cases  not  embraced  in  this  statutory  law,  and  not  made  triable  by 
le  courts  which  it  creates,  we  must  recur  to  the  general  code  of  war 
id  try  by  a military  commission. 

A military  commission  will  be  immediately  ordered  to  assemble  at 
a Mine  Cantonment  for  the  trial  of  such  prisoners  as  may  be  brought 
sfore  it.  You  will  furnish  the  judge-advocate  with  a copy  of  this  letter 
r his  guidance,  and  will  see  that  the  charges  and  specifications  are 
roperly  drawn  up. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  December  31, 1861. 

rigadier-General  Schofield, 

Commanding , &c. : 

General  : I inclose  a memorandum  of  information*  received  here  re- 
jecting the  principal  persons  who  originated  or  encouraged  the  arsons 
jmmitted  on  the  North  Missouri  Railroad,  and  also  a communica- 
on  from  Mr.  Clay  Taylor,  whom  you  will  observe  is  one  of  the  parties 
reused,  although  he  was  not  aware  of  that  fact  when  he  wrote.  It  is 
elieved  here  that  there  is  pretty  good  foundation  for  these  charges, 
wish  you  to  get  all  the  information  on  this  subject  you  can,  and, 
you  deem  the  evidence  sufficient  to  justify  it,  to  arrest  the  parties. 
>o  not  let  the  contents  of  the  memorandum  be  made  public.  If  Gen- 
:al  Prentiss  has  taken  the  command  of  your  forces  you  will,  of  course, 
iport  this  letter  to  him.  I also  wish  the  matter  of  Mr.  Clay  Taylor’s 
implaint  to  be  investigated,  and  if  injustice  has  been  done  him  it 
mst  be  repaired.  I have  had  no  information  from  you  or  General 
I rentiss  for  several  days.  Why  is  this  1 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


t Washington  City,  January  3, 1862. 

iajor-General  Halleck  : 

General  : I have  some  anxiety  in  regard  to  your  Orders,  No.  24, 
laking  the  friends  of  the  enemy  contribute  to  the  support  oi  the  refu- 
ees  from  the  Southwest.  . 

I have  regarded  that  order  as  eminently  wise  and  proper,  and  desired 
i see  it  carried  out  with  vigor.  Recently  it  was  intimated  from  Saint 
jouis  that  an  effort  was  being  made  by  some  oi  our  Union  friends  in 
•aint  Louis  to  induce  you  to  relax  the  order,  if  not  to  recall  it  entirely, 
nd  this  report  gave  me  great  concern.  I apprehended  that  efforts  had 
een  made  to  obtain  the  interposition  of  the  President,  and  therefore  I 
etermined  to  see  him  in  regard  to  the  matter.  He  told  me  to  tell  you 
that  he  had  not  given  the  subject  much  consideration,  but  that  he 

* Not  found.  t For  reply,  see  p.  490. 


824 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


was  very  mucli  inclined  to  favor  the  policy  yon  had  announced  in  yo 
order,  and  that  he  heard  nothing  in  regard  to  the  matter  from  any  o; 
that  was  not  favorable  to  that  policy.” 

As  a matter  of  course,  if  your  own  judgment  condemns  the  polic 
now  that  you  have  witnessed  its  workings  at  least  to  some  exter 
then  I have  not  a word  to  say ; but  it  is  so  evident  to  my  mind  that 
vigorous  and  severe  policy  is  the  only  one  that  suits  the  case  of  the 
secessionists,  that  I should  regret  exceedingly  to  see  your  order  recalle 
and  that  I have  ventured  to  make  any  suggestion  to  you  upon  the  su 
ject  is  a proof  of  how  deeply  I feel  in  regard  to  this  matter. 

One  word  more.  The  President,  in  our  conversation,  informed  n 
of  the  substance  of  his  recent  telegraphic  correspondence  with  you. 
am  exceedingly  anxious  to  join  you  when  you  are  prepared  to  make 
decisive  movement  to  the  south,  and  will  take  it  as  a great  personal  fav» 
if  you  will  allow  one  of  your  aides  to  give  me  timely  notice.  I hoi 
it  will  not  be  long  deferred,  for  I am  convinced  that  our  cause  is  i 
greater  danger  from  foreign  intervention  than  from  defeat  by  the  arm! 
of  the  South.  If  this  war  is  allowed  to  drag  along  for  three  iriontl 
more  you  may  set  it  down  for  a certainty  that  we  shall  have  Englar 
on  our  hands  as  well  as  Jeff.  Davis. 

Kespectfully,  yours, 

FRANK  P.  BLAIR,  Jr. 


Lancaster,  Ohio, 

January  5,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  IIalleck, 

Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Dear  Sir  : The  ground  on  which  you  can  treat  these  railroad  d< 
stroyers  as  military  criminals  is  that  they  are  within  your  lines  in  th 
guise  of  peaceful  citizens,  destroying  life  and  property,  and  therefor* 
as  secret  enemies  caught  in  the  warlike  act,  amenable  to  martial  lav 
The  secessionists  cannot  except  to  it,  for  in  Tennessee  they  hang  all  th 
bridge-burners  they  catch,  and  in  this  case  you  very  truly  say  severiti 
is  mercy.  However,  all  you  want  is  to  protect  life  and  property,  an 
perhaps  the  best  wav  to  do  it  is  this:  Try  by  a court-martial  all  tka 
you  have  caught.  Hang  at  once  two  or  three  of  the  ringleaders  in  th! 
presence  of  their  fellows,  sentence  a dozen  or  twenty,  or  even  fifty,  o 
the  most  culpable  and  reprieve  them  for  a time,  with  the  distinct  under 
standing  that  they  will  be  hanged,  according  to  sentence,  if  furthe 
depredations  are  committed  by  their  associates,  but  that  they  may  kop< 
for  mercy  if  there  is  order  and  peace.  Discharge  the  least  culpable  am 
let  them  go  home  and  carry  the  conditions  with  them,  with  the  assur 
ance  that  if  they  themselves  are  caught  again  they  will  find  no  mercy 
And  in  holding  as  hostages  care  should  be  taken  to  hold  from  eacl 
neighborhood,  family,  and  clique  one  or  more. 

The  scoundrels  engaged  at  the  Little  Platte  deserve  more  seven 
handling  than  those  you  have  caught,  for  they  deliberately  planned  am 
committed  the  most  cruel,  indiscriminate  murder  of  men,  women,  am 
children. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

T.  EWING. 


lp.  xvni.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


825 


Saint  Louis,  January  11,  1862. 

L Fred.  Steele, 

Commanding  Sedalia: 

Iolonel  : Yours  of  the  9th  is  just  received.  I entirely  disapprove 
the  release  of  prisoners  of  war  on  their  parole  to  go  where  they 
sase.  Most  of  them  do  not  keep  their  parole  at  all,  and  merely  serve 
spies  about  our  lines  and  get  up  insurrections.  This  is  especially 
> case  with  u Virginia  gentlemen”  of  the  class  you  refer  to.  They 
y no  regard  whatever  to  their  oath  of  allegiance.  All  prisoners  of 
r — that  is,  taken  in  arms  or  in  the  enemy’s  service — should  be  held  as 
ih,  and  not  allowed  to  leave  camp.  This  taking  of  prisoners  and 
easing  them  over  and  over  again  is  all  wrong;  it  is  time  to  end  it. 
I such  men  should  be  sent  here,  where  they  can  be  retained  or  ex- 
mged. 

Such  men  as  the  Washingtons  and  Magoffins  are  not  proper  persons 
release. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General . 


Saint  Louis,  January  14,  1862. 

1.  L.  F.  Boss, 

Commanding  Cape  Girardeau , Mo.  : 

Iolonel  : I have  delayed  answering  your  letter  of  December  23, 
felation  to  General  Watkins,  in  order  to  obtain  certain  information 
ich  I have  been  expecting  about  General  W.  [Watkins]  and  others  in 
4 part  of  the  country. 

/ery  many  of  those  who  have  returned  from  the  enemy  and  given 
ir  parole  have  acted  as  spies  on  our  operations,  giving  the  enemy 
the  information  they  could  obtain,  assisting  in  getting  up  insurrec- 
is,  and  planning  the  burning  of  bridges,  &c.  It  is  therefore  neces- 
y to  observe  due  precaution  in  this  matter. 

f General  Watkins  has  been  in  the  enemy’s  service,  either  State  or 
nfederate,  he  must  come  back  in  one  of  two  capacities — either  as  a 
soner  of  war  or  as  a citizen  returning  to  his  allegiance.  If  he  re- 
ns  as  a prisoner  of  war,  he  may  be  released  on  his  parole  of  honor 
4 he  will  remain  quietly  on  his  farm,  giving  no  information  or  assist- 
i ;e  of  any  kind  to  the  enemy,  and  that  he  will  present  himself  at  your 
n;t  or  any  other  when  called  for. 

f he  returns  as  a loyal  citizen,  he  certainly  cannot  object  to  taking 
oath  of  allegiance.  Such  oath  will  not,  as  a general  rule,  be  re- 
red  of  men  who  have  not  been  in  the  enemy’s  service  or  have  in  no 
sy  assisted  the  enemy,  although  they  may  have  been  in  the  Confed- 
te  States.  For  example,  secessionists  here  in  Saint  Louis  have  not 
>m  required  to  take  any  oath  of  allegiance;  but  if  they  have  been  in 
enemy’s  service,  and  now  wish  to  return  to  their  allegiance,  they 
l invariably  required  to  take  the  oath  and  sometimes  to  give  addi- 
i ial  security. 

f General  Watkins  should  decide  to  take  the  oath  all  stock  taken  from 
in  should  be  returned.  With  regard  to  his  slaves,  if  any  are  in  your 
«ap  as  fugitives,  they  are  so  held  in  positive  violation  of  General 
-lers,  Yo.  3,  of  1861,  unless  such  slaves  were  taken  in  virtue  of  the 
[ of  Congress.  Except  in  the  case  provided  for  by  Congress  troops 
; >uld  be  permitted  neither  to  steal  slaves  nor  to  catch  and  return 


826 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XYl] 


The  military  are  neithi 
all  difficulties  about  tlf 


them  to  their  owners  or  pretended  owners 
slave-stealers  nor  slave-catchers.  To  avoid  all  difficulties  about  thl 
matter  keep  fugitives  out  of  camp,  and  let  the  question  of  ownershl 
be  decided  by  the  civil  tribunals. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General.  I 


Washington,  D.  O.,  January  15, 1862.1 

Major-General  Halleck: 

My  Dear  Sir:  This  will  introduce  Gov.  G.  Koerner,  of  Illinois,  wlj 
is  my  personal  friend,  and  who  calls  on  you  at  my  particular  requel 
Please  open  the  sealed  letter  he  will  hand  you  before  he  leaves  y<, 
and  confer  with  him  as  to  its  contents. 

Yours,  very  truly,  x.Txnnr.w. 


[Incloaure.] 


Executive  Mansion, 
Washington , January  15,  1862.1 

Major-General  Halleck: 

My  Dear  Sir  : The  Germans  are  true  and  patriotic,  and  so  far  j 
they  have  got  cross  in  Missouri  it  is  upon  mistake  and  misunderstan 
iug.  Without  a knowledge  of  its  contents  Governor  Koerner,  of  11 
nois,  will  hand  you  this  letter.  He  is  an  educated  and  talented  G< 
man  gentleman,  as  true  a man  as  lives.  With  his  assistance  you  can  £ 
everything  right  with  the  Germans.  1 write  this  without  his  knov 
edge,  asking  him  at  the  same  time,  by  letter,  to  deliver  it.  My  cle 
judgment  is  that,  with  reference  to  the  German  element  in  your  coi 
maud,  you  should  have  Governor  Koerner  with  you ; and  if  agreeable 
you  and  him,  I will  make  him  a brigadier-general,  so  that  he  can  affo 
to  so  give  his  time.  He  does  not  wish  to  command  in  the  field,  though 
has  more  military  knowledge  than  many  who  do.  If  he  goes  into  t 
place  he  will  simply  be  an  efficient,  zealous,  and  unselfish  assistant 
you.  I say  all  this  upon  intimate  personal  acquaintance  with  Govern 
Koerner. 

Yours,  very  truly, 


Saint  Louis,  January  17,  1862.1 

Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  B.  Curtis, 

Commanding , c fee.,  Rolla  : 

General  : Yours  of  yesterday  is  received.  I regret  to  inform  y 
that  neither  the  Pay  nor  Quartermaster’s  Department  have  auy  mone 
Troops  are  sent  from  here  to  Cairo  without  pay.  I can  do  no  better  i 
you.  The  moment  money  is  received  the  forces  under  your  commai 
shall  be  supplied.  They  were  all  paid  to  the  31st  of  October.  Soi 
here  and  in  North  Missouri  are  not  paid  for  September  and  October, 
have  done  everything  in  my  power  for  the  troops  at  Holla,  and  tn 
have  no  cause  to  complain  of  me. 

The  truth  is  that  Congress  is  so  busy  discussing  the  eternal  mgg 
question  that  they  fail  to  make  any  appropriations,  and  the  fiuanc 
departments  are  dead  broke.  No  requisitions  for  money  are  filled. 


Up.  xvin.j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


827 


The  extra-duty  pay  will  be  forthcoming  as  soon  as  we  get  any  money, 
jssure  these  men  that  they  will  be  paid,  but  they  must  have  patience, 
jam  doing  everything  in  my  power  for  them. 

■We  must  all  do  the  best  we  can  to  make  the  men  comfortable  and 
'ntented  till  we  get  more  means.  I rely  on  you  to  use  all  your  powers 
conciliation,  especially  with  the  German  troops.  You  told  me  you 
uld  manage  them,  and  I rely  on  you  to  do  it.  At  present  we  have 
ore  difficulties  to  conquer  with  our  own  men  than  with  the  enemy. 
Yours,  truly, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  January  21, 1862. 
is  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States : 

Your  Excellency’s  letter  of  the  15th,  by  Governor  Koerner,  is  just  re- 
ived. I nominated  Governor  K.  [Koerner]  some  time  ago  for  appoint- 
ed as  aide-de-camp,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  the  highest  authorized 
r law  as  a staff  officer.  Should  Your  Excellency  see  St  to  make  him  a 
jigadier- general  1 will  use  my  best  endeavors  to  give  him  such  em- 
oyment  as  may  best  suit  him. 

i The  difficulty  with  the  Germans  results  from  two  causes : 1st,  the 
ant  of  pay,  the  pay  department  here  being  out  of  funds,  which  fact 
| is  very  difficult  to  satisfactorily  explain  to  them ; 2d,  they  are  con- 
lually  tampered  with  by  designing  politicians  in  and  out  of  service  in 
der  to  serve  particular  ends.  A part  of  the  scheme  is  the  story  about 
e ill-treatment  of  General  Sigel,  which  is  without  the  slightest  founda- 
>n. 

All  these  difficulties  are  being  satisfactorily  arranged.  A firm  and 
voided  course  will  end  them  forever.  Any  yielding  on  the  part  of  the 
overnment  will  only  create  new  difficulties  and  give  rise  to  new  de- 
ands.  Being  a German  myself  by  descent,  I know  something  of  the 
erman  character,  and  I am  confident  that  in  a few  weeks,  if  the  Gov- 
nment  does  not  interfere,  I can  reduce  these  disaffected  elements  to 
der  and  discipline. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  January  22, 1862. 

rig.  Gen.  John  Pope, 

Commanding , ffic.,  Otterville : 

General  : I have  just  received  your  telegrams  of  yesterday  # and  to- 
ly.  Your  arrangements  are  all  satisfactory.  Major  Allen  has  deter- 
ined  to  send  75  extra  wragons  with  the  division.  Colonel  Davis’ 
:perience  in  such  marches  renders  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  give  him 
iy  special  instructions.  He  will  communicate  with  General  Curtis’ 
>mmand  at  Lebanon  as  early  as  practicable.  Colonel  Phelps  says 
iere  are  two  fords  at  Linn  Creek,  which  can  be  used  at  all  seasons  of 
te  year. 


See  p.  512. 


828 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XV] 


I hear  of  more  rebel  organizations  in  the  vicinity  of  Lexington ; if  j 
break  them  up. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  February  2, 18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  1).  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  Kansas , Fort  Leavenivortli : 
General  : Yours  of  tbe  28th  is  received.  I presume  that  ere  tl 
the  First  Kansas  Infantry  have  reported  to  you,  as  they  left  Lexingt 
some  time  since.  After  the  order  was  issued  it  was  ascertained  that  t 
detachment  called  u Kansas  Bangers”  was  not  composed  of  Kans 
troops,  and  the  order  respecting  it  was  revoked. 

Your  General  Orders,  Ho.  12,  are  just  received.  I am  delighted  wi 
them.  The  only  way  to  keep  peace  between  the  Kansians  and  Missc 
rians  is  to  keep  them  apart.  We  have  numerous  old  grudges  to  sett 
I have  directed  my  adjutant-general  to  send  you  a full  file  of  i 
general  orders,  and  I would  be  pleased  if  you  can  reciprocate. 

The  expedition  against  Price  moves  very  slowly,  the  roads  being  h( 
rible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

Major-General. 


Saint  Louis,  February  2,  1802. 
Maj.  Gen.  Georoe  B.  McClellan, 

Washington : 

General  : I inclose  herewith  extracts  from  General  SigePs  lette: 
published  in  the  German  papers  and  translated.  The  German  pape 
here  are  filled  with  anonymous  attacks  on  the  Government  at  Was 
ington  and  on  my  administration  here,  coming,  as  it  is  well  ascertain 
from  the  German  officers  under  General  SigePs  command.  They  ha 
also  held  a number  of  secret  meetings  in  this  city  for  the  purpose 
organizing  a meeting  among  the  foreign  troops  and  an  insurrection 
the  German  population.  I have  succeeded  in  introducing  police  office 
into  some  of  these  meetings,  and  their  reports  are  conclusive  as  to  the  e 
istence  of  this  plot.  I send  you  a copy  of  a report  of  a captain  of  polk 
who  was  present  at  a meeting  of  this  kind  on  the  20th  ultimo.  I won 
remark  that  most  of  the  officers  named  were  here  without  my  knov 
edge  and  contrary  to  my  positive  orders.  Being  ordered  to  move  frc| 
Holla  toward  Springfield,  they  left  their  regiments  and  came  here  ! 
stir  up  mutiny  and  insurrection.  Several  of  them  belong  to  SigEi 
immediate  command. 

General  SigePs  name  is  put  forward  first,  but  he  is  an  instrume 
rather  than  the  head  of  these  revolutionists.  Letters  and  papers  whi< 
have  fallen  into  my  hands  prove  that  the  instigators  of  this  moveme 
are  the  emissaries  of  leading  politicians  of  the  Fremont  party,  and  it 
expected  that  the  result  will,  by  means  of  the  newspaper  press,  be  ma< 
to  inure  to  his  benefit  as  against  the  present  administration.  The  pla 
as  discussed  at  one  of  these  secret  meetings,  was  to  force  the  President 
make  Sigel  a major-general,  which  would  make  him  second  in  commai 
in  this  department.  He  would  then  claim  all  the  German  regimen 


AP.-xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


829 


d the  largest  portion  of  the  troops  in  this  State.  By  this  means,  it 
vs  said,  the  Fremont  party  would  be  virtually  restored  to  power  here; 
d,  by  continually  fomenting  dissatisfaction  among  the  German  troops 
d German  population,  they  could  completely  paralyze  and  control  the 
tion  of  the  Government.  Moreover,  it  was  said  that  the  German  and 
bolition  press  throughout  the  country  would  use  Sigel  as  an  instru- 
ct with  which  to  attack  me,  and  break  down,  or  at  least  greatly 
saken,  my  authority  and  influence  in  this  State,  so  that,  at  the  proper 
ne,  the  x^ress  and  the  Germans  throughout  the  country  could  demand 
y removal  and  the  substitution  of  Sigel  in  the  command.  This  hav- 
g been  accomplished,  Sigel,  his  army,  and  the  German  press  would 
quire  the  restoration  of  Fremont.  By  a joint  movement  in  Congress, 
r mass  meetings,  &c.,  it  was  thought  that  the  President  would  Anally 
i forced  to  yield.  I am  also  told  that  leading  secessionists  in  this  city 
e cognizant  of  these  movements  and  assist  them  indirectly. 

Any  yielding  on  the  part  of  the  Government  to  the  demands  of  SigePs 
ends' will  only  add  to  the  mutiny  and  insurrection,  for  his  promotion 
)uld  be  but  a single  step  in  the  plan.  Our  only  safety  is  to  put  it 
>wn  with  a strong  hand,  and,  when  we  get  sufficient  proof,  arrest  the 
iders  and  remove  them  out  of  the  department.  I am  fully  x>osted  in 
e matter  and  am  prepared  for  them,  but  I must  have  the  suiiport  of 
e Government,  and  the  President  should  make  no  appointment  of 
ese  foreign  officers  without  consulting  you.  If  he  had  ax>pointed 
sterhaus  and  Albert  at  the  time  I recommended  they  could  have  been 
pt  out  of  this  faction.  Now  it  is  too  late,  as  they  are  fully  committed, 
id  ought  not  to  be  appointed.  Of  course  this  is  intended  to  be  en- 
ely  confidential* 

Yours,  truly, 

H.  W.  HALLECK. 


Saint  Louis,  February  2, 1 862. 

aj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter, 

Commanding  Department  of  Kansas , Fort  Leavemcorth : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  is  just  received.  If  Colonel 
3wgent’s  command  is  in  your  department  please  muster  them  out.  If 
3an  find  them  in  my  department  I will  do  the  same.  I wish  to  get 
1 of  all  these  irregular,  illegal,  and  fragmentary  organizations  as  soon 
imssible.  They  are  of  great  expense  and  of  very  little  use. 

I am  delighted  with  your  recent  orders.  Keep  the  Kansas  troops  out 
Missouri  and  I will  keep)  the  Missourians  out  of  Kansas.  They  can’t 
free,  and  make  infinite  trouble.  The  only  way  is  to  keep  them  apart. 
Yours,  truly, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kansas, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Fans.,  February  8,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 
General:  Believing  that  the  public  interests  may  be  i)romoted  by 
i interchange  of  views  between  us  and  a knowledge  with  each  (in  some 

* See  McClellan  to  Halleck,  February  6,  1862,  Series  I,  Volume  VII,  p.  937. 


830  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVE 

general  sort)  of  what  the  other  intends,  I venture  on  intruding  son 
outlines  of  the  condition  of  affairs  in  this  department  on  your  attentio 

It  seems,  from  all  the  evidence  before  me,  that  Senator  J.  H.  LaE 
has  been  trading  at  Washington  on  a capital  partly  made  up  of  his  ow 
Senatorial  position  and  partly  of  such  scraps  of  influence  as  I may  ha\ 
possessed  in  the  confidence  or  esteem  of  the  President,  said  scraps  ha 
ing  been  “jayhawked”  by  the  Kansas  Senator  without  due  consent  < 
the  proper  owner. 

In  other  words,  I find  that  “ Lane’s  great  Southern  expedition”  wt 
entertained  and  sanctioned  by  the  President  under  misrepresentatioi 
made  by  somebody  to  the  effect  that  said  “expedition”  was  the  joii 
design  and  wish  of  Senator  Lane  and  myself.  Mr.  Lincoln  doubtles 
thought  he  was  obliging  me  and  aimed  to  oblige  me  in  the  matter,  bi 
so  little  was  I personally  consulted,  that  to  this  hour  I am  in  ignorant 
what  were  the  terms  or  striking  points  of  Senator  Lane’s  programm 
Never  to  this  hour  has  Senator  Lane  consulted  me  on  the  subject  direct! 
or  indirectly,  while  the  authorities  at  Washington  have  preserved 
similar  indiscreet  reticence,  thinking  no  doubt  (as  General  Thomas  int 
mates  in  a recent  letter)  that  as  the  plan  was  of  my  own  concoction  i 
joint  committee  of  two  with  Senator  Lane,  there  could  be  no  use,  bi 
rather  an  impertinence,  in  any  third  party’s  tryiug  to  explain  the  gener 
drift  and  details  to  one  of  the  original  patentees. 

Thus  I am  left  in  ignorance,  but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  yo 
have  been  more  favored. 

Your  co-operation  certainly  would  be  necessary  to  make  effective  an 
such  expedition  as  that  talked  of,  and  as  you  have  never  been  suspecte 
of  enjoying  Senator  Lane’s  confidence  and  sharing  his  counsels,  I thin 
it  more  than  probable  that  the  veil  of  mystery  must  have  been  lifted  i 
your  particular  case.  If  so,  let  me  know,  for  otherwise  I must  lowe 
myself  in  the  estimation  of  the  authorities  at  Washington  by  confessin 
that  I have  never  at  any  time,  directly  or  indirectly,  consulted  with  ( 
been  consulted  by  the  Kansas  Senator  in  reference  to  this  or  any  oth< 
military  operation  whatever,  and  that  as  to  any  brotherly  confident 
between  us  there  is  just  about  as  much  now  as  there  ever  was. 

You  can  hardly  conceive  to  what  an  extent  the  authorities  at  TV  asl 
ington  have  carried  their  faith  in  the  representations  of  Mr.  Lane  an 
their  belief  in  a sort  of  Damon  and  Pythias  affection  between  that  gei 
tleman  and  myself.  Regiments  have  been  sent  here  with  orders  1 
“report  for  duty  with  the  forces  under  General  J.  H.  Lane;”  blant 
telegraphed  for  by  me  have  been  shipped  to  “Brigadier-General  Lan_ 
Fort  Leavenworth,”  and  have  never  reached  these  headquarters.  I 
fact,  I may  say  that,  so  far  as  Washington  was  concerned,  the  Kansf 
Senator  would  seem  to  have  effectually  “jayhawked”  out  of  the  minoj 
of  the  War  Department  any  knowledge  or  remembrance  of  the  gener^ 
commanding  this  department. 

And  now  we  have  reached  an  aspect  of  the  case  which  would  be  n 
tensely  ludicrous,  if  it  were  not  so  fraught  with  humiliation  to  officia 
and  detriment  to  the  public  service.  I am  daily  receiving  letters  froi 
majors,  colonels,  and  lieutenant-colonels  announcing  that  they  ha\ 
been  appointed  additional  aides-de  eamp  on  the  staff  of  General  M' 
Olellan,  with  orders  to  report  to  me  in  jierson,  that  I may  again  ord< 
them  to  report  on  the  staff  of  “Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Lane.” 

The  trouble  is  that  I know  of  no  such  brigadier-general,  Senator  bar 
having  told  me  expressly  and  in  terms,  at  the  only  interview  we  ha% 
had  since  his  return  to  Kausas,  that  he  had  not  accepted  his  com  mi 
sion,  and  was  only  my  visitor  “as  a Senator  and  member  of  theMilitai 


ap.  xvm.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. VNION. 


831 


)mmittee  of  the  Senate  of  the  United  States.”  I may  add  that  in  the 
anion  of  those  who  know  him  best  it  is  not  his  intention  to  accept  the 
igadiership,  his  hue  and  cry  for  that  position  having  only  been  raised 
a time  when  he  thought  it  probable  that  Stanton  (or  whomsoever  was 
overnor  Robinson’s  nominee)  might  oust  him  from  the  Senate.  They 
y that  he  will  never  resign  his  seat  in  the  Senate  unless  he  can  have 
preme  control  of  this  department,  with  liberty  to  appoint  his  personal 
Iherents  and  the  legion  of  army  contractors  who  follow  in  his  wake  in 
urge  of  the  quartermaster’s  and  subsistence  departments  of  the  pub- 
*,  service  in  Kansas.  This  statement  I believe. 

As  to  the  vote  obtained  by  him  in  the  Kansas  Legislature,  asking  that 
! be  appointed  major-general,  &c.,  I have  heard  from  men  thoroughly 
formed  that  it  was  also  “jayhawked”  from  the  reluctant  lips  of  an 
erwhelming  opposition  majority  by  Lane’s  positive  promise  to  resign 
3 Senatorship  forthwith  in  case  it  was  passed.  This  made  all  Lane’s 
gislative  enemies  his  most  active  friends,  on  the  principle  of  “ anything 
get  rid  of  him,”  and  all  the  aspirants  for  his  seat  at  once  impressed 
eir  friends  into  voting  anything  that  would  create  a vacancy. 

Now,  what  is  to  be  done  with  this  erratic  Senator,  or  how  are  the 
thorities  at  Washington  to  be  convinced  that  it  is  neither  wise  nor 
ite  decorous  to  act  in  matters  vitally  affecting  a department  without 
e knowledge  or  sanction  of  the  department  commander'?  On  these 
ints  I have  to  ask  light  from  you,  my  “confidential”  relations  being 
parently  confined  to  Senator  Lane,  while  you,  and  very  deservedly,  I 
nfess,  are  believed  to  receive  beams  from  the  light  of  “the  inner  sanc- 
ary. 

Disappointed  himself,  Lane  is  now  bent  on  making  trouble  and  ob- 
racting  the  expedition  which  he  finds  he  cannot  control.  He  is  he- 
rring himself  in  a thousand  little  irritating  processes,  trying  to  make 
quarrel  or  “disagreement”  with  me  his  pretext  for  backing  out  of  an 
lployment  which  he  never  intended  to  accept.  As  a specimen  of  the 
>rk  he  is  at  and  the  friends  he  is  working  with  I send  you  this  copy 
a telegram  sent  to  him  a few  days  since,  a copy  having  been  sent  to 
3 by  a friend  at  Washington : 

Washington. 

neral  Lane,  Fort  Leavenworth : 

have  been  with  the  man  you  name.  Hunter  will  not  get  the  money  or  men  he 
mires.  His  command  cannot  go  forward.  Hold  on.  Don’t  resign  your  seat. 

JOHN  COVODE. 

And  now,  having  given  you  a pretty  thorough  insight  of  the  shape 
matters  here,  and  reserving  a statement  of  mv  own  plans  and  the 
litary  condition  of  the  department  for  another  letter,  I am,  general, 
ry  truly  and  obediently,  yours, 

D.  HUNTER. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Missouri, 

Saint  Jjouis , March  7,  18G2. 

M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington : 

The  Departments  of  the  Ohio  and  the  Missouri  should  be  under  one 
neral  head.  If  not,  all  south  of  the  Cumberland  River  should  be 
ded  to  this  department.  If  I can  have  the  general  charge  of  the  two, 
vould  leave  General  Buell  in  the  particular  command  of  his  present 


832 


OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 


department  and  army.  The  Department  of  Kansas  lias  less  connectk 

with  present  operations,  and  could  be  left  as  it  is. 

H.  W.  kLAljLliiL'JA, 

Major-  General. 


General  Orders 
No.  3. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  oe  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  14,  1862. 

I All  jurors,  whether  in  civil  or  criminal  courts,  in  the  State  of  M 
souri  will  hereafter  be  required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  prescrib 
by  the  convention  on  the  16th  of  October,  1861.  Those  refusing  to  tal 
such  oath  will  be  rejected  as  aliens.  . 

II.  Any  neglect  on  the  part  of  army  or  volunteer  surgeons  m tin 
duties  to  the  sick  and  wounded  will  be  immediately  reported  to  the 
headquarters.  It  is  said  that  some  of  the  medical  officers,  prisoners 
war,  have  failed  to  give  proper  attention  to  their  own  sick  and  wonnde 
In  all  cases  of  this  kind  the  medical  officer  will  be  deprived  of  1 
parole  and  be  placed  in  close  confinement,  and  the  facts  reported 
headquarters. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

J N.  H.  McLEAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


General  Orders, 

No.  7. 

* * 

II.  Bri°\  Gen.  J.  W.  Denver  will  be  assigned  to  the  command  of  t 
District  of  Kansas,  to  include  what  was  heretofore  known  as  the  B 
partment  of  Kansas,  except  the  Kansas  troops  now  in  the  field  und 
Colonel  Deitzler,  near  the  southwestern  frontier  of  Missouri,  lhe 
troops  will  report  for  duty  to  Major-General  Curtis,  m Arkansas.  J 
officers  of  the  District  of  Kansas  will  report  by  letter  to  Brigadu 
General  Denver,  at  Fort  Leavenworth. 

III.  The  term  “ mixed  colors”  used  in  General  Orders,  No.  oJ, 
March  10,  1862,  Department  of  the  Missouri,  is  intended  to  include  or 
such  clothing  as  in  the  opinion  of  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  in 
be  mistaken  in  the  field  for  the  uniform  of  the  enemy.  Clothing  ot  otli 
mixed  colors  will  not  be  exchanged. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck:  ^ ^ McLEAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi, 

Saint  Louis , March  19,  1862. 
* * * * 


Washington  City, 

March  22,  1S62. 

General  H.  W.  Halleck,  ffic.,  Saint  Louis  : 

My  Dear  General:  I have  just  left  the  Secretary  (late  in  the  eve 
in  a).  When  about  to  bid  him  good  evening  he  conversationally  M 
me  that  Jim  Lane  had  been  to  him  to-day  with  an  order  from  the  P* 
dent  for  you  not  to  put  Denver  in  command  in  Kansas,  but  that  Dav] 
(a  recent  appointment  from  New  York,  a brother  of  Tush,  younger)  w 
to  be  assigued  to  that  command. 


AP.  XVffl.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


833 


He  told  me  that  his  answer  to  Lane  was  a positive  refusal  to  attend 
any  such  order,  and  if  its  enforcement  should  be  attempted  he  would 
live  the  office.  He  said  so  many  right-minded  things  about  your  right 
make  your  own  assignments  within  your  own  command,  expressing 
s active  confidence  in  you,  that  I finally  asked  him  if  he  had  any  ob- 
stions  to  my  writing  you  a private  note  that  you  might  feel  assured 
proper  support  here.  He  said  he  had  none,  and  then  went  on  at  some 
ngth,  expressing  his  determination  to  allow  no  improper  interference 
Lth  you  while  he  continued  in  the  department. 

He  then  added  that  I might  say  that  he  had  called  upon  the  Secre- 
ry  of  the  Treasury  for  the  money  you  need  for  the  payment  of  troops, 
id  had  been  told  that  eight  millions  would  soon  be  ready,  and  that  he 
tie  Secretary  of  War)  had  directed  that  the  first  payment  should  be 
ade  to  your  troops,  as  you  desired  (by  a telegram). 

I then  bid  the  Secretary  good  evening  and  left  him,  but  he  called  me 
tck,  and  added  that  if  I was  going  to  write  to  you  he  wished  me  to  convey 
s respects  and  his  entire  confidence  in  your  ability  and  patriotism,  ex- 
aining  that  he  had  been  employed  against  you  in  the  mine  case  in  Cali- 
rnia,  and  that  his  partner  had  some  difficulty  or  controversy  with  you 
a somewhat  personal  nature,  but  that  for  his  part  he  had  taken  no 
Iterest  in  it,  and  Jiad  never  had  any  other  than  the  highest  respect  for 
>u,  and  he  hoped  you  would  not  imagine  that  he  ever  had. 

The  Secretary  understands  the  importance  of  your  command  and  the 
I Sees  si  ty  of  your  being  the  commander  for  carrying  out  its  objects. 

My  writing  this  note,  general,  is  a motion  of  my  own,  not  his,  and  I 
ive  been  moved  to  it  only  because  of  the  very  sensible  and  proper  re- 
arks  of  the  Secretary,  made  without  any  thought  of  their  being  com- 
unicated. 

I have  constituted  myself  a sort  of  temporary  aide-de-camp  to  the 
beretary  for  a short  time.  I do  not  expect  or  desire  to  remain  here, 
id  shall  be  more  willing  to  go  than  any  one  to  have  me  go. 

I remain,  very  truly,  yours, 

E.  A.  HITCHCOCK. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi, 

Ho.  10.  f Saint  Louis , March  28,  1862. 

j I.  It  having  been  reported  that  shippers  and  carriers  of  goods  have 
hcently  violated  the  “ regulations  for  the  transportation  and  trade  of 
le  Department  of  the  Missouri,”  established  in  January  last,  claiming 
tat  said  u regulations”  had  been  revoked,  notice  is  hereby  given  that 
eneral  Orders,  Ho.  61,  of  Department  of  the  Missouri,  current  series, 
poking  General  Orders  of  March  3rd  and  6th  of  same  series,  does  not 
i any  manner  affect  the  “ regulations  ” of  January  last,  which  “regu- 
itions  for  transportation  and  trade”  will  be  enforced  in  all  parts  of  the 
resent  Department  of  the  Mississippi,  except  reconquered  territory, 
le  trade  of  which  is  regulated  by  the  license  system  promulgated  by 
le  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  in  his  circular  of  March  4. 

II.  The  orders  of  officers  of  the  customs  within  this  department,  when 
|i  conformity  with  the  regulations  of  January  last  and  the  instructions 
f the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  must  be  complied  with  by  shippers 
|tid  carriers ; and  it  is  directed  that  all  military  officers  assist  in  their 
aforcement. 

53  R R— VOL  VIII 


834  OPERATIONS  IN  MO.,  ARK.,  KANS.,  AND  IND.  T.  [Chap.  XVI 

III.  In  view  of  the  rapid  extension  of  steamboat  navigation  into  di 
loyal  States,  and  the  importance  of  having  the  boats  engaged  in  sut 
navigation  controlled  by  loyal  citizens,  it  is  ordered  that  all  licenses 
pilots  and  engineers  navigating  the  waters  of  this  military  departmei 
be  revoked  from  and  after  the  15th  proximo,  and  that  said  pilots  ai 
engineers  take  out  new  licenses  from  the  u supervising  inspector,”  wl 
will  only  grant  licenses  to  persons  of  approved  loyalty;  or,  in  case 
doubt,  will  require  bond  with  security  for  the  loyal  conduct  of  such  e 
gineers  and  pilots. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

IT.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Mississippi, 
No.  13.  j Saint  Louis , March  30,  1862. 

I.  Commanders  of  army  corps,  divisions,  and  brigades,  and  of  inij 
tary  districts,  where  their  commands  are  equal  to  a brigade,  are  autho 
ized  to  order  military  commissions  to  try  offenses  against  the  laws  < 
war,  which  are  not  triable  by  general  court-martial;.  but  all  sentenc< 
of  such  commissions  extending  to  loss  of  life,  or  confiscation  of  propert, 
or  imprisonment  exceeding  the  term  of  thirty  days,  must  be  confirme 
by  the  commanding  general  of  the  department. 

II.  The  attention  of  all  such  commanders,  and  of  all  officers  of  mil 
taTy  commissions,  is  called  to  General  Orders,  No.  1,  of  1862,  Depar 
ment  of  the  Missouri,  in  relation  to  the  powers  and  duties  of  commi 
sions  as  distinguished  from  courts-martial. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck: 

N.  H.  McLEAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


I NDEX 


I gades , Divisions,  Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  arc  “ Mentioned"  under  name  of 
commanding  officer ; State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation. 


Page. 

>andoned  Lands,  Refugees,  etc.  (See  Refugees,  etc.) 

lam.  (A  Creek.)  Mentioned 17 

lams,  Dr.  Mentioned 363 

lams,  Mr.  Mentioned 369 

lams,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 84,622 

lams,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 698 

lams,  J.  M.  Mentioned 192,200,203 

lams,  John.  Mentioned 815 

lams,  J.  Quincy.  Mentioned 227 

lams,  Theodore.  Correspondence  with  Andrew  H.  Foote 489 

Idington,  W.  H.  H.  Mentioned 27 

iljutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W 377, 434, 505, 507, 605, 624, 659, 683, 817 

Hunter,  David 379, 428, 525 

Paymaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 418 

Surgeon-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 576 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  96,  378. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  54,  612 ; No.  64,  643. 

Ijutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Arkansas,  Governor  of 780 

Hubert,  Louis 726 

McIntosh,  James 2§,  703, 712, 713, 715, 732 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 755, 786, 813 

War  Department,  C.  S 134, 703 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  234,  690.  Series  1862:  No.  8,  734. 

Imiral,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 198,758,800 

luddell,  John  P.  Mentioned 347 

ilfeldt,  John.  Mentioned 192, 203, 219 

imer-cher-ner,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned — - 17 

:ard,  James  J.  Mentioned - 355 

abama  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  129,  132, 152-154, 161,  174, 175, 177,  178,  778,  780, 

795. 

bert,  Anselm.  Mentioned 545, 829 

rfeck  Scott,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 433 

Bxander,  Colonel.  Mentioned 72 

isxander,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 40 

Jexander,  I.  C.  Mentioned - 170 

den,  Mr.  Mentioned 414 


835 


836 


INDEX. 


Pag< 


U.  S.  A 3f 


398, 488, 489, 506, 631, 665, 678, 8! 

778, 7* 

3f 


Allen,  B.  L.  Mentioned 

Allen,  Robert. 

Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General  s Office, 

Mentioned 

Allison,  J.  A.  Mentioned  - 
Allison,  Wills.  Mentioned 
A-luk-tus-te-nu-ke.  Correspondence  with  Abraham  Lincoln 

Amory,  Copley. 

Mentioned ***'''  ' *’** 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Blackwater  Creek,  Mo.,  December  18,  1861 

Anderson.  Edward.  Mentioned  

Anderson,  Price.  Mentioned  ....... ......  ---- 

Andrews,  Ray  W.  Mentioned - 

Andrews,  T.  P.  Mentioned 


39, 


Ankeny,  William  H.  Mentioned 


341, 3 


1862. 


1862. 


Anthony,  Daniel  R. 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 

Mentioned 

Reports  of 

Columbus,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  January  9,  1862.... 

Dayton,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  January  1-3,  1862. 

Johnson  County,  Missouri.  Operations  in,  January  5-12 
La  Fayette  County,  Mo.  Operations  in,  January  5-12, 

Rose  Hill,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  January  1-3,  1862 

Apprederis,  Joseph.  Mentioned 

Arkansas. 

Address  to  the  people  of.  (Curtis.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 686,  699,  700," 734 J 

Arkansas,  Governor  of ’ & 

Army  Headquarters 5 

Halleck,  Henry  ? 

McIntosh,  James ? 

Van  Dorn,  Earl  ------- 693, 702, 723, 7 

War  Department,  C.  „ 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  &c . . 

Military  depart  nmnts  embracing  

Operations  in  . N 

Northeastern.  (See  Missouri.  Operations  m Southeastern.) 

Northwestern.  (See  Missouri.  Operations  in  Central  and  Southwestern.) 

Requisition  for  troops  for  Confederate  service 

Union  sentiment  in - ' 

Arkansas,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with.  ^ J 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A ^ 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Polk,  Leonidas 


369,605,7 


.69,662,699,700,1 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A 


686, 693, 700, 702, 748, 

Gorham’s,  322, 788 ; Hart’s, 


Arkansas  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  : Gaines’,  728, 763, 788 , 7.Q 

215  220, 227, 293, 294, 310, 330, 719, 728, 763, 776, 788 ; Provence  s,  304, 719, 

69, 293,  318,  728,  746,7.  « 

vents:  1st  (Churchill),  289,315,719,  728,746,776  ; 2d l (*««••*  Em' 

bry),  22-25, 29, 30, 292, 294, 295, 719, 728, 746, 776, 788;  ~d  (Borland),  684. 


5*  co 


INDEX. 


837 

Page. 


rkansas  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry — Battalions:  4th,  130, 186, 807 ; 5th,  129, 708;  7th  (Desha),  684; 
Logan’s,  708.  Companies:  Roberts’,  322.  Regiments:  4th  (McNair), 
293,295,296,718,728,746,776,788;  9th  [?] (McCarver),  749;  11th  (Smith), 

126,  129, 163,  164,  166-168, 175,  177,  178,  186,  689,  708,  718,  744,  807 ; 12th 
(Gantt),  126, 129, 130, 163, 164, 166, 175-178, 186, 717, 744 ; 14th  (Mitchell), 

253, 293, 295, 719, 728, 746, 749,  776, 783  ; 15th  (Gee),  743 ; 16th  (Hill),  289, 

309, 628, 728, 746, 776, 788 ; 17th  (Rector),  62, 289, 618, 728, 746, 749, 776, 788 ; 

19th  (Dawson),  317, 743 ; 21st  (McRae),  253, 285, 293, 295, 728, 746, 776, 788 ; 

22d  (King),  304, 317. 

rmstrong,  Frank  C.  Mentioned 24, 286, 294, 732, 787 

rmy  Headquarters.  Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W 382, 389, 392, 395, 402, 408, 419, 436, 437, 448, 462, 

500,503,508,513,514,552,553,555,  557,  560,  567,  582,  602,  817,  818,  828 

Hunter,  David 428,450 

Lincoln,  Abraham 450,534 

War  Department,  U.  S 513,552 

mold,  Thomas  T.  Mentioned 27, 28 

sbell,  Franklin.  Mentioned 442 

sboth,  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 545,562 

Halleck,  Henry  W 375, 390, 399, 465 

Waring,  George  E.,jr 451 

Mentioned 62, 192, 196, 198, 200, 201, 203, 204,  209, 

212-214,  249,  258,  261, 438, 472, 483, 508, 539, 540, 543, 545, 550, 598, 601 

Proclamation  to  citizens  of  Fayetteville,  Ark 70 

Reports  of 

Bentonville,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  18,  1862 63 

Fayetteville,  Ark.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  February  23,  1862  . 69 

Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  Battle  of,  March  6-8,  1862 239 

sbury,  Colonel.  Mentioned 324 

smussen,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 214, 219 

ssessments  in  Missouri  on  Confederates  and  sympathizers.  (See  Missouri, 
Department  of  the.) 

tchison,  Kans.  Operations  about,  Jan.  20-24, 1862.  Report  of  I.  W.  Fuller.  54 

tchison,  D.  R.  Mentioned 734 

tlantic,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 564 

ubrey,  Kans.  Skirmish  near,  Mar.  12, 1862.  Report  of  Robert  H.  Graham..  335 

verett,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned 152, 158 


very,  W.  T.  Mentioned 

alley,  Frederick  K.  Mentioned 

aird,  A.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Inspector -Gener aV s Office,  TJ.  S.  A.) 

aird,  J.  W.  Mentioned 

aker,  A.  D.  Mentioned - 

aker,  Alpheus.  Mentioned - 

aker,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned 


aker,  J ames  F.  Mentioned 

aker,  R.  H.  Mentioned 

aldridge,  Broom.  Mentioned 

aldwin,  Mr.  Mentioned 

aid  win,  Judge.  Mentioned 

allou,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 

ankhead,  Smith  P.  Mentioned 129,173,700 


129 

48 

552 

376 

255 

169 

267 

10 

28 

17 

520 

533 

270 


838 


INDEX. 


Banka,  Nathaniel  P.  Mentioned ■ 

Banning,  "William  L.  Mentioned 

Banzhaf,  Charles. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Pink  Hill,  Mo.,  March  31,  1862 

Barker,  J.  J.  A.  Mentioned * 

Barnes,  Joseph  K.  Mentioned - 

Earnes,  Lucien  J.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  James  Totten.) 

Barnes,  Myron  S.  Mentioned 

Barney,  C.  R.  Mentioned 

Barrett,  O.  W.  Mentioned 

Barrett,  W.  W.  Mentioned 

Barris,  Sampson  P. 

Mentioned - 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 

Barrow,  Balt.  Mentioned - 

Bass,  Bird.  Mentioned 

Bates,  Kinzie.  Mentioned 

Baxter,  A.  S.  Correspondence  with  Lewis  B.  Parsons 

Beall,  W.  N.  R.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Earl  Van  Dorn.) 


Pa{ 

e 


3 

2 

3 


248,2 


271,272,274,2 


7 

3 


..  5 

746,7 


Bear,  Noah  Drowning.  Mentioned 
Bearmeat,  John.  Mentioned 

Beasley,  Mr.  Mentioned - 6 

Beauregard,  G.  T. 

Co-operation  of  Van  Dorn  with 
Correspondence  with 

Harris,  D.  B § 

Hollins,  George  N 7 

McCown,  John  P - ®jl 

772, 777, 778, 781, 782, 785, 786, 789, 794, 795, 797, 799, 800, 8 

Mackall,  W.  W 134, 804, 807, 8 

Pickett,  Ed.,  jr - 7 

Polk,  Leonidas 754,757,775,776,779,786,789,8 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 784,791,7 

Walker,  L.  M 797-7 

Mentioned - 79, 132, 162, 282, 54 

634, 678, 760-763, 768,  771-773,  775, 781,  786,  790,  801, 804, 805, 809, 8 
Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  1 

Beebe,  Hinkley  F.  Mentioned 2 

Beebe,  James  M.,  & Co. 

Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-GeneraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 3 

Mentioned — - 3 

Bell,  J.  M.  Mentioned 


Bell,  J.  W.  (Colonel).  Mentioned 6 


Bell,  J.  W.  (Private).  Mentioned 2 

Bell,  W.  S.  Mentioned 128,778,781,7 

Bencke,  Henry.  Mentioned 219,236,2 

Benge,  Anderson.  Mentioned - 

Benge,  George.  Mentioned , 

Benge,  Pickens  M.  Mentioned 

Benjamin,  Judah  P.  Mentioned. 693,700,702,720—723,727,735,780,/ 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department , C.  S.) 


INDEX. 


839 

Page. 


tennett,  H.  S. 

Mentioned 23 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah,  Ind.  T.,  December  26,  1861 30 

Jensberg,  Gerhard.  Mentioned 64,546 

Jenteen,  Frederick  W.  Mentioned 270 

Senton,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned . . 119, 120, 124, 397, 488, 504, 505, 535, 621, 623, 656 
teuton,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  Jan.  15-17,  1862.  Report  of  Leonard  F.  Ross..  52 

lenton  Barracks,  Mo.  W.  T.  Sherman  assigned  to  command 459 

teuton,  William  F.  Mentioned 246, 248, 249, 251, 252 

lentonville,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  18,  1862.  Reports  of 

Asboth,  A 63 

Boernstein,  C.  Schaeffer 62 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 62 

terry,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 14, 18 

terryhill,  Samuel.  Mentioned 6 

terryville,  Ark.  Reconnaissance  to,  Mar.  3-7,  1862.  Report  of  C.  A.  Ellis..  186 
tertrand,  Mo.  Skirmishnear,  Dec.  11,  ’61.  (See  Summary  Principal  Events , p.  1) 

tesier,  John  C.  Mentioned 84 

jtevier,  R.  S.  Mentioned 312,314 

levins,  Alva  [or  Aina].  Mentioned 268 

3ig  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  on,  March  9,  1862.  Report  of  A.  Krekel 333 

3inmore,  Henry.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  B.  M.  Prentiss .) 

3irch,  Judge.  Mentioned 407,408,411 

lirge,  John  W. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 426, 439 

Mentioned - 44,45,51 

f3ishop,  Edward  H.  Mentioned 277 

3ishop,  William.  Mentioned 458,459 

3issell,  Josiah  W. 

Correspondence  with  John  Pope 625 

Mentioned 79, 82, 


84,  86,  87, 90, 94, 97, 104, 124, 125, 394, 599, 604, 620, 635, 644, 649, 667,  682 


31ack  Beaver.  Mentioned 

31ack,  David.  Mentioned 

31ack,  John  Charles.  Mentioned 
31ack,  R.  H.  Mentioned 


26 

..  483 

253,254 

18 


31ack,  Samuel.  Mentioned 265 

Blackburn,  Mr.  Mentioned - 674 

31ackwater  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmishes  on  the. 

December  18,  1861. 

Communications  from 

Pope,  John 447 

Steele,  Frederick 42 

Reports  of 

Amory,  Copley - 46 

Halleck,  Henry  W 37 

Pope,  John 38 

March  29,  1862.  Report  of  James  D.  Thompson 356 

Blair,  Francis  F.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 490, 823 

Mentioned 451 

Blake,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 770,  789 

Blake,  E.  D. 

Mentioned 4^6,  *30 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.  135 


840 


INDEX. 


Page 
..  32 

3 

327, 32 


63 


Blane,  Major.  Mentioned - 

Blaylock,  M.  G.  Mentioned 

Bledsoe,  H.  M.  Mentioned 

Blood,  James  H. 

Correspondence  with  James  Totten  . — - 

Mentioned — — 349, 350, 356, 637-63 

Bloomfield,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  Jan.  15-17, 1862.  Reports  of  Leonard  F.  Ross . 52, 5 
Blue  Springs,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  Jan.  29-Feb.  3, 1862.  Report  of  W . S.  Oliver 

Bobbitt,  James  G.  Mentioned 36' 

Bob’s  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  March  7,  1862.  Report  of  Arnold  Krekel.. . 33 

Boernstein,  C.  Schaeffer. 

Mentioned — ^6 

Report  of  action  at  Bentonville,  Ark.,  February  18,  1862... 

Boggess,  J.  S.  Mentioned 297,29 

Bolivar,  Mo.  Affair  at,  Feb.  8,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  2.) 

Bolton,  Robert  D.  Mentioned 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon.  Mentioned — * 47 

Boone,  J.  H.  [?].  Mentioned 64 

Borcherdt,  Albert.  Mentioned 24 

Borg,  Charles.  Mentioned ^ 

Borland,  Solon. 

Correspondence  with 

Johnston,  A.  Sidney  — . — — - — 

Polk,  Leonidas 68 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 69 

Mentioned - 687,689,70 

Borris,  Herman.  Mentioned 25 

Botwick,  Judge.  Mentioned 

Boudinot,  E.  C. 

Mentioned - 24, 32, 28j 

Report  of  skirmish  with  Creeks  and  Seminoles,  December  27,  1861 3 


687, 70 


Bourland,  James.  Mentioned 


5*2 


Bovine,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Bowen,  H.  G.  Mentioned 52 

Bowen,  John  S.  Mentioned 71 

Bowen,  Moses  B.  Mentioned - • * 

Bowen,  O.  A.  Mentioned 

Bowen,  William  D. 

Mentioned 33, 36, 59, 61, 200, 203, 235, 257, 260, 409, 416, 417, 438, 559, 81! 

Reports  of 

Current  Hills,  Mo.  Expedition  through,  December  5-9, 1861 3 

Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  18,  1862 26 

Salem,  Mo.  Action  at,  December  3,  1861 3 

7 70 

Bower, . Mentioned 


52, 36 
. 59 

327, 32 


Bowles,  Captain.  Mentioned - 

Bowman,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Bowman,  John  P.  Mentioned..--- - ----- 

Boyd,  Sempronius  H. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 

Mentioned 

Report  of  operations  about  Rolla,  Mo.,  March  8-9,  1862 

Boyd,  William  S.  Mentioned 

Boyden,  Ezekiel.  Mentioned 2* 

Brackett,  Albert  G.  Mentioned 


593, 628, 63 

20 

33 

4 


37 


INDEX, 


841 

Page. 


iradbury  Daniel. 

Affidavit  of.  Indian  atrocities  at  Pea  Ridge,  Ark  

Mentioned 

iradford,  Hamlet.  Mentioned 

iradford,  Hiram  S.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  John  P.  McCown.) 

iradford,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 

iradfute,  William  R. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 

Mentioned — — 286,293,294,746,786 

iradley,  Emory.  Mentioned 248 

iradley,  Jervine.  Mentioned - 268,269 

iradley,  Luther  P.  Mentioned 109 


. 207 

. 207 

28 

130, 772 
30 

. 787 


Iradshaw,  George.  Mentioned. 

Iragg,  Braxton,  Mentioned 

Jrann,  C.  H.  Mentioned 

irannan,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

irannon, . Mentioned 

Jranson,  Nathan.  Mentioned... 


35 

134,645,723,775 

158 

644 

704 

248 

hasher,  Frederick.  Mentioned 2^5 

hay,  Nathan.  Mentioned 371 

Jrazelton,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 223 

Jreedin  (Scout).  Mentioned 415 

Jreese.  Sidney  A.  Mentioned 06 

lirent,  George  William.  Report  of  a' 1 vance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid, 

Mo.,  February  28- April  8,  1862  138 

Jreshers,  Henry.  Mentioned 71 

3rice,  Benjamin  W.  Mentioned 629,633,644,665,672 

Iridge-burners,  Marauders,  etc.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters - 052 

Carlin,  W.  P - 408 

Ewing,  Thomas ^24 

Grant,  U.  S - 404 

\ Halleck,  Henry  W 439, 453, 459, 462, 463, 474-476, 514, 528, 561, 611, 641, 823 

Prentiss,  B.  465 

Price,  Sterling 496 

Schofield,  John  007 

Totten,  J ames 063 

War  Department,  U.  S 546,624,637-639 


Mentioned 


3ridges,  H.  W 
3rinson,  M.  J. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  engagement  at  Round  Mountain,  Ind  T.,  November  19,  1861 

iBrity,  Captain.  Mentioned 

IBroadhead,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Brodie,  William.  Mentioned 

Brooks,  W.  H.  Mentioned 


303 


6 
14 
45 

655 
42 

293, 304 

i Brown  (Guide).  Mentioned ^ 

Brown,  Mr.  Mentioned - ^ 

Brown,  Alexander  J. 

I Correspondence  with  John  P.  McCown 179 

Mentioned 130, 157 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  179 

Brown,  D.  B.  Mentioned ^ 

Brown,  E.  B.  Mentioned * 38,39 


842 


INDEX. 


Page 

Brown,  S.  Lockwood.  Mentioned 53 

Brown,  Thomas.  Mentioned 26 


Brown,  William  W.  Mentioned 22 

Browner,  William  M.  Mentioned 36 

Brusle,  Charles  A.  Correspondence  with  Ben.  McCulloch 75; 

Bryan,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 68! 

Bryner,  John.  Mentioned 92,95,11! 

Buchanan,  James  L.  Mentioned II1 

Buckner,  Allen.  Mentioned 22! 

Buckner,  Simon  B.  Mentioned 51i 

Budd,  Colonel.  Mentioned 33! 

Buell,  Don  Carlos. 

Co-operation  with  Halleck.  Communications  from 

Halleck,  Henry  W 474, 489, 49‘ 

Lincoln,  Abraham 47- 

Mentioned 419,450,474 


489,  492,  501,  510, 544, 597, 602, 605, 634, 647, 649, 650, 672, 678, 729, 83] 


Buford,  Napoleon  B. 

Mentioned 77, 86, 89, 94, 95, 119, 123, 124, 621, 625, 626, 629, 635, 653, 669, 67-1 

Reports  of 

New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8,  1862...  Ill 

Union  City,  Tenn.  Descent  upon,  March  30-31,  1862 lit 

Bull,  Hiram  C.  Mentioned 26| 

Bunn,  Henry  G.  Mentioned 29t 

Burbridge,  J.  Q.  Mentioned 285, 307, 308, 311  323, 325, 75/ 

Burch,  John  C.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Gideon  J.  Pillow.) 

Burke,  Thomas.  Mentioned - 9(j 

Burkhardt,  Christian.  Mentioned 24(j 

Burgess,  Mr.  Mentioned - 357,664 

Burrows,  Amos  S.  Mentioned 5Cj 

Burt,  H.  Seymour.  Mentioned 104! 

Burton,  Mr.  Mentioned 729,731! 

Bussey,  Cyrus. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  R.  Curtis 207 

Mentioned 203, 217, 242, 245, 270, 464 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  2321 

Butcher,  John  H.  Mentioned 71,72 

Butler,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  Nov.  20, 1861.  (See  Summary  of  PrincijpalEvents,  p.  1. ) 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 634 

Butler,  B.,  jr.  Mentioned 80a 

Butler,  George.  Mentioned 311 

Butler,  Speed.  Mentioned 84, 90, 110, 566, 590 

Byser,  Charles.  Mentioned 312 

Cabell,  B.  C.  Correspondence  with  D.  M.  Frost 706 

Cabell,  William  L. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn.... 780,782,803,812 

Mentioned 361,661,746 

Cairo,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned - 122 

Cairo,  District  of.  (Union.)- 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  3,  478. 

Sherman,  W.  T.,  assigned  to  command  of 555 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 474,478 

Caldwell,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 341,342,458,460 

Caldwell,  W.  J.  Mentioned 30 


INDEX. 


843 


I,  Page. 

Callaway,  W,  H.  Mentioned 30 

Callender,  Franklin  D.  Mentioned I * 398, 401, 552, 558, 673 

Salliway,  John.  Mentioned 319 

Sameron,  Simon.  Mentioned 555 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department , U.  S .) 

Campbell,  E.  Mentioned 504 

Campbell,  Hugh.  Correspondence  with  Q.  M.  General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 385,396 

i Campbell,  J.  C.  Mentioned 188 

! Campbell,  L.  C.  Mentioned 324,326 

Campbell,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 324,334 

Camps  and  Hospitals.  Sanitary  condition  of,  in  the  Department  of  the  Mis- 
souri. Report  of  James  E.  Yeatmau 484 

Canby,  E.  R.  S.  Mentioned 75,614,616,627-629,633,644,648,655 

Cannon,  John  R.  Mentioned 28 

Carlin,  W.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 410, 417, 468, 527,  552, 581 

r Mentioned.... ...... . — 361, 609, 627, 651, 657 

Carney,  Thomas.  Mentioned 517 

Carondelet,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned.  78, 88, 104, 109, 120-122, 660, 661, 667, 668, 676 

Carpenter,  Don  A.  Mentioned 267 

Carr,  Byron  O.  Mentioned 243 

Carr,  Eugene  A. 

I Correspondence  with  Samuel  R.  Curtis. ....  473, 483, 484, 487, 494, 498, 499, 527, 5/4 

I Mentioned — — 192,196,197, 

199-201,  203,205,211-213,219,222-224,234,241,  242,  246,  247,  249,  250, 
255,  265,  270,271,471-473,  480,489,498,501,504,  513,  539,  545,  546,  550 

| Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 256 

Carrick,  Robert.  Mentioned 44 

Carroll,  Charles  M.  Mentioned *26 

Carroll,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 6, 10 

Carruth,  E.  H.  Correspondence  with 

Chickasaws  and  Choctaws - - 26 

Ho-po-eith-le-yo-ho-la 25 

Tusaquach 26 

Carskaddon,  David.  Mentioned.... 267 

Carter,  J.  H.  Mentioned 164,165,169,185,774 

Carter,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 311 

Carthage,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  March  19-20, 1862.  Report  of  Powell  Clayton.  343 

Caruthers,  J.  B.  Mentioned 151, 152, 159 

Cates,  O.  G.  Mentioned 624 

Cearnal,  J.  T.  Mentioned p05 

Ceathe,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 357,358 

Central  Missouri.  District  of.  (Union.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  29,  471. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  (Pope),  No.  18,  535;  No.  29,  544;  (Totten), 


No.  27,  663. 

Champion,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 
Champion,  J.  Rock.  Mentioned  . . . 

Champneys,  J.  T.  Mentioned 

Chandler,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Chandler,  William  P.  Mentioned  . 
Chapman,  George  J.  Mentioned  . . 
Chapman,  Samuel.  Mentioned  ... 
Chapman,  William  B.  Mentioned 


176,800 

324 

775,778,779 

55 

261,264,309,632 

156,161 

231 

209,212, 239,241,242, 546 


844 


INDEX. 


Page. 


1.) 


Charleston,  Mo.  Skirmishes  at. 

December  13, 1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p 

January  8,  1862.  Report  of  Nicholas  Perczel 

Chase,  Salmon  P.  Mentioned - 387,607,633,835 

Cheatham,  B.  F. 

Correspondence  with  John  P.  McCown. .. - 768 

Mentioned 77^ 

Cherrie,  Martin.  Mentioned 65, 66, 338 


Chickasaw,  Ala.  Expedition  to,  April  1, 1862.  Reports  of  William  Gwin..  121, 122 


Chickasaws  and  Choctaws.  Correspondence  with  E.  H.  Carruth 2€ 

Chiles,  R.  B.  Mentioned 311 

Chilton,  George  YY.  Mentioned  23, 26, 299 


Chilton,  R.  H.  Mentioned 


738 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generals  Office,  C.  S.  A.) 

Chisum,  Isham.  Mentioned - - - 29 

Chittenden,  Major.  Mentioned — - 490 

Choctaw,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 120 

Chowder,  Richard  B.  Mentioned 561 

Christian,  A.  W.  Mentioned 3441 

Christy,  Broad.  Mentioned I7 

Churchill,  T.  J. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Yan  Dorn 791, 804j 

Mentioned  290, 309, 776, 7801 

Chustenahlah,  Ind.  T.  Engagement  at,  December  26,  1861. 

Communication  from  James  McIntosh - 251 

Letters  from  U.  S.  Commissioner  found  in  Hopoeithleyohola’s  camp 25, 26; 

Reports  of 

Bennett,  H.  S - 30J 

Gipson,  William 29l 


Griffith,  John  S.  . 
Lane,  Walter  P.  . 
McIntosh,  James. 
Young,  W.  C 

Chusto-Talasah,  Ind.  T. 

Drew,  John 


27 

28 
22 
26 


Engagement  at,  December  9, 1861.  Reports  of 


16 


Hall,  Joseph  R 19 

McCurtaiu,  Jackson 20 

McIntosh,  D.  N. 16 

Pitchlynn,  William  B 21 

Sims,  William  B ^ 

(See  also  Indian  Territory.  Operations  in,  November  19,  1861  -January  4, 1862.) 

Cincinnati,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 119,120,621 

City  of  Alton,  Steamboat. 

Attack  on  December  29,  1861.  Report  of  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 45 

Mentioned 45 

Claflin,  Norman  W.  Mentioned .' 268 

Claggett,  Mr.  Mentioned 17® 

Claims,  etc.,  in  Western  Department.  (See  Western  Department. — Union.) 

Clark,  Colonel.  Mentioned 17^ 

Clark,  Alonzo.  Mentioned ^ 

Clark,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 27 

Clark,  Charles.  Mentioned 77* 

Clark,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 223 

Clark,  E.  A.  Mentioned 2o4 

...j 11,709 


Clark,  George  W.  Mentioned. 


INDEX. 


845 


Page. 

31ark,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 799 

31ark,  John  B.  Mentioned 733 

nark,  John  B.,  jr. 

Mentioned 305, 320 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 v 318 

nark,  John  M.  Mentioned 181 

71ark,  M.  Lewis. 

Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 703 

Mentioned 792 

nark,  S.  Churchill.  Mentioned 193, 285, 306, 307, 310,  311, 327, 329 

31ark,  S.  R.  Mentioned 324 

nark,  William  M.  Mentioned 175, 156, 160, 170, 175, 180, 785 

Hlark,  William  T.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Thomas  J.  McKean.) 

Dlark son,  J.  J. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  V an  Dorn - / 813 

Mentioned 393 

nayton,  Powell.  Report  of  expedition  to  Carthage,  Mo.,  March  19-20, 1862..  343 

Clendenning,  Robert  M.  Mentioned - 72,73 

Clerk,  J.  B.  Mentioned 371 

Cleveland,  Dr.  Mentioned 333 

Clever,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 279 

Clinton,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  30, 1862.  Report  of  Henry  W.  Halleck..  358 

Clinton,  Charles.  Mentioned  51 

Clowes,  Edward  G.  Mentioned 242 


Cobb, 


Mentioned 


493 

348 

403 


Cockerel,  Mathias.  Mentioned 

Coe,  Isaac  S.  Mentioned 

Coffee,  J.  T.  [?].  Mentioned 75 

Coffman,  G.  W.  Mentioned 28 

Colburn,  A.  V.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 

Colby,  J.  C.  S.  Mentioned 272 

Cole,  Captain.  Mentioned 52 

Cole,  Neut.  Mentioned 363 

Coleman,  Colonel.  Mentioned 65-67,332,336,337,339 

Coler,  William  N.  Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 221 

Collins,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 272 

Colorado  Territory.  Military  departments  embracing 605 

Columbus,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  January  9,  1862. 

; Communications  from  David  Hunter 508 

Report  of  D.  R.  Anthony 46 

Coming  Deer.  Mentioned 17 

Commerce,  Mo.  Descent  on,  Dec.  29,  1861.  Report  of  M.  Jeff.  Thompson...  45 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 320 

Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 4th,*  127, 129, 162, 177, 178, 186, 757, 759, 760, 795  ; 

5th, t 127, 129, 162, 173, 175, 177, 178, 186, 757, 759, 760, 795. 

(For  State  Troops,  see  respective  States.) 

Organization  of,  strength,  etc. 

Army  of  the  West,  First  Division.  (Price.)  March  17,  1862 788 

Fort  Smith,  Ark.  December  21,  1861 718 


* Originally  First  Alabama,  Tennessee,  and  Mississippi, 
t Originally  Fortieth  Tennessee. 


846 


INDEX. 


Confederate  Troops — Continued. 

Organization  of,  strength,  etc. 

McCulloch’s  command. 

January  31,  1862  

March  2,  1862 

March  fl,  1862 

McIntosh’s  command. 

January  1,  1862 - -- 

January  31,  1862 

New  Madrid,  Mo.,  and  Island  No.  10. 

February  28,  1862 

March  21,  1862 

Congress,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Curtis,  Samuel  R. .. - 

War  Department,  U.  S 

Connelly,  Timothy.  Mentioned 

Conner,  W.  F.  Mentioned 

Connor,  Thomas.  Mentioned  

Conrad,  Joseph. 

Mentioned - 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8, 1862 

Constable,  A.  Gk  A.  Mentioned 

Contvere,  D.  W.  Mentioned 

Conway,  Steamboat.  Mentioned  

Coodey,  William  S.  Mentioned 

Coody,  D.  R.  Mentioned 

Cook,  John. 

Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 

Mentioned 


Page. 


74( 
76*. 
77  ( 

72£ 

74( 

186 

795 


..  206 
454, 576 


265 

277 

196,208, 209,213,244 

278 

.'....  488 

392 

806 

17 

32, 331 


433 

478 


Cook,  W.  D.  S. 

Mentioned 130,158, 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862. 

Cooke,  W illiam  M.  Mentioned 

Cooney,  Charles.  Mentioned 

Cooper,  Douglas  H. 

Correspondence  with  James  McIntosh 

Mentioned 15, 20, 22, 31, 292, 318, 712, 713, 715, 720, 

Report  of  operations  in  Indian  Territory,  Nov.  19,  1861-Jan.  4,  1862  

Cooper,  Frederick  W.  Mentioned 

Cooper,  John.  Mentioned 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 744, 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  S.A.) 

Corden,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned • 

Cornish,  Mr.  Mentioned...... 520,522, 

Corrlis,  Giles.  Mentioned 

Corse,  John  M.  Mentioned 84,90,566, 

Cosgrove,  John.  Mentioned 355, 

Cotton,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Covode,  John.  Correspondence  with  James  H.  Lane...... 529, 

Cox,  Quartermaster.  Mentioned 

Cox,  Daniel.  Mentioned 

Cox,  W.  B.  Mentioned.... .• 

Coyl,  William  H.  Mentioned 260, 

Crabtree,  John  D.  ..  Mentioned 


166 

175 

716 

336 


709 

732 

5 

210 

520 

755 


17 

523 

521 

590 

365 

345 

831 

673 

7 

320 

267 

203 


INDEX, 


847 

Page. 


Craig,  J ames. 

Assignments  to  command -- — — - 672 

Mentioned 672 

'raig,  Tom.  Mentioned... 56,524,525 

'rane,  Carso  [or  Canso].  Mentioned — * 267 

rane  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  14,  1862.  Report  of  Samuel  R.  Curtis..  59 
Greeks  and  Seminoles.  Skirmish  with,  December  27,  1861.  Reports  of 

Boudinot,  E.  C - 32 

McIntosh,  James 31 

k Watie,  Stand  32 

(See  also  Indian  Territory.  Operations  in,  Nov.  19,  1861-Jaw.  4,  1862.) 

reitz,  William  F.  Mentioned 344 

Crittenden,  T.  T.  Correspondence  with  James  Totten 350,351 

ilrow,  John  H.  Mentioned ... — ...... 7,14 

'rump,  R.  P.  [?].  Mentioned 304,317 

ullum,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck - 559, 

560,  565,  569,  570,  573,  581,  583,  587,  588,  590, 591, 593, 595-597, 600, 602 

Mentioned 398, 401, 435, 565, 570, 573 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  Henry  W.  Halleck.) 

Cumby,  R.  H.  Mentioned 299 

lumming,  Gilbert  W. 

Mentioned. ...... — 92, 95, 104, 109, 110 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feh.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  Ill 

Cummings,  A.  Mentioned - 28 

Cummings,  E.  H.  Mentioned 129, 130, 153, 159, 761, 784 

lummons,  Dr.  Mentioned - - 363 

Cunningham,  George  H.  Mentioned ^61 

Current  Hills,  Mo.  Expedition  through  the,  December  5-9,  1861.  Reports  of 

Bowen,  William  D. 36 

Wyman,  John  B - - 36 

Curtis,  Samuel  R. 

! Address  to  people  of  Arkansas - 677 

• Assignments  to  command 462, 473, 611 

Correspondence  with 

Asboth,  A 645, 502 

Bussey,  Cyrus  — - 207 

Carr,  Eugene  A 473, 483, 484, 487 , 494, 498, 499, 527, 574 

Commanding  Officer  United  States  Troops  en  route  for  Kansas  .. 

Congress,  U.  

Davis,  Jefferson  643, 592 

Halleck,  Henry  W 493, 375, 441, 

468-471,  475,  480,  489,  491,  492,  495,  498-500,  506,  511,  513,  514,  516, 
523,  525,  528,  538,  540,  541,  543-545,  547,  548,  551,  553,  556,  558,  559, 
561-563,  566-568,  574,  577,  583,  588,  596,  611,  617,  618,  621,  624,  626, 
628,  632,  636,  640,  646,  647,  650,  652,  659,  661,  662,  664-666,  679,  826 

Noble,  John  

Osterhaus,  P.  J 

Sigel,  Franz 526, 540, 543, 583, 592, 598 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 

Wright,  Clark 

Mentioned  ... ............  62, 64, 68, 70, 190, 204, 212, 216—218, 220, 222, 223, 

225,  230,  240-242,  252,  258,  259,  261,264,  269,270,280,344,431,449,462, 
504,  508-510,  512,  516,  528,  539,  542, 555, 560, 567, 574, 575, 594, 598, 602, 
603,  614,  615,  627,  628,  631-634,  636, 649,  652,  671, 672, 678, 680, 827, 832 


610 

206 


206 

504 


193-195 
498, 589 


848 


INDEX, 


Page 


Curtis,  Samuel  R.— Continued. 

Orders,  congratulatory.  Operations  in  Central  and  Southwestern  Missouri . 
Reports  of 

Bentonyille,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  18,  1862  


56* 


Crane  Creek,  Mo. 
Fayetteville,  Ark. 


Skirmish  at,  February  14,  1862 


Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  February  23,  1862. 


Flat  Creek,  Mo. 
Keetsville,  Mo. 
Marshfield,  Mo. 
Pea  Ridge,  Ark. 
Springfield,  Mo. 


601 


36: 

731 


Skirmish  near,  February  15,  1862 

Skirmish  at,  February  25,  1862  

Skirmish  at,  February  9,  1862 5 

Battle  of,  March  6-8,  1862 191, 193-19 

Skirmish  at,  February  12,  1862... 51 

Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  17,  1862  

Cutler,  Horace  D.  B.  Mentioned 

Cutts,  Richard  D.  Mentioned 39( 

Dailey,  David  W.  Mentioned 24i 

Dakota  Territory.  Military  departments  embracing 

Dallas,  Mo. 

Expedition  to,  January  15-17,  1862.  Report  of  Leonard  F.  Ross 

Reconnaissance  to,  April  2-4,  1862.  Report  of  Lindsay  Murdoch 

Dan  forth,  Jo.  Mentioned 

Danley,  B.  F.  [?].  Mentioned 36 

Danville,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  December  25, 1861.  Report  of  George  R.  Todd. 

Darrow,  Jesse.  Mentioned 32{ 

David,  Virgil  J.  Mentioned 202, 203, 258, 262, 264-26* 

Davidson,  H.  B.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  W.  W.  Mackall.) 

Davidson,  Peter.  Mentioned 202, 248, 254, 25.' 

Davies,  Thomas  A. 

Assignments  to  command - 

Mentioned 643,835 

Davis,  Mr.  Mentioned 521 

Davis,  David. 

Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 372,385 

Mentioned — 

Davis,  Ephraim  R.  Mentioned - - ^ 


64: 


DaviB,  Jefferson. 


Correspondence  with 

Arkansas,  Governor  of...-.-.- - - - 

Harris,  W.  ^ 

Jackson,  Claiborne  - 717,724 

Polk,  Leonidas - 

Price,  Sterling 714,711 

War  Department,  C.  S 434»  ■ 

Mentioned 133, 134, 698, 700, 701, 725, 726, 737, 745-747, 786, 82^ 

Davis,  Jefferson  C. 

Correspondence  with  ■ 

Curtis,  Samuel  ^ 

Halleck,  Henry  37‘ 

Mentioned  37-41, 192, If* 

201, 203, 205, 211-214, 218, 224, 230, 236, 241, 257, 279, 388, 439, 447, 453 
512, 514, 516, 517, 523-526,  528, 538,  540, 542-545,  547, 550, 553, 554,  821 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  — ^ 

Davis,  J.  P.  Mentioned ' 

Davis,  Nicholas.  Mentioned - 

Davis,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 


Davis,  William  F.  Mentioned 


25: 


INDEX. 


849 


Page. 

by  ton,  Mo. 

I Expedition  to,  skirmish  near,  and  destruction  of,  J anuary  1-3, 1862. 

Communication  from  David  Hunter 508 

Report  of  D.  R.  Anthony 

I Skirmish  at,  December  23,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events , p.  1.) 

ban,  Thaddeus  J.  Mentioned 

Iser-in- Water.  Mentioned 

b Gress,  Jacob  C.  Mentioned 

bitzler,  George  W. 

Assignments  to  command 541 

Correspondence  with  David  Hunter 573 

J Mentioned 541,614,615,617,627,631,647,822,832 

; mning,  Robert  M.  Mentioned 227 

bnver,  James  W. 

Assignments  to  command 456,612,653,672,832 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 6a3, 664, 679 

! Mentioned 416, 456, 482, 528, 612,  647, 668, 672, 683, 832 

> Soto,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 127, 169. 176, 178, 800 

putsch,  Gustav  von.  Mentioned 68 

amond,  James  J.  Mentioned - 11,293,298 

; ckerson,  J ohn  H. 

Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General's  Office.. 387 

Mentioned 385, 396 

| ckey,  Theophilus  L.  Mentioned 372 

ickinson,  C.  V.  Mentioned - 253 

lion,  Ed.  Mentioned 286,787 

. smuke,  Paul  T.  Mentioned 151, 152, 159 

vine,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 355 

xon,  Sueter.  Mentioned 55 

Ddge,  Grenville  M. 

j Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck. 373, 375, 398, 408,  415, 442, 444 

j Mentioned . 33, 192, 198, 200, 203, 205, 248, 252, 256, 258-262, 267, 539, 550, 574, 575, 584 

\ Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 i 263 

:>dge,  Isaac  C.  Mentioned 255 

jdson,  Christian  B.  Mentioned 636 

ales,  Mr.  Mentioned 482 

riloff,  S.  F.  Mentioned 261 

onaldson,  James  L.  Mentioned 648 

oniphan,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  April  1,  1862.  Report  of  Frederick  Steele 361 

Doly,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 275 

orsey,  Caleb.  Mentioned 44,51,501 

otson,  Josephus.  Mentioned 293,294 

oubleday,  Charles. 

Assignments  to  command 657 

Mentioned 557,558,573 

ouglas  County,  Mo.  Scout  through,  March  4-11,  1862.  Report  of  George 

E.  Waring,  187 

ouglas,  Dr.  Mentioned 

ove,  Benjamin  M.  Mentioned - 116,621 

owney,  John.  Mentioned - ^6 

owning,  Lewis.  Mentioned 

owning,  Samuel.  Mentioned *7 

rake,  William  C. 

Mentioned  65, 66, 336-338, 558, 559 

Report  of  skirmish  at  West  Plains,  Mo.,  February  19,  1862 67 

54  R R— VOL  VIII 


'850 


INDEX. 


Pa 


Mentioned. 


7-13,289,290, 709,7 


267, 


127, 169, 


Drew,  Charles 
Drew,  John. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 

Mentioned 

Reports  of  Chusto-Talasah,  December  9,  1861 

Drips,  Andrew  W.  Mentioned 

Dulfer,  Louis.  Mentioned - 

Duncan,  Jeptha.  Mentioned 

Duncan,  W.  E.  Mentioned 

Dunlap,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Dunnington,  John  W.  Mentioned 

Durham,  B.  F.  Mentioned 

Durrum,  O.  A.  Mentioned 

Dustin,  Charles.  Mentioned 

Duvall,  D.  J.  Mentioned - 

Dwyer,  R.  D.  A.  Mentioned 

Dyer,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 

Dyer,  W.  E.  Mentioned 

Eads,  James  B.  Mentioned 368, 505, 

Easton,  John.  Mentioned 

Easton,  Langdon  C.  Mentioned 654> 

Eastport,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned ---•  426, 

Eastport,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  April  1,  1862.  Reports  of  William  Gwin..  121, 

Ebner,  Conrad.  Mentioned 

Echols,  J.  A.  Mentioned  

Ector,  M.  D.  Mentioned 

Edson,  J.  J.  Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 

Edwards,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Edwards,  Private.  Mentioned 

Elbert,  Gustavus  M.  Mentioned 62, 210, 212, 242, 280, 

Elkhorn  Tavern,  Ark.  Battle  of,  March  ff-8,  1862.  (See  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.) 


..  46 
356,: 


22, 


Ellet,  Charles.  Mentioned 

Elliott,  Colonel.  Mentioned 

Elliott,  James  R.  Mentioned 

Elliott,  John.  Mentioned 

Elliott,  Washington  L. 

Mentioned 89, 90, 439, 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8,  1862. 

Ellis,  Calvin  A.  Mentioned 60, 75, 232, 234, 246, 248, 

Ellis,  Henry.  Mentioned 

Elstner,  William  H.  Mentioned 

Elwell,  George  W.  Mentioned 

English,  Han.  Mentioned. 520, 521, 532, 

English,  James  N.  Mentioned 

Eppler,  W.  C.  Mentioned 

Eppstein,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned “ 

Erwin,  Eugene.  Mentioned * 

Erwin,  F.  J.  Mentioned ^ 

Erwin,  William  H.  Mentioned 

Essex,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned ^ 

<3 

Estes,  Thomas.  Mentioned 

Estis,  Major.  Mentioned ^ 

Evans,  James  P.  Mentioned 

Evans.  John  A.  Mentioned * 

t 

Evans,  Robert  L.  Mentioned 4 


•.<  BS 


INDEX. 


851 


Page. 

wing,  P.  B.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 441 

wing,  Thomas.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 475, 824 

xpenditures  in  Western  Department.  (See  Western  Department — Union.) 


airchild,  J.  H.  Mentioned 

btnner,  Mr.  Mentioned 

finny  Gilmore,  Steamboat, 
armer,  Lieutenant-Colonel, 
arrar,  Bernard  G. 
Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W . . . 


Mentioned  . 
Mentioned . 


54, 55 
523 
99 
52 


444 


Leighton,  George  E 411, 446 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  Police  Commissioners 584 

Snedicor,  J.  D 641 

Mentioned 405,  431 

'arrington.  S.  Mentioned 309,311 

'arris,  James  L.  Mentioned 311 

'ayetteville,  Ark. 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  February  23,  1862.  Reports  of 

Asboth,  A 69 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 68 

Halleck,  Henry  W 68 

Proclamation  of  Asboth  to  citizens  of 70 

'ellows,  Samuel.  Mentioned 268 

henton,  Frank  B.  Mentioned 255 

'erguson,  W.  J.  Mentioned 296 

I 'err  ell,  Enoch  P.  Mentioned 277 

lelds,  Richard.  Mentioned - 17 

Inley,  Clement  A.  Mentioned 576 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Surgeon- General’ 8 Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

flnney,  Captain.  Mentioned 320 

Innie,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 129,155,161,181 

'ish,  Nathan.  Mentioned 17 

isher,  James  A.  Mentioned 150,152 

Isk,  Julius  G.  Mentioned 346 

’itch,  G.  N.  Mentioned 92,94 

'itzhue,  G.  S.  Mentioned 24,27,28 

lad,  Henry.  Mentioned 115 

lat  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  Feb.  15, 1862.  Report  of  Samuel  R.  Curtis.  60 

leming,  John  G.  Mentioned 130,151,808 

lentz,  William. 

Mentioned 364 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Jackson,  Mo.,  April  9,  1862 365 

letcher,  Major.  Mentioned 638 

letcher,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 96 

lint,  Mortimer  R.  Mentioned 188, 334 

lynn, . Mentioned 458 

lynn,  George  W.  Mentioned 223 

\)gg,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 17 

’oote,  Andrew  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Adams,  Theodore 489 

Grant,  U.  S 430 

Halleck,  Henry  W 441, 588, 606, 608, 620, 631, 646, 660, 668, 674 

Howard,  W.  A 397 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 606,609,619,623,668 


■ 


852 


INDEX. 


Pag 


Foote,  Andrew  H.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Pope,  John 644,660,6 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 36' 

369, 371,  383, 397, 488, 504, 535, 576, 600, 6, 

Sanford,  J.  P 5 

Walke,  H V 

Mentioned 77, 86, 88, 89, 115, 11 

118,  123-125,  402,433,  506,  581,  583,  590,591,595-597,602,618-620,62 
625,  627,  630,  635,  641,  642,  645,  646,  649,  653,  655-657,659,666,667,6 
Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

8,1862 119,120,1 

Foote,  H.  S.,  jr.  Mentioned 1 


5( 


Forshey,  William  J.  Mentioned 

Fort  Smith,  Ark.  Confederate  forces  at.  Organization,  strength,  etc 

Foster,  Abram.  Mentioned 

Foster,  Emory  S. 

Correspondence  with  James  Totten 35 

Mentioned 350-352, 31 

Report  of  action  on  the  Post  Oak  Creek,  Mo.,  March  26,  1802  35 

Foster,  John  D.  Mentioned 116, 552, 6( 

Foster,  John  S.  Mentioned 

Foster,  Melville  IT.  Mentioned 352-35 

Foster,  Samuel.  Mentioned , 1 

Fox  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  March  7,  1862.  Report  of  George  E.  Waring..  R 

Fox,  G.  V.  Mentioned 367,31 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S.) 

Frank,  Max.  Mentioned . - 214,219,22 

Franklin,  John.  Mentioned 27 

Franklin,  William  (Major).  Mentioned 324,3$ 

Franklin,  William  (Private).  Mentioned  

Frazier,  Colonel.  Mentioned 35: 

Frazier,  Dr.  Mentioned 35: 

Frederick,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 248, 25 

Freeman,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Freeman,  Colonel.  Mentioned 33, 34, 36, 37, 269, 398, 410, 416, 417 , 4 4 

Freeman,  E.  T.  Mentioned 7 

Fremont,  John  C. 

Assignments  to  command 6( 

Mentioned • 7, 368, 372, 385-387, 396, 418, 425 

434,  435,  444,  449,  450,  485,  486,  490,  524,  532,  546, 605, 716,  819, 828, 8S 

Frese,  Rudolph.  Mentioned 22 

Friend,  John.  Mentioned 

Fritz.  S.  L.  Mentioned 272,271 

Froehlich,  George.  Mentioned 219, 237, 23| 

Frost,  D.  M. 

Assignments  to  command 7fj 

Correspondence  with 

Cabell,  E.  C 70 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 81 

Mentioned 59, 259, 305, 308, 309, 319, 553, 555, 704, 755, 788, 79 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 32 

Fry,  James  B.  Mentioned 39 

Fugitt,  T.  F.  Mentioned 519-521,523,53 

Fulkerson,  Captain.  Mentioned 4 


INDEX, 


853 

Page. 


iller,  Irving  W. 

Mentioned 54, 55 

Report  of  operations  in  and  about  Atchison,  Kans.,  January  20-24,  1862.. . 54 

iller,  John  W.  Mentioned 102 

irnas,  Robert  W.  Mentioned 659 

ran,  Robert  W. 

Mentioned 271,272 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  274 

idfly,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862.  Report  of  Clark  Wright 363 

lenslan,  J.  J.  Mentioned 746 

lines,  Richard  V.  [?].  Mentioned 724 

ileskowsky,  Albert  [?].  Mentioned 244 

illagher,  W.  D.  Mentioned 586 

illaton,  Abram.  Mentioned 277 

llligan,  John.  Mentioned 261,264 

dlion,  William  G.  Mentioned 110 

imbell,  Orrin  W.  Mentioned 259, 263, 265, 266 

tmble,  Hamilton.  Mentioned 340 

imble,  H.  R.  Mentioned 378, 394, 399, 422, 423, 454-456, 530, 531, 557, 586 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Missouri , Governor  of.) 

msevoort,  Conrad.  Mentioned 214 

intt,  E.  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Pillow,  Gideon  J 700 

Polk,  Leonidas 707,717,723,742-744,757,759,763 

Mentioned 82, 112, 125, 126, 128-130, 138, 164, 165, 

172,  176,  178, 186,  614,  700,  704,  716,  736,  743,  759, 762, 769, 771, 773, 807 
Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

8,1862 165,  L68,171 

arland,  Rufus  K.  Mentioned 296 

irland,  William.  Mentioned 296 

irrett,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 770 

irtland,  John.  Mentioned 339 

issen,  John.  Mentioned 211,242 

ites,  Elijah.  Mentioned 285,297,307,311,321,328,757 


mse,  R.  B.  Mentioned 


29 


luse,  W.  R.  Mentioned 314,315 

iw,  William  B.  Mentioned 103-105  115,598 

jiger,  Washington  F.  Mentioned 260 

sneral  Polk,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 164,165,185,738,771-773 

3rrard,  John  C.  Mentioned 357 

Srster,  Anton.  Mentioned 524,546 

,bson,  Charles. 

Correspondence  with.  Missouri,  Governor  of 454 

Mentioned 454 

lien,  Peter.  Mentioned 243 

Imore,  J.  B.  Mentioned 296 

ipson,  William. 

Mentioned 22, 23, 27 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah,  Ind.  T.,  December  26,  1861 29 

lass,  P.  T.  Mentioned - 130 

lover,  John  M.  Mentioned 43,44,652 

3dley,  John  C.  Mentioned 113, 115 

Sidthorp,  George  W.  Mentioned 269 

aod,  John  J.  Mentioned 289,310 


854 


INDEX. 


Pa 


Gordon,  A.  Mentioned 

Gordon  Grant,  Tugboat.  Mentioned. 

Gordon,  G.  W.  Mentioned 

Gordon,  Henry.  Mentioned 


Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned. 


39-42, 103, 
721, 


Gorham,  James  C.  Mentioned 

Gouge’s  Mill,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  26, 1862.  Report  of  J ames  Totten . . 

Gozler,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Graham,  Steamboat.  Mentioned - 

Graham,  Commodore.  Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 

Graham,  John  M.  Mentioned 52, 

Graham,  Robert  H.  Report  of  skirmish  near  Aubrey,  Kans. , March  12, 1862 . . 

Grampus,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 78,115,121,153,674, 

Granby,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862.  Report  of  Clark  Wright 

Grand  River,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  November  30,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Princi- 
pal Events,  p.  1.) 

Granger,  Gordon. 

Assignments  to  command — 

Mentioned 80, 88, 90, 92, 94, 95, 103, 107, 118, 573, 590, 667,  ( 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

8,  1862 103> 

Grant,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Grant,  U.  S. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with 

Cook,  John 

Foote,  Andrew  

Graham,  Commodore 

Halleck,  Henry  W 53,  373,  383,  404, 432,  4 

McClernand,  John  A 416,433 

Oglesby,  Richard  J 369, 410, 430, L 

Paine,  E.  A 494 

Ross,  Leonard  404,4 

Wallace,  W.  H.  

Mentioned 79, 122, 372, 375, 403, 416, 503, 555, 629, 634, 649, 652, 672, 676, 

Grason,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Gravely,  Joseph  J. 

Mentioned 345, 354, 355, 

Report  of  scout  to  Montevallo,  Mo.,  April  13-14,  1862  A 

Graves,  G.  Mentioned - 1 

Gray,  A.  B. 

Correspondence  with  Leonidas  Polk *\ 

Mentioned *26,  lSj 

130, 144, 148, 149, 151, 156, 159, 161, 178,  689,  738, 760,  773, 800, 805, 8 
Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

8,1862 138>l 

Greeley,  C.  S.  Mentioned 4 

Greelish,  John.  Mentioned 3 

Green,  James.  Mentioned 

Green,  Martin  E. 

Mentioned 193, 207, 292, 305, 309,  717 , 783, 788, 7 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 3 

Greene,  Colton. 

Meutioned — ••  — 308,309,311,3 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  3 


INDEX. 


855 


Page. 


783 

•290,301,763,776,78 8 

293,297 

335 

46 


reer,  **• 

Correspondence  with  Earl  V an  Dorn  .....  ...... ....  •••• 

Mentioned * * ' * 

Reports  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862.. 

reer,  William.  Mentioned 

iegory,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 

•reusel,  Nicholas.  ^ 204, 21^  ^ ^ 601 

Mentioned * on« 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 

rriffith,  John  S.  22,  23}  304 

27 

....  264 

....  361 

....  320 

....  102 


Mentioned ******  oe  i qcV 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah,  Ind.  T.,  December  2b,  1861 

Griffiths,  H.  H.  Mentioned 

^riggsby,  • Mentioned 

fenstead,  John  J.  Mentioned 

rriswold,  D.  B.  Mentioned ..... 

rroesbeck,  J ohn. 

" *82,*9X,*94;98,"ioO,"l02, 567, 572, 589 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862. 

■puner,  Lorenz.  Mentioned 

xuibor,  Henry.  Mentioned 

Juilford,  William  H.  Mentioned 

Junnels.  W.  L.  Mentioned 

shmter,  Mr.  Mentioned 

lorley,  Mr.  Mentioned - 304 

Surley,  D.  R.  Mentioned 35g 

skirnee,  Alfred.  Mentioned 

Sustavison,  Gastavis.  Mentioned * - * * * ' * * 

Jwin,  WilUam.  Reports  of  expedition,  April  1, 1862,  to  Clnckasaw,  Ala.,  and 

m m ......  m mm  m livlj 

Eastport,  Miss ^3g 

Haggerty,  John.  Mentioned 398 

Elaines,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned ’ 3g6 

Halbert,  Enos.  Mentioned ^ 

Halbert,  Ephraim  F.  Mentioned 254 

Hale,  Clayton.  Mentioned 23 

Halek  Tustenuggee.  Mentioned 52Q 

Hall,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Hall,  Joseph  R.  6 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah,  Ind.  T„  December  9,  1861 J* 

Hall,  Zebulon.  Mentioned - • - 

Hallsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  27,  1861. 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 

Assignments  to  command 

Co-operation  with 

Buell,  Don  Carlos.  Communications  from 

Halleck,  Henry  W 

Lincoln,  Abraham 

Hunter,  David.  Communications  from  ^ 

Halleck,  Henry  398<  39g 

Hunter,  David 

I U.s.  A 377, 434, 505, 507, 605, 624, 659, 683, 81T 


567 


99 

238 

330 

269 

296 

278 

518 


(See  Mount  Zion  Church,  Mo.) 

369,605 


474, 489,  492 
474 


856 


INDEX. 


Pag< 


Halleck,  Henry  W. — Continued. 

Correspondence  witli 

Army  Headquarters 382, 389, 392, 395,  402, 408,  419,  436,  437, 448, 461 

500,  503,  508,  513, 514, 552, 553,  555, 557,  560, 567, 582, 602,  817, 818, 82 

Asboth,  A 375,390,399,46 

Birge,  J.  W 426,  43 

Blair,  F.  P.,  jr •- 490, 82 

Boyd,  S.H 593,628,63 

Carlin,  W.  P 410, 417,  468, 527, 552, 58 

Cullum,  George  W 55j| 

560, 565, 569,  570,  573, 581, 583, 587-590, 591, 593, 595-597, 600, 60 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 193,  375,  441 

468-471,  475,  480,  489,  491,  492,  495,  498-500,  506,  511,  513,  514,  516 

523,  525,  528,  538,  540,  541,  543-545,  547,  548,  551,  553,  556,  558,  558 

561-563,  566-568,  574,  577,  583,  588,  596,  611,  617,  618,  621,  624,  626 

628,  632,  636,  640,  646,  647,  650,  652,  659,  661,  662,  664-666,  679,82 

Davis,  Jefferson  C 37 

Denver,  James  W 653,  664,  67 

Dodge,  Grenville  M 373, 375, 398, 408, 415, 442, 44 

Ewing,  P.  B 44 

Ewing,  Thomas 475,82 


Farrar,  Bernard  G. 


44 


Foote,  Andrew  H 441, 588, 606, 608, 620, 631, 646, 660, 668, 67 

Grant,  U.  S 53, 373, 383, 404,  432,  44i 

Herron,  Frank  J 45! 

Hitchcock,  E.  A 835 

Hundhausen,  J 400,  46< 

Hunter,  David 392, 398-400, 481, 554, 594, 598, 614, 615, 828, 82! 


Krekel,  Arnold 458, 461 , 47 

Lincoln,  Abraham 401, 826, 82 1 

McClernand,  John  A 52( 

McKean,  Thomas  J 427 

430,  439,  446,  447,  457, 458, 460, 466,  467, 469,  470, 474, 575, 600, 604 

McPherson,  William  M 65^ 

Missouri,  Citizens  of 37B 

Osterhaus,  P.  J 392, 403, 412, 413 

Palmer,  J.  M 491i 

Phelps,  John  S 45 /j 

Pope,  John 382,  391, 393, 399,  407,  411, 412,  414,  417, 

418,  420,  422-426,  429,  435-437,  442,  447,  452,  453, 457-461,  466, 469, 470,! 
512,  516,  517,  528,  548,  553,  564-566,  570, 572,  580, 582, 587, 591, 593,  595, | 
596,  599,  604,  609,  610,  612,  613,618-620,623,625,629,630,634,641,643,! 
645,  646,  650,  653,  655,  657,  667,  669, 670, 674, 675, 678, 681,  820-822,  827j 

Porter,  W.  D 673 

Prentiss,  B.  M 379,! 

399,  400,  404,  433,  437, 440, 441,  444, 446,  447, 454, 458-460,  465,  474,  492 

Price,  Sterling « 496, 497, 514, 528 

Price,  Thomas  L 373,377,392 

Prince,  William  E 628, 631 

Ross,  Leonard  F 825 

Quartermaster-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A 396 

Schofield,  John  M 462,  466, 467, 469, 475, 479, 493,  503, 627, 823 

Sherman,  W.  T 379, 381, 382, 391, 445, 462, 464, 573, 583, 588, 591, 819 

Sigel,  Franz 375, 460, 461 


INDEX. 


857 

Page. 


alleck,  Henry  W.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Steele,  Frederick — 42, 374,  375,  379, 390, 393, 400, 408,  410, 

413-415,  418, 424, 478, 490, 507, 578, 609, 610, 626, 636, 651, 671, 672,  825 

Sturgis,  S.  668 

Strong,  William  618, 619 

Todd,  George  R 453, 456 

Totten,  James 632, 637, 658, 673, 679 

War  Department,  U.  S 547,596,597,603, 

614,  624,  627-629, 631, 633, 641-644, 647, 649, 657, 665, 672, 676, 677,  831 

Waring,  George  E.,  jr 594,604 

Whittlesey,  Charles  481 

Wyman,  J.  B 395,416,417,542,558 

Yeatman,  James  E - 484 

Mentioned  ...  67, 79, 81, 134, 194, 368, 369, 371, 377, 378, 391, 394, 396, 428, 450, 474, 
482,  489, 492, 504, 507, 512, 526, 530, 533, 558, 560, 561, 577, 593, 605, 606, 
612,  618, 632, 637, 643, 648, 649, 651-653, 672, 678, 681, 706, 707, 729,  829 

Orders,  etc.  Military  commissions 476, 822, 834 

Reports  of 

Blackwater  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  December  18,  1861 37 

Clinton,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  30,  1862 358 

i Fayetteville,  Ark.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  February  23,  1862.  68 

Houston,  Mo.  Scout  toward,  December  18,  1861 42 

Lexington,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  December  23,  1861 42 

Staff.  Announcements  of 398 

[allsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  27,  1861.  Report  of  B.  M.  Prentiss 43 

litallum,  W.  D.  Mentioned 128,771,786 

[lalpine,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 370 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  David  Hunter.) 

lamilton,  Schuyler. 

Assignments  to  command 491,  o69 

Mentioned 78-80,  83>  84>  86, 90, 91, 94, 96, 98, 

119, 173, 390, 398, 491, 569, 571, 572, 581, 582, 590, 606, 613, 614, 670, 671, 682 
Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo. , F eb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862 . 101 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Henry  W.  Halleck.) 

lamilton.  W.  T.  Mentioned 278 

Hamlin,  Hannibal.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Congress,  U.  S.) 

Handle,  Dempsey.  Mentioned 17 

Hansel,  Jacob  C.  Mentioned 255 

Jansen.  Ferdinand.  Mentioned 244 

lardee,  William  J.  Mentioned 544, 685, 687,  688 

Hardeman,  William  D.  Mentioned 294 

Hardin,  A.  J.  Mentioned 28 

Harding,  James.  Mentioned 799 

.Hare,  Abraham  M.  Mentioned 479 

Harkins,  E.  H.  Mentioned 269 

Harmans,  L.  G.  Mentioned 304 

Harrington,  F.  A.  Mentioned 116-118 

iHarris,  Major.  Mentioned 40 

Harris,  D.  B. 

I Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 805 

J Mentioned - 1‘29>  *38>  151. 156, 161, 178, 774, 782 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  I eb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.  148 

Harris,  Isham  G.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Tennessee,  Governor  of.) 

Harris,  J.  B.  Mentioned * 28 


858 


INDEX. 


Pag 

Harris,  J.  F.  Mentioned * 295,21 

Harris,  W.  A.  Mentioned 73 


Harris,  W.  P.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis .7( 

Harrison,  A.  A.  Mentioned 272-aj 

Hart,  Harrison  E.  Mentioned 1( 

Hart,  Pleasant  A.  Mentioned 271, 272, 275, 2/ 

Hart,  William.  Mentioned 21 

Harvey,  Captain.  Mentioned 52 

Hasie,  M.  S.  Mentioned 102, 13 

Haskell,  Alexander  M. 


Mentioned 775,80 

52 


Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn. . — 8] 

Mentioned 746,  81 

Haskell,  L.  F.  Mentioned 24 

Hatcher,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 167,16 

Hawkins,  Lacy.  Mentioned 

Hay,  John.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Abraham  Lincoln.) 

Hayden,  Mortimer  M. 

Mentioned 202, 241, 257, 260, 26 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8, 1862 26 

Haymakeur,  George  W.  Mentioned. 

Hazle,  Bill.  Mentioned 

H.  D.  Mears,  Steamboat. 

Heatt,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Hebert,  Louis. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 72 

McCulloch,  Ben 75 

Price,  Sterling 738, 741, 745, 75 

Mentioned 231, 281, 282 

284, 285, 295,  306, 703, 728, 738, 741,  742,  746, 751-753,  763,  788, 790,  79 

Hedges,  Colonel.  Mentioned 518,  522, 523, 53: 

Heg,  Hans  C.  Mentioned 116—11 

Heiden,  Theodore.  Mentioned 187,188,60 

Heinrichs,  Gustav.  Mentioned 212, 242, 243, 28« 

Hendershott,  H.  B.  Mentioned 43!| 

Henderson, . Mentioned 33 

Henderson,  C.  C.  Mentioned 17 


Henderson,  John  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  M.  Schofield 467, 47^ 

Mentioned 461, 462, 467,  469,  474, 479, 482, 493 

Hendricks,  John  A.  Mentioned 246, 248-25(1 

Henriques,  S.  Mentioned 367,383,384 

Henry  County,  Mo. 

Operations  in,  March  18-30,  1862.  Reports  of 

Totten,  James 343 

Warren,  Fitz  Henry 341-341 

Scout  in,  March  24,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events , p.  3.) 

Henry,  Jesse.  Mentioned 1/ 

Henry,  Kirk  W.  Mentioned  26S 

Herrick,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 46,4/ 

Herron,  Frank  J. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 45t 

Mentioned 261 , 267, 496, 632 

Hescock,  Henry.  Mentioned 97, 571 

Hesse,  Herman  T . Mentioned 243,244 


INDEX. 


859 


Page- 


Mentioned 70l>725 

17 


371 

348 


102 
116-118 


503 

520 


[eth,  Henry. 

[ewbanks,  William.  Mentioned. 

lewitt,  Fayette.  Mentioned 2 ’ 

leyn,  Frederick.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

licks,  E.  R.  Mentioned 

licks,  J.  D.  Mentioned 

licks,  William.  Mentioned 

liggins,  C.  W.  Mentioned 327  ’ 328 

lildebrand,  J.  N.  Mentioned * ^7 

Iill; . Mentioned * 

Jill,  EbenM.  Mentioned 84 

lill,  J.  F.  Mentioned , 

lillyer,  William  S.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  U.  S.  Grant.) 

(liltabidle,  Hiram  S.  Mentioned 278 

litchcock,  E.  A.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W . Hallack 832 

loadley,  F.  W.  Mentioned 151,152,159 

locke,  N.  Mentioned  ... 

Bodere.  Levi.  Mentioned 

3oeppner,  A.  Mentioned 192,203,546 

Hoffmann,  Louis. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 ^ 

Bogane,  James  T.  Mentioned 

Hogg,  Harvey.  Mentioned 

Hogshooter,  Nelson.  Mentioned * 

Holbert,  Ephraim  F.  Mentioned 356 

Hollan,  Hugo.  Mentioned 
1 Holland,  Mr.  Mentioned.. 

'Holland,  Captain.  Mentioned 451,T" 

Holland,  Colly  B.  Mentioned 

Holla  way,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Hollins,  George  N. 
j Correspondence  with 
Beauregard,  G.  T 
McCown,  John  P 
Polk,  Leonidas  .. 

| Mentione(l  82,126,127,130 

ionec  * " ' ‘ " ’ “g" ""  '699* *760-762, 765, 766, 769, 773, 777-779, 785, 804, 809 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8,  1862.  184 

Hollister,  George  S.  Mentioned 615’  628’ 654’ 655’  ^ 

Holman,  George.  Mentioned ' 

Holstein,  Charles  L.,  jr.  Mentioned * 

Holt,  Captain.  Mentioned * * * ‘ " * * 

Holt,  Joseph.  Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General  s Office,  U.  8.  A 

Hook,  U.  S.  Marshal.  Mentioned 

Ho-po-eith-le-yo-ho-la. 

Correspondence  with 

Carr u th,  E.  

Lincoln,  Abraham Q{,  ^ 

^ *24, Vl,Vo9,Vl2,Vi3, *715*719, *720, 780 

Scout  after,  December  29,  1861-January  4,  1862.  (See  Indian  Territory. 

Operations  in,  December  19,  1861-Ja»uari/  4,  1862.) 

Hoppe,  Walker.  Mentioned 

Hopper,  J.  Francis.  Mentioned 


777 

773 

758 


334 
385, 396 

54 


25 

534 


240 

339 


860 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Horine,  Elias.  Mentioned 33S 

Horr,  H.  R.  Mentioned 265 

Horton,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 336 

Hoskin,  John.  Mentioned 398 

Hough,  R.  M.  Mentioned 47, 370, 375 

Houghtaling,  Charles.  Mentioned 112 

House,  Leroy  S.  Mentioned 269 

Houston,  Mo.  Scout  toward,  Dec.  18,  1861.  Report  of  Henry  W.  Halleck..  42 

Houts,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned . . . 344, 345, 352, 353, 357 

Houx,  Matt.  Mentioned 352-354 

Hovey,  A.  P.  Mentioned 544 

How,  John.  Mentioned 490 

Howard,  W.  A. 

Correspondence  with  Andrew  H.  Foote 397 

Mentioned 397 

Howe,  Oscar  P.  Mentioned 232,242 

Howell,  E.  V.  Mentioned 28 

Howland,  J ames  T.  Mentioned 44 

Hoxie,  Mr.  Mentioned 518| 

Hubbard,  J.  M.  Mentioned 38,40,49-51,234,2351 

Hubbard,  L.  D.  Mentioned 37flf 

Hubbell,  F.  L.  Mentioned 311 

Hughes,  Barney.  Mentioned 1561 

Hughes,  H.  Mentioned 319 

Hughes,  John  T. 

Mentioned 312 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 314 

Hull,  E.  B.  Mentioned 311 

Humansville,  Mo.  Action  at,  Mar.  26,  1862.  Report  of  Joseph  W.  McClurg.  354 

Humes,  W.  Y.  C.  Mentioned 129, 150-153, 158, 176, 179 

Hummel,  G.  W.  Mentioned 364, 365 

Humphrey,  J.  G.  Mentioned 36 

Hundhausen,  Julius. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 460, 466 


43 


Mentioned 

Hunnewell,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  January  3,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events,  p.  2.) 

Hunt,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 35,50,51 

Hunter,  David. 

Assignments  to  command 370,  606,  644 

Co-operation  with  Halleck.  Communications  from 

Halleck,  Henry  W 400  ! 

Hunter,  David 398, 399  ! 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A 379, 428, 525  i 

Anthony,  D.  R 508 

Army  Headquarters 428,450 

Deitzler,  George  W 573 

Halleck,  Henry  W 392, 398-400, 481, 554, 594, 598, 614, 615, 828, 829 

Lane,  James  H 482 

Lincoln,  Abraham 551 

Mentioned 58, 194,  372,  379,  389,  400, 416,  419, 450, 470, 508, 515,  529, 538, 

546,  551,  555,  568,  574,  576.  589,  602,  605,  606,  615-618, 644, 686, 721, 831 

Staff.  Announcements  of 370 

Hunter,  Jason  H.  Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 767 


INDEX. 


861 


Page. 

unter,  R.  M.  T.  Mentioned 725 

unting,  Charles.  Mentioned 348 

iurse,  Private.  Mentioned 277 

utchens,  William  D.  Mentioned 117,118 

utchinson,  Major.  Mentioned 319 

yams,  S.  M.,  jr.  Mentioned 294 

linois.  Military  departments  embracing 369> 605 

linois,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 372,373 

linois  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery  —Regiments : 1st,  C,  88,  93, 95, 112  ; G,  95;  2d,  A,  202,205,246- 
250,253-256;  G,  115-117;  I,  95. 

Cavalry — Companies : Hutchens’,  116-118  ; Huntley’s,  633 ; Kane  County 
(Dodson’s),  636;  Jenks’,*  204,209,  210,212,  229-231,  473;  Smith’s,*  204, 
212,229-232,473;  Stewart’s,  457.  Regiments : 1st,  95,  110,580,581,603, 

661;  2d,  93,95,116;  3d,  60,61,69,205,225,257,261-263,266,277,473,539, 

545, 550 ; 4th,  372  ; 5th,  636  ; 7th,  52,  92,  95, 102,  110,  114,  173,  347,  348, 

572,580  ; 9th,  372  ; 10th,  661, 662 ; 13th,  609, 636. 

Infantry — Regiments : 10th,  82,83,88,92,95,97,109-111,404,580,581;  11th, 

47 ; 13th,  33, 539, 550, 588 ; 14th,  544 ; 15th,  49,  404, 526, 544  ; 16th,  82, 83, 
88,92,95,97,109,111,404,533;  17th,  52, 568;  20th,  47  ; 2 2d,  47,  88, 92, 95, 
109-112,  603;  24th,  221 ; 25th,  204,  210-215,219-224,  229,539 ; 26th,  92,  95, 

102, 103,  113,  404,  567,  572, 590 ; 27th,  95,  115-117  ; 35th,  205, 256,  259,  261, 

263,  539  ; 36th,  202,  204,  213,  215,  217,  218,  220,  225-229,  237,  278,  539; 

37th,  205,  245,  246,  250,  253,  254,  256;  42d,  95,  115,  124,  535;  43d,  464, 

496,  499,  511,  528,  547 ; 44th,  204,  210-215,  219,  220,  224,  225,  246,  281,539; 

47th,  92,  95,  113,  535,  564,  567,  590  ; 51st,  88,  92,  95,  109,  111,  112;  52d, 

55th,  372;  59th,  205,  245,  246,  250,  253,  254, 256;  64th,  t 93,  95. 
ndependence,  Mo.  Skirmishes  at 

November  26,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  1.) 

February  22,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  2.) 

ndest,  Joseph.  Mentioned 464 

ndiana.  Military  departments  embracing 605 

ndiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  (Independent) : 1st,  205,  214,  245-252;  2d,  416,  615,  631, 

654 ; 3d,  349,  639,  640. 

Cavalry— Regiments  : 1st,  72. 

Infantry — Regiments : 8th,  205,  245-252,  261-263,  267  ; 18th,  205,  245-247, 
249-251 ; 22d,  205,  217-219,  245-251 ; 24th,  544  ; 26th,  638  ; 34th,  91,  94, 

564,  590  ; 43d,  92,  94,  564,  590  ; 46th,  92,  94,  103,  107,  564,  590;  47th,  91, 

94,  103,  564,  590  ; 59th,  91,  94,  103,  105,  107,  564,  590. 

Iiidian  Creek,  Mo.  Scout  through  valley  of,  April  8,  1862.  Report  of  Clark 
Wright 


363 


Communications  from 


Cndians. 

Confederate  States  service  (employment  of,  in). 

Pike,  Albert 697 

War  Department,  C.  699 

References  to  (atrocities,  employment  of,  and  policy  toward) 194, 195 

206-208, 235, 236, 481, 482, 659, 660, 665, 668, 679, 
697-700,709,712,713,  715,719-721,  732,  780,796 
United  States  service  (employment  of,  in).  Communications  from 

Adjutant-Gen eraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 659 

Denver,  J.  W 


679 


* Companies  A and  B,  36th  Illinois, 
t Yates  Sharpshooters. 


862 


INDEX. 


Indian  Territory. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 

Carruth,  E.  H 

McIntosh,  James 

Pike,  Albert 

War  Department,  C.  S - 

Denver,  J.  W.,  assigned  to  command 

“Lane’s  Expedition,”  to.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 

A-luk-tus-te-nu-ke 

Army  Headquarters 

Halleck,  Henry  W 

Ho-po-eith-le-yo-ho-la 


Pag 


,.  65 

..  25,5 
..  71 

097,71 
699,76 
..  6? 

525,57 
. 53 

..  55 

. 55 

53 


Hunter,  David 52 

Lane,  James  H 52 


Lincoln,  Abraham 534, 538, 55 

War  Department,  U.  S 57 

Military  departments  embracing 605, 690, 73? 

Operations  in 

Communications  from 

Cooper,  Douglas  H 70 

McIntosh,  James 713,71 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 78 


November  19,  1861-January  4,  1862. 

Events.  Summary  of  Principal 

Report  of  Douglas  H.  Cooper 

(See  also 

Chustenahlah.  Engagement  at,  December  26,  1861. 
Chusto-Talasah.  Engagement  at,  December  9,  1861. 

Creeks  and  Seminoles.  Skirmish  with,  December  27,  1861. 
Ho-po-eith-le-yo-ho-la.  Scout  after , Dec.  29,  1861-Jaw.  4, 1862. 
Round  Mountain.  Engagement  at,  November  19,  1861.) 

Indian  Territory,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 


Constituted  and  limits  defined 69(1 

Merged  into  Trans-Mississippi  District 7m 

Pike,  Albert,  assigned  to  command 69f 

Indian  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Cherokee — Regiments : Drew’s,  7,  8, 10, 12, 13,  16-18,  287-290,  292,  709,  713, 
719-721, 764  ; Stand  Watie’s,  24, 32, 287-290, 318, 721, 764. 

Choctaw  and  Chickasaw—  Regiments : Cooper’s,  5-12, 14-16, 18-21, 286, 287, 
292, 300, 720. 


Creek — Regiments : D.  N.  McIntosh’s,  5-10,  16,  19,20,23,287,  719,720,764. 
Creeks  and  Seminoles— Battalions : Chilly  McIntosh’s,  5, 23. 

Ing,  Stanford.  Mentioned 27C 

Inspector- General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Report  of  inspection  of  Union  troops 

in  Kansas 552 

Iowa. 

Affairs  in  Fremont  County.  Communications  from 

Iowa,  Governor  of. 518, 530 

Nutt,  H.  C 519, 531 

State  Department,  U.  S 523 

Military  departments  embracing 369, 605 

Iowa,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Nutt,  H.  C 518,519,530,531 

State  Department,  U.  S 518, 530 


INDEX. 


863 


Page. 

owa  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  ( Independent ):  1st,  202,203,205,  239,  256-259,  262,  266, 

275, 464, 499, 539;  2d,  78, 93, 95, 465, 511 ; 3d,  202, 205, 241, 257-262, 265, 266, 
268,269, 327,539,550. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  38, 39, 41, 50, 51, 334,  335, 341-343, 350, 351, 356-358, 

422,  464, 517, 535, 637  ; 2d,  93, 95, 118, 119, 465, 496,  499, 511, 606 ; 3d,  61,  62, 
64,65,67,69,203,206-208,211,217,  232-236,  242,  245,  246,  333,  336-338,  464, 
469,475,559,534,593;  4th,  632;  Curtis  Horse,  465, 506, 511, 547, 550. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 4th,  200, 205, 252, 256, 257, 263, 264, 274,  275,  539  ; 5th 
91,  94,  103,  105-107,  535,  567,  590  ; 7th,  464  ; 8th,  470,  535;  9th,  200,  205, 

252, 256, 261, 262, 266-268, 270, 271, 496, 499, 506, 511, 539, 542, 550 ; 10th,  47, 


48, 91, 94, 103, 108 ; 11th,  427,  430, 440, 458, 475  ; 13th,  430. 

rving,  Mr.  Mentioned 55, 56 

sland  No.  10,  New  Madrid  Bend,  Mississippi  River. 

Batteries  (Confederate),  ammunition,  etc.,  at 144,145, 182, 183, 800, 801 

Operations  at.  (See  New  Madrid , Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February 
28-April  8,  1862.) 

Sketch  of 767 

snard,  Edward.  Mentioned 164, 167 

som,  John  F.  Mentioned 223 

ackman,  Sidney  D.  Mentioned 342, 637 

ackson,  Mo. 

Reconnaissance  to,  April  2-4,  1862.  Report  of  Lindsay  Murdoch 362 

Skirmish  at,  April  9,  1862.  Reports  of 

Flentz,  William 365 

Murdoch,  Lindsay 364 


fackson, . Mentioned 7 


fackson,  A.,  jr. 

Mentioned 151, 152, 176 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.  157 

Tackson,  Albert.  Report  of  reconnaissance  to,  and  skirmish  near,  Saint  Fran- 
ci8ville,  Mo.,  February  23-25,  1862 72 

Tackson,  Claiborne  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 717,724,733 

Price,  Sterling 725,756 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 704,735,753,765 

War  Department,  C.  S 746 

Mentioned 35, 373, 421, 432, 537, 704-706, 711, 725, 727, 732, 735, 815, 816 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  26,  814;  No.  27,  813. 

Tackson,  Congreve.  Mentioned 319 

Tackson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 117 

Tacobs,  . Mentioned 330 

Tacoby,  Lawrence.  Mentioned 221,236 

Taensch,  Frederick.  Mentioned 240 

T.  D.  Perry,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 362,404 

Tefferies,  William.  Mentioned 364,365 

Tefferson  City,  Mo.  Thomas  J.  McKean  assigned  to  command 407 

Tenks,  Albert. 

Mentioned 210,230 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 229 

Tenks,  James  D. 

Mentioned 334 

Report  of  skirmish  in  La  Fayette  County,  Mo.,  March  10,  1862. 335 

Tenks,  John  C.  Mentioned 252 


864 


INDEX. 


Page 


Jennison,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 423, 437, 449, 507, 508, 546, 573, 614, 702, 81! 

Jewell,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 34 

Jewell,  John  M.  Mentioned 344,345,350,352-35- 

Johnson  County,  Mo.  Operations  in. 

January  5-12,  1862.  Report  of  D.  R.  Anthony 4< 

March  18-30,  1862.  Reports  of 

Totten,  James - 34 

Warren,  Fitz  Henry 341-34 

March  19-23, 1862.  Report  of  James  Totten 34 

Johnson,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Johnson,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 78 

Johnson,  J.  T.  Mentioned 11 

Johnson,  J.  W.  Mentioned 17 

Johnson,  Morris.  Mentioned - 3|i 

Johnson,  Moses  F.  Mentioned 35 

Johnson,  Thomas.  Mentioned 42! 

Johnson,  Waldo  P.  Mentioned 324, 32 

Johnston,  . Mentioned 48 


80 


0! 


Johnston,  A.  Sidney. 

Co-ox>eration  of  Yan  Dorn  with 

Correspondence  with 

Borland,  Solon 687,/ 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 749>  755,  787>  789> 8a 

Mentioned 510,  544, 687, 689,  711, 729, 734, 735, 749, 751, 80 

Johnston,  T.  N.  Mentioned - 429,  451,  452, 77! 

Johnstown,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  November  24, 1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events,  p.  1.) 

Joliat,  Francis  J.  Mentioned 209>  245, 243, 54! 

Jones,  Captain.  Mentioned 33 

Jones,  A.  W.  Mentioned 321 

Jones,  Eden.  Mentioned 156,16. 

Jones,  Jacob.  Mentioned 

Mentioned 4^ 


Jones,  Jeff. 

Jones,  Junius  A. 

Mentioned 203,258,259,26 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1882  263 

Jones,  Samuel.  (Signal  Corps.)  Mentioned 46 

Jones,  Samuel,  Private.  Mentioned 3 

Jones,  S.  M.  Mentioned 251 

Jones,  Willis.  Mentioned 8-10,20,2 

Jones,  W.  C.  Mentioned  150-152, 15. 

Jordan,  E.  C.  Mentioned "j 

Jordan,  Thomas.  Mentioned 128,765,774,78^ 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard.) 

Joslyn,  John  J.  Mentioned ' 

Joslyn,  Merritt  L.  Mentioned , 

Jumen,  Captain.  Mentioned 3 

Jumper,  John.  Mentioned 

J.  Wilson,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 43* 

Kaiser,  John  B. 

Mentioned ** 

Reports  of 

Little  Sni,  Mo.  Skirmish  on  the,  April  1,  1862  • 

Marshall,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  16,  1862  341 

Saline  County,  Mo.  Operations  in,  March  7-10,  1862 33 


INDEX. 


865 


Page. 

Kalfus,  Columbus  C.  Mentioned 172,692,705,722 

Kanawha  Valley,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 800 

Kansas. 

Denver,  J.  W,  assigned  to  command  of  troops  in 456 

Martial  law  declared  in 547 , 548 

Military  departments  embracing 605 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Denver,  J.  W 423 

Halleck,  Henry  W 594, 598 

Hunter,  David 573 

Montgomery,  James 415 

(See  also 


Atchison,  Kans.  Operations  in  and  about , January  20-24. 

Aubrey , Kans.  Skirmish  near,  March  12. 

Indian  Territory.  u Lane's  Expedition .”) 

Union  troops  in.  Inspection  report  of.  Extract 552 

Kansas  Troops.*  Mentioned. 

Battalions : Clark’s,  616, 617.  Batteries  ( Independent ) ; 1st,  664.  Regiments : 

1st.  46, 47, 423, 470, 507, 528, 541, 573, 615-617, 631, 653, 655, 664,828  ; 2d,  346, 

347, 614, 616, 653-655, 664 ; 3d,  416, 423, 615-617, 653  ; 4th,  416, 614-617, 653 ; 

5th,  343,344,541,615-617,654;  6th,  541, 615-617, 654  ; 7th,  416, 615-617, 

631, 654, 664  ; 8th,  336, 423, 614-617, 654  ; 9th,  616, 617, 654  ; 10th,  654. 

Kansas,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 


Covode,  John 831 

Halleck,  Henry  W 828,829 

Hunter,  David 450,614,615,829 

Lane,  James  H 482 

Hunter,  David,  assumes  command  of 370 

Merged  into  Department  of  the  Mississippi 605 


Orders,  General,  series  1861:  No.  1,  370;  No.  2,  456.  Series  1862:  No.  11, 
529;  No.  14,541;  No.  17,  547;  No.  26,  617. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861  (Denver):  No.  8,  423.  Series  1862:  No.  57, 


No.  58,  54;  No.  100,  557. 

Kansas,  District  of.  (Union.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Denver,  James  W 653,679 

Halleck,  Henry  W 664, 668, 683 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 832 

Denver,  James  W.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command 653, 832 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  4,  683. 

Sturgis,  S.  D.,  assumes  command 683 

Kay,  Reuben.  Mentioned 315 

Keetsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  February  25,  1862.  Reports  of 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 74 

Wright,  Clark 74 

Keisengro, . Mentioned 364 

Keller,  A.  M.  Mentioned 28 

Kelley,  Josiah  L.  Mentioned 28 

Kelley,  William  H.  Mentioned 343,658 

Kellogg,  William  P. 

Correspondence  with  E.  A.  Paine 568 

Mentioned 192, 114, 568 


* Organizations  designated  without  regard  to  arm  of  service. 

55  R R — VOL  VIII 


866 


INDEX. 


Kelly.  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Kelly,  Joseph. 

Assignments  to  command 

Mentioned 

Kelly,  Michael  J.  Mentioned 

Kelsey,  F.  M.  Mentioned 

Kelton,  John  C.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Henry  W.  Halleck.) 


Pag< 
..  77 

,.  81 

704, 81 
35,10 
..  26 
..  39 


Mentioned - 33 

Correspondence  with  Frederick  Steele 37 


Kendall,  John  W. 

Kenedy,  George  F. 

Kennedy,  J.  B.  G. 

Correspondence  with  Leonidas  Polk '5 

Mentioned 130,178,760,762,80 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862  17 

Kennedy,  John.  Mentioned 32 

Kennellv,  Colonel.  Mentioned 70 

Kennerly,  Clark.  Mentioned 
Kentucky. 

Military  departments  embracing 369, 60 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters  56 

Halleck,  Henry  W 5(5 

Ketchum,  W.  Scott.  Mentioned 41 

Colonel.  Mentioned  52 


31 


Key, 


Keyworth,  R.  W. 


Correspondence  with  Earl  Yan  Dorn - 

Mentioned 

Kidwell,  Private.  Mentioned 35 

Kielmansegge,  Eugene  von.  Mentioned 208, 209, 215, 219, 27 

Kile,  Augustus.  Mentioned 29 

Kimmel,  M.  M.  Mentioned 286,78 

King,  Colonel.  Mentioned 363, 3b 

King,  James  M.  Mentioned 

King,  J.  P.  Mentioned 

King,  Thomas.  Mentioned 10 

Kingman,  A.  D.  Mentioned 1® 

Kirby,  W.  A.  Mentioned 271 

Kirkpatrick,  James.  Mentioned 4 


Kirkwood,  Samuel  J.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Iowa,  Governor  of.) 

Kitchen,  SoL  G. 

Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff  Thompson 74 

Mentioned 52, 173, 362, 364, 690, 700, 743, 761 

Klauss,  Martin.  Mentioned 214,247-249,25: 

Kluefer,  John.  Mentioned 2® 

Knapp,  Everett  J.  Mentioned 22j 

Knobe,  O.  B.  Mentioned 2® 

Knobelsdorff,  Charles.  Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  Mar.  6-8,  1862..  22* 


Knobnoster,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  January  22,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events,  p.  2.) 

Koehler,  Anton  P.  Mentioned 

Koemer,  G.  Mentioned 

Kohr,  Francis.  Mentioned * 

Koontz,  John.  Mentioned 

Krausnick,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Krebs.  Alfred  L.  Mentioned 


34* 

395, 826, 82: 

24< 

15. 

54< 

21 


INDEX. 


867 

Page. 


Krekel,  Arnold. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 458, 461, 474 

Mentioned 467 

Reports  of 

Big  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  on,  March  9,  1862 333 

BoVs  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  on,  March  7,  1862 330 

Krone,  Max.  Mentioned 225  • 

Krumsick,  August.  Mentioned 279 

Kykendall,  Captain.  Mentioned 685 

Laclede  County,  Mo.  Scout  through,  March  4-11,  1862.  Report  of  George 

E.  Waring,  jr 187 

Lademann,  Otto  C.  Mentioned 278 

Lady  Polk,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 168 

La  Fayette  County,  Mo. 

Operations  in,  J anuary  5-12, 1862.  Report  of  D.  R.  Anthony 46 

Skirmish  in,  March  10, 1862.  Reports  of 

Jenks,  James  D 335 

Stevenson,  John  D 334 

Lahore,  Mitchell.  Mentioned 6, 7, 9, 10 

Laibold,  Bernard.  Mentioned 239, 240, 242, 280 

Lake,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned  . 223 

La  Mine  Crossing,  Mo.  J.  M.  Palmer  assigned  to  command 471 

Lancaster,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  November  24,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events,  p.  1.) 

Landry,  George.  Mentioned 280 

Landry,  J.  A.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Louis  Hubert.) 

Lane,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 154 

Lane,  F.  Mentioned 31 

Lane,  James  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Covode,  J ohn 529, 831 

Hunter,  David 482 

Lincoln,  Abraham • 551 

Montgomery,  James 415 

Mentioned 194, 396, 449, 450, 525, 529, 

533,534,538,551,552,555,576,615,  616,  642,  686,  702,  707,  819,  830-833 
Lane,  Walter  P. 

Mentioned 22,23,27,298,299 

Reports  of 

Chustenahlah,  lad.  T.  Engagement  at,  December  26,  1861  28 

Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  Battle  of,  March  6-8, 1862 299 

Langen,  Edward.  Mentioned 244 

Lanigan,  Thomas.  Mentioned 31,292 

Lawson,  John  H. 

Affidavit  of.  Indian  atrocities  at  Pea  Ridge,  Ark 207 

Mentioned 207 

Lawther,  R.  R.  Mentioned 285, 311 

Leavenworth,  Jesse  H.  Mentioned 665, 668 

Lebanon,  Mo.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  January  22,  1862.  Report  of 

Clark  Wright 56 

Lee,  Robert  E.  Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn p . . 791 

Lee,  Roswell  W.  Mentioned 6, 8, 10, 288, 300 

Lee,  W.  S.  Mentioned 261 

Leebert,  William  R.  Mentioned 259 


868 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Leeper,  William  T.  Mentioned 73 

Leesville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  19,  1862.  Reports  of 

Totten,  James 641 


Warren,  Fitz  Henry - - 341-343 

Leffingwell,  William  E.  Mentioned 535 

Leftwich,  L.  C.  Mentioned 286 

Lehman,  Charles.  Mentioned 68,244 

Leighton,  George  E. 


Correspondence  with  Bernard  G.  Farrar - 411,446 

Mentioned 405 

Lelia,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 798 


Leser,  Frederick.  Mentioned 280 

Lewis,  Captain.  Mentioned 365 

Lewis,  Barbour. 

Mentioned * 271,272,275 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  277 

Lewis,  Frederick  W.  Mentioned 58, 483, 484 

Lewis,  L.  M.  [?].  Mentioned 286 

Lewis,  R.  A.  Mentioned 766-769 

Lewis,  William.  Mentioned 532 

Lexington,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 121, 122 

Lexington,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  December  23,  1861.  Report  of  Henry  W. 

Halleck 42 

Liabilities  in  Western  Department.  (See  Western  Department — Union.} 

Libby,  John  S.  Mentioned 96 

Lightfoot,  Gustavus.  Mentioned 220 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with 

A-luk-tus-te-nn-ke 534 

Army  Headquarters 450, 534 

Halleck,  Henry  W 401, 826, 827 

Ho-po-eith-le-yo-ho-la 534 

Hunter,  David 551 

Lane,  James  H 551 

War  Department,  U.  S 538 

Mentioned 25, 394, 395, 399, 402, 422, 454, 455, 468, 474, 489, 507, 

525,  530,  555, 601, 611, 624, 648, 653, 726, 817, 818, 823, 824, 828-830, 832 

War  Order,  No.  3,  series  1862  605 

Lindsay,  D.  Herndon. 

Mentioned 305, 308 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 322 

Linkinfitter,  Mr.  Mentioned 523 

Little,  Henry. 

Assignments  to  command 739 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 803 

Mentioned 259, 260, 285, 

294,  305,  306, 322, 323, 325-327, 329, 717, 736, 739, 747, 757, 788, 792, 812 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  306 

Little  [Red]  Bird.  Mentioned 17 

Little  Niangua,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  — , 1862.  Report  of  Joseph  W.  McClurg . 365 

Little  River,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  March  23,  1862.  Report  of  Jonas  Rawalt..  347 

(See  also  New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.) 

Little  Santa  Fe,  Mo.  Skirmishes  at. 

November  20,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  1.) 

March  22,  1862.  Report  of  Robert  B.  Mitchell 346 


INDEX. 


869 


Page. 

Little  Sni,  Mo.  Skirmish  on  the,  April  1,  1862.  Reports  of 

Kaiser,  John  B 360 

Totten,  James 359 

Livingston,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 164,165,168,185 

Livingston,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 54 

Loan,  Ben. 

Assignments  to  command 422 

Correspondence  with  John  M.  Schofield 422 

Mentioned ; 422, 652 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Medicine  Creek,  Mo.,  April  8,  1862  363 

Logan,  Captain.  Mentioned 743 

Logwood,  T.  H.  Mentioned 770 

Lomax,  I*.  L.  Mentioned 286,287,786 

Loomis,  John  M.  Mentioned 92,95,102,113 

Lord,  G.  P.  Mentioned 119 

Lothrop,  Warren  L. 

Mentioned 84,  93-95, 590 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  97 

Louisiana.  Military  departments  embracing 734 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : Point  Coupee,  127-129,  133,  186,  774,  811. 

I nfantry — Regiments  : 3d,  225, 230, 253, 285,  293,  295,  306,  718,  728,  746,  776, 

788;  7th,  224;  Hth,  128,130,151,186;  12th,  128,129,186,766  ; 21st,* 

128, 130, 178, 179, 186. 

Iiouisville,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 116,127,169,621 

Lovell,  Mansfield.  Mentioned 777,778 

Lucas,  William.  Mentioned - 313 

Ludlow,  B.  C.  Mentioned ' 187,188,366,604 

Lusby,  Robert.  Mentioned - 48 

Luther,  Christian.  Mentioned 244 

Lutrell,  W.  H.  H.  Mentioned  155 

Lyford,  Stephen  C.  Mentioned 115 

Lyon,  James  J. 

Mentioned 271, 272, 274, 276 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  276 

Lyon,  Nathaniel.  Mentioned 616 

Lytle,  W.  J.  Mentioned 6 

McBride,  J.  H. 

Assignments  to  command 740,755 

Mentioned  . . 36, 37, 75, 323, 324,  393, 395,  398, 408,  413, 416,  417, 442, 444, 543, 740, 755 

McCabe,  Henry.  Mentioned 345 

McCalla,  Nathaniel.  Mentioned 168 

Me  Carthey,  William.  Mentioned 30 

'McCartners.  Milton.  Mentioned 520 

McCartney,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned 278 

McCarty,  Thomas.  Mentioned 315 

Me  Carver,  John  S. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn. 753 

Mentioned 780, 783 

McClellan,  George  B. 

Assignments  to  command — 665 

Mentioned 67, 377, 

428,  470,  492,  507,  530, 534, 538, 555, 557, 561,  605,  665,  817,  822,  829, 830 
(For  correspondence,  etc. — as  General-in-Chief — see  Army  Headquarters.) 

* Also  called  5th  Battalion. 


870 


INDEX. 


Page. 

McClernand,  John  A 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  S 416,433,457 

Halleck,  Henry  W 526 

Mentioned 116,372,766 

McClure,  W.  H.  Mentioned 268 

McClurg,  Joseph  W. 

Mentioned 673 

Reports  of 

Humansville,  Mo.  Action  at,  March  26,  1862  354 

Little  Niangua,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  9-16,  1862 365 

McKay’s  Farm,  Mo.  Affair  at,  March  21,  1862  345 

Montevallo,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  9-16,  1862 365 

Quincy,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  9-16,  1862  365 

McConnell,  John.  Mentioned 60,257,259,261,263,264,484 

McCoole,  Jackson  E.  Mentioned 6,14 

McCowan,  Colonel.  Mentioned 358,664 

McCown,  John  P. 

Assignments  to  command 803,  804 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T . . 131,772,777,778,781,782,785,786,789,794,795,797, 799, 800, 804 

Brown,  Alexander  J - 179 

Cheatham,  B.  F 768 

Hollins,  George  N 773 

Pickett,  Ed.,  jr 785 

Polk,  Leonidas 131, 

759-762, 765, 766, 768, 769, 771-773, 775, 778-782, 784-786, 793, 795 

Stewart,  A.  P v 131 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 767 

Walker,  L.  M 131 

Mentioned 82, 

125, 132, 138, 148-150, 154, 163-165,  169-173,  179,  184-186,  614,  629,  754,  , 
758, 759, 763,  767-769, 774-776, 778,  779, 781,  786,  789,  803,  804,  807,  809 
Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28- April 

8,1862 125,126,130 

McCoy,  Creek.  Mentioned 17  j 

McCray,  T.  H.  Mentioned 685  i 

McCulloch,  Colonel.  Mentioned 193  | 

McCulloch,  Ben. 

Correspondence  with 

Brusld,  Charles  A 753 

Hdbert,  Louis 752 

Price,  Sterling 702 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 763 

War  Department,  C.  S 686,699,701,702 

Mentioned 7, 61, 68, 69, 74, 191-193, 

196, 199, 204, 217, 218, 226, 233, 246, 247,  250,  253,  281-285,  287,  289,  293, 
295, 298-301,  303, 304, 306, 329, 330, 379, 382,  392,  393,  395,  402,  403,  408, 
417,  429, 479, 501, 543, 559-562, 568, 610, 627,  686,  687,  693,  701,  703,  712, 
713,716,720,721,724,  728-731,  734,  746,  748-751,  755,  763,  764,  776,  790 

Organization,  strength,  etc.,  of  command  of 746,763,77 6 

McCulloch,  Joseph  B,  Mentioned 296 

McCurtain,  Jackson. 

Mentioned 6,  8-10 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah,  Ind.  T.,  December  9,  1861 20 


INDEX. 


871 


Page. 

jDaniel,  James.  Mentioned - I7 

;Dannal,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 65,  338 

jDermott,  John.  Mentioned 357 

icDonald,  Emmett.  Mentioned 285, 300, 310, 319, 324, 327 


jDonald,  Reuben.  Mentioned 

;Donald,  Stephen  D.  Mentioned. 

jDowell,  Mr.  Mentioned 

;Dowell,  Drake.  Mentioned 

jDowell,  Irvin.  Mentioned 

icFarlane,  A.  Mentioned 

jGivern,  Claude.  Mentioned 


jlntee, 


Mentioned 


. 365 

. 304 

. 691 

. 801 
. 665 

336, 339 
. 812 
. 362 

. 5,6 


jlntosh,  Chilly.  Mentioned 

jlntosh,  D.  N. 

Mentioned — 5,7-10,17,18 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah,  December  9,  1861 16 

Dlntosh,  James. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 25, 703, 712, 713, 715, 732 

Cooper,  Douglas  H 7 69 

Price,  Sterling 712,741 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 764 

Mentioned 11-13, 191, 193, 199, 204, 217, 218, 231, 233, 

246,  247, 250, 253, 281-285, 287-289, 292, 293, 295, 297-301, 303, 306, 330, 
510,  525, 543, 555, 627, 703, 720, 721, 728, 730, 738, 746, 749, 750, 764,  790 


of  command  of. 


'28 


22 

31 

13 

337, 339 
803, 804 


Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Reports  of 

Chustenahlah,  Ind.  T.  Engagement  at,  December  26,  1861 
Creeks  and  Seminoles.  Skirmish  with,  December  27,  1861.. 

slntosh,  W.  R.  Mentioned 

ack,  Rufus  H.  C.  Mentioned 

ackall,  W.  W. 

Assignments  to  command - 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T — 134,804,807,808 

Sheliha,  Victor 8*6 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 806,808 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  A.  Sidney  Johnston.) 

Mentioned 110-112, 129, 132, 157, 158, 175, 176, 178, 675, 677, 803, 804 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

8,1862 132,134,135 

cKay,  James  H.  Mentioned ,r>46 

IcKay,  J.  P.  Mentioned ~^9 

cKay,  M.  M.  Mentioned 130  > 807 

cKay’s  Farm,  Mo.  Affair  at,  March  21,  1862.  Report  of  Joseph  W.  Mc- 


345 


407 


{@lurg 

cKean,  Thomas  J. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  427» 

430, 439, 446, 447, 457, 458, 460, 466, 467, 469, 470, 474, 575, 600, 604 

Merrill,  Lewis 47  ^ 

Schofield,  John  682 

Mentioned 43, 342,  407, 429,  447,  448, 456, 547, 637 


872 


INDEX. 


Page 


McKenny,  Thomas  I.  Mentioned 61, 192, 203, 212, 219, 235, 551 


321 


411 

49' 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Samuel  R.  Curtis.) 

Mackenzie,  Charles.  Mentioned 26. 

McKinsock,  C.  Mentioned &21, 53: 

Maclean,  L.  A.  Mentioned 

McLean,  N.  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Henry  W.  Halleck.) 

McMahon,  E.  Mentioned 

McMichael,  William.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Henry  W.  Halleck.) 

McMinn,  Captain.  Mentioned 351 

McNair,  Evander.  Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  29' 

McNeil,  R.  Mentioned 335 

McNey,  Captain.  Mentioned 
McPhail,  Enos.  Mentioned  . 

McPherson,  J.  B.  Mentioned 398,401,420,445,821 

McPherson,  William  M. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 

Mentioned 

McQueen,  Alexander  G.  Mentioned 356,35' 

McRae,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 163, 16' 

McRae,  D,  Mentioned 285,291 

Madison,  Edward.  Mentioned 203, 260, 27( 

Magee,  David  F.  Mentioned 20 ' 

Magenis,  Arthur  J.  Mentioned 324, 32 

Magoffin,  Ebenezer.  Mentioned 39,40,415,418,45. 

Major,  James  P.  Mentioned - 

Mallory,  S.  R.  Mentioned ^ 

Manassas,  C.  S.  Ram.  Mentioned 184, 77 < 

Manter,  Francis  H.  Mentioned 336 

Marie,  Steamboat.  Mentioned ^ 

Marks,  S.  F. 

Correspondence  with  Ed.  Pickett,  jr ?6t 

Mentioned *30,  1®3,  '6( 

Marmaduke,  J.  S.  Mentioned 335 

Marshall,  Mo.  Skirmish  near. 

March  15,  1862.  Report  of  E.  Anson  Moore 331 

March  16,  1862.  Report  of  John  B.  Kaiser 346 

Marshall,  Colonel.  Mentioned 

Marshall,  George  C. 

Mentioned 35,  37, 39, 447 

Report  of  scout  through  Saline  County,  Mo.,  December  3-12, 1861 

Marshall,  George  S.  Mentioned 

Marshall,  Louis  H.  Mentioned 84,  88, 90, 97, 566, 59C 

Marshfield,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  February  9,  1862.  Report  of  Samuel  R.  Curtis.  56 
Martial,  Law. 

Kansas,  Department  of 347, 546 

Missouri,  Department  of 377, 395, 401, 468, 556, 611, 817, 816 

Martin,  Dr.  Mentioned 341 

Martin,  Major.  Mentioned 326 

Martin,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 26S 

Marvin,  Major.  Mentioned 393.394 

Mary  Keene,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 

Maryland.  Military  departments  embracing 

Mason,  James  M.  Mentioned 

Mnsterson.  William.  Mentioned 


4i: 


446 

34 

251 


114 

605 

726 

33( 


INDEX. 


87$ 


Page. 

■i  30 

lathe  ws.  B.  N.  Mentioned 

laury . Dabney  H.  Mentioned  ...... .......  ......  - - 

(For  correspondence*  etc.,  see  Earl  Van  Dorn.) 

ffaus,  Joseph  S.  Mentioned 257 

ffay,  James  H.  Mentioned 296 

layes,  J.  T.  Mentioned 33 

ffaynard,  Henry  J.  Mentioned 253*  254 

Jaynadier,  Henry  E.  Mentioned 115,621 

dedicine  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  April  8,  1862.  Report  of  Ben.  Loan 363 

deie:s.  Henry.  Mentioned ^7 

deigs,  Montgomery  C.  Mentioned 396,397,489,609 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Quarterrnasler-GeneraVs  Office,  U.  S<  A.) 

teller,  George.  Mentioned 360,361 

Memphis,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 433,  457 

Menifee,  Richard  W.  Mentioned - - 3^8 

Meriwether,  Minor.  Mentioned 136>  148> 774 » 778 

Merrill,  Lewis. 

Correspondence  with 

McKean,  Thomas  J 

Pope,  John * 

Totten,  James 

Mentioned. * 439,637,638 

Report  of  action  at  Roan’s  Tan-Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo.,  January  8, 1862..  ol 

Merrimac,  U.  S.  Frigate.  (C.  S.  S.  Virginia)  Mentioned 643 

Merriman,  Clark  S.  Mentioned - 46, 47 

Merriman,  James  E.  Mentioned  

Meszaros,  Emeric.  Mentioned - 299>  244>  242> 244 

Meteor,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 565 

Meyer,  Anthony.  Mentioned 

Meyer,  John.  Mentioned 


471 

537 

639 


Micco,  Hutka.  Mentioned 

Michigan.  Military  departments  embracing 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  {Independent) : 3d,  93.  Regiments  : 1st,  C,  95, 98, 100  ; 
H 95 

Cavalry — Regiments : 2d,  92,95,105,113,465,610,622  ; 3d,  92,  95,  113,  465, 
610, 622. 

Milford,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  December  18, 1861.  (See  Blackwater  Creek,  Mo.) 

Miller,  Mr.  Mentioned 

[Miller, . Mentioned 

Miller,  Jacob  F.  Mentioned 

Miller,  M.  S.  Mentioned 

| Miller,  Silas.  Mentioned 


237 

238 
25 

60S- 


143 
362 
65, 339 
167 
227 


Miller,  T.  G.  [?].  Mentioned /7° 

Mills.  James  K. 

, 7i,204 

Mentioned * 

Report  of  expedition  to  Mount  Vernon,  Mo.,  February  18-19,  1862  64 

Milton,  N.  B.  Mentioned 330 

Minnesota.  Military  departments  embracing 

Minnesota  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  ( independent ) : 1st,  465. 

Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Companies : Hudson’s,  128, 177, 186, 807;  Wheeler  s,128, 178, 186, 

807. 


369, 60S 


874 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Mississippi,  Army  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  445,804. 

Mississippi,  Army  of  the.  (Union.) 

Granger,  Gordon,  assigned  to  command  in  the 573 

Groesbeck,  John,  assigned  to  command  in  the 567 

Hamilton,  Schuyler,  assigned  to  command  in  the 569 


Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  8,  566;  No.  17,  571;  No.  17,  589;  No.  18, 
590;  No.  25,  618;  No.  30,  681;  No.  31,  682. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  35,  564;  No.  37,  No.  38,  567;  No.  41,  572; 


No.  42 a,  569;  No.  42,  573;  No.  52,  603. 

Organization,  strength,  etc  91-95, 564, 565, 567, 572, 589, 590 

Palmer,  John  M.,  assigned  to  command  in 565 

Pope,  John,  assumes  command  of 566,  590 

Slack,  J.  R.,  assigned  to  command  in 564 

Worthington,  William  H.,  assigned  to  command  in 567 

Mississippi,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Halleck,  Henry  W 647,649,657,672 

Hitchcock,  E.  A 832 

War  Department,  U.  S 644,649 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 605 

Davies,  Thomas  A.,  assigned  to  duty  in 643 

Denver,  J.  W.,  assigned  to  duty  in 612 

Halleck,  Henry  W.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 605,611 

Martial  law  in.  (See  Missouri , Department  of.) 

Military  commissions  in.  Orders,  etc 834 

(See  also  Missouri,  Department  of.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  1,  No.  2,  611;  No.  3,  No.  7,  832;  No.  10,  833; 

No.  13,  834.  % 

Orders  (Provost-Marshal-General),  March  28,  1862  648 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 649,652 

Missouri. 


Admitted  as  a member  of  the  Confederate  States.  (See  Summary  of  Princi- 


pal Events , p.  i.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector-General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 726 

Davis,  Jefferson J 701,716,717,733 

Frost,  D.  M 706 

Hubert,  Louis 738 

Jackson,  C.  F 724,725 

Polk,  Leonidas 728 

Price,  Sterling 729, 736, 744, 792 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 715,722,727,731,735 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 748-750 

War  Department,  C.  S 723,746,747 

(See  also 

Missouri , Department  of  the.  Mississippi,  Department  of  the.) 

Home  Guards,  Reserve  Corps,  etc 418,  434 

Legislature  of  (Confederate),  adjourned  by  Thompson 765 

Martial  law  in.  (See  Missouri , Department  of  the.) 

Military  departments  embracing 369,605,734 

Oath  of  allegiance. 

Attorneys,  Counselors,  and  Proctors  required  to  take  the 586 

Jurors  in  civil  and  criminal  courts  required  to  take  the 832 

Voters  required  to  take  the 557, 648 


INDEX, 


875 


Page. 

isouri— Continued. 

Operations  in 

Central  and  Southwestern.* 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A - 703 

Asboth,  A 390,  399, 545 

Brusld,  Charles  A - 753 

Carlin,  W.  P 410,417,468,552 

Carr,  Eugene  A 483, 527, 574 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 469, 471 , 473, 480, 484, 487, 489, 

491, 492, 494, 498-500, 504, 513, 523, 525, 526, 538, 540,  541, 543, 545,  547- 
551, 553, 554, 558, 559, 561, 562, 566, 567, 577, 583, 588, 589, 592, 598, 601, 
610, 618, 621,  624, 628, 632, 640, 646,  647, 650, 659, 662, 664, 665, 677, 679 

Davis,  Jefferson  C 377 , o92 

Dodge,  G.  M 373, 375, 398, 408, 415, 442,  444 

Hallftck,  Henry  W 374, 375, 377 , 379,  382, 390, 391, 

400,  411,  413,  415,  417,  420, 422,  424,  425,  429, 436,  452,  453,  458-461,  468, 
470, 475, 481, 495, 498, 499,  506,  507, 511, 512, 514, 516, 527, 528, 544, 548, 
552-554, 556, 560, 563, 567, 568, 574, 575, 578, 593, 594, 596, 598, 604, 608, 
611, 617, 626, 628, 632,  636, 652, 661, 662, 664,  666, 671, 672, 820, 821, 827 

Hubert,  Louis 738,741,752 

Hunter,  David 398,481 

Landry,  J.  A 752 

McCulloch,  Ben 686,701,763 

McIntosh,  James 703, 712,  741 

McKean,  Thomas  J 575, 600 

Missouri,  Citizens  of 370 

Osterhaus,  P.  J 392,  403,  412,  413 

Phelps,  John  S - 457 

Pope,  John. . 382, 391, 393, 399,  407, 411,  412,  414,  417, 418, 420,  422-426, 
429, 435-4:37,  442, 447, 452,  453, 457-459, 461, 469,  512, 516, 517, 535, 544 

Price,  Sterling 702,714,717,756,783 

. Price,  Thomas  L 373,377,392 

Schofield,  John  582>  632> 672 

Sherman,  W.  379,381,391 

Sigel,  Franz 46  L 

Steele,  Frederick 374, 

375, 393,  400,  408,  410,  414,  415,  418,  423,  424,  478,  507 

Totten,  J anies 637-639, 658, 663, 673, 679, 680 

Yan  Dorn,  Earl 748, 755, 763, 764, 777, 783, 784, 787 , 789,  791 

War  Department,  C.  699’  J02 

War  Department,  U.  ^97 

Waring,  GeorgPE.,jr 594,604 

Woldemar,  C.  A.  von 413 

Wyman,  J.  395,416,542,558 

Orders,  congratulatory 560,651 

(See  also 

Nov.  20.  Butler  and  Little  Santa  Fe.  Skirmishes  at. 

21.  Warsaw.  Destruction  of  United  States  stores  at. 

24.  Johnstown.  Skirmish  at. 

26.  Independence.  Skirmish  at. 

30.  Grand  River.  Skirmish  at. 


iat  portion  lying  south  of  the  Missouri  and  west  of  Saint  Francis  Rivers  ; operations  in  North- 
jrn  Arkansas  included. 


876 


INDEX. 


Missouri — Continued. 

Operations  in 

Central  and  Southwestern. 

(See  also 

Dec.  1.  Shanghai.  Skirmish  at. 

3.  Salem.  Action  at. 

3- 12.  Saline  County.  Scout  through. 

5-  9.  Current  Hills.  Expedition  through. 

18.  Houston.  Scout  toward.  Blackwater  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

23.  Dayton.  Skirmish  at.  Lexington.  Expedition  to. 

24.  Wadesburg.  Skirmish  at. 

27.  Hallsville.  Skirmish  near. 

28.  Mount  Zion  Church.  Action  at. 

Jan . 1-  3.  Dayton  and  Rose  Hill.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmish  en  route. 

5- 12.  Johnson  and  La  Fayette  Counties.  Operations  in. 

Columbus.  Skirmish  at. 

8.  Roan's  Tan-Yard,  Silver  Creek.  Action  at. 

22.  Knobnoster.  Skirmish  at,  Lebanon.  Occupation  of. 

29- Feb.  3.  Blue  Springs.  Expedition  to. 

Feb.  8.  Bolivar.  Affair  at. 

9.  Marshfield.  Skirmish  at. 

12.  Springfield.  Skirmish  at. 

14.  Crane  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

15.  Flat  Creek.  Skirmish  near. 

16.  Potts'  Hill,  Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Action  at. 

17.  Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Action  at. 

18.  Bentonville,  Ark.  Action  at. 

18-19.  Mount  Vernon.  Expedition  to. 

19.  West  Plains.  Skirmish  at. 

22.  Independence.  Skirmish  at. 

23.  Fayetteville,  Ark.  Occupied  by  Union  forces. 

23-24.  Pea  Ridge  Prairie.  Reconnaissance  to  and  skirmish. 

25.  Keetsville.  Skirmish  at. 

28.  Osage  Springs,  Ark.  Affair  at. 

Mar.  3-  7.  Berry ville,  Ark.  Reconnaissance  to. 

4- 11.  Laclede , Wright,  and  Douglas  Counties.  Scout  through. 

6-  8.  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  Battle  of. 

7.  Fox  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

7- 10.  Saline  County.  Operations  in. 

8-  9.  Rolla.  Operations  about. 

9.  Mountain  Grove.  Skirmish  at. 

10.  La  Fayette  County.  Skirmish  in. 

13.  Spring  River,  Ark.  Action  at.0 
15-16.  Marshall.  Skirmishes  near. 

18- 30.  Johnson,  Saint  Clair,  and  Henry  Counties.  Operations  in. 

19.  Leesville.  Skirmish  at. 

19- 20.  Carthage.  Expedition  to. 

19-23.  Johnson  County.  Operations  in. 

21.  McKay' 8 Farm.  Affair  at. 

22.  Little  Santa  Fe  and  Post  Oak.  Skirmish  at. 

24.  Saint  Clair  and  Henry  Counties.  Scout  in. 

25.  Monagan  Springs.  Skirmish  at. 

25-28.  Moniteau  County.  Expedition  in. 

26.  Post  Oak.  Action  on  the.  Gouge's  Mill.  Skirmish  near. 
Humansville.  Action  at. 


INDEX- 


877 

Page. 


330 uri — Continued . 

Operations  in 

Central  and  Southwestern. 

(See  also 

Mar.  29.  Blackwater  Creek.  Skirmish  on  the , near  Warrenshurg. 

30.  Clinton.  Skirmish  near. 

31.  Pink  Hill.  Skirmish  at. 

Apr.  1.  Doniphan  and  Little  Sni.  Skirmishes  at. 

8.  Warrenshurg.  Skirmish  near. 

Warsaw.  Skirmish  near. 

Gadfly , Ntwtonia,  Granby , Neosho , and  Indian  Creek  Val- 
ley. Scout  through  and  skirmishes, 

9-16.  Shiloh  Camp,  on  Hoyle’s  Run,  near  Quincy . Scout  to  and 
skirmishes. 

Little  Niangua,  Hickory  County.  Scout  to. 

Montevallo.  Scout  to.) 

Northern.*  Communications  from 


Halleck,  Henry  W 379,  400, 426, 427, 429, 

430, 436,  439, 440,  446, 447, 453, 456-462,  466,  470,  474,  491, 492, 552, 627 

Hundhausen,  J 460 

Hunter,  David 399 

Krekel,  A 458,461,474 

McKean,  Thomas  J 439, 447, 458, 460, 467, 469-471, 474 

Morsey,  F 600 

Pope,  John 466,537 

Prentiss,  B.  M 399, 404, 433, 437, 441, 444, 446, 447, 454, 458, 460, 465 

Schofield,  John  M 422, 467, 469, 475, 479, 482, 493, 607 

Todd,  George  R 453 

(See  also 


Nov.  24.  Lancaster.  Skirmish  at. 

Dec.  9.  Union  Mills.  Skirmish  at. 

18.  Blackwater  Creek,  or  Milford.  Skirmish  at. 

25.  Danville.  Expedition  to. 

Jan.  3.  Hunnewell.  Skirmish  at. 

Mar.  7.  Bob's  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

9.  Big  Creek.  Skirmish  on. 

Apr.  2.  Walkersville.  Skirmish  near. 

8.  Medicine  Creek.  Skirmish  at.) 

Southeastern,  t Communications  from 

Borland,  Solon 683, 687 , 709 

Cabell,  W.  L 780,782 

Grant,  U.  S..  370,373,383,404,410,416,430,432,433,440,453,457,494,495 
Halleck,  Henry  W 375, 560, 581, 610, 657 


Kelloffe-  W P 

568 

McClernand,  John  A 

Paine,  E.  A. 

i 526 

568 

Polk,  Leonidas 

Pope,  John  ....  ...... ....  ...... ...... ...... ..... 

699,736 

682 

Prinfi  Oharlps  P . 

711 

T?Afla  T iPori  fiprl  P , . .......... 

432 

Steele,  Frederick 

609,626,636,651 

* That  portion  lying  north  of  the  Missouri  River. 

t That  portion  lying  between  the  Saint  Francis  and  Mississippi  Rivers  ; 
rkansas  included. 

operations  in  Northeastern 

878 


INDEX. 


Missouri — Continued. 

Operations  in 

Southeastern.  Communications  from 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff £ 

693, 700, 703-706, 711, 715, 722, 737, 753, 767, 788, 801, 806- 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 748,749,753, 

War  Department,  U.  S 

Whittle,  William  C ".  .. 


(See  also 


Dec. 


Skirmish  near. 

Skirmish  at. 

Descent  upon,  and  attack  on  steamboat  City  of 


Jan. 


Feb. 


Apr. 


379. 


11.  Bertrand. 

13.  Charleston 
29.  Commerce. 

Alton. 

8.  Charleston.  Skirmish  at. 

15-17.  Benton,  Bloomfield , and  Dallas.  Expedition  to. 

24.  New  Madrid  and  Saint  Francisville.  Skirmishes  at. 

28-  April  8.  New  Madrid.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of. 

2-  4.  Jackson,  Whitewater,  and  Dallas.  Reconnaissance  to. 

9.  Jackson.  Skirmish  at.) 

Prentiss,  B.  M,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  in  Northern 

Proclamation  (Price)  to  people  of  Central  and  Southwestern 

Requisition  on,  for  troops  for  Confederate  service 

Resolutions  of  citizens  of  Southwestern 

Schofield,  John  M,  assumes  command  of  troops  in  vicinity  of  Warrenton 

Steele,  Frederick,  assigned  to  command  in  Southeastern,  west  of  Saint 

Francis  River 

Volunteers  from,  for  Confederate  service.  Enlistment  and  organization  of. 

Circulars,  etc 693, 

Missouri,  Citizens  of.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 

Missouri,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 377, 

Array  Headquarters 419, 513, 5 

Baxter,  A.  S gj 

Farrar,  Bernard  G g 

Halleck,  Henry  W 373, 382, 389, 392, 395, 402, 408, 434, 437, 4k 

462,  481,  490,500,503,508,513,554,602,633,  817,  818,  822,  825-828,  8 

Illinois,  Governor  of 3 

Lincoln,  Abraham 401, 450, 8 

Schofield,  J.  M 493,5 

Sherman,  W.  T 4 

War  Department,  U.  S 547, 596, 597, 6 

Assessments,  etc.,  on  Confederates  and  sympathizers. 

Communications  from 

Blair,  Francis  P.,  jr 8 

Farrar,  Bernard  G 446, 4 

Halleck,  Henry  W 490, 5 

Orders.  (Halleck.) 431,5 

Camps  and  Hospitals  in.  Sanitary  condition  of.  Report  of  J.  E.  Yeatman.  4 
Claims,  expenditures,  liabilities,  etc.,  in.  (See Western  Department — Union.) 

Halleck,  Henry  W.,  assumes  command  of 3 

Irregularities  in.  Orders,  etc 380, 3 

Martial  law  in 377, 395, 401, 468, 556, 611, 612, 817, 8 

Merged  into  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi 6 

Military  commissions  in.  Orders,  etc 476  822  8 


INDEX. 


879 


Page. 

Missouri,  Department  of  the.  (Union.)— Continued. 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  1,  369;  No.  3, 370  No.  8, 380  ; No.  11,  398 ; 

No.  13,  405;  No.  19,414;  No.  21, 418;  No.  24, 431;  No.  32,  463;  No.  34,468. 

Series  1862:  No.  1,476;  No.  16,495;  No.  28,542;  No.  37,555;  No.  39,556; 

No.  41, 557 ; No.  44, 561 ; No.  46, 563 ; No.  48, 568 ; No.  49, 570 ; No.  52, 584 ; 

No.  53,  No.  54,  No.  55, 586 ; No.  56, 651 ; No.  57, 594 ; No.  59, 603 ; No.  61, 607. 
Orders.  (Provost-Marshal-General.)  Series  1861 : No.  2,411;  No.  14,446; 

No.  16, 452. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861:  No.  8,374;  No.  24,  401;  No.  34,  407;  No.  87, 


459;  No.  92,462. 

Missouri,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Charles  Gibson 454 

Missouri  State  Guard.  (Confederate.) 

Address  of  Price  to  soldiers  of 814 

Frost,  D.  M.,  assigned  to  command  in 755 

Kelly,  Joseph,  assigned  to  command  in 815 

Little,  Henry,  assigned  to  command  in 739 

McBride,  J.  H.,  assigned  to  command  in 740, 755 

Mentioned.  (See  Missouri  Troops— Confederate.) 

Orders,  Circular,  November  25, 1861 693 


Orders,  General,  series  1861:  (Price),  No.  136,717.  Series  1862:  No.  7,  No.  9, 

733;  No.  26,739;  No.  47,  755;  No.  74,  783;  No.  79,  814;  (Parsons),  No  1, 

815. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  1,802. 

Organization  of,  January  23, 1862  739 

Parsons,  M.  M.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 814,815 

Price,  Sterling.  Resignation  as  major-general  in,  accepted 813 

Slack,  William  Y.,  assigned  to  command  in 740 

Transfer  of,  to  Confederate  service 693-695, 701, 703-7015, 715-717, 724- 

726, 734-737,  739-741, 744, 745, 747,  748,  788,  789,  792,  793,  802,  813,  816 

Missouri  State  Militia.  (Union.) 

Agreement  between  State  and  United  States  authorities 454-456 

Mentioned.  ( See  Missouri  Troops — Union. ) 

Orders,  General,  series  1861:  (Missouri,  Governor  of),  No.  1,378;  (Hal- 
leck),  No.  1,  389 ; (Schofield),  No.  1,  394. 

Organization  of,  order  for  the - 378 

Schofield,  John  M.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of - 389,  394 

Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery — Batteries:  Bledsoe’s,  788;  Clark’s,  260,  307,  310,  323,  327,  736, 
739,788;  Guibor’s,  260,308,323,788;  Kelly’s,  321,788;  Kneisley's,  788; 
Landis’,  Lucas’,  740,788;  MacDonald’s,  260,  309,  313,  319,323,327,788; 
Wade’s,  260, 307, 309, 310,  323, 327, 736, 739, 788. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st  ( Gates’ ),  297,  301,  305,  307,  308,  321,  329,  73(5,  739, 
788,791.  State  Guards  -Battalions : Cearnal’s,  305;  H.  W.  King’s, 

326;  McCulloch’s,  315,  316,  329,740,788.  Companies:  Campbell’s,  325; 
Champion’s, 788 ; Galbraith’s,  McMurray’s, 700.  Regiments:  Hughes’, 

314, 315. 

Infantry — Regiments : 2d  ( Burbridge ),  307-310,  313,  736,  739,  788;  3d 
(Hives),  307-309,  326,  736,739,788.  State  Guards— Battalions : Bevier’s, 
314,740;  McCown’s,  684;  Rosser’s,  740.  Companies:  Coleman’s,  65; 
Swynne’s,  35.  Regiments : Frazier’s,  Freeman’s,  325;  Harris’,  Holmes’, 

767;  Jackson’s,  319,320;  Lile’s,  767;  Peacher’s,  319, 320;  Poindexter’s, 
319-321;  Major  Rucker’s, '319, 320;  Schnable’s,  319,320,325;  Ward's, 

767.  • 


380 


INDEX. 


Pag 


Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Artillery —Batteries  ( Independent ):  Welfley’s,  202,204,208,211-214,217,218, 
220,  222-226,  229,  236,  237,  242,  245,  278,  539.  Regiments : 1st,  C,  511 ; 
F,  343 ; G,  93, 95  ; M,  93, 95, 113, 544. 

Cavalry — Battalions : 4th,  539  5 Bowen's,  34,  36,  37,  188,  202,203,  206,235, 
257,266,269,270,  539,  550,677.  Companies:  Fremont  Body  Guard,  434 
Regiments:  1st,  38,50,51,54-56,61,75,186,  187,205,  217,  225,232-235,242, 


244-246,248,257,277,278,332,358,  359,473,  525,539,550  ; 2d,  34-36, 38, 39, 


50, 51, 376, 400,  447, 457, 466, 475, 493, 535, 536, 627  ; 3d,  43, 44, 404, 501 ; 4th," 

62,69, 187, 188, 205,209, 210,213-216,232-234,240-242,245,278,280,473,539,545, 

550  ; 5th,  t 59,  62,68,  200,  202,  205,  209-218,  225,229,230,  232-234,  239-242, 

244, 245, 278-281, 413, 511, 514, 528, 539, 545, 547, 550 ; 6th,  X 56, 58, 60, 61, 65- 
67,  72,  74,  75,  257,279,  332,  336-339,  363,473,  593  ; 7th, § 43,  627;  Hollan 
Horse,  503;  Home  Guards— Regiments : Cass  County  ( Newgent ),  46, 

416.  State  Militia— Battalions  : Booneville  {Kaiser),  331, 332, 340, 360, 

361;  Krekel’s,  330,331,333.  Companies:  McFaden’s,  333;  Mountain 
Rangers  {Richardsan),  71,72.  Regiments : 7th,  339,340,350,  351,353,354, 

357, 404  ; 8th,  345, 346,  354-356, 366  ; 12th,  52, 72,  73, 364, 365. 

Engineers — Regiments : Bissell's,  78, 87, 90,  93,  95, 102, 113, 394, 434, 43*,  572, 

682, 683. 

Infantry — Regiments : 2d,  201,  205,  208,  210,  212-216,  220,  221,  228,  239,  240, 

241, 243, 244, 280, 539,  545  ; 3d,  206,  211-213, 215, 220,  278, 280, 464, 539, 788 ; 

4th,  542  ; 6th,  349, 638-640  ; 7th,  57, 58, 376, 470, 535 ; 9th,  245, 253  ; 10th. 

43 ; 11th,  54, 92, 95, 102, 103, 113, 572, 590 ; 12th,  202, 204,  210, 212, 213, 215- 
218,220,222,224,226-229,236,237,240,244,278,539;  13th,  464;  14th,  115; 
15th,  205,  209,  212-216,  220,  240-243,  278,  280,  539,  545;  17th,  204,  211- 
213, 215, 216, 220, 224,  242,  278,  280,  539  ; 18th,  603  ; 22d,  95, 116, 603, 604 ; 

23d,  404;  24th,  200,206,  257,  258,260,270-277,539  ; 26th,  91,94,103,108; 
Phelps’ , 200, 205, 258, 260, 262, 266, 303, 334, 539, 550, 647.  Pioneers—  Com- 
panies: Gerster’s,  473  ; Sharpshooters— Regiments : Birge’s,44, 51, 426, 
462,493,501.  U.  S.  Reserve  Corps— Regiments : 1st,  2d,  546.  Militia— 
Companies:  Rice’s,  349,  350,  638;  Ward’s,  349, 639. 

Mitchell,  M.  C.  Mentioned - - 2a 

Mitchell,  Robert  B. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Little  Santa  F6,  Mo.,  March  22,  1862 34 

Mitchell,  Samuel.  Mentioned 2$ 

Mohawk,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 143,163,779, 

Moles  worth,  James.  Mentioned 

Monagan  Springs,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  March  25,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Prin- 
cipal Events,  p.  3.) 

Mondell,  Ephraim  W.  Mentioned 

Moniteau  County,  Mo.  Expedition  in,  and  skirmish  en  route,  March  25—28, 

1862.  Report  of  James  Totten 

Moniteau  County,  Mo.  Sheriff  and  Grand  Jury  of.  Correspondence  with 

James  Totten 

Montevallo,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  9-16,  1862.  Reports  of 

Gravely,  Joseph  J 

McClurg,  Joseph  - 

Montgomery,  Bacon.  Mentioned 

Montgomery,  James. 

Correspondence  with  James  H.  Lane - 

Mentioned 423, 702, 7< 


* Fr6mont  Hussars, 
t Benton  Hussars. 


* Wood's  and  Wright’s  battalions. 

§ Also  called  Black  Hawk  Cavalry. 


S£  » SB  fc?  9R 


INDEX. 


881 


ntgomery,  Samuel.  Mentioned 36,58,74,75  589 

ntgomery,  William  M.  Mentioned gss'  294 

ody  , Alonzo.  Mentioned ......  ....  ......  ....................  ......  66  337—339 

onlight,  Thomas.  Mentioned 683 

ore,  Dr.  Mentioned 399 

ore,  Amaziah.  Mentioned... 346  347 

ore,  Edwin.  Mentioned 45 

ore,  E.  Anson.  Report  of  skirmish  near  Marshall,  Mo.,  March  15, 1862 339 

ore,  George  W.,  Corporal.  Mentioned 339 

ore,  George  W , Lieutenant.  Mentioned 272, 277, 278 

ore,  Henry  D.  Report  of  scout  to,  and  skirmishes  near,  Quincy,  Mo.,  April 

_1(j’ 18n2 366 

ore,  Lawson.  Mentioned 345 

ere,  Martin  A.  Mentioned 267 

ore,  W.  D.  Mentioned 339 

rgan,  Master.  Mentioned 449 

rgan,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 96 

rgan,  Christopher  A.  Mentioned 84,90,566,599 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  John  Pope.) 


Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

M**2 110,111 

rrison,  Theophilus  W.  Mentioned 248,255 

rsey,  Frederick. 

Correspondence  with  John  M.  Schofield 600 

Mentioned 334  607 

rton,  Thomas.  Mentioned 43  475 

ses,  W.  Q.  Mentioned 493 

ss,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 366 

tt,  J.  W.  Mentioned 566,599 

und  City,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 119,129 

untain  Department.  (Union.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 605 

Fremont,  John  C,  assigned  to  command 605 

untain  Grove,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  March  9,  1862.  Reports  of 

Rich,  Josephus  G 334 

Waring,  George  E.,  jr 187 

unt  Vernon,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  February  18-19,  1862.  Report  of  James 

. Mills 64 

unt  Zion  Church,  Mo.  Action  at,  December  28,  1861. 

Communications  from  Henry  W.  Halleck 474 

Report  of  Benjamin  M.  Prentiss 43 

over,  Joseph  A. 

Mentioned 82-84,97 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862  96 

figett,  Gilman  C.  Mentioned 64, 71 

rdoch,  Lindsay. 

Mentioned 52,54,404 

Reports  of 

Dallas,  Mo.  Reconnaissance  to,  April  2-4,  1862  362 

Jackson,  Mo. 

Reconnaissance  to,  April  2-4,  1862  362 

Skirmish  at,  April  9,  1862  364 

Whitewater,  Mo.  Reconnaissance  to,  April  2-4,  1862  362 

56  R R — VOL  VIII 


882 


INDEX. 


Pagi 


Murphy,  Captain.  Mentioned - - - 340» 

Murphy,  Robert  C.  Mentioned % 468,61 

Murrell,  R.  K.  Mentioned 

Musser,  R.  H.  Mentioned 

Navy  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with  A.  H.  Foote..  - 606, 609, 619, 623, 6f 

Nazro,  Charles  A.  Mentioned - 

Nebraska  Territory.  Military  departments  embracing 6( 

Nebraska  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  376,  585. 

Neely,  R.  P.  Mentioned 

Neff,  Abner  G.  M.  Mentioned a 

Neff,  Reuben.  Mentioned 

Nelson,  Scout.  Mentioned 

Nelson,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 

Nelson,  Horatio  C.  Mentioned 


Nelson,  I.  B.  Mentioned. 


Nemett,  Joseph. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862. 


210, 215, 232,  2 


2 


Neosho,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862.  Report  of  Clark  Wright 3< 


New  Era,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 3! 

Newgent,  Andrew  G.  Mentioned ® 

New  Golden  State,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 

Newland,  Benjamin  J.  Mentioned 

New  Madrid,  Mo. 

Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February  28- April  8, 1862.* 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  forces.  (See  respective  reports.) 

Union  forces 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A lj 

Beauregard,  G.  

754,  757,772,775,777,779,781,782,786,789,  791,  794,  797,  798,  803,  8 

Cullum,  George  W 569, 573, 581, 587, 590, 591, 593, 595-597, 600, 6 

Davis,  Jefferson 134,1 

Foote,  Andrew  H 121, 122, 606, 608, 619, 620, 623, 668, 6 

Gantt,  E.  W 707,717,723,742-744,759,7 


Gray,  A.  B. 


774,8 


Halleck,  Henry  W . . 559, 560, 565, 566, 570, 573, 581-583, 588, 591, 593, 595, 5£ 
602,603,606,608,610,613,614,  618,  627,  629,  631,  641,  643,  646,  675-€ 
Harris,  D.  ® 

760,762,765,766,768,769,  771,  773,  777-780,  784,  785,  795,  799,  800,  E 

Mackall,  W.  804, 807,  e 

TVT arks  S F . ••••••  ..•#.•••••••*  

Pickett,  Ed.,  jr  767,768,770.774,; 

Pillow,  Gideon  J - 689,690,^ 

Polk,  Leonidas ' 

758,  760, 761, 768, 769, 772, 775, 776, 778, 781, 782, 786, 793,  795,  ( 

Pope,  John 564, 565, 570-572, 580, 582, 5 

591,593,596,598,599,603,604,600,609,  610,  612,  613,  619,  620,  622,  6 

625, 630, 634, 643-646, 650, 653, 655,  657, 660, 066,  667, 669, 670, 674,  < 
Sheliha,  Victor _ 


* Includes  operations  at  Island  No.  10. 


INDEX. 


883 

Page. 


;w  Madrid,  Mo. — Continued. 

Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February  28-April  8, 1862. 

Communications  from 

Strong,  William  K 619 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 742, 743, 758, 765 

Walker,  L.  M 791,794,799 

War  Department,  C.  S 135 

War  Department,  U.  S 649, 659, 661, 666, 670, 671, 675, 676, 681 

Confederate  forces.  Organization,  strength,  etc 186,795 

Events.  Summary  of  Principal 76 

Orders,  congratulatory.  (Pope.) 618,681 

Reports  of 

Beauregard,  G.  T 125 

Blake,  E.  D 135 

Brent,  George  W 1.38 

Brown,  Alexander  J 179 

Buford,  Napoleon  B 115 

Cook,  W.  D.  S 175 

Cummin g,  Gilbert  W Ill 

Elliott,  Washington  L 118 

Foote,  Andrew  H 119, 120, 122 

Gantt,  E.  W 165, 168, 171 

Granger,  Gordon 103, 107 

Gray,  A.  B 138,141 

Groesbeck,  John 99 

Hamilton,  Schuyler 101 

Harris,  D.  B 148 

Hollins,  George  N 184 

Jackson,  A.,  jr , 157 

Kennedy,  J.  B.  G 178 

Lothrop,  W.  L 97 

McCown,  John  P 125, 126, 130 

Mackall,  W.  W 132, 134, 135 

Morgan,  James  D 110,  111 

Mower,  Joseph  A 96 

Nixon,  O.  W 93 

Paine,  E.  A 109 

Perczel,  Nicholas 108 

Plummer,  Joseph  B 113 

Pope,  John 77-79, 81, 85 

Robertson,  William  8 107 

Rucker,  Edward  W 159 

Smith,  J.  L.  Kirby 100 

Sprague,  John  W 101 

Stanley,  David  S 98 

Steedman,  J.  G.  W 174 

Stewart,  Alexander  P 162 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 171, 172 

Trudeau,  J 150 

Walke,  H 123 

Walker,  L.  M 169, 170 

War  Department,  U.  S 123 


Wintter,  D. 


149 

Worthington,  William  H 105, 106 


884 


INDEX. 


I*ag< 


New  Madrid,  Mo.— Continued. 

Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February  28-April  8, 1862. 

Union  forces.  Organization,  strength,  etc 91-9 

(See  also  Union  City,  Tenn.  Descent  upon,  March  30-31,  1862.) 

McCown,  John  P.,  relieved  from  command  of 803,80 

Mackall,  W.  W.,  assigned  to  command  of 803, 80 

Sketches  of  defenses  of *37, 146, 14 

Skirmishes  at  or  near. 

February  24,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  2.) 

March  2,  1862.  (See  New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  Feb- 
ruary 28-April  8,  1862.) 

New  Mexico.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 


Denver,  J.  W 


65 


Halleck,  Henry  W 627-629, 631, 633, 664, 668, 68 

War  Department,  U.  S ® 

(See  also  Kansas,  District  of.) 

Newtonia,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862.  Report  of  Clark  Wright 36 

Nichols,  Mr.  Mentioned 59 

Nichols,  Joe  H.  Mentioned - 49 

Nichols,  L.  V.  Mentioned 528,52 

Nicholson,  Riley.  Mentioned 3 

Niegemann,  F.  Mentioned — . .......  - - 28 

Nieman,  Anton.  Mentioned 

Nixon,  O.  W. 

Mentioned ^ 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862. 
Noble,  John  W. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  R.  Curtis - 2( 

Mentioned ^34, 2J 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 2* 

Nodine,  Richard  H. 

Mentioned 22 


25 


39 


Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 

Noel,  James.  Mentioned 

Noleman,  Robert  D.  Mentioned 

North  Missouri,  District  of.  (Union.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : (Prentiss),  No.  1,  390;  (Schofield),  No.  1,  468 
Series  1862:  No.  2,  478. 

Prentiss,  B.  M.,  assumes  command  of. 

Noyes,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 100,102,56 

Nutt,  H.  C. 

Correspondence  with  Iowa,  Governor  of 518, 519, 530, 53 

Mentioned 518,53 

O’Connell,  John  D.  Mentioned 4- 

O’Connor,  James  H.  Mentioned 271,272,275,27 

Odenbaugh,  Lisbon.  Mentioned p 

Ogden,  Samuel.  Mentioned 2S 

Oglesby,  Richard  J.  Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 369, 410, 430, 45 

Ohio  Belle,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 127, 693, 8( 

Ohio.  Military  departments  embracing ® 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  ( Independent ) : 2d,  205,  209,  212-214,  220,  239-241,  243, 

539, 545, 546, 577 ; 4th,  204,  212-214, 216-220, 225, 226, 228, 229, 237, 238, 242, 

539 ; 11th,  93, 94, 102,  535, 565, 572  ; 16th,  636. 


INDEX. 


885 

Pago. 


lio  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Cavalry — Companies  ( Independent ):  4th,  38,  50;  Regiments:  2d,  557,  573, 
615,631,654,655  ; 6th,  668. 

Infantry — Regiments : 27th,  82,  83,  91,  94,  99,  100,  102,  535,  567,  572,  589; 

39th,  82,83,91,94,99,100,102,  470,  535,  567,572,589  ; 43d,  82,  83,  91,  94, 

100, 102, 103,  105,  572,  589;  63d,  82,83,91,  94,  100-102,  106,  567,  572,  589; 

81st,  43. 

do,  Department  of  the.  (Union.)  Merged  into  the  Department  of  the 

Mississippi 605 

Kane,  Walter  S.  Mentioned 328 

iver,  W.  S.  Report  of  expedition  to  Blue  Springs,  Mo.,  Jan.  29-Feb.  3, 1862. . 57 

>-yor-lor-cha-he,  Carter.  Mentioned «. 17 

ear,  Sergeant-Major.  Mentioned 328 

age  Springs,  Ark.  Affair  at,  February  28,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Princi- 
)al  Events , p.  2.) 

■bom,  William  W.  Mentioned 223 

terhaus,  Peter  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 504 

Halleck,  Henry  W 392, 403, 412, 413 

Woldemar,  C.  A.  von 413 

Mentioned 191, 192, 198, 199, 203, 204, 209-212, 214, 

215, 229, 232-234, 236-240, 245-247,  256,  438, 513, 527, 539, 544, 601, 829 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 216 

itermayer,  Peter.  Mentioned 356 

rerland  Mail  Route.  James  Craig  assigned  to  protect 672 

ven,  Captain.  Mentioned 475 

vens,  John  J.  Mentioned 154, 161, 174, 175 

ce,  Captain.  Mentioned 332 

ine.  E.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  S 494, 495 

Kellogg,  W.  P 568 

Pope,  John 606, 666, 670 

Mentioned 78, 79, 82, 88-90, 

92, 94, 95, 98-100, 478,  568, 573, 587,  594,  600, 605, 669-671, 674, 675, 682 
Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.  109 

Imer,  Dr.  Mentioned... 321 

lmer,  J ohn  M. 

Assignments  to  command 471, 565 

Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W 491 

Pope,  John 620  622 

Mentioned 80,  82, 86, 90, 91, 94, 103, 471, 565, 567, 571, 590, 622, 669, 682 

Report  of  action  at  Roan’s  Tan -Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo.,  January  8,  1862. . 49 

lmer,  W.  K.  Mentioned 328 

Inabaker,  William  E.  Mentioned 102 

irker,  Private.  Mentioned 355 

rker,  Colonel.  Mentioned 357,360,361 

rkhurst,  Irving  W.  Mentioned 227 

rkhurst,  Reese.  Mentioned 265 

rks,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 8,33 

rrott,  James  C.  Mentioned 464 

xrott,  Marcus  J.  Mentioned 370 

:rsons,  Lewis  B.  Correspondence  with  A.  S.  Baxter 512 


886 


INDEX, 


Pi 


Parsons,  M.  M. 

Assignments  to  command - - 814, 

Mentioned 260,391,407,717,792, 

Patrick,  William.  Mentioned 

Patten,  Samuel  P.  C.  Mentioned 

Pattison,  Thomas. 

Mentioned 192, 203, 205, 239, 245, 248, 252, 253, 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 

Patton,  John.  Mentioned 

Patton,  T.  J.  Mentioned 

Paymaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  Adjutant-Gen- 


eral’s Office,  U.  S.  A 

Peabody,  Albert  P.  Mentioned 358-' 

Peacher,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned - j 

Pearcy,  A.  J.  Mentioned - 327, 

Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  Battle  of,  March  6-8,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  forces - • 

Union  forces 203—! 


Communications  from 
Bradbury,  Daniel. 

Bussey,  Cyrus 

Curtis,  Samuel  R . . 
Halleck,  Henry  W 
Lawson,  John  H.. 


Noble,  John  W 206, 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 193, 

Orders. 


Army  of  the  West  (Confederate) < 

Trans-Mississippi  District  (Confederate) ‘ 

Reports  of 

Asboth,  A - 1 

Barris,  Sampson  P J 

Bowen,  William  D 

Bussey,  Cyrus j 

Carr,  Eugene  A - 

Clark,  John  B.,  jr 

Coler,  William  N I 

Conrad,  Joseph * 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 191, 193- 

Davis,  Jefferson  C 

Dodge,  Grenville  M 

Frost,  D.  M 

Fyan,  Robert  W 4 

Green,  Martin  E j 

Greene,  Colton 

Greer,  E 293, 

Greusel,  Nicholas 

Halleck,  Henry  i 

Hayden,  Mortimer  M M 

Hoffmann,  Louis 

Hughes,  John  T V 

Jenks,  Albert J 

Jones,  Junius  A * I 

Knobelsdorff,  Charles 


INDEX. 


887 


Page. 

ea  Ridge,  Ark.  Battle  of,  March  6-8, 1862— Continued. 

Reports  of 

Lane,  Walter  P 299 

Lewis,  Barbour 277 

Lindsay,  D.  Herndon 322 

Little,  Henry 306 

Lyon,  James  J 276 

McNair,  Evander 294 

Nemett,  Joseph 244 

Nodine,  Richard  H 223 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 216 

Pattison,  Thomas 249 

Pike,  Albert 286 

Poten,  August  H 280 

Price,  Sterling 304 

Rains,  James  S 326 

Reed,  Thomas  A 273 

Riggins,  G.  W 316 

Rosser,  Thomas  H 312 

Samuels,  D.  Todd 328 

Saunders,  James  P 321 

Shunk,  David 252 

Sigel,  Franz 208 

Smith,  Henry  A 231 

Snyde,  J.  321 

Stone,  B.  Warren 301,302 

Yandever,  William - 2^ 

Yan  Dorn,  Earl 281,283,285 

Wangelin,  Hugo - 227 

Welfley,  Martin 23^ 

Weston,  Eli  270 

White,  Julius 2^3 

>ea  Ridge  Prairie,  Mo.  Reconnaissance  to,  and  skirmish  on,  Feb.  23-24, 1862. 

Report  of  John  M.  Richardson 71 

>ease,  Henry.  Mentioned *87>  2^8»  ®40 

Jeck,  John  H.  Mentioned 2^ 

»egg,  Thomas.  Mentioned 7, 8, 10, 17 

5elican,  Peter.  Mentioned 218> 22^ 

aennock,  A.  M.  Mentioned  ,r>05’ 53Ji 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Andrew  H.  Foote.) 


’erczel,  Nicholas. 

Mentioned 

Reports  of 

Charleston,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  January  8,  1862 
New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of, 

Perkins,  Major.  Mentioned 

Perry,  Carlton,  H.  Mentioned 

Peter,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 

Peterson, . Mentioned 

PfafF,  Ernest.  Mentioned 

Phul,  Francis  von.  Mentioned 

Pheelan,  W.  G. 

Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 

Mentioned 

Phelps,  Colonel.  Mentioned 


91, 94, 103-105 


47 

Feb.  28- Apr.  8,  1862.. . 108 

319 

234 

17 

704 

244 

312 

690,700,705 

753 

303 


888 


INDEX. 


Mentioned . 


Page. 


Phelps,  John  E. 

Phelps.  John  S 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 45? 

Mentioned 69, 260, 267, 489, 499, 502, 527, 541, 82? 

Phelps,  S.  L.  Mentioned 669,67* 

Phifer,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 

Philips,  J.  F. 

Correspondence  with  James  Totten 351 

Mentioned 

Pickett,  Ed.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 761 

McCown,  John  P 7®2 


Marks,  S.  F 7& 


Polk,  Leonidas  767,768,770,774,775,785 


L.  M r. 791,794 

117,128,779,781 

Mentioned - 219, 23£ 

Mentioned US 

Mentioned - 33? 


Mentioned 


17f 


Walker, 

Mentioned  . 

Piderit,  Louis. 

Pierce,  Master. 

Pierce,  Eli  W. 

Pike,  Albert  (Captain) 

Pike,  Albert  (General). 

Assignments  to  command 
Correspondence  with 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 763,764,791 

War  Department,  C.  S 697,699,719,780 

Mentioned 74, 193, 195, 196, 204, 207, 233, 246, 253, 

282,  283,  293, 299, 301, 303, 363, 610, 650, 668, 690, 749-751, 755, 790, 798 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  280 

Pike,  W.  L.  Mentioned 288,291 

Pillow,  Gideon  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Gantt,  E.  W 7| 


Thompson,  M.  Jeff. 


690, 692, 70- 


Mentioned 690, 791 

Pindall,  L.  A.  Mentioned 319 

Pink  Hill,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  March  31,  1862.  Report  of  Charles  Banzhaf 358 

Pinckney,  R.  F.  Mentioned 185 

Piper,  Mr.  Mentioned 358,664 

Pitchlynn,  W.  B. 

Mentioned 15 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah,  December  9,  1861 21 

Pitkins,  James.  Mentioned 33fl 

Pittsburgh,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 78,88,104,119,120,668,669 

Plummer,  Joseph  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  Pope 698, 599, 69 

Mentioned 81, 82, 84, 90, 


92,  94,  95, 97, 102, 103, 105, 572, 590, 593, 595-597, 600,  602, 623, 670, 682 
Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  112 


Poindexter,  Mr.  Mentioned V 

Poindexter,  Colonel.  Mentioned 49, 5C 

Poindexter,  J.  A.  Mentioned 319,491,492 


Point  Pleasant,  Mo.  Engagements  at,  March  7 and  18,  1862.  (See  New 
Madrid , Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February  28- April  8,  1862.) 


INDEX. 


889 

Page. 


Dlk,  Leonidas. 

Correspondence  with 

Arkansas,  Governor  of 734 

Beauregard,  G.  T 754, 757, 775, 776, 779, 786, 789, 803 

Borland,  Solon 683 

Davis,  Jefferson 728 

Gantt,  E.  W 707, 717, 723, 742-744, 757, 759, 763 

Gray,  A.  B 774 

Hollins,  George  N 758 

Kennedy,  J.  B.  G 758 

McCown,  John  P 131, 

759-762,  765,  766,  768, 769, 771-773, 775, 778-782, 784-786, 793, 795 

Pickett,  Ed.,  jr 767, 768, 770, 774, 775, 789 

Price,  Sterling 698, 729 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 705,706,711,715,722,731,735,737,742,743 

Walker,  L.  M 793 

Whittle,  W.  C 738 

711 


Mentioned 126, 127, 132, 

144,  150,  162, 186, 403, 544, 629, 634, 687, 689, 734, 735, 738, 758, 808, 809 

ollok,  S.  Mentioned 487 

omeroy,  James  M.  Mentioned 346, 347 

ontchartrain,  C.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 127, 163, 164, 169, 185, 773 

ope,  Mr.  Mentioned - 211 

ope,  John. 

Assignments  to  command 403,566,590 

Correspondence  with 

Bissell,  J.  W 625 

Foote,  Andrew  H 644, 660, 669 

Halleck,  Henry  W 382, 391, 393, 399, 407, 411, 412, 414, 417, 

418, 420,  422-426, 429, 435-437, 442, 447, 452, 453, 457-461, 466, 469, 470, 
512, 516, 517, 528, 548, 553, 564-566, 570, 572, 580, 582, 587, 591,  593, 595, 
596, 599, 604, 609, 610, 612, 613, 618-620, 623, 625, 629, 630, 634, 641, 643, 
645, 646, 650, 653,  655, 657, 667, 669, 670,  674, 675,  678, 681, 820-822, 827 


Merrill,  Lewis  .. 

Paine,  E.  A 

Palmer,  John  M 
Plummer,  J.  B . . 
Steele,  Frederick 
Walke,  Henry  .. 


537 

606, 666, 670 
...  620,622 
598, 599, 622 
....  423,516 
....  667,669 


Mentioned 37, 42, 77, 79, 91, 94, 96, 102, 106, 

108-112, 118, 119, 121, 124, 131, 134, 174, 349, 375, 391, 407, 408, 418, 424, 
427, 438,  439, 446-448, 462, 463, 496, 506-508, 511, 517, 528, 529, 544, 560, 
565, 569, 570, 573, 581-583, 587, 588, 591, 593-597, 600, 602, 606, 610, 614, 
619, 627, 633, 643,  646, 649, 652, 661,  666, 668-671, 674,  676-678, 763, 819 


Reports  of 

Blackwatcr  Creek,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  December  18,  1861 38 

New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February  28-April  8, 

1862 77-79,81,85 

Staff.  Announcements  of 566, 590 


opejay,  William  D.  Mentioned 273 

orter,  J.  C.  [?].  Mentioned 318 

orter,  J.  S.  Mentioned 28, 302, 304 

orter,  William  D. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 672 

Mentioned 120, 369, 661, 672 


890 


INDEX. 


Pag© 


Post  Oak  Creek,  Mo. 

Action  on,  March  26, 1862. 

Communications  from 

Crittenden,  T.  T 350, 35] 

Totten,  James 350, 351 

Reports  of 

Foster,  Emory  S 353 

Totten,  James - 350, 35S 

Skirmish  on,  March  22,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events , p.  3.) 

Post,  P.  Sidney.  Mentioned 253,2511 

Postlethwaite,  John  T.  Mentioned 156, 16C 

Poten,  August  H. 

Mentioned 212, 213, 215, 216, 28C 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 280 

Potts’  Hill,  Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  16,  1862.  Report  of 

Clark  Wright - 61 

Powell,  A.  M.  Mentioned 

Powers,  Major.  Mentioned 690,  691 

Powers,  E.  R.  Mentioned 328 

Powers,  Edward.  Mentioned 360 

Praffer,  W.  W.  Mentioned 360 

Pratt,  John  A.  Mentioned 

Prentiss,  Benjamin  M. 

Assignments  to  command 379,390 

Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W 379j 

399,  400,  404,  433,  437, 440,  441,  444,  446,  447,  454,  458-460,  465,  474,  492 

Schofield,  John  M 

Mentioned 

400, 408, 429, 435-438, 448, 462,  463,  469,  470: 

Reports  of 

Hallsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  December  27, 1861 
Mount  Zion  Church,  Mo.  Action  at,  December  28 
President  C.  S.  (See  Jefferson  Davis.) 

President  U.  S.  (See  Abraham  Lincoln.) 

Preston,  S.  M.  Mentioned 

Preuitt,  Valentine.  Mentioned 

Price,  Celsus.  Mentioned 

Price,  Charles  P. 

Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 

Mentioned 

Price,  Edwin  W.  Mentioned 537,798 

Price,  Sterling. 

Address  to  soldiers  of  Missouri  State  Guard 814 

Assignments  to  command 7M 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 714,716 

Halleck,  Henry  W 496,497,514,528 

Hubert,  Louis 738, 741, 745, 752 

Jackson,  C.  F 725,756 

McCulloch,  Ben 702 

McIntosh,  James 712,741 

Polk,  Leonidas 698, 720 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff 727 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 748, 750, 798, 802 

War  Department,  C.  S 736,744,747,792 


482,492 

382,392, 

475, 479,  496,  501,  818,  823 


1861 


398 

56 

320 


711 

172 


INDEX. 


891 

Page. 


813 

799 


>rice,  Sterling— Continued. 

Mentioned  38,42,46,54,56, 

59,60,64,65,  67,  74,  191,  193,  196,  197,  204,  208,  209,  249,  250,  257,  259, 
278,281,283-285,290-294,297,298,  300,304,  308,  316,  317,  323,  327,  329, 
332, 334, 358, 363, 373, 374,  379,  382,  392-396,  398-400,  402,  403,  407-412, 
414-418,421,423-426,  428,429,435-438,  441-443,  445,  447,  448,  453,  458, 
461-463, 468-470, 472, 475, 478-481,  483, 487,  489,  492,  494,  496,  499-502, 
504,506,508-510,516,524-528,  531,  540,  541,  543-545,  551,  553-556,  558, 
560-563,  566-568, 575, 592, 594, 598, 604, 610,  612,  627,  628,  642,  646,  647- 
650,657-659,661,662,664,666,  671,673,693,  700,  701,  704,  707,  712,  715, 
717,724,725,727-729,752,  753,  755,  763-765,  788,  793,  812,  813,  819,  828 

Proclamation  to  people  of  Central  and  North  Missouri 695 

Report  of  battle  at  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 304 

Resignation  as  major-general  Missouri  State  Guard  accepted 

Staff.  Announcements  of 

3rice,  Thomas  L.  Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  373,377,392 

War  Department,  U.  

Price,  Warren.  Mentioned p20’ 521 

Priest,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 317» 318 

Prince,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 151» 723 

Prince,  Edward.  Mentioned 453 

Prince,  William  E. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 628, 631 

Mentioned 

Prisoners  of  War.  Treatment,  exchange  of,  etc 53, 134, 

341,  342,  381, 395, 403, 405-407, 418, 439, 453, 490, 494- 
497,  515,  527,  561,  657,  658,673,699-702,710,822,825 

Pritchard,  J.  A.  Mentioned 309> 311 

Private  Property.  Action  touching 70, 188, 381, 404-406, 478, 482,  494, 497, 503, 

507,  508,  529, 552, 553, 563, 564, 571, 577, 578, 607, 641, 642, 664, 733, 797 

(See  also  Slaves  and  Slave  Property.) 

Proctor,  W.  S.  Mentioned 27 

Pugh,  John.  Mentioned ^20 

Pulliam,  George  M.  Mentioned 561 

Putnam,  Daniel  C.  Mentioned 273 

Quantrill,  W.  C.  Mentioned 57,335,336,346,347,358,360,361 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Allen,  Robert ^ 

385,396 


Beebe,  James  

Campbell,  Hugh 

Davis,  David 372, 38..,  99b 


387 

367-369, 371, 383, 397, 488, 504, 535, 576, 600, 652 

396 

385,396 

* 385-387 

5,6, 8-10, 18, 288, 294 

Quincy,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  9-16,  1862.  Report  of  Joseph  W.  McClurg 365 

Quine,  Nathaniel  J.  O.  Mentioned 10 

Raftre,  John.  Mentioned 341,342 

Rains,  James  S. 

Mentioned 38, 56, 260, 305, 391-393, 395,  398, 423, 443, 458, 479, 524,717 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  326 


Dickerson,  J.  H 

Foote,  Andrew  H 

Halleck,  Henry  W 

Holt,  Joseph 

War  Department,  U.  S. 
Quayle,  William.  Mentioned 


892 


INDEX. 


Rains,  Samuel.  Mentioned 

‘Randall,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 

Randleman,  Martin  C.  Mentioned . . 

Randol,  A.  M.  Mentioned  

Randolph,  Maklon.  Mentioned 

Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G.  Mentioned 

Rapley,  N.  F.  Mentioued 

Rathbun,  George  S.  Mentioned 

Rawalt,  Jonas. 


Page. 
352, 354  * 
. 364 

48, 108; 

. 439 1 

84 
47 

..  753 

..  328 


Mentioned 52, 1 14 , 115,  643 


Report  of  expedition  to  Little  River,  Mo.,  March  23,  1862 347 

Rawlins,  John  A.  (For  correspondence.,  etc.,  see  U.  S.  Grant.) 

Ray,  John  C.  Mentioned 277 

Rea,  Con.  Mentioned 11 

Rector,  Judge.  Mentioned 522 

Rector,  Frank  A.  Mentioned 195, 292, 698 


Rector,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 196,685,693,702,754,755,802 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Arkansas,  Governor  of.) 


Red  Rover,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 800 

Reed, . Mentioned 

Reed,  Thomas  A. 

Mentioued 272,276 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  273 

Reeder,  Benjamin  A. 

Mentioned 366,367 

Report  of  scout  to  Little  Niangua,  etc.,  April  9-16,  1862  366 

Reeder,  Howard.  Mentioned 96,97 

Reeside,  J.  E.  Mentioned 372,385-387,396 

Refugees,  Abandoned  Lands,  etc. 

Communications  from  Bernard  G.  Farrar 411 

Orders.  Department  of  the  Missouri - 405, 431 

Reid,  John.  Mentioned 799  j 

Reynolds.  Lemuel  M.  Mentioned 6, 9, 10, 19 

Rhein,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 332 

Rhodes,  F.  T.  Mentioned 15 


Rich,  Josephus  G.  Report  of  skirmish  at  Mountain  Grove,  Mo.,  March  9, 


1862  ----  334 

Richards,  Mr.  Mentioned 508 

Richards,  George  N.  Mentioned 223 

Richardson,  J ohn  M.  Report  of  reconnaissance  to,  and  skirmish  on,  Pea  Ridge 

Prairie,  Mo.,  February  23-24,  1862 71 

Richardson,  Yancy.  Mentioned 363 

Richay,  John,  Mentioned 660 

Richmond,  W.  B.  Mentioned 169, 765, 766 

Riddle’s  Point,  Mo.  Action  at,  March  17,  1862.  (See  Xetv  Madrid,  Mo. 

Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  February  28- April  8,  1862.) 

Riggins,  G.  W. 

Mentioned 313 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8.  1862  316 

Riley,  Asher.  Mentioned 267 

Riley,  James.  Mentioned 21 

Ritchie,  John.  Mentioned 416 

Rives,  Benjamin  A.  Mentioned 285, 306, 308, 310, 311, 325,  326, 757 


INDEX. 


893 


49 

50 
49 


Page. 

>an’s  Tan- Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo.  Action  at,  January  8, 1862.  Reports  of 

Merrill,  Lewis 

Palmer,  John  M 

Torrence,  W.  M.  G 

Turner,  Thomas  J 

>bberson,  James  L.  Mentioned 272-274 

jbbins,  George  W.  Mentioned 11 4 

fberson,  William  C.  Mentioned 355 

fberts,  Franklin.  Mentioned 685 

fberts,  George  W.  Mentioned 119, 124 

jbertson,  William  S. 

Mentioned 103,105,107 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.  107 

Dbinson,  Colonel.  Mentioned 40 

abinson,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 128, 163, 786 

Dbinson,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 40 

Dbinson,  Charles.  Mentioned 616,631,653,664,831 

Dbinson,  J.  D.  Mentioned 27 

Dbinson,  Richard.  Mentioned I7 

Ddan,  Mr.  Mentioned 48 

Ddgers,  John.  Mentioned 383 

:>e,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

olla,  Mo.  Operations  about,  March  8-9,  1862.  Report  of  Sempronius  H. 

Boyd 


332 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Sempronius 


alia,  Mo.,  Commanding  Officer. 

H.  Boyd.) 

ollen,  . Mentioned 

ollen, . Mentioned 347 


34: 


546 
45 
336 

156 

17 

130 

333 

17 

11,395,481,668,732 


ollins,  James  S.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  8 

ose  Hill,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  January  1-3,  1862.  Report  of  D.  R.  Anthony . . 

lose,  Milton.  Mentioned 

ose,  S.  Mentioned * 

oss,  Allan.  Mentioned 

oss,  Em.  Mentioned 

oss,  Francis.  Mentioned  . 

oss,  George  W.  Mentioned - 

oss,  John.  Mentioned - 

oss,  Leonard  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  

Halleck,  Henry  W 

Mentioned 4^2 

Reports  of  expeditions  to  Benton,  Bloomfield,  and  Dallas,  Mo.,  January 

15-17,1862  52’54 

oss,  L.  S.  Mentioned 75> 302-304 

loss,  Newton.  Mentioned 

oss,  Oliver.  Mentioned 

loss,  P.  F.  Mentionod 

’oss,  Thomas.  Mentioned 

Loss,  William  P.  Mentioned 17, 246 

Losser,  Thomas  H. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 .... 
tottaken,  Herbert  H.  Mentioned 337,339 


404, 432 
..  825 


806 

17 

28 


285, 314 
..  312 


894 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Round  Mountain,  Ind.  T.  Engagement  at,  November  19, 1861.  Reports  of 

Brinson,  M.  J 14 

Young,  R.  A 14,15 

(See  also  Indian  Territory.  Operations  in,  Nov.  19,  1861-Jan.  4,  1862.) 

Rowland,  John  B.  Mentioned 340 

Rowles,  David  H.  Mentioned 269 

Rowley,  R.  F.  Mentioned 143 

Rucker,  Major.  Mentioned 235,319 

Rucker,  Edward  W. 

Mentioned 128-130, 144, 145, 151-155, 157, 159, 170, 175, 180, 784, 785, 801, 810 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  159 

Ruggles,  Daniel.  Mentioned 754 

Ruggles,  James  M.  Mentioned 257 

Russell,  Ezekiel  Mentioned 17 

Russell,  John.  Mentioned 212, 224, 225 

Russell,  R.  M.  Mentioned - - 778,779 

Russell,  William  C.  Mentioned 104 

Rust,  Albert. 

Assignments  to  command 776, 80S,  815 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 802 

Mentioned 776, 780, 783, 803, 815  i 

Rust,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 118 

Sabin,  L.  M.  Mentioned 225 

Saint  Clair  County,  Mo. 

Operations  in,  March  18-30,  1862.  Reports  of 

Totten,  James 341  i 

Warren,  Fitz  Henry 341-343 

Scout  in,  March  24,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events , p.  3.) 

Saint  Francisville,  Mo.  Reconnaissance  to,  and  skirmish  near,  February  23- 

25,  1862.  Report  of  Albert  Jackson 72 

Saint  Louis,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 119,621,624 

Saint  Louis,  Mo. 

Defense  of  (immediate).  Board  appointed  to  examine  into 401 

Mayor  and  municipal  officers  to  subscribe  to  oath  of  allegiance 

Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  Police  Commissioners.  Correspondence  with  Bernard  G. 


414 


Farrar . 


584 


491 


Saint  Louis  District.  (Union.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 

Hamilton  Schuyler  assumes  command 491 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  1,  401 ; No.  4,  557. 

Schofield,  John  M.,  assumes  command ....• 557 

Salem,  Mo.  Action  at,  December  3,  1861.  Reports  of 

Bowen,  William  D 34 

Wyman,  John  B 33 

Saline  County,  Mo. 

Operations  in,  March  7-10,  1862.  Report  of  John  B.  Kaiser 

Scout  through,  December  3-12,  1861.  Report  of  George  C.  Marshall 

Samuels,  D.  Todd.  Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 

Sanders,  George  O.  Mentioned 

Sanders,  N.  B.  Mentioned 

Sands,  Frank  C.  Mentioned 


331 

34 

328 

17 

17 

97, 105 


154, 161, 174, 175 


Sandford,  J.  H.  Mentioned 

Sanford,  J.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Andrew  H.  Foote 537 

Mentioned 505,621 


INDEX. 


895 


Page. 

amders,  James  P. 

Mentioned JU6,"“ 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 321 

Hinders,  J.  E.  Mentioned 129>  156>  ^ 

ivery,  Phineas  M.  Mentioned 784 

jhaefer,  Frederick.  Mentioned 192’ 

203, 205, 208, 210, 212, 214, 215, 221,  239,  241,  242, 545, 550, 592, 598, 601 

;haumberg,  Wright  C.  Mentioned 193>  285» 312 

:henck,  Egbert  T.  S.  Mentioned - - -* • 3™ 

shipper,  John.  Mentioned - 209’  244> 245 

jhneider,  E.  F.  Mentioned 

bhneider,  L.  W.  Mentioned 

bhnitzer,  Gustavus.  Mentioned 118,1  iy 

bhofield,  John  M. 

Assignments  to  command 389,  394>  468» 

; Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W 462, 466, 467 , 469, 475, 479, 493, 503, 627, 823 

Henderson,  John  4^7’ 

Loan,  Ben 

McKean,  Thomas  J 

Morsey,  

Prentiss,  B.  ’ 

Totten,  James 


336 

242 


422 

582 

600 


Warrens,  Charles  H 

Mentioned 

chouler,  Mr.  Mentioned. 


632, 663, 672 

607 

389, 439,  466, 474, 492, 499, 501, 502, 509, 626, 649, 652 

520 

211 


ichramm,  Louis.  Mentioned 

chwarzman,  G.  A.  Mentioned - ’ 

•cott,  Mr.  Mentioned 

icott,  Mr.  Mentioned ^ 

ksott,  Captain.  Mentioned ’ 

Mentioned 


30 

324 


icott,  John  F. 

►cott,  Joseph  T.  Mentioned 

Correspondence  with  War  Dept. , U.  S 649, 659, 661, 666, 670, 671, 675, 676, 681 

Mentioned 110,601,602,642,660 

^New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8,  1862.. . 123 

Union  City,  Tenn.  Descent  upon,  March  30-31,  1862 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  War  Department,  U.  S .) 

Scott,  William  C.  Mentioned 

Scott,  Winfield.  Mentioned 

3coville,  Master’s  Mate.  Mentioned 9 

3elden,  William.  Mentioned 

3enteny,  P.  S.  Mentioned - 

Severs,  F . B . Mentioned " ' * * * * * ------ - - - - - - 

3eward,  William  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  State  Department,  u.  b.) 

Shackelford,  George  D.  Mentioned : 

Shaffer,  J.  W.  Mentioned 

Shaffer,  William  F.  Mentioned in«  inn 'in' 324  326 

Shaler,  James  R.  Mentioned 308,309,311,324,326 

Shands,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 


123, 124 

28 
478 


266 

311 

6 

321 

370 

51 


896 


INDEX, 


Page 

Shanghai,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  December  1,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events,  p.  1.) 

Sharp,  Tid.  Mentioned 331 

Sheffield,  Leonard.  Mentioned 2t 

Shelby,  J oseph  O.  Mentioned 35, 328, 332, 340, 424, 429, 49< 

Sheldon,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 501 

Sheliha,  Victor. 

Correspondence  with  W.  W.  Mackall 81( 

Mentioned 132, 80£ 

Sheridan,  Philip  H.  Mentioned 481,506,524,545 

Sherman,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 450,634 

Sherman,  W.  T. 

Assignments  to  command 459,555 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 379 

381, 382,  391, 445,  462, 464,  573,  583, 588,  591,  819 

Mentioned 122, 374, 389,  391,  441, 459, 511,  514,  555,  587, 591, 644,  785, 820,  821 

Shields,  L.  Mentioned 262 

Shields,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 815 

Shields,  William.  Mentioned 726 

Shiloh  Camp,  Mo.  Scout  to,  April  9-16,  1862.  (See  Quincy,  Mo.) 

Shirk,  James  W.  Mentioned 122 

Short,  D.  M.  Mentioned 22,23,29 

Short,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned 251 

Shreveport,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 392 

Shumate,  Nathan.  Mentioned 255 

Shunk,  David. 

Mentioned 247, 249-252, 261, 262, 267 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  252 

Sibley,  H.  Mentioned 655 

Sigel,  Franz. 

Assignments  to  command 460 

Correspondence  with 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 526,540,543,583,592,598 

Halleck,  Henry  W 375, 460, 461 

Mentioned 61, 62, 191, 192, 196-198, 200-204, 216, 219-222, 224, 

225,  228-232, 238, 239,  244, 246-248, 255, 258,  278,  280,  281,  283,  292,  305, 
307,  323,  329,  371,  438, 471,  472, 481, 496, 502, 508,  524,  539,  540,  543,  545, 
546,  550,  556,558,559,575,596,601,626,  662,  678,  686,  769,  779,  827-829 


Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 208 

Siggins,  Thomas.  Mentioned 277 

Sikeston,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  1, 1862.  (See  New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance 
upon  and  siege  of,  February  28- April  8,  1862.) 

Simmons,  Captain.  Mentioned 35 

Simonds,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 758,800 

Simpson,  John  M.  Mentioned 296 

Sims,  William  B. 

Mentioned 7, 9-11, 288, 294 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah,  Iiid.  T.,  December  9,  1861 18 

Sioux  City,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 430 

Sipple,  W.  C.  Mentioned 522, 523 

Situwakee,  Private.  Mentioned 17 

Skeels,  Beilis  H.  Mentioned 223 

Skeels,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned 278 


INDEX. 


897 


Page. 

sketches. 

Island  No.  10 767 

New  Madrid,  Mo.  Defenses  of 137, 146, 147 

Bkieyaltooka,  Big.  (Sky-yah-too-kah.)  Mentioned 17 

Bkivinki,  E.  Mentioned 265 

Black,  James  R. 

Assignments  to  command *. 564 

Mentioned 91, 94, 103, 564, 565 

Black,  William  Y. 

Assignments  to  command 740 

Mentioned 193, 260, 281, 285, 305, 307, 308, 312, 314, 717, 740, 792 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property. 

Communications  from 

Halleck,  Henry  W 370,444,465 

Waring,  George  E.,  jr 451 

References  to 444, 445, 451, 464, 465, 555, 556, 564, 584, 637, 642, 686, 690, 693, 825 

Blayback,  A.  W.  Mentioned 315 

Slidell,  John.  Mentioned 726 

small, 364 

Small,  A.  V.  Mentioned 324 

Small,  Captain.  Mentioned 340 

Small,  William  B.  Mentioned 47,48 

Smith, . Mentioned 7 

Smith, . Mentioned 7 

Smith,  Corporal.  Mentioned 355 

Smith,  Benjamin  D.  Mentioned 355 

Smith,  Caleb  B.  Mentioned 624, 659 

Smith,  Charles  P.  Mentioned 503,588,591,595,629,634 

Smith,  Crabgrass.  Mentioned 17 

Smith,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 370 

Smith,  Eli.  Mentioned  17 

Smith,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 52 

Smith,  Gideon.  Mentioned - 18 

Smith,  Gustavns  A.  Mentioned - 259,263,264 

Smith,  Henry  A. 

Mentioned 230 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8, 1862 231 

Smith,  James  M.  C.  Mentioned 7 

Smith,  J.  L.  Kirby. 

Mentioned 82, 88, 91, 94, 98, 102, 103, 105, 667 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28- Apr.  8, 1862.  100 

Smith,  J.  M.  Mentioned 164,166,167,175,689 

Smith,  J.  W.  Mentioned 507,508 

Smith,  P.  R.  Mentioned 317 

Smith,  Robert  F.  Mentioned 83, 109, 533 

Smith,  S.  H.  Mentioned 17 

Smith,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 561 

Smith,  W.  R.  Mentioned 28 

Smoote,  G.  P.  Mentioned 130,131 

Snead,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned - 744, 745, 751, 799 

Snedicor,  J.  D.  Correspondence  with  Bernard  G.  Farrar 641 

Snodgrass,  William  N.  Mentioned 799 

Snowden,  J.  Hudson.  Mentioned 143 

jsnyde,  J.  M.  Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  321 

Snyder,  Captain.  Mentioned 198 

57  r R — vol  vm 


898 


INDEX, 


Page. 


Southwestern  District  of  Missouri.  (Union.) 

Curtis,  Samuel  R.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command 462, 473 

Limits  defined 473,491 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  1,  473.  Series  1862 : No.  2, 491 ; No.  7, 651. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  1,  473.  Series  1862 : No.  75,  No.  78, 549  ; 

No.  80,  No.  81,  550;  No.  84,554;  No.  90,560;  No.  108,  601 ; No.  Ill,  608; 

No.  134,  659;  No.  138,677. 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 539, 550, 554 

Sparks,  David  R.  Mentioned * ??* 

Sparrestrom,  Frederick.  Mentioned 117 ’ llb 

Spencer,  William.  Mentioned 28 

Spillman,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 333,339 

Spoor,  N.  T.  Mentioned ?? 

Sprague,  James  M.  Mentioned 55,56 

Sprague,  John  W. 

Mentioned yy’ 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo. , Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  101 
Springfield,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  12,  1862.  Report  of  Samuel  R.  Curtis.. . 59 
Spring  River,  Ark.  Action  at,  March  13, 1862.  Report  of  Samuel  N.  Wood. . 336 

Springston,  George.  Mentioned 17 

Stanley,  David  S. 

Mentioned 79, 80, 82-84, 90, 91, 94, 96, 98, 102, 103, 106, 108, 589. 669-671, 682 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  98 

Stanton,  E.  M.  Mentioned 385,387,396,419,450, 

455,  456,  507,509,525,530,569,591,605,  606,  652,  659,  660,  683,  831-833 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department , U.  S.) 

Stark,  W.  H.  Mentioned - 192> 203 

State,  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Iowa,  Governor  of 518j  530 

War  Department,  U.  523 

Steedman,  I.  G.  W. 

Mentioned 130, 152, 154, 156, 160, 161, 180,785, 807, 809 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  174 


Steele,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 


330 


578 


Steele,  Frederick. 

Assignments  to  command - — 

Correspondence  with 

Halleck,  Henry  W 42, 374, 375, 379, 390, 393, 400, 408, 410, 

413-415, 418, 424, 478,  499, 507, 578,  609, 610, 626,  636, 651, 671, 672, 825 

Kenedy,  George  37^ 

Pope,  John ^23, 

Mentioned 38, 407 , 420-422, 425, 438, 507 

535, 536,  569, 570, 572,  610, 613, 649, 652, 657, 661,  662, 665, 666, 672, 782 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Doniphan,  Mo.,  April  1,  1862  - 361 

Steen,  A.  E.  Mentioned - 316, 329,381,414, 415,417,717, /88, 792 

Stein,  George  W.  Mentioned 339 

Stembel,  Roger  N.  Mentioned 595> 535 

Stemmons,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 327,328 

Stephens,  John  W.  Mentioned 203, 257, 269, 629 

Sterling,  Robert.  Mentioned 150-152, 158 

Stevens,  Captain.  Mentioned 37 

Stevenson,  John  D. 

Mentioned 360,536 

Report  of  skirmish  in  La  Fayette  County,  Mo.,  March  10,  1862 334 


INDEX. 


899 

Page. 


Stewart,  Alexander  P. 

Correspondence  with  John  P.  McCown 131 

Mentioned 82, 127-131, 138, 166-169, 185, 186, 614,  761, 779 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  162 

Stewart,  C.  S.  Mentioned . 7 

Stewart,  J.  W.  Mentioned 129, 164, 165, 457, 709 

Stewart,  R.  A.  Mentioned - 127, 129, 166 

Stitt,  R.  A.  Mentioned 192,203 

Stockton,  David  D.  Mentioned 354-356 

Stockton,  Philip.  Mentioned - 786 

Stockton,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned 376 

Stoddard,  Albert.  Mentioned 48 

Stolbrand,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 117 

Stone,  Colonel.  Mentioned 320 

Stone,  B.  Warren. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 777 

Mentioned 284,289,297,318,783 

Reports  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,1862...- 301, 302 

Stop,  Wat.  Mentioned 17 

Stott,  Steven.  Mentioned 561 

Stover,  Elias  S.  Mentioned 346,347 

Strong,  William  K. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 618,619 

Mentioned 116, 362, 608, 644, 649, 652, 682 

Stuart,  David.  Mentioned 372 

Sturgis,  Samuel  D. 

Assignments  to  command 683 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 668 

Mentioned 376, 389, 400, 401, 626, 661, 672, 683 

Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Action  at,  Feb.  17, 1862.  Report  of  Samuel  R.  Curtis 61 

Sulivane,  E.  Clement.  Mentioned 286,746 

Sullivan,  T.  W.  Mentioned 262 

Sumers,  Mr.  Mentioned 55 

Summers,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 223 

Sunshine,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 429,490,565 

Surgeon-General’s  Office,  T7.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  Adjutant-General’s 

Office,  U.  S.  A 576 

Swain,  James  A.  Mentioned 376, 536, 565, 566, 590 

Swank,  S.  Mentioned 736,737 

S wayne,  Wager.  Mentioned - 100 

Sweeney,  Captain.  Mentioned 415,424 

Switzler,  Theodore  A.  Mentioned 61,559 

Swoyer,  Frederick.  Mentioned - 47 

Swykiffer,  . Mentioned 341,342 

Symington,  John.  Mentioned 505 

Taggart,  W.  Mentioned 223 

Talleyrand,  . Mentioned 701 

Tate,  David.  Mentioned 346 

Taylor,  Clay.  Mentioned 327,632,750,751,799,823 

Taylor,  John  A.  Mentioned...'. 365 

Taylor,  John  W.  Mentioned 566,590 

Taylor,  Samuel  F.  Mentioned 313 

Taylor,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned 33 

Taylor,  T.  T.  Mentioned 324,325 

Teil,  T.  Mentioned - 264 


900 


INDEX. 


Page. 

45 


365 


Temple,  Adjutant.  Mentioned — 

Tennessee. 

Military  departments  embracing 605 

Operations  in.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 661 

Halleck,  Henry  W 661 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communication  from  Henry  W.  Halleck 548,553,554 

Tennessee,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 771 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : Bankhead’s,  127,128,  162,163,  173,186,771,781;  Ca- 
ruthers’,  150,151,159;  Dismuke’s,  150,  151;  Fisher’s,  150;  Hoadley’s, 
150,155,161;  Hume’s,  150;  Jackson’s,  150,  158;  Johnston’s,  129,  150, 
151,186,775;  Jones’,  150;  Rucker’s,  136,150,155,174,178,180,186,  794; 
Sterling’s,  150,  153,  155,  158,  161;  Stewart’s,  126,  163,  186,  689,  762; 
Tobin’s,  770 ; Upton’s,  126, 163, 186. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  Logwood’s,  117,782;  Neely’s,  128, 186.  Companies: 
Haywood’s,  128,186. 

Infantry — Regiments : 4th,  128, 129, 154, 157, 186  ; 5th,  126-128, 162, 186, 770 ; 

12th,  13th,  778;  15th,  126;  21st,  117;  22d,  778;  31st,  128,186;  40th 
(see  5 th  Confederate)’,  46th,  129,175,177-179,186,762,795,807;  55th,  129, 

154, 155, 157, 174, 175, 177-181, 186, 795, 807. 

Tergin,  James.  Mentioned 

Texas.  Expedition  (proposed)  against  Northeastern.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 379 

Army  Headquarters . - - 428 

Hunter,  David * 428,450 

Texas  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : Good’s,  289,  310,  719,  728,  763,  788;  Teel’s,  309,  788. 
Cavalry — Battalions:  1st  (Crump’s),  783,  788;  4th  (Whitfield’s),  11-13,22, 

289,  309,  310,  315,  713,  719,  728,  746,  776,  788.  Companies:  (Bennett’s),  22, 
23,30,31,719,746.  Regiments:  3d  (Greer’s),  11, 12, 22, 23, 27-30, 290, 293, 
294,297-301,  713,  719,  728,  746,  776,  788,  793  ; 3d  [11th]  (Young’s),  11, 

22,  23,  26,  27,30,  293,  298,709,  713,  746,  776  ; 4th  [9th]  (Sims’),  5-12, 14, 

18,  19,  287,  288,  293,  709,  713,  719,  720,  728,  746,776  ; 6th  (Stone’s),  22,23, 

27-30,  74,  75,  290,  293,  297,  301-304,  318,  719,  728,  746,  776,783;  10th,  783. 
Squadrons : ( Welch’s),  287,  289,  290. 

Thayer,  John  M.  Mentioned - - 535 

Thom,  George.  Mentioned 398,401 

Thomas,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned — - 251 

Thomas,  Frank.  Mentioned - - 490 

Thomas,  Hubbard  T.  Mentioned 349, 640 

Thomas,  I.  D.  Mentioned 170 

Thomas,  Lorenzo.  Mentioned  379, 390, 403, 419, 428, 439, 450, 454, 511, 554, 555, 576, 830 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Thompson,  Egbert.  Mentioned 068 

Thompson,  James.  Mentioned 20 

Thompson,  James  D. 

Mentioned 351,664 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Black  water  Creek,  Mo.,  March  29,  1862  356 

Thompson,  Joe.  Mentioned 32 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff. 

Correspondence  with 

Borland,  Solon 091 

Clark,  M.  L 703 

Edson,  J.  J 093 


INDEX.  901 

Page. 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Hunter,  Jason  H 767 

Jackson,  C.  F 704,735,753,765 

Kitchen,  Sol.  G - 742 

McCown,  J.  P 767 

Mackall,  W.  W 806,808 

Pheelan,  W.  G 690, 700, 705 

Pillow,  Gideon  J 690,692,704 

Polk,  Leonidas 705, 706, 711, 715, 722, 731, 735, 737, 742, 743 

Price,  Charles  P 711 

Price,  Sterling 727 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 758,788,801 

Yillepigne,  John  B 806,807 

Mentioned 53, 102, 110, 114, 125, 

127,171,362,365,374,404,432,526,573,  581,  582,  609,  626,  643,  650,  685, 
686,  690,  700, 708, 711, 717, 718, 723, 724,  726,  738,  744,  759,  763,  769,  783 

Proclamation  adjourning  Missouri  Legislature.  (Confederate) 765 

Reports  of 

City  of  Alton,  Steamboat.  Attack  on,  December  29,  1861 45 

Commerce,  Mo.  Descent  on,  December  29,  1861 45 

New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8,  1862.  171, 172 

Thompson,  Richard  W.  Mentioned — 370 

Thornton,  G.  A.  Mentioned — - - — 25 

Thornton,  Q.  B.  Mentioned 130 

Throckmorton,  James  W.  Mentioned 28, 303 

Thyssens,  F.  Mentioned — - ^12 

Tice,  M.  M.  Mentioned 330 

Tidmarsh,  T.  H.  [?].  Mentioned  .. 129, 151, 156, 161, 778 

Tilman,  H.  Mentioned 

Tillson,  John.  Mentioned — 169 

Tindall,  Jacob  T.  Mentioned 446 

Tinkham,  Charles  J.  Mentioned H4 

Tisdale,  Edgar.  Mentioned 267 

Tison,  Josephus  C.  Mentioned 296 

Tobin,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned - 770,771 

Tobly,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned - 20 

Todd,  George  R. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 453,  456 

Mentioned 460,467,469,475,479 

Report  of  expedition  to  Danville,  Mo.,  December  25,  1861 - 43 

Todd,  Preston.  Mentioned 1®6 

Toler,  Silas  C.  Mentioned 362 

Toler,  W.  H.  Mentioned 16^ 

Tompkins,  John  C.  Mentioned — — 561 

Torrence,  William  M.  G. 

Correspondence  with  James  Totten — 356, 351 

Mentioned.... 38, 40, 41, 49, 51, 517, 535, 663, 664 

Report  of  action  at  Rban’s  Tan-Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo.,  J anuary  8,  1862 50 

Totten,  James. 

Correspondence  with 

Blood,  J.  638 

Crittenden,  T.  350> 351 

Foster,  Emory  3&1 

Halleck,  Henry  W 632, 637 , 658, 673, 679 


902 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Totten,  James — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Merrill,  Lewis - 639 

Moniteau  County,  Mo.  Sheriff  and  Grand  Jury  of. 680 

Philips,  J.  F 351 

Schofield,  John  M 632, 663, 672 

Torrence,  William  M.  G — 350,351 

Wheatley,  W.  M 351 

Mentioned 398, 401, 626, 649, 652 

Reports  of 

Gouged  Mill,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  26, 1862 356 

Henry  County,  Mo.  Operations  in,  March  18-30,1862 341 

Johnson  County,  Mo.  Operations  in. 

March  18-30,  1862 341 

March  19-23, 1862 344 

Leesville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  March  19,  1862 341 

Little  Sni,  Mo.  Skirmish  on  the,  April  1,  1862 359 

Moniteau  County,  Mo.  Expedition  to,  and  skirmish  en  route,  March  25- 

28,1862 349 

Post  Oak  Creek,  Mo.  Action  on  the,  March  26, 1862  350, 352 

Saint  Clair  County,  Mo.  Operations  in,  March  18-30,  1862 341 

Towner,  James  W.  Mentioned 267 

Townes,  N.  W.  Mentioned - 13 

Townsend,  E.  D.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office,  U.S.  ,A.) 

Tracker,  Private.  Mentioned 17 

Tracy,  Henry.  Mentioned 324 

Trade  and  Intercourse 404, 440, 453, 454, 457, 584-586, 594, 595, 833, 834 

Trans-Mississippi,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 791 

Lee,  Robert  E 791 

Tennessee,  Governor  of 771 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 789, 793, 795, 796, 798, 802-804, 812, 813, 815, 816 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 734 

Orders,  Circular,  February  24, 1862 755 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  1,745;  No.  7,329;  No.  9,796. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  7,748;  No.  41,  812;  No.  44,  815;  No.  46, 

No.  48, 816;  No.  81, 793. 

Van  Dorn,  Earl,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command 734,745 

Travis,  W.  E.  Mentioned 127,129 

Trimble,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 232-234 

Trio,  Steamboat.  Mentioned - 99 

Trotting  Wolf.  Mentioned 17 

Trudeau,  James. 

Mentioned 129, 130, 132, 160, 161, 174, 180, 771, 782, 784, 785, 791, 807 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  150 

Truitt,  James.  Mentioned 28 

Turley,  Captain.  Mentioned 340 

Turley,  John  A.  Mentioned 663 

Turner, . Mentioned 34,409 

Turner,  J.  W.  Mentioned 370 

Turner,  Thomas  J. 

Mentioned 388,391 

Report  of  action  at  Roan’s  Tan-Yard,  Silver  Creek,  Mo.,  January  8, 1862. . 49 

Turnley,  P.  T.  Mentioned 385,387,489 


INDEX. 


903 


Page. 

Tusaquach.  Correspondence  with  E.  H.  Car  ruth 26 

Fweeddale,  William.  Mentioned..-...---.. 84 

Tweedy,  Amandus.  Mentioned ; 348 

Tyler,  U.  S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 121, 122 

[Jllfers,  Mr.  Mentioned 243 

[Jit ee sky,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned..  — — ....  — * - - 17 

Onion  City,  Tenn.  Descent  upon,  March  30-31, 1862.  Reports  of 

Buford,  Napoleon  B - - H6 

Scott,  Thomas  A 123,124 

Onion  Mills,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  December  9, 1861.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events , p.  1,) 

Onion  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

New  Madrid,  Mo.  Advance  upon  and  siege  of,  Feb.28-Apr.  8,  1862  ..  91-93 

Pea  Ridge,  Ark.  Battle  of,  March  6-8,  1862 203-205 

Mentioned.  (Regulars.) 

Artillery — Regiments:  2d,  P,  93,95,97. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 4th,  34-36, 38-42, 93, 95, 535, 590. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  82-84, 86, 93, 95-97 , 102, 457, 565, 572, 590. 

(For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States.) 

Inspection  of,  in  Kansas 552! 

Organization  of,  strength,  etc. 

Army  of  the  Mississippi. 

February  23,  1862  564, 565  > 

March  14,  1862 91  ~93' 

March  31, 1862  94> 95 

Army  of  the  Southwest. 

January  31,  1862  - - 539 

February  9, 1862  - 550 

February  12, 1862  - 554 

Cairo,  District  of 474,478 

Mississippi,  Department  of  the 

March  30, 1862 549 

March  31, 1862  552 

Unrich,  Max  von.  Mentioned 243 

Utt,  Levi  H.  Mentioned  ......  45 

Uttley,  T.  L.  Mentioned. - 1® 

Vance,  James  G.  Mentioned 28 

Vanderbilt,  Steamer,  Mentioned 543 

Vanderbilt,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 543 

Vanderen,  Archibald.  Mentioned 223 

Vandever,  William. 


Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8, 1862 266 

Van  Dorn,  Earl. 

Assignments  to  command - - — 734, 735,  / 45 

Co-operation  with  Beauregard  and  J ohnston - 801 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.... 755,786, 813 

Beauregard,  G.  T 784,791,  796 

Bradfute,  W.  R 787 

Cabell,  W.L -----  780,782,803,812 

Churchill,  T.  J 791,804 

Clarkson,  J.  J 813 


904 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Van  Dorn,  Earl— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Curtis,  Samuel  R 193-195 

Drew,  John - * 794 

Frost,  D.  816 

Greer,  783 

Haskell,  A.  M . — - - — 849 

Johnston,  A.  Sidney 749,755,787,789,804 

Key  worth,  R.  - 7,r>3 

Lee,  Robert  791 

Little,  Henry - 803 

Me  Carver,  John  S 7i^3 

McCulloch,  Ben 793 

McIntosh,  D.  794 

Pike,  Albert - 763,764,795 

Price,  Sterling 748,750,798,802 

Rust,  Albert 892 

Stone,  B.  W 777 

Tennessee,  Governor  of T?! 

Thompson,  M.  Jeff - - - 758,788,801 

War  Department,  C.  S v- - 789 

Watie,  Stand 7641 

Mentioned 74,172,191-195,197, 

204,259,287,289-292,300,304,308,310,313,316,  326,  328,  361,  551,  553- 
555,561,568,610,611,626,628,632,646,650,661,  662,  664,  665,  671,  734, 
735,  748,752,753,763,764,776,780,792,795,  797-799,  801,  802,  808,  812 

Reports  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  281,283,286 

Staff.  Announcements  of - 74^ 

Van  Lear,  G.  W.  Mentioned 321| 

Vann,  James  9.  Mentioned 17,25 

Vanzant,  J.  R.  Mentioned - 271,272 

Varian,  William.  Mentioned *94 

Vaughan,  A.  J.,  jr.  Mentioned — — - 798 

Vaughn,  James  P.  Mentioned 329 

Viglini,  John  P.  Mentioned 231 

Villepigue,  John  B.  Correspondence  with  M.  Jeff.  Thompson 806,807 

Virginia,  C.  S.  S.  (U.  S.  Frigate  Merrimac.) 643 

Virginia.  Military  departments  embracing 605 

Wade,  Alfred.  Mentioned 7> 19 

Wade,  B.  P.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Congress,  U.  S .) 

Wade,  William.  Mentioned 284,  285, 307, 311 

Wadesburg,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  December  24,  1861.  (See  Summary  of  Princi- 
pal Events , p.  1.) 

Waizenegger,  F.  Mentioned 236 

Wakefield,  Thomas.  Mentioned 3^5 

Walke,  Henry. 

Correspondence  with 

Foote,  Andrew  H 121 

Pope,  John 667,669 

Mentioned 78, 88, 89, 104, 122, 123, 660, 661, 668, 676 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  123 

Walker,  J.  T.  Mentioned 273 

Walker,  L.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 797-799 


INDEX, 


905 

Page. 


Walker,  L.  M.— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

McCown,  John  P 131 

Pickett,  Ed.,  jr ! 791,794 

Polk,  Leonidas 793 

Mentioned 125, 127-131, 161, 759, 767, 771, 773, 781, 782, 795, 807 

Reports  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  February  28-April 

8,  1862 169,170 

Walker,  Robert.  Mentioned 319 

Walker,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 365 

Walkersville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  April  2,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events , p.  3. ) 

Wall,  Samuel  D.  Mentioned 223 

Wallace,  W.  H.  I».  Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 416 

Wangelin,  Hugo. 

Mentioned 210, 215, 216, 219, 220, 227 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  227 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 134,703 

Arkansas,  Governor  of 686, 693, 700, 702, 748, 776 

Davis,  Jefferson 134, 135 

Jackson,  C.  F 746 

McCulloch,  Ben 686, 699, 701, 702 

Pike,  Albert 697,699,719,780 

Price,  Sterling 736,744,747,792 

Van  Dorn,  Earl 789 

War  Department,  TJ.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 513,552 

Congress,  U.  S - 454,576 

Halleck,  Henry  W 547, 596, 597, 603, 

614,624,627-629,631,633,  641-644,  647,  649,  657,  665,  672,  676,  677,  831 

Lincoln,  Abraham 538 

Price,  Thomas  L 546 

Quartermaster-GeneraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 385-387 

Rollins,  James  S 546 

Scott,  Thomas  A 649, 659, 661, 666, 670, 671, 675, 676, 681 

State  Department,  U.  S 523 

Orders,  congratulatory 678 

War  Eagle,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 564 

War f el.  Captain.  Mentioned - 604 

Waring,  George  E.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with. 

Asboth,  A 451 

Halleck,  Henry  W 594,604 

Mentioned - 204, 465, 489, 550 

Report  of  scout  through  Laclede,  Wright,  and  Douglas  Counties,  Mo., 

March  4-11,  1862 187 

Warren,  Mr.  Mentioned 523 

Warren,  Fitz  Henry. 

Mentioned 339, 341, 352, 637, 658, 673, 679 

Reports  of  operations  in  Henry,  Johnson,  and  Saint  Clair  Counties,  Mo., 

March  18-30,  1862  341-343 

Warren,  R.  W.  Mentioned 345 


906 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Warrens,  Charles  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  M.  Schofield 607 

Mentioned 600 

Warrensburg,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  April  8,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events , p.  3.) 

Warriner,  Dr.  Mentioned 487 

Warsaw,  Mo. 

Destruction  of  U.  S.  stores  at,  November  21,  1861.  Communication  from 

George  F.  Kenedy 276 

Skirmish  near,  April  8,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  3.) 


Washburn,  Frederick  S.  Mentioned 267 

"Washburn,  Henry  D.  Mentioned. 246,248,249,251 

Watie,  Stand. 

Correspondence  with  Earl  Van  Dorn 764 

Mentioned 12, 13, 24, 31, 288, 291, 318, 709, 721 

Report  of  skirmish  with  Creeks  and  Seminoles,  December  27,  1861 32 

Watkins,  N,  W.  Mentioned - 432,825 

Watkins,  Richard.  Mentioned 432 

Watson,  J.  B.  Mentioned.. 52,349,639 

Watts,  William  H.  Mentioned 237 

Weaver,  H.  H.  Mentioned 269 

Webber,  William.  Mentioned 17 

Weber,  A.  J.  Mentioned 114 

Webster,  Milton  L.  Mentioned , 52 

Weed,  Captain.  Mentioned 25 

Weer,  William.  Mentioned 246 

Welch,  O.  G.  Mentioned 6,290,300 

Welch,  Thomas.  Mentioned 271 

Welfley,  Martin. 

Mentioned 214, 219 1 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8, 1862 - 236 

Weller,  Gideon.  Mentioned 666 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department , TJ.  S.) 

Wells,  J.  W.  Mentioned 16 

Welty,  Mr.  Mentioned 520 

Wessells,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 423, 615 

We  st,  C aptain.  Men  ti  oned - 128 

West,  Sergeant-Major.  Mentioned 289 

West,  Army  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  1,  798;  No.  15,  330. 

Organization  of,  strength,  etc 788 

Price,  Sterling,  assumes  command  of  First  Division 798 

West,  Army  of  the.  (Union.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1861 : No.  11,  403. 

Orders,  Special:  No.  — , November  27,  1861,  388. 

West,  John  R.  Mentioned - 28 

West  Plains,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  February  19, 1862.  Reports  of 

Drake,  William  C 67 

Wood,  S.  N 65 

West,  Samuel.  Mentioned 254 

West  Tennessee,  District  of.  (Union.)  U.  S.  Grant  assigned  to  command  of..  555 

West  Virginia.  Military  departments  embracing 605 

Western  Department.  (Confederate.) 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  5,  736. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861 : No.  34,  No.  36,  689. 


INDEX. 


907 

Page. 


restern  Department.  (Union.)  Claims,  etc.,  in.  Communications  from 

Beebe,  James  M.,  & Co - 386 

Davis,  David 372 

Quartermaster-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A - 385-387,396 

War  Department,  U.  S 387 


estern  Rivers.  Floating  defenses  for.  Communications  from 


489 

505 


Adams,  Theodore 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 

Foote,  Andrew  H 367, 383, 397, 488, 504, 535, 537, 576, 600, 652 

Halleck,  Henry  W 402,408,441,642,644,660,672 

Howard,  W.  A - 397 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A — 368,369,371 

War  Department,  U.  S ..... 643,665 

r©ston,  Eli  W. 

Mentioned ........ — — - - ........... 199, 203, 260 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862 270 

ntiarton,  Jack.  Mentioned 28, 303 

pheatley,  W.  M.  Correspondence  with  James  Totten 351 

rhite,  Captain.  Mentioned 685 

Tiite-Catcher,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 17 

rhite  Cloud,  Steamboat.  Mentioned - 433 

rhite,  J.  R.  Mentioned - 177 

rhite,  Julius. 

Mentioned  192,203,205,246,248,250,251 

Report  of  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  Ark.,  March  6-8,  1862  253 

rhite,  R.  M.  Mentioned 304 

rhite,  William.  Mentioned 358, 359 

rhitewater,  Mo.  Reconnaissance  to,  April  2-4,  1862.  Report  of  Lindsay 

Murdoch 362 

rhitfield,  J.  W.  Mentioned 11,289,311 

rhittington,  James  H.  Mentioned 28 

rhittington,  W.  B.  Mentioned - 


28 


rhittle,  William  C. 

Correspondence  with  Leonidas  Polk 

Mentioned - 

rhittlesey,  Charles  C.  Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck  . 

riegand,  Charles.  Mentioned 

Tilley,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 

rilliams,  Captain.  Mentioned - 

rilliams,  Colonel.  Mentioned 

rilliams,  George  A.  Mentioned 

rilliams,  James  M.  Mentioned 

rilliams,  Jonathan  H.  Mentioned 

rilliams,  Martin  H.  Mentioned 

rilliamson,  A.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Missouri , Citizens  of.) 

rilliamson,  J.  A.  Mentioned 

Tillis,  George  H.  Mentioned 

rills,  William.  Mentioned 

rilson,  George  W.  Mentioned 

Tilson,  H.  E.  Mentioned 

Tilson,  Isaac  G.  Mentioned 

Tinch ester,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 

Tindmueller,  Henry.  Mentioned «» 

r infield,  W.  E.  [?].  Mentioned 


738 

758 

481 

243 

48 

376 

75 

....  88,102 

265 

252 

....  34,270 
371 

264 

227 

....  346,347 

28 

31 

372 

....  127,153 
330, 331, 333 
....  770,774 


908 


INDEX. 


Pag 

5« 


Winkel,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Winslow,  Frederick  S.  Mentioned * 

Winston,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 21 

Wintter,  D. 

Mentioned - - - - - 129, 130, 149, 151, 156, 161, 1' 

Eeport  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo,,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.  1 

Wisconsin.  Military  departments  embracing 369, 6( 

Wisconsin  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries  ( Independent ) : 5th,  6th,  7th,  95 ; 8th,  664, 668. 

Infantry — Regiments : 8th,  92,  95,  114;  9th,  558,  573,  615,  654;  11th,  636; 

12th,  557, 573, 615, 654, 664 ; 13th,  615, 654, 664 ; 15th,  95, 115-117. 

Wise, . Mentioned 7( 

Wise,  George  D.  Mentioned - 367,371,372, 383,384,489, 6< 

Wise,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 6( 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S .) 


Woldemar,  C.  A.  von. 

Correspondence  with  P.  J.  Osterhans - 4. 

Mentioned 41 

Wolfers,  Henry.  Mentioned 3( 

Wood,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 317,71 

Wood,  Samuel  N. 

Mentioned.— ... — - ......  42, 67, 444,558, 51 

Reports  of 

Spring  River,  Ark.  Action  at,  March  13,  1862  31 

West  Plains,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  February  19,  1862 ( 

Wood,  Stephen  M.  Mentioned 3a 

Wood,  W.  D.  Mentioned 663, 61 

Woodmansee,  Clark.  Mentioned — . — - 2( 

Woods,  J.  C.  Mentioned — -. . — 3£ 

Woodside,  Colonel.  Mentioned.... 336,338,31 

Woodson, . Mentioned 31 

Wooster,  James  William.  Mentioned 2f 

Wooten,  Thomas  D.  Mentioned 35 

Worthington,  William  H. 

Assignments  to  command 

Mentioned 91, 94, 103-105, 107, 535, 537, 567, 55 

Report  of  advance  upon  and  siege  of  New  Madrid,  Mo.,  Feb.  28-Apr.  8, 1862.105, 1( 
Wright  County,  Mo.  Scout  through,  March  4-11,  1862.  Report  of  George 

E.  Waring,  jr 1£ 

Wright,  Clark. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  R.  Curtis 498, 5t 

Mentioned 58, 209, 232, 279, 375, 489, 494, 498, 500, 525, 527,  & 

Reports  of 

Gadfly,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862 3( 

Granby,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8, 1862 3( 

Indian  Creek,  Mo.  Scout  through  valley  of,  April  8,  1862 3( 

Keetsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  at,  February  25,  1862 ' 

Lebanon,  Mo.  Occupation  of,  by  Union  forces,  January  22,  1862 1 

Neosho,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862 3( 

Newtonia,  Mo.  Scout  through,  April  8,  1862 3( 


Potts’  Hill,  Sugar  Creek,  Ark.  Action  at,  February  25,  1862 

Wright,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Wright,  I.  H.  Mentioned * 

Wright,  J.  D.  Mentioned 

Wright,  J.  H.  Mentioned 


INDEX. 


909 


Page. 

Wight,  J.  J.  B.  Mentioned.... — 398 

Wight,  Melvil  C.  Mentioned . ... 259,268,269 

ATright,  W.  P.  Mentioned 28 

Wierpel,  Edmund.  Mentioned 187 

Vyatt,  Private.  Mentioned 355 

Vyatt,  W.  J.  Mentioned - 178 

Vyman,  John  B. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 395, 416, 417, 542, 558 

Mentioned 410, 539, 546, 550, 574, 677 

Reports  of 

Current  Hills,  Mo.  Expedition  through  the,  December  5-9, 1861 36 

Salem,  Mo.  Action  at,  December  3,  1861 33 

Vyrick,  Mathew.  Mentioned 736 

r ah -hoo-lar,  Thomas.  Mentioned 17 

fates,  John  W.  Mentioned..... 44 

rates,  Richard.  Mentioned 502, 557 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Illinois,  Governor  of.) 

razoo,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 178,800 

r eatman,  James  E. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 484 


Report  of  sanitary  condition  of  camps  and  hospitals  in  Department  of  the 


Missouri f. - 484 

roung,  A.  5.  Mentioned - 28 

roung,  John.  Mentioned - 17 


roung,  J.  D.  Mentioned 24,27 

foung,  R.  A. 

Mentioned 6,8-10 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Round  Mountain,  Ind.  T.,  November  19,  1861. ..  14, 15 

roung,  W.  C. 


Mentioned 22, 23 

Report  of  engagement  at  Chustenahlah,  Ind.  T.,  December  26,  1861  — ....  26 


roungman,  Charles.  Mentioned 90 


o 


THE 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION: 

A COMPILATION  OF  THE 
OFFICIAL  RECORDS 

OF  THE 

UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS 

TO 

SERIES  I— VOLUME  VIII. 

(To  "be  inserted  in  the  volume.  For  explanation  see  General 
Index  volume,  Serial  IV o.  130,  page  X X VIII.) 


PUBLISHED  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF 

The  Hon.  ELIHTJ  ROOT,  Secretary  of  War, 

BY 

BRIG.  GEN.  FRED  C.  AINSWORTH, 

Chief  of  the  Record  and  Pension  Office,  War  Department, 

and 

MR.  JOSEPH  W.  KIRKLEY. 


IWr.  JOHN  S.  MOODKV,  Indexer. 


Drt 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE. 

19  02. 


2 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 


Page 

7- 

Page 

17. 

Page 

27. 

Page 

30. 

Page 

66. 

Page 

76. 

Pages 

77,  1 

Page 

95- 

Page 

122. 

Page 

178. 

Page 

179. 

Page 

186. 

Page 

217. 

Page 

238. 

Page 

286. 

Page 

309- 

Page 

312. 

Page 

354- 

Page 

365- 

Page 

420. 

Page 

453- 

Page 

481. 

Page 

490. 

Page 

554- 

Page 

664. 

Page 

684. 

Page 

699. 

Page 

728. 

Page 

744- 

Page 

783. 

Page 

788. 

Page 

855- 

TEXT. 

Eighteenth  and  twenty-ninth  lines,  top,  for  Concharta  read  Conchanty . 

Fifteenth  line,  bottom,  for  a surgeon  read  Assistant  Surgeon. 

Sixth  and  twentieth  lines,  top,  for  Burk's  read  Burks' . Seventh  line, 
top,  for  Bound's  read  Bounds' . Ninth  line,  top,  for  Wallace's  read 
Wallis'. 

Fourth  line,  top,  for  Flannagan' s read  Flanagin's. 

Twenty -first  line,  top,  for  Hulton  Valley  read  Hutton  Valley. 

Second  line,  top,  for  White  Haw  read  White  Hare. 

74,  175.  For  J.  G.  W.  Steedman  read  I.  G.  W.  Steedman. 

Flotilla  Brigade,  2d  Illinois  Eight  Artillery,  for  Battery  I read  Battery  G. 

Inclosure  No.  3,  insert  * after  Eastport , Miss .,  and  add  foot-note,  *For 
report,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  10,  Part  1,  p.  83. 

Strike  out  foot-note,  also  reference  mark  after  Kennedy  in  caption  to 
report. 

Signature,  for  B.  N.  Mathis  read  B.  N.  Mathes.  • 

For  Johnson's  siege  artillery  read  Johnston's  siege  artillery. 

Erase  foot-note  and  insert  See  Plate  10,  Map  8,  of  the  Atlas. 

Erase  foot-note  and  insert  See  Plate  10,  Maps  3 and  6,  of  the  Atlas. 

Address,  for  General  Braxton  Bragg,  Commanding,  &c.,  read  General 
Beauregard. 

Twelfth  line,  bottom,  for  Teel's  read  Tull's. 

Address,  for  B.  H.  Brand  read  W.  H.  Brand. 

McClurg’s  report,  caption,  after  McClurg  insert  Eighth , and  after  Mis- 
souri insert  State  Militia;  also  erase  Militia  following  Cavalry. 

Flentz’s  report,  twelfth  line,  for  Hable's  read  Hubble. 

Halleck  to  Pope,  first  line,  third  paragraph,  for  Steen  read  Steele. 

Pope  to  Halleck,  first  line,  for  (90)  read.  go. 

Halleck  to  Hunter,  erase  Johnston  before  Ross  and  insert  John,  so  that 
it*  will  read  John  Ross.  Erase  foot-note  and  insert  See  Series  II,  Vol. 
1,  p.  243. 

Halleck  to  Blair,  eighth  line,  for  Hain  read  How. 

Erase  foot-note  and  insert  See  p.  829. 

Fourth  line,  top,  for  Hart's  read  H outs' . 

Second  and  fifth  lines,  bottom,  for  McCown's  read  McCarver's. 

Benjamin  to  McCulloch,  insert  * after  explanation  and  add  foot-note, 
* For  McCulloch' s reply,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  3,  pp.  743-749. 

Field  report,  for  Burnett's  read  Bennett's. 

Gantt  to  Polk,  January  27,  last  line,  for  officer  read  affair. 

For  General  Orders , No.  74,  read  Special  Orders , No.  74. 

Organization  table,  First  Brigade,  for  21st  Arkansas  read  21st  [/5^/z] 
Arkansas;  Artillery  Brigade,  for  Kneisby's  read  Kneisley's,  and  for 
Teel's  read  Tull's. 

Erase  Hallsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  27, 1861.  ( See  Mount  Zion 

Church,  Mo.) 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

INDEX. 


3 


Insert  all  words  and  figures 

correction  indicates  that 

Alexander,  J.  [I.]  C. 

Allison,  J..  D.  [A.]. 

Arkansas  Troops. 

Artillery,  Heavy— Companies: 

Dismukes',  150,  13 1. 

Hoadley's,  130,  755,  161. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries: 

[Gorham’s,  322,  788.] 

Roberts'  {F.),  685. 

Infantry — Battalions : 

[4th,  130, 186, 807.] 

[5th,  129,  708.] 

14th  { McCaryer ),  684*  749. 

Letnoyne's , 749. 

Terry's- Me  Kay's,  129 , 130 , 186 , 708, 807. 

Infantry — Companies: 

[Roberts’,  322.] 

Infantry— Regiments : 

[9th  [?]  (McCarver),  749.] 

13th  {McRae)  [21st  (McRae)]. 

17th  (Rector),  [749]. 

20th  {King,  G.  IV. ) [22d  (King)]. 

Baldwin,  Caleb  [Judge]. 

Barret  [Barrett],  O.W. 

Barrow,  Bartholomew  [Balt.] . 

Bell ,Jeptha  IV.  [J.W.  (Private)]. 

Bell , Joseph  IV.  [J.  W.  (Colonel) J. 

Birch,  James  H.  [Judge]. 

Biser  [Byser],  Charles  T. 

Bradford,  Hamilton  [Hamlet] . 

Bradley,  Jerome  [Jervine]. 

Braselton  [Brazelton] , Thomas  W. 

Braun  [Brann],  C.  H. 

Butler,  B./.  [jr.]. 

Callaway,  J.  W.  [W.H.]. 

Campbell,  Colonel,  334. 

Campbell,  Teonidas  A.,  [334]- 
Carden  [Cordeu],  Joseph  W. 

Claggett,  Thomas  H.  [Mr.] 

Clark,  John  M.,  175  [Clark,  Colonel,  175]- 
Clarke  [Clark],  George  W. 

Cleveland,  Edward  H.  [Dr.]. 

Coffee,  J.  T.  [[?]]. 

Cole,  E.  IV.  [Captain] . 

Coleman,  IV.  O.  [Colonel]. 

Coodey  [Coody] , D.  R.  % 

Cotton,  Gabriel  [Mr.]. 

Crittenden,  T.  T. 

Mentioned , 490  [Chittenden,  Major,  490]. 
Crump,  R.  P.  [[?]]. 

Cummins  [Cummings],  E.  H. 

Danley,  B.  F.  [[?]] . 

Deer-in-Water,  Josiah. 

Dismukes  [Dismuke],  Paul  T. 

Dole,  William  P.  [Doles,  Mr.]. 

Drew,  John. 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Chusto-Talasah, 
Ind.  T„  etc. 

Elliott,  Benjamin  [Colonel] . 

Ellis,  James  H.  [Henry]. 

Farmer,  B.J.  [Lieutenant-Colonel] . 

Fitzhugh  [Fitzhue] , G.  S. 


An  asterisk  (*)  following  a 
should  be  consulted. 

Franklin,  William  H.  [(Private)]. 

Freeman,  Thos.  R.  [Colonel]. 

Gaenslen  [Gaenslan],  J.J. 

Gaines,  Richard  [V.  [?]]. 

Garrett,  Kenneth  [lieutenant]. 

Gilmore,  Fanny,  Steamboat,  99. 

Graham,  George  W.  [Commodore]. 

Grant,  U.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Graham,  George  W.  [Commodore] . 

Gurley,  William  H.  F.  [Mr.]. 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Herron,  Francis  [Frank]  J. 

Whittelsey  [Whittlesey] , Charles  C. 

Hallsville,  Mo.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  27, 1861. 

Communication  from  Henry  W.  Halleck,  474 
Hubert,  Paul  O.,  791;  Hebert,  houis,  [791]. 
Herron,  Francis  [Frank]  J. 

Holland,  Colley  [Colly]  B. 

Hoppe,  Walter  [Walker]. 

How,  John,  490.* 

Hoxie,  Herbert  M.  [Mr.]. 

Illinois  Troops. 

Artillery— Regiments: 

2d,  G,  95  [1,95]-* 

Indian  Troops. 

Creeks  [and  Seminoles] , 6 [23] . 

Seminoles — Battalions: 

Jumper's , 5, 6. 

Jeffers  [Jefferies],  William  L. 

John  Simonds,  Steamboat,  738,800. 

[Johnson,  Thomas,  129.] 

[Johnston, , 481.]* 

Jones,  Eicon  [Eden]. 

Jones , Jefferson  F.  [Jeff.]. 

Keene , Mary  E.,  Steamer,  114. 

Kennerly,  W.  Clark. 

Key,  Thomas  M.  [Colonel]. 

King,  George  W.  [J.  P.]. 

Kuykendall,  John  L.  [Kykendall,  Captain]. 
Laiboldt  [haibold] , Bernard. 

Fane,  Franklin  J.  [F.]. 

Lebert  [Teebert],  William  R. 

Le  Flore  [Laflore] , Mitchell. 

L,ewis,  D.  M.  [[?]]. 

I,ogan,  John  L.  [Captain]. 

McArthur  [McCarthey],  William  C. 

McBride,  Colonel,  324. 

McDowell,  Drake,  691  [McDowell,  Mr.,  691]. 
McKay,  John  [M.  M.]. 

Marshall,  Mo. 

Skirmish  near,  March  15,  1862.  Report  of  E. 
Anson  More  [Moore] . 

Martin,  C.  C.  [Major]. 

Mary  E.  Keene,  Steamer  [Steamboat]. 

Mathes  [Mathews],  B.  N. 

Michigan  Troops. 

Artillery—  [Batteries  ( Independent) : 3d,  93] . 
Artillery —Regiments:  1st,  C,  93. 

Military  Commissions. 

Missouri,  Department  of  the,  476,822,834. 


in  italics  and  strike  out  all  in  [brackets] . 

“ Additions  and  Corrections”  to  the  text 


4 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 


Miller,  John  H.  [T.G.  [?]], 

Missouri  State  Guard. 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  [No.  74, 783].* 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  74 , 783.* 
Missouri  Troops  (C.). 

Artillery— Batteries: 

Gorham's,  322 , 788. 

Tull's , 309,  788* 

Inf  antry— Companies : 

[Coleman’s,  65.] 

Roberts',  322. 

State  Guards— Battalions: 

[McCown’s,  684.]* 

Missouri  Troops  (U.). 

Cavalry— Battalions : 

[4th,  539.] 

Mitchell,  William  [M.]  C. 

More  [Moore],  E.  Anson. 

New  Madrid,  Mo. 

Advance. upon,  etc.  Reports  of 
Rucker,  Edmund  [Edward]  W. 
Nicholson,  W.  R.  [Riley] . 

O' Quin  [Quine],  Nathaniel  J.  [O.]. 

Parker,  B.  F.  [Colonel] . 

Patton  [Patten] , Samuel  P.  C. 

Pea  Ridge,  Ark. 

Battle  of,  March  6-8,  1862.  Reports  of 
Samuel  [Samuels],  D.  Todd. 

Snyder  [Snyde],  J.  M. 

Phelps,  John  S. 

Mentioned,  303  [Phelps,  Colonel,  303]. 
Piercey  [Pearcy] , A.  J. 

Pinkney  [Pinckney],  R.  F. 

Polk,  General , C.  S.  S.  See  General  Polk. 
Porter,  J.  C.  [[?]]. 

Powers,  Thomas  [Major]. 

Priest,  J.  W.  [Lieutenant-Colonel] . 

Rapley,  W.  [N.]  F. 

Ritchie,  John,  660  [Richay,  John,  660]. 
Robinson,  J.  N.  [D.]. 

Roe,  Pleasant  B.  [Lieutenant] . 

Ross,  E.  M.  [Em.]. 

Rucker,  Edmund  [Edward]  W. 

Schofield,  John  M. 

Correspondence  with 
Loan,  Ben.  F. 

Schram  [Schramm],  Louis. 

Shackleford  [Shackelford] , George  D. 
Sibley,  Henry  Hopkins  [H.] . 
Simonds./o^tt,  Steamboat. 


Smoote,  G.  T.  [P.]. 

Snyder  [Snyde],  J.  M. 

Southeastern  District  of  Missouri. 

Constituted,  578. 

Steele , Frederick,  assigned  to  command,  578. 
Stephens,  John  W.,  37  [Stevens,  Captain,  37]. 
Stewart,  Warren,  457;  Stewart,  J.  W.,  [457]. 
Stopp,  Watt  [Stop,  Wat]. 

Stott,  Stephen  [Steven]. 

Swank,  William  P.  [S.]. 

Talleyrand-Perigord,  C.  M.  [Talleyrand, ]. 

Taylor,  Clay  {Mr.),  823. 

Taylor,  Clay  {Colonel),  [823]. 

Tennessee  Troops. 

Artillery — Batteries : 

[Dismuke’s,  150,  151.] 

[Hoadley’s,  150,  155,  161.] 

Cavalry — Battalions : 

[Neely’s,  128,  186.] 

Cavalry — Companies: 

Neely's,  128, 186. 

Texas  Troops. 

Artillery— Batteries : 

[Teel’s,  309,  788.]* 

Cavalry— Companies: 

Bennett’s,  728.* 

Thomas,/.  [I.]  D. 

Thompson,  Joseph  F.  [Joe]. 

Thornton,  Gustavus  [Q.]  B. 

Thyssens,  Francis  L.J.  [F.]. 

Tidmarsh,  T.  U.  [H.  [?]]. 

Tracy,  Henry  W. 

Truett  [Truitt],  James. 

Turley,  James  O .,  663. 

Turley,  Jesse  J.  [Captain]. 
differs,  Herman  A.  [Ullfers,  Mr.]. 

Utley  [Uttley],  T.  L. 

Vann,  James,  17. 

Wakefield,  Thomas  A . 

Walker,  James  A.,  767;  Walker,  L.  M.,  [767]. 
Welles  [Weller] , Gideon. 

Wenkel,  T.  Ch.  [Winkel,  Captain]. 

West,  George  [Sergeant-Major]. 

White,  F.  S.  [Captain]. 

Whittelsey  [Whittlesey] , Charles  C. 

Wilson,  J.  A.  [Nelson,  Sergeant]. 

Winfield,  W.  E.  [[?]]• 

Woods,  Isaac  [J.]  C. 

Wright , James  [I.]  H. 


' 


. 


