UNIVERSITY  OF 
ILLINOIS  LiDRARY 
AT  URBANA-uHAMPAIGN 
BOOK.STACKS 


The  person  charging  this  material  is  re- 
sponsible for  its  return  to  the  library  from 
which  it  was  withdrawn  on  or  before  the 
Latest  Date  stamped  below. 

Theft,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books  are  reasons 
for  disciplinary  action  and  may  result  in  dismissal  from 
the  University. 

To  renew  call  Telephone  Center,  333-8400 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LIBRARY  AT  URBANA-CHAMPAIGN 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion18unit 


THE 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION: 

A COMPILATION  OF  THE 
OF'F'IOI-A.Li  RECORDS 

OF  THE 

UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED,  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR, 

BY 

Lieut.  Ool.  EOBEET  N.  SOOTT,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery, 

AND 

PDBIISHED  PURSDANT  TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS  APPROVED  JUNE  16,  1880. 

VslCAGo^ 

F:r'  ^iCHTY, 

' . ■ 

SEKIES  I— VOLUME  XVIII. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE, 

1887. 


PREFACE 


3 

Y'  i ^ 


By  an  act  approved  June  23, 1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 
‘‘to  enable  the  Secretary  of  War  to  begin  the  publication  of  the  Official 
Kecords  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  both  of  the  Union  and  Confed- 
erate Armies,”  and  directed  him  “to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 
all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  properl3"  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

Appropriations  lor  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 
ten  thousand  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Records  (Union  and 
Confederate)  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  so  far  as  the  same  may  be 
readj"  for  x)ublication,  during  the  fiscal  j^ear”^  and  that  “ of  said  num- 
ber, seven  thousand  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, two  thousand  copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  one 
thousand  cox)ies  for  the  use  of  the  Executive  Departments.”* 

This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  i)ublication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

* Volumes  I-V  distributed  under  act  approved  June  16,  1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  1882,  provides  that — 

“ The  volumes  of  the  Official  Eecords  of  the  War  of  the  Re  bellion  shall  be  distributed 
as  follows : One  thousand  copies  to  the  Executive  Departments,  as  now  provided  by- 
law. One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War  among  officers  of 
the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three  hundred  copies  shall 
be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Congress.  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceeding  twenty-six,  and  each 
Rexjresentative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of  such  addresses,  and  the 
volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are  published,  until  the  pub- 
lication is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  shall  inform  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those  heretofore  published  they 
have  forwarded  to  such*  addresses.  The  remaining  copies  of  the  eleven  thousand  to 
be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  distributed  as  provided 
herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of  publication,  with  ten  per 
cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be  covered  into  the  Treasury. 
If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the  same  address,  the  Secretary  of 
War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives,  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 
the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other  libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals. 
The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the  first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress 
what  volumes  of  the  series  heretofore  published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such 
libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals.  He  shall  also  inform  distributees  at  whose 
instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 

(Ill) 


800857 


IV 


PREFACE. 


The  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement : 

The  First  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond, 
ence,  orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed,  is 
to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  camj^aigns 
and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme. 
diately  followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c., 
not  embraced  in  the  “reports  ” proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
Coa  federate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  Second  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns.  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  i)olitical 
Ijrisoners. 

The  Third  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in-Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments;  the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
correspondence  between  the  National  and  the  several  State  authorities. 

The  Fourth  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
between  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

EGBERT  N.  SCOTT, 

Major  Third  Art.,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col. 

War  Department,  August  23, 1880. 

Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Operations  in 
June  3,  1863 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEE  XXX. 

Nortli  Carolina  and  Southeastern  Virginia.  August  20,  1862- 


(V) 


Page. 

1-1104 


9 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


TOIilJME  I. 


CHAPTEE  L Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1 1-317 

CHAPTER  n. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  January  3-26, 

1861  318-325 

CHAPTER  in. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861 326-330 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Operations  in  Elorida.  January  6-Angust 
31,  1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  V.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 
ary 9-May  20, 1861 474-488 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19, 1861 489-501 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-J  une  11,  1861  502-636 

CHAPTER  Vin. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

1861 637-691 


VOIiUME  II. 

CHAPTER  IX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia,  April  16-July  31,  1861.  1-1012 

TOEUME  III. 

CHAPTER  X.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19,  1801.  1-749 

VOEUME  IT. 


CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-February  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-November  19, 1801  175-565 


CHAPTER  Xni.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1,  1861-Janu- 
ary  11,  1862 566-721 


TOEUME  T. 

CHAPTER  XIV.  Page, 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 18Cl-March  17, 1802.  1-1106 

TOEUME  TI. 


CHAPTER  XV.  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

August  21,  1861-AprU  11,  1862 1-435 


CHAPTER  XVI.  Page. 

0]>eration8  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 
abama, Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 
isiana. September  1, 1861-May  12, 1862.  430-894 


TOEUME  TII. 

CHAPTER  XVn.  Page. 

Operations  In  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabama,  and  S.  W.  Virginia.  Nov.  19, 18G1-Mar.  4, 1862.  1-946 

(Vll) 


vm 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOIiUME  VIII. 

CHAPTER  XVm.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missonri,  Arkc-nsas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  Nov.  19, 1861-April  10, 1862.  1-834 

VOLUME  IX. 


CHAPTER  XIX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Southeastern  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 11-March  17, 1862 1-71 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina.  January 
11-August  20,  1862  72-480 


CHAPTER  XXI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  Eehruary  1-Septemher  20, 

1862  481-736 


VOLUME  X-IX  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  North  Mississippi,  North  Alabama,  and 

March  4- June  10,  1862. 


Part  I— Reports 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 


Southwest  Virginia. 

Page. 

1-927 

1-642 


VOLUME  XI— IX  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXin. 

The  Peninsular  Campaign,  Virginia.  March  17-September  2,  1862. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  March  17-June  24 1-1073 

Part  II— Reports,  June  25-September  2 1-994 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc 1-691 


VOLUME  XII— IX  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  "Vest  Virginia,  and  Maryland.  March  17-Sex)tember  2,  1862. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  March  17-June  25 1-818 

Part  II — Reports,  June  2$-September  2 1-820 

Part  III — Correspondence,  etc 1-966 


VOLUME  XIII. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the 
Northwest.  April  10-November  20,  1862 1-981 

VOLUME  XIV. 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida.  April  12, 
1862-June  11, 1863 1-1025 


VOLUME  XV. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Page. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Alabama,  Southern  Mississippi  (embracing  all  operations 
against  Vicksburg,  May  18-J  uly  27, 1862),  and  Louisiana,  May  12, 1862-May  14,  1863 ; and  oper- 
ations in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  September  20,  1862-May  14,  1863 1-1135 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


IX 


VOI^UME  XVI. 


CHAPTER  XXVm. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Middle  and  East  Tennessee,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia.  June 

10-October  31,  1862. 


Page. 

Part  1 — Reports 1-1168. 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-lOlT 


VOLUME  XVII. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Operations  in  West  Tennessee  and  Northern  Mississippi.  June  10,  1862-January  20, 1863. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1_807 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-916 


n 


S'. 


T'.si-l' 


A,  ' 


n ffUvi'  r 


^..  ,^.,,..^.....,/iv;, 

;nfr.'7Vrr^f 
,,  ■ I 


^/j^!f4iVr  , > Aot  nlbltiif.  «•  xyi>':it;^f,i’J  ■'  ’3 

■ ' 'ii 

- - ' • ■ — ^ V .....  ..,.v  . . U - - j 

.... ; ~.  V,..  ■ 1 


YJ  /.X  a:il'JAHO  ■" 


-I*  > ■■ 


. *■  • • 

•v 


J*.,. 


l 


»1 


i 


f . 
if  .A 


7 


'ij 


■■:s^ 


•yi- 


4 


CHAPTER  XXX 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  SOUTHEAST- 
ERN VIRGINIA. 


AUGUST  20,  1862-JUNE  3, 1863. 


SXJJMMIARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAX.  EA^ENTS.* 

Aug.  20-Sept.  10, 1862. — Army  of  the  Potomac  embarks  for  Aquia  Creek  and  Alex- 

andria, Va.  t 

30. 1862.  — Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  defenses  of  Eichmond,  etc. 

Skirmish  near  Plymouth,  N.  C. 

31,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Franklin,  Va. 

Sept.  2-  3,  1862. — Expedition  from  Suffolk,  Va. 

6,  1862. — Attack  on  Washington,  N.  C.  , 

9. 1862.  — Skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 

17-20,  1862. — Operations  at  and  about  Shiloh,  N.  C. 

19,  1862. — The  Confederate  Department  of  North  Carolina  and  Southern 
Virginia  (Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina)  consti- 
tuted, under  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith. 

Oct.  3, 1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  near  Franklin,  Va. 

Affair  on  the  Blackwater,  near  Zuni,  Va. 

15. 1862.  — Skirmish  near  Carrsville,  Va. 

25. 1862.  — Skirmish  near  Zuni,  Va. 

29. 1862.  — Skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  Va. 

31.1862.  — Skirmish  at  Franklin,  Va. 

Nov.  1-12, 1862  — Expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  including  skirmishes  (2d)  at 
Little  Creek  find  Rawle’s  Mill. 

8.1862.  — Brig.  Gen.  W.  TI.  C.  Whiting,  C.  S.  Army;  assigned  to  command 

of  the  defenses  of  Cape  Fear  Ki  ver,  N.  C. 

11. 1862.  — Demonstration  on  New  Berne,  N.  C. 

12-14,1862. — Operations  about  Suffolk,  Va.,  including  skirmishes  (12th)  at 
I’rovidence  Church  and  (I4th)  at  Blackwater  Bridge,  and 
Zuni,  Va. 

16. 1862.  — Skirmish  at  Gloucester  Point,  Va. 

17. 1862.  — Affair  near  Carrsville,  Va. 

18.1862.  — Skirmish  at  Franklin,  Va. 

Skirmish  at  Core  Creek,  N.  C. 

22. 1862.  — Destruction  of  Salt-Works  in  Matthews  County,  Va. 

*Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  mentioned  in  this  ‘^Summary”  no  circumstantial 
reports  are  on  file. 
tSee  Series  I,  Vols.  XI  and  XIX. 

I E E— VOL  XVIII 


2 

Nov. 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


22,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Williamsburg,  Va. 

25,  1862. — Capture  of  the  United  States  steamer  Ellis,  New  River,  N.  C. 

Dec.  1,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Beaver  Dam  Church,  Va. 

2,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Black  water,  near  Franklin,  Va. 

8-12,  1862. — Reconnaissances  from  Suffolk  to  the  Blackwater  and  skirmishes  at 
and  about  Zuni,Va. 

10,  1862. — Attack  on  Plymouth,  N.  C. 

11-15,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Yorktown  to  Gloucester,  Matthews,  King  and 
Queen,  and  Middlesex  Counties,  Va. 

11- 20,  1862. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C. 

* 12,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of  the 

Richmond  defenses,  etc. 

17,  1862. — Reconnaissance  to  Diascuud  Bridge  and  Burnt  Ordinary,  Va. 

22,  1862. — Skirmishes  near  Windsor  and  at  Joyner’s  Ferry,  on  the  Black- 

water,  Va. 

24,  1862. — The  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  constituted,  under  command  of  Maj. 

Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army. 

27,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. 

28,  1862. — Skirmishes  near  Suffolk  and  at  Providence  Church,  Va. 

Jan.  7-  9,  1863. — Expedition  from  Yorktown  to  West  Point  and  White  House,  Va. 
8-10,  1863. — Expedition  from  Suffolk  toward  the  Blackwater,  Va. 

9,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Providence  Church,  Va. 

13,  1863.— Expedition  from  Yorktown  to  West  Point,  Va. 

17-21,  1863. — Reconnaissance  from  New  Berne  to  Pollocksville,  Trenton,  Young’s 
Cross-Roads,  and  Onslow,  N.  C.,  and  skirmishes  (19th)  at  White 
Oak  Creek  and  (20th)  near  Jacksonville. 

19,  1863. — Scout  from  Williamsburg  and  skirmish  at  Burnt  Ordinary,  Va. 
27-28,  1863. — Reconnaissances  on  the  Neuse,  Dover,  and  Trent  Roads,  N.  C. 

30,  1863. — Engagement  at  Deserted  House,  or  Kelly’s  Store,  near  Suffolk,  Va. 
Feb.  1-10,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Plymouth,  N.  C. 

2,  1863. — Destruction  of  Salt-Works  at  Wale’s  Head,  Currituck  Beach,  N.  C. 
5,  1863.— Skirmish  near  Olive  Branch  Church,  Va. 

6-21,  1863. — The  Ninth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  William  F.  Smith,  U.  S.  Army, 
commanding,  transferred  from  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  Newport 
News,  Va. 

7,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Olive  Branch  Church,  Va. 

Skirmish  near  Eden  ton,  N.  C. 

10,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

12- 13,  1863. — Expedition  from  Batchelder’s  Creek  and  skirmish  (13th)  at  Sandy 

Ridge,  N.  C. 

13,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Washington,  N.  C. 

17,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French,  C.  S.  Army,  temporarily  in  com- 

mand of  the  Department  of  North  Caroliua  and  Southern  Vir- 
ginia. 

18,  1863. — Two  divisions  of  Longstreet’s  corps  ordered  from  Army  of  North- 

ern Virginia  to  defense  of  Richmond. 

23,  1863. — Engagement  at  Fort  Caswell,  N.  C.* 

25,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  Daniel  H.  Hill,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  troops 

in  North  Carolina. 

26,  1863. — Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

. the  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 

Mar.  1-  6,1863. — Expedition  from  N<‘-w  Berne  to  Swan  Quarter,  N.  C.,  and  skir- 
mislios  (3d  and  4tli)  near  Fairfield  and  Swan  Quarter. 

^'flie  United  States  steamers  Dacotah  and  Monticello  engaged.  See  Annual  Report 
tlie  Secretar^^  of  tlic  Navj^,  December  7, 1863, 


CuAr.  XXX.]  SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS.  3 

Mar.  6-  8,  1863. — Demonstration  on  Kinston,  N.  C.,  including  skirmislies  (7th)  at 
Core  Creek  and  near  Dover. 

6- 10,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Trenton,  Pollocksville,  Young’s 

Cross-Roads,  and  Swansborough,  N.  C. 

7-  9,  1863. — Reconnaissance  from  Suffolk  and  skirmish  (9th)  near  Windsor,  Va. 
7-10,  1863.— Expedition  from  Newport  Barracks  to  Cedar  Point,  N.  C. 

7- 14,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Mattamuskeet  Lake,  N.  C. 

8- 16, 1863. — Expedition  against  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  including  skirmishes  (13th- 

14th)  at  Deep  Gully  and  attack  (14th)  on  Fort  Anderson. 

10-13,  1863. — Demonstration  on  Plymouth,  N.  C.  f 

13-16,  1863. — The  Third  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps,  transferred  from  Newport 
News  to  Suffolk,  Va. 

17,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 
the  Ninth  Army  Corps. 

Skirmish  near  Franklin,  Va. 

19-26,  1863. — The  First  and  Second  Divisions,  Ninth  Army  Corps,  embark  at 
Newport  News  for  the  Department  of  the  Ohio. 

23,  1863. — Skirmish,  at  Winfield,  N.  C. 

24,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Rocky  Hock  Creek,  N.  C. 

25,  1863. — Affair  at  Norfolk,  Va. 

29,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 

30,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Deep  Gully,  N.  C. 

30-April20,  1863. — Siege  of  Washington,  N.  C.,  and  pursuit  of  the  Confed- 
erate forces. 

April  1, 1863. — Lieutenant-General  Longstreet’s  command  reorganized,  to  con- 

sist of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  (Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill 
commanding),  Department  of  Southern  Virginia  (Maj.  Gen.  S. 
G.  French  commanding),  and  Department  of  Richmond  (Maj. 
Gen.  Arnold  Elzey  commanding). 

Expedition  from  Yorktown  to  Smith’s  and  Byrd’s  plantations,  Ware 
River,  Va. 

6.1863.  — Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army,  temporarily  in  command  of 

the  Department  of  Virginia. 

' Skirmish  at  Nixonton,  N.  C. 

7. 1863. — Expedition  from  Gloucester  Point  to  Gloucester  Court-House,  Va. 

9- 14, 1863. — Operations  against  Gloucester  Point,  Va. 

11. 1863.  — Skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 

11-May  4, 1863. — Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va. 

12. 1863.  — Reconnaissance  from  Gloucester  Point  to  the  vicinity  of  Hickory 

Forks,  Va. 

16. 1863.  — Affair  on  the  Pamunkey  River,  near  West  Point,  Va. 

27. 1863.  — Expedition  frPm  Yorktown  beyond  Hickory  Forks,  Va. 

27-May  1,1863. — Expeditionj  from  New  Berne  toward  Kinston,  N.  C.,  and 

skirmish  (28th)  at  Wise’s  Cross-Roads. 

May  3, 1863. — Skirmishes  at  Ashland  and  Hanover  Station,  Va.’' 

4-  5, 1863. — Skirmishes  at  Hungary  Station,  Tunstall’s  Station,  Hanovertown 
Ferry,  and  Aylett’s,  Va.* 

5. 1863.  — Skirmish  at  Peletier’s  Mill,  N.  C. 

• 7, 1863. — West  Point,  Va.,  occupied  by  the  Union  forces. 

12-26, 1863. — Operations  on  the  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad  and  skirmishes 
(1.5th-16th)  near  Carrsville,  Va. 

• 15, 1863. — Capture  of  the  steamers  Emily  and  Arrow. 

Expedition  from  West  Point  to  Robinson’s  Plantation,  King  and 
Queen  County,  Va. 


Incidents  of  raid  I'roui  Army  of  the  Potomac.  See  Scries  I,  Vol.  XXV, 


4 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


May  15-28,  1863. — Operations  on  the  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad  and  skir- 
mishes (17th)  near  Providence  Church  and  (23d)  at  Antioch 
Church  and  Barber’s  Cross-Roads,  Ya. 

19- 22,  1863. — Expedition  from  Gloucester  Point  into  Matthews  County,  Va. 

20- 23,  1863. — Demonstration  on  Kinston  and  skirmishes  (22d)  at  Gum  Swamp 

and  (23d)  at  Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

28,  1863. — The  Confederate  Department  of  North  Carolina  extended  to  em- 
brace Petersburg,  Ya.,  and  the  Appomattox  River. 

31-June  1,  1863. — West  Point,  Ya.,  evacuated  by  the  Union  forces. 


SEPTEMBER  2-3,  1862. — Expedition  from  Suffolk,  Va. 

Eeport  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  BiXj  TI,  S.  Army,  commanding  the  J)epart- 

ment  of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  4,  1862. 

Ou  tlie  evening  of  the  2tl  instant  General  Mansfield  sent  two  com- 
panies of  Dodge’s  cavalry,  under  Major  Wheelan,to  cut  off  a company 
of  rebel  recruits  on  their  way  to  Richmond.  The  expedition  was  com- 
pletely successful,  the  whole  force,  consisting  of  2 officers,  65  soldiers, 
and  44  white  men,  with  28  wagons  and  carts  and  25  negroes,  were 
brought  into  Suffolk  last  night.  The  negroes  were  tied  when  the  party 
were  captured. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


SEPTEMBER  6,  1862. — Attack  on  Washington,  N.  0. 

RKFORTS.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  North 
Carolina. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Potter,  First  North  Carolina  Infantry  (Union). 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  TI.  8.  Army,  commanding  the  De- 
partment of  North  Carolina. 

Headquarters  Departihent  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  September  7, 1862.  . 
Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  just  received  a communi- 
cation from  Colonel  Potter,  First  Regiment  North  Carolina  Union  Vol- 
unteers, commanding  at  Washington,  N.  C.,  that  the  rebels  attacked 
that  town  yesterday  morning  with  about  1,000  infantry,  six  companies 

* For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee  and  Actg.  Vol.  Lieut.  R.  T.  Renshaw, 
U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1,  1862. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


5 


ATTACK  ON  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 

of  cavalry,  and  one  battery  of  artillery.  Colonel  Potter  was  at  the  time 
about  leaving,  in  obedience  to  my  orders,  for  Plymouth,  K.  C.,  with 
Colonel  Mix,  in  command  of  five  companies  of  cavalry  and  one  battery 
of  artillery,  to  co-operate  with  the  Navy  in  attacking  Hamilton,  on 
Koanoke  Eiver.  The  attack  of  the  rebels  was  made  suddenly,  and  it 
appears  they  surprised  the  outer  line  of  pickets,  killing  and  wounding 
them,  and,  dashing  into  town,  surprised  the  company  of  foot  artillery 
in  the  barracks,  stationed  for  garrison  at  the  new  field  works,  capturing 
from  them  four  old  brass  6-pounders,  that  were  captured  by  us  at  New 
Berne. 

Colonel  Mix  and  Colonel  Potter,  hearing  the  firing,  halted,  and  im- 
mediately returned  into  town,  attacking  the  rebels  vigorously,  and  after 
two  and  a half  hours’  hard  fighting  drove  them  from  the  town  and 
beyond  Tranter’s  Creek,  8 miles  from  town,  taking  20  prisoners,  many 
muskets,  and  about  30  horses. 

The  rebels  left  12  dead  and  12  wounded  in  the  streets,  carrying  off 
many  killed  and  wounded,  some  of  which  thej^  had  to  leave  by  the  road- 
side. It  is  reported  that  30  dead  bodies  have  been  found  up  to  time  of 
last  dispatch. 

Our  loss  was  7 killed  and  47  wounded,  most  of  them  slightly.  Lieu- 
tenant Everett,  adjutant  of  the  cavalry,  was  shot  in  the  knee.  Colonel 
Potter  had  his  horse  shot  under  him. 

An  unfortunate  disaster  happened  to  the  army  gunboat  Picket,  caus- 
ing her  destruction.  Just  as  the  men  were  called  to  quarters  the  maga- 
zine blew  up,  undoubtedly  from  carelessness  or  accident,  tearing  the  boat 
to  pieces,  instantly  killing  Capt.  [Sylvester  D.]  Nicoll,  the  commander, 
and  19  men,  and  wounding  6 others. 

The  gunboat  Louisiana,  Captain  Eenshaw,  U.  S.  Navy,  rendered  most 
efficient  aid,  throwing  her  shells  with  great  precision,  and  clearing  the 
streets  through  which  her  guns  had  range. 

Our  whole  force  in  the  fight  at  the  time  of  the  attack  consisted  of 
four  companies  of  infantry,  two  of  artillery,  and  five  of  cavalr}^,  and 
was  considerably  outnumbered  by  the  enemy. 

I shall  leave  for  Washington  immediately  to  take  such  measures  as 
may  be  necessary,  and  will  send  detailed  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded 
on  my  return. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  EOSTEE, 

3lajor- General,  Volunteers. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief,  V.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  September  12, 1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  state,  in  addition  to  my  brief  report 
of  the  7th  of  the  attack  on  Washington,  N.  C.,  that,  upon  careful  inves- 
tigation of  the  circumstances  and  of  the  reports,  that  the  affair,  although 
undeniably  a surprise  at  the  outset,  proves  to  have  terminated  in  a very 
creditable  display  of  gallantry  by  our  troops.  I find  that  all  the  men, 
infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery,  recovering  from  their  first  surprise,  drove 
the  enemy  from  the  town  and  8 miles  beyond. 

We  have  knowledge  of  the  loss  of  the  enemy  of  33  killed  and  about 
three  times  that  number  wounded.  Our  loss  was  8 killed,  36  wounded, 


6 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CllAPa 


and  12  missing  (as  will  be  seen  by  list  appended*),  exclusive  of  those  lost 
by  the  unfortunate  blowing  up  of  the  army  gunboat  Picket.  Owing  to 
the  death  of  the  captain  of  the  Picket,  who  was  the  only  officer  attached 
to  the  vessel,  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded  has  not  been  as  yet  made  out. 

I find  that  the  explosion  of  the  magazine  of  the  Picket  will  not  even- 
tuate in  the  total  loss  of  the  vessel.  The  guns  have  already  been  re- 
covered; the  machinery  can  certainly  be  saved,  and  possibly  the  hull 
raised  and  repaired.  If  this  be  found  impossible  the  machinery  can  be 
transferred  to  a canal-barge,  and  fit  up  a second  gunboat  as  effective  as 
the  Picket. 

The  five  companies  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  Battery  H, 
Third  New  York  Artillery,  were  very  effective  in  driving  the  enemy  from 
the  streets.  The  two  companies  of  the  Twenty -fourth  Massachusetts 
Volunteers  and  two  companies  of  the  First  North  Carolina  Union  Vol- 
unteers, under  command  of  Col.  E.  E.  Potter,  First  North  Carolina,  fought 
well  and  held  their  position. 

I shall  have  the  honor,  in  my  next  communication,  to  solicit  the  medal 
of  honor  for  three  most  gallant  men  of  the  rank  and  file. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

Major-General  of  Volunteers^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halle ck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington^  J).  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Potter,  First  North  Carolina  Infantry 

(Union). 

Headquarters, 

Washingtoiiy  September  5 [6],  1862 — 12  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  town  was  attacked  this  morn- 
ing at  4 o’clock  by  a force  consisting,  according  to  the  reports  of  pris- 
oners, of  from  600  to  1,000  infantry,  six  companies  of  cavalry,  and  one 
battery  of  artillery.  I had  just  started  with  Colonel  Mix  and  his  com- 
mand for  Plymouth,  when  the  attack  was  made.  A halt  was  ordered 
and  we  moved  back  into  the  town.  A heavy  firing  of  musketry  was 
going  on  at  the  upper  end  of  the  town.  As  we  turned  into  the  main 
street  some  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  came  charging  down,  using  sabers 
and  pistols  freely.  Some  of  them  were  knocked  over  and  others  turned 
back.  The  artillery  was  placed  at  the  intersection  of  the  streets,  with 
the  cavalry  supporting  it.  I advanced  up  the  main  street  with  one 
piece  of  artillery  and  a squadron  of  cavalry  to  the  infantry  quarters, 
where  a desultory  firing  was  going  on.  The  enemy  had  surprised  the 
artillerymen  at  their  quarters  in  the  school-house,  at  the  corner  of  Second 
and  Bridge  streets,  and  were  there  in  very  strong  force.  I placed  the 
12-pounder  at  the  intersection  of  Main  and  Bridge.  All  the  infantry. 
North  Carolina  and  Massachusetts,  supported  the  artillery.  The  firing 
here  w^as  very  sharp.  Nothing  but  a small  lot  separated  our  men  from 
theirs,  each  firing  from  behind  fences.  Our  piece  did  good  execution, 
but  the  gunners  were  all  shot,  and  I had  to  withdraw  the  gun  and  the 


* Nominal  list  omitted. 


ATTACK  ON  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


Chap.  XXX.  ] 


7 


infantry  to  give  the  Louisiana’s  guns  a chance.  The  Louisiana  opened 
at  once,  at  my  request,  and  did  excellent  service. 

Cavalry  skirmishing  was  going  on  in  the  mean  time  on  the  outskirts 
and  in  different  streets.  The  enemy  after  a time  began  to  retreat,  taking 
with  them,  I am  sorry  to  say,  the  four  brass  pieces  which  were  in  the 
yard  of  the  academy.  The  cavalry  pursued  them  several  miles,  but  did 
not  come  up  with  them. 

The  most  unfortunate  event  connected  with  the  affair  was  the  loss  of 
the  gunboat  Picket.  According  to  the  report  of  the  engineer  her  mag- 
azine exploded  just  as  Captain  Nicoll  had  ordered  the  men  to  quarters. 
It  must  have  arisen  from  carelessness  in  opening  the  magazine.  Cap- 
tain Mcoll  and  19  men  were  killed  and  6 wounded.  Our  loss  in  the 
affair  is  as  follows : 

Company  B,  First  North  Carolina,  Lieutenant  Lyon:  Two  killed  and  7 
wounded. 

Company  D,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts : Two  wounded. 

Company  B,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts : Four  wounded. 

Company  G,  Third  New  York  Artillery : Two  killed,  2 wounded,  4 
missing.  ^ 

Third  New  York  Cavalry:  Two  killed  and  25  wounded,  slightly. 

Company  H,  Third  New  York  Artillery:  One  killed  and  7 wounded. 

The  rebels  left  behind  12  killed  and  as  many  wounded,  several  mor- 
tally. We  have  also  some  20  prisoners,  and  have  taken  several  horses 
and  a good  many  muskets. 

The  conduct  of  the  men  was  generally  good.  In  this  hurried  report 
I can  make  no  mention  of  individual  good  conduct.  Colonel  Mix,  with 
his  cavalry,  did  excellently.  Lieutenant  Garrard  made  a very  handsome 
charge.  Lieutenant  Lyon,  of  the  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  displayed 
great  courage.  Lieutenants  Pendleton  and  Strong  were  with  Colonel 
Mix  during  the  fight.  No  casualties  occurred  among  the  officers,  with 
the  exception  of  Adjutant  Everett,  of  the  cavalry,  shot  in  the  knee. 
Several  horses  were  shot  from  under  their  riders,  among  them  my  own. 

Captain  Murphy  has  returned  after  pursuing  the  enemy  to  Tranter’s 
Creek.  He  reports  that  they  carried  oft'  many  dead  and  wounded.  They 
have  left  some  at  a short  distance  from  town.  I shall  make  proper  dis- 
position for  the  defense  of  the  town  to-night.  The  Plymouth  expedi- 
tion is  postponed. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

EDWAKD  E.  POTTER, 

Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Ueport  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix,  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding,  the  operations  of  my  command  on  the  4th,  5th,  and  6th 
instant : 

In  compliance  with  my  instructions  I shipped,  on  the  4th,  one  com- 
pany (D)  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry  and  one  battery  (H)  of  the 
Third  New  York  Artillery.  They  left  this  post  at  11  p.  m.  and  de- 


8 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


barked  at  Wasbington,  N.  0.,  at  3 p.  in.  on  tlie  5tli.  At  4 a.  in.  on  tlie 
Gtli  a command,  consisting  of  Companies  D,  G,  I,  and  L,  Third  New  York 
Cavalry,  and  Battery  H,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  with  an  aggregate 
of  263  men,  formed  for  the  expedition  I had  been  ordered  to  make,  and 
at  4.15  broke  into  column.  Scarcely  were  the  troops  in  column,  the  head 
of  it  having  just  reached  the  outskirts  of  tlie  town,  on  the  Plymouth 
road,  when  a rapid  and  continuous  firing  was  heard  to  our  left  and  rear. 
The  column  was  counter-marched  at  the  gallop,  and  the  cavalry,  in  col- 
umn of  eights,  ordered  to  charge  and  clear  the  difierent  streets,  which 
were  now  apparently  full  of  small  parties  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  The 
night  was  intensely  dark,  and  between  the  darkness,  fog,  and  dust  it 
was  impossible  in  many  cases  to  distinguish  friend  from  foe  at  half  a 
dozen  paces.  The  order  to  clear  the  streets  was  in  each  case  most 
gallantly  obeyed.  Company  L,  Captain  Garrard,  charged  First  street, 
driving  back  a considerable  body  of  cavalry  to  Bridge  street,  where  he 
came  upon  a large  body  of  infantry,  and  was  comiielled  to  retire;  in 
doing  this  he  cleared  the  cross-streets  to  his  left.  Company  D,  Captain 
Murphy,  performed  the  same  operation  on  Second  street.  Company  G, 
Captain  Hall,  charged  the  length  of  Third  street,  driving  back  several 
small  parties  of  cavalry,  and,  upon  reaching  the  fence  around  the  acad- 
emy, found  a large  force  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  in  position  unfavorable 
to  attack.  Company  H,  Captain  Willson,  which  was  not  to  accompany 
the  expedition,  and  consequently  not  out  at  the  commencement  of  the 
fight,  turned  out  and  was  in  saddle  and  ready  for  action  in  an  incredi- 
bly short  space  of  time.  The  captain,  hearing  firing  and  loud  cheers  in 
direction  of  the  academy,  promptly  proceeded  with  his  company  to 
ascertain  the  cause  thereof,  and  found  a large  force  of  the  enemy  in 
possession  of  four  brass  guns,  which  had  been  left  in  park  near  the  hos- 
pital, and  over  which  accidental  capture  the  rebels  were  giving  vent  to 
their  exuberance  of  spirits  in  loud,  continuous  cheers  and  demoniac  yells 
of  “Death  to  the  damned  Yankees”;  “No  prisoners”;  “No  quarters,” 
&c.  The  captain,  nothing  daunted  by  these  friendlj^  salutations,  made  a 
most  gallant  but  unsuccessful  attempt  to  recover  the  guns ; dismounted 
a number  of  his  men,  under  a severe  fire,  within  60  yards  of  the  enemy, 
and  attempted  to  tear  down  a fence  to  enable  him  to  charge  them,  but 
could  not  succeed  in  making  a sufficient  opening  for  that  purpose.  Com- 
pany I,  Captain  Jocknick,  in  the  mean  time  had  succeeded  in  driving  a 
number  of  detached  and  very  troublesome  parties  of  enemy’s  cavalry 
from  Third  and  Fourth  streets,  and  had  gone  to  the  support  of  one  of 
the  guns  of  Battery  H. 

During  the  first  hour-  of  the  melee  the  convalescents  and  sick  men 
turned  out  largely,  considering  the  number  in  hospitals.  These  were 
united  with  small  scattering  parties,  who  had  become  temporarily  de- 
tached from  their  companies,  by  officers  who  were  without  commands, 
and  did  good  service  in  clearing  the  cross-streets.  Lieutenant  Everett, 
acting  adjutant,  while  conveying  an  order  to  a distant  part  of  the  com- 
mand, encountered  alone  a party  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  on  a side  street, 
dashed  past  them,  emptying,  as  he  did  so,  the  contents  of  his  pistol 
among  them.  He  was,  in  turn,  fired  into,  receiving  a serious  wound  in 
liis  right  leg.  The  guns  of  Battery  H,  Captain  Eiggs,  were  promptly 
jilaced  in  position  upon  several  cross- streets,  and  held  in  readiness  to 
lire  the  moment  that  the  enemy  could  be  distinguished  from  among  the 
confused  mass  in  every  direction.  And  I would  here  mention  as  an  ex- 
traordinary fact,  and  as  due  entirely  to  the  coolness  and  intrejiidity  of 
the  officers  and  men  of  this  battery,  tliat  in  no  instance  did  occur  the 


diiAi’.xxX.]  attack  ok  WASHINGTON,  N.  C.  9 

irustake  of  firing  iijion  oar  own  j^eople,  anti  that  in  order  to  inevent 
siicli  fatal  mistake  the  enemy  were  allowed  at  times  to  approach  witliin 
a few  feet  of  the  muzzles  of  the  guns;  then,  when  amid  the  dust,  smoke, 
and  fog  the  gray  coats  could  be  seen,  the  death-dealing  contents  of  the 
pieces  were  hurled  among  them  with  such  precision  and  effect  as  told 
them,  plainer  than  could  words  have  done,  that  Yankee  guns,  when 
manned,  asked  no  quarter,  but  give  unasked  a (w)hole. 

Our  situation  now  began  to  assume  a more  tangible  appearance. 
The  river  street  and  most  of  the  cross-streets,  for  a distance  of  two  or 
three  blocks,  had  been,  by  means  of  rapid  and  successive  cavalry 
charges,  cleared  entirely  of  the  midnight  assassins.  Their  cavalry  had 
congregated  upon  the  edge  of  the  town  and  reformed  for  the  attack. 
Their  infantry  had  concentrated  in  two  columns,  one  of  which,  with  the 
assistance  of  one  6-pounder  brass  piece  and  a 3-pounder  rifled  gun,  was 
endeavoring  to  turn  our  left  flank,  with  the  evident  desire  of  getting 
between  our  forces  and  the  gunboats.  They  were  met  at  this  i)oint, 
and  their  object  most  completely  foiled,  by  our  infantry,  consisting  of 
two  companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  two  companies 
of  the  First  North  Carolina,  one  12-pouuder  brass  piece  (Lieutenant 
O’Neil),  and  20  cavalry,  under  Lieutenant  Gouraud  (which  had  been 
detailed  as  a provost  guard  for  the  expedition),  all  commanded  in  x)©!*- 
son  by  Colonel  Potter,  First  North  Carolina.  At  this  point  the  fight  was 
most  severe,  and  continued  without  cessation  for  two  hours  and  a half. 
Two  sets  of  gunners  having  been  shot  away  from  the  gun,  it  became  nec- 
essary to  haul  it  off,  which  was  done  without  further  loss.  Our  infantry 
in  the  mean  time  did  good  service  with  their  rifles.  The  situation  of 
Lieutenant  Gouraud  and  his  handful  of  mounted  men  at  this  point  was 
aggravating  in  the  extreme.  Necessarily  within  supporting  distance 
of  the  gun,  he  was  greatly  exposed  to  the  raking  fire  of  the  enemy,  and 
unable,  from  the  inconsiderable  numbers  of  his  command  and  the  posi- 
tion and  strength  of  the  enemy,  to  ox)erate  upon  him.  In  this  trying 
position  the  men  evinced  a most  commendable  degree  of  fortitude. 
One-fourth  of  their  number  having  falleir  victims  to  the  enemy’s  mis- 
siles, the  remaining  few  increased  their  enthusiasm  for  the  charge,  and 
made  several  efiective  dashes. 

The  enemy’s  second  column  of  attack  had  advanced  upon  our  cen- 
ter, and  was  comx)osed  of  artillery  and  infantry,  preceded  by  a squad- 
ron of  cavalry.  Their  approach  being  observed.  Company  L,  Captain 
Garrard,  advanced  boldly,  and  in  close  column,  to  the  attack.  His 
shout  of  “ Come  on,”  as  he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  his  men,  was 
responded  to  by  his  daring  followers  with  a yell  and  a rapid  galloi^ 
that  showed  no  want  of  confidence  in  their  leader  and  themselves,  and 
no  fear  of  the  solid  column  opposed  to  them.  He  met  the  enemy  with 
a shock  that  told  upon  his  columns,  received  the  fire  from  their  i^istols, 
and  vigorously  responded  with  his  sabers  until  finding  that  he  Avas 
being  surrounded  by  the  enemy’s  infantry  and  in  danger  of  being  cut 
ofl’  he  commanded  his  men  to  retire,  which  they  did,  gallantly  cutting 
their  way  through  the  infantry — who  were  now  in  the  rear  of  them — 
having  had  a brilliant  hand-to-hand  conflict  with  vastly-superior  num- 
bers, in  which  the  horses  of  all  the  officers  of  the  company  had  been 
shot  and  9 men  and  14  horses  wounded,  promptly  retiring  behind  the 
gun  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Mercer,  leaving  the  street  clear  for  the 
operation  of  the  i)iece,  which  opened  a destructive  fire  upon  the  enemy, 
who  had  brought  a 6-pouuder  to  bear  upon  him.  An  interesting  can- 
non duel  now  ensued,  but  soon  terminated  by  the  withdrawal  of  the 


10 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


6-pounder  and  the  disappearance  of  the  enemy  from  that  street.  Tims 
the  enemy  had  been  thrice  foiled.  First,  his  attempt  to  surprise  and 
massacre  ns  was  foiled  by  the  existence  of  the  expedition,  and,  subse- 
quently, when  in  position,  his  attack  upon  onr  left  and  center  was  obsti- 
nately met,  and,  though  not  without  difficulty  and  hard  fighting,  suc- 
cessfully repulsed. 

Upon  the  first  intimation  of  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  our  cavalry, 
which  had  necessarily  been  much  scattered,  was  concentrated  and  sent 
in  pursuit,  and  moving  rapidly  out  upon  the  Greenville  road,  soon  en- 
countered a flag  of  truce  with  a rebel  surgeon,  who  desired  the  privi- 
lege of  attending  to  his  wounded.  This  flag  w'as  a well-calculated  sub- 
terfuge, under  which  the  enemy  gained  considerable  in  their  retreat, 
as  the  officer  commanding  the  pursuing  party  felt  it  his  duty  to  sus- 
pend operations  until  he  could  communicate  with  the  commanding  offi- 
cer, who  was  at  the  rear.  After  disposing  of  this  flag  of  truce  our  cav- 
alry pushed  out  9 miles  on  the  Greenville  road,  encountering  only  a 
surgeon’s  flag  over  a party  of  18  of  the  enemy’s  wounded,  and  upon 
returning  discovered  two  ambulances  in  the  road,  which  he  captured. 
The  dismounted  men  of  the  detachment  of  cavalry  were  under  standing 
orders,  in  the  event  of  an  attack,  to  report  to  Lieutenant  Chesebrough, 
who  was  temporarily  disabled  for  mounted  duty.  These  men  arrived, 
with  the  Colt’s  revolving  rifles,  and  were  stationed  in  ambush,  for  the 
purpose  of  preventing  the  entrance  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  upon  the 
upper  end  of  Main  street,  and  were  most  successful. 

In  conclusion,  sir,  too  much  cannot  be  said  in  praise  of  the  coolness 
of  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command,  who  fought  full  three  times 
or  more  their  number  four  hours,  under  the  most  trying  circumstances. 
Battery  H,  Third  Niew  York  Artillery,  did  most  creditably,  and  the 
result  of  this  first  meeting  with  the  enemy  promises  them  a brilliant 
future.  I would  especially  commend  to  the  notice  of  the  commanding 
general,  in  consequence  of  most  gallant  conduct,  Corpl.  James  E.  Nicoll, 
Company  I,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  Corpl.  William  Smith,  Bat- 
tery H,  Third  New  York  Artillery  (the  latter  since  lost  his  leg,  by  am- 
putation, in  consequence  of  wounds),  and  would  respectfully  suggest 
that  medals  of  honor,  recently  ordered  by  Congress,  be  presented  to 
these  two  men. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  MIX, 

Lieutenant-Colonel^  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry. 

Maj.  Southard  Hofrman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Dept,  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French^  C.  S.  Army. 

Petersburg,  Va.,  September  7,  1SG2. 

General  Martin  telegraphs  me  our  troops  had  a sharp  fight  of  three 
hours  at  Washiogton,  N.  C.,  this  morning  (Gth),  but  could  not  hold  the 
town.  Our  loss  heavy.  We  brought  out  three  brass  field  guns. 

S.  G.  FEENCH. 


General  S.  Cooper. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  SKIRMISH  AT  WILLIAMSBURG,  VA. 

SEPTEMBER  9,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 


11 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia,  and  resulting  correspondence  and  orders. 


Yorktown,  Ya.,  ISeptemher  9,  1862. 


Colonel  Campbell,  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  was  attacked 
this  morning  at  Williamsburg  and  disgracefully  beaten,  partly  by  bad 
management  and  partly  by  the  cowardly  conduct  ot  some  of  his  men. 
I am  glad  to  say  that  others  behaved  with  proper  spirit.  The  colonel 
and  some  6 or  7 other  officers  are  prisoners.  I have  not  yet  been  able 
to  ascertain  the  extent  of  the  loss. 


Major-General  Halleck. 


JOHN  A.  HIX, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 
September  10,  1862 — 6.30  p.  m. 

The  loss  yesterday  in  the  attack  on  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry 
was  the  colonel,  2 majors,  and  5 other  officers  and  29  men  captured  ,* 
1 officer  and  55  men  missing  j 7 killed  and  13  wounded.  We  took  2 
prisoners,  from  whom  I learn  that  the  attacking  party  consisted  of  a 
mixed  force  of  Georgians,  South  Carolinians,  and  Yirginians,  certainly 
not  exceeding  300  men.  One  of  the  majors  ran  away,  and  if  a court 
cannot  be  found  who  have  courage  enough  to  shoot  him  he  should  be 
dismissed  the  service.  I will  report  on  his  case  especially.  What  re- 
mains of  the  regiment,  about  430  men  in  all,  are  at  Williamsburg,  the 
rebels  having  retired. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Mqjor- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  September  10,  1862. 

Order  immediately  a court-martial  on  the  cowards  of  Williamsburg. 
If  no  one  has  courage  to  have  them  shot  report  them  here,  so  that  we 
can  ask  the  President  to  cashier  them.* 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  September  11, 1862. 

Order  a court  if  you  have  officers  suitable.  If  not,  get  the  facts  in 
relation  to  the  bad  conduct  of  the  officers  and  I will  ask  the  President 
to  cashier  them. 

What  is  the  object  of  holding  Williamsburg  ? Why  not  withdraw  the 
garrison  to  Yorktown  1 


* See  Dix  to  Halleck,  September  12,  in  “ Correspondence,  etc.,’’jpo8<. 


12 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap. 


Colonel  Williams’  cavalry  was  sent  to  General  Burnside  when  he  had 
none  for  reconnoitering  the  enemy.  I have  none  here  to  send  yon  at 
present. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

ISTo.  19.  ) Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  25,  1862. 

I.  Before  a general  court-martial,  of  which  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck  is 
president,  convened  at  Yorktown,  Va.,  pursuant  to  Paragraph  III, 
Special  Orders,  No.  97,  current  series,  from  these  headquartprs,  of  Sep- 
tember 11,  1862,  was  arraigned  and  tried — 

Maj.  Jacob  P.  Wilson,  Fifth  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  upon 
the  following  charges  and  specifications : 

Charge  I. — Misbehavior  before  the  enemy. 

Specifieation. — In  this : That  he,  Jacob  P.  Wilson,  a major  in  the 
Fifth  Eegiment  of  Pennsylvania  Volunteer  Cavalry,  in  the  service  of  the 
United  States,  while  on  duty  with  his  regiment  at  or  near  Williams- 
burg, Va.,  did  misbehave  himself  before  the  enemy,  and  did  shamefully 
abandon  his  post  and  command  and  run  away.  This  at  or  near  said 
Williamsburg,  and  between  said  Williamsburg  and  Yorktown,  Va.,  on 
or  about  the  9th  day  of  September,  1862. 

Charge  II. — Speaking  words  indueing  others  to  misbehave  themselves 
before  the  enemy  and  to  run  away  and  to  shamefully  abandon  the  post  which 
he  or  they  were  commanded  to  defend. 

Specification. — In  this:  That  he,  said  Jacob  P.  Wilson,  major  as  afore- 
said, being  stationed  with  his  regiment  at  or  near  said  Williamsburg, 
which  post  he  and  they  were  commanded  to  defend,  did  speak  words 
inducing  members  of  his  regiment,  or  some  of  them,  to  misbehave  them- 
selves before  the  enemy,  to  shamefully  abandon  said  post,  and  to  run 
away.  This  at  or  near  Williamsburg,  on  or  about  September  9, 1862. 

Charge  III. — Cowardice. 

Specification. — In  this:  That  said  Jacob  P.  Wilson,  major  as  afore- 
said, while  stationed  with  his  regiment  at  or  near  said  Williamsburg, 
and  before  the  enemy,  did,  in  a cowardly  manner,  misbehave,  abandon 
his  post  and  command,  and  run  away.  This  at  or  near  Williamsburg, 
Va.,  on  or  about  the  9th  day  of  September,  1862. 

Plea. — JVot  guilty. 

FINDING  OF  THE  CORUT. 

I.  Upon  careful  consideration  the  court  finds  the  accused,  Maj.  Jacob 
P.  Wilson,  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteer  Cavalry,  ‘^Eot  guilty,”  of 
each  and  all  of  the  charges  and  specifications,  and  thereupon  acquits 
him. 

II.  The  proceedings  and  finding  of  the  court  are  approved.  IMajor 
Wilson  will  resume  his  sword  and  return  to  duty. 

The  encounter  at  Williamsburg,  on  which  the  charges  against  Major 
Wilson  are  founded,  was,  under  all  its  aspects,  most  disgraceful  to  the 
regiment  to  which  he  belonged.  The  force  of  the  enemy  was  certainly 
not  superior  to  ours.'  The  commanding  officer  had  full  notice  of  the 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


13 


SHILOH,  N.  C. 

intended  attack  and  chose  his  own  ground.  The  men  were  misman- 
aged; wrong  words  of  command  were  given,  and,  although  some  of  the 
officers  and  men  behaved  with  becoming  gallantry,  the  regiment  broke, 
most  of  them  ran  away,  some  of  them  as  far  as  Yorktown,  13  miles 
from  their  camp.  The  colonel,  6 other  officers,  and  nearly  60  enlisted 
men  were  taken  prisoners;  the  camp  was  partially  destroyed;  they 
were  not  rallied  until  the  enemy  had  retired ; and  the  whole  affair  ex- 
hibited a want  of  organization  and  discipline  utterly  discreditable  to 
the  principal  officers,  who  are  responsible  for  the  condition  of  the  reg- 
iment. It  can  never  regain  its  standing  until  this  stain  on  its  character 
is  effaced  by  worthier  conduct  in  the  face  of  the  enemy. 

While  the  commanding  general  approves  the  finding  of  the  court  in 
acquitting  Major  Wilson  of  the  charge  of  cowardice,  the  testimony 
shows  that  he  might  with  propriety  be  brought  before  another  court, 
on  less  serious  charges  of  misconduct,  and,  if  it  is  not  thought  advisa- 
ble to  do  so,  it  is  only  for  the  reason  that  so  many  others  are  as  deeply 
involved  as  himself  in  the  general  delinquency. 

III.  The  general  court-martial,  of  which  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck  is 
president,  is  dissolved. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Dix ; 

D.  T.  YAH  BUEEH, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


SEPTEMBER  17-20,  1862.~Operations  at  and  about  Shiloh,  N.  C. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Capt.  Enos  C.  Sanders,  First  North  Carolina  Infantry  (Union),  of  affair  at 
Shiloh,  N.  C.,  September  17,  1862. 

No.  2. — Capt.  William  B.  Avery,  commanding  U.  S.  gunboat  Lancer,  of  affair  near 
Shiloh,  N.  C.,  September  20,  1862. 


Ho.  1. 


Report  of  Capt,  Enos  C,  Sanders,  First  North  Carolina  Infantry  ( Union), 
of  affair  at  Shiloh,  N,  C.,  September  17,  1862. 

Headquarters, 
Shiloh,  N,  C,,  September  18,  1862. 

Sir  : Last  night  we  were  attacked,  as  we  had  all  the  force  over  to 
Pasquotank  holding  a meeting,  and  stopped  overnight,  except  the 
gun’s  crew,  which  we  sent  back,  all  except  16  men — them  we  had  with 
us.  We  got  word  this  morning,  and  with  about  30  men  have  landed  6 
miles  below  Shiloh.  There  are  3 men  killed,  3 wounded,  and  5 or  6 
taken  prisoners,  and  they  have  taken  all  the  arms  and  ammunition  we 
had  and  stores  and  provisions.  They  were  completely  surprised.  The 
men  that  got  away  think  their  force  was  about  50  strong.  Please  send 
us  a gunboat  and  men  immediately ; send  two  howitzers  and  ammuni- 
tion for  tlie  same.  We  can  intercept  them  at  the  upper  end  of  the 
county.  It  is  necessary  to  haA^e  a chance  to  get  a re-enforcement  at 


14 


NOKTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Pasquotank.  They  got  our  guns  and  all  our  private  property.  We 
have  the  names  of  some  of  the  rebels.  Joseph  Forbes  was  one  of  the 
leaders. 

E.  0.  SANDEPvS, 

Captain^  First  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

Col.  W.  A.  Howard. 


I 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  B.  Avery,  commanding  U.  S.  gunboat  Lancer,  of 
affair  near  Shiloh,  N.  O.,  September  20,  1862. 

United  States  Gunboat  Lancer, 

September  21,  1862. 

Sir  : I reached  Shiloh  at  4 p.  m.  Friday,  19th,  at  dark.  I landed  60 
men,  taking  with  me  Lieutenants  Fowler  and  Moore,  and  leaving  the 
vessel  in  charge  of  Acting  Master  Allen.  Being  joined  by  the  two  lieu- 
tenants [and]  Sanders  with  20  men,  we  started  at  9.30  p.  m.  for  the  place 
where  the  rebels  were  last  heard  of;  reached  that  place  to  learn  they 
were  last  heard  of  4 miles  oft*,  in  a swamp  near  the  ^‘lake,”  as  they 
term  a sort  of  pond.  The  men  were  two-thirds  of  them  in  carts,  and  so, 
by  changing,  the  12  miles  already  passed  did  not  fatigue  them  much. 

We  left  for  the  lakes”  at  4.30  a.  m.,  so  our  hopes  of  surprising  them 
before  light  were  dispelled.  In  the  swamp  we  found  the  men  had  gone 
one  way  that  morning,  half  an  hour  previous,  and  the  things  had  been 
sent  another  the  night  previous,  toward  the  house  of  one  Willis  Will- 
iams. We  had  been  told  that  it  was  there  they  had  been  encamped;  so 
I decided  to  push  on  after  the  things,  expecting  to  find  a portion  of 
their  force  with  them.  After  3 miles^  more  march  we  reached  it  to  find 
no  one  there,  and  to  learn  that  the  things  had  been  sent  there  the  night 
before  and  they  would  not  receive  them,  and  they  were  taken  back. 
The  first  house  from  the  school-house  we  learned  that  the  carts  had 
some  men  without  arms,  and  one  man  lying  down  apparently  hurt. 
We  knew  they  must  be  the  prisoners,  and  I immediately  took  Lieut. 
Enos  0.  Sanders  and  20  of  the  best  men  and  gave  chase  after  them. 
They  had  two  and  a half  hours  the  start,  and  we  had  been  traveling  all 
night.  By  following  their  tracks  we  knew  the  road  they  took,  and  by 
inquiring  learned  that  we  were  gaining  on  them.  We  went  across  the 
battle-field  and  over  the  bridges  across  the  river  and  canal. 

About  miles  beyond  the  river  we  came  on  them  just  as  they  were 
halting  for  dinner.  The  road  was  straight  for  half  a mile  to  them,  and 
through  a swamp,  so  we  could  not  avoid  being  discovered  by  the  guard, 
which  numbered  some  15  men,  I am  told.  We  made  a dash  for  them, 
and  without  firing  a shot  they  took  their  guns  and  fled  to  the  swamp 
across  a corn  field,  leaving  the  muskets  and  prisoners  in  our  hands.  1 
immediately  returned  and  reached  the  main  body  of  the  men  at  2 p.  m., 
Iiaving  gone  18  miles  in  four  hours. 

We  then  started  for  Shiloh,  distant  12  miles,  and  reached  it  6.30  p.  m., 
and  at  8 p.  m.  all  were  on  board,  having  been  gone  twenty-four  hours. 

Besides  the  7 prisoners  from  Shiloh  they  had  2 of  my  men  who  had 
straggled  behind  and  met  the  rebels,  who  had  come  into  the  road.  I 
went  down  some  twenty  minutes  after.  Had  I been  half  hour  later  I 
should  have  met  them.  Had  I been  one  hour  earlier  I should  have  sur- 
prised them  before  they  started.  Had  I been  so  fortunate  I should  have 


Chap.  XXX.]  SKIRMISH  ON  THE  BLACKWATER.  15 

saved  some  40  or  50  miles  travel  for  myself  and  20  of  the  men  with  Lieu- 
tenant Sanders. 

As  to  the  howitzer  I have  heard  of  it  in  two  or  three  places  by  report. 
The  most  probable  one  is  that  it  is  up  in  Currituck  County,  somewhere 
in  a swamp.  Until  I had  started  after  them  I did  not  know  they  did 
not  have  it  with  them  to  take  it  to  Kichmond.  If  Lieutenant  Sanders  fol- 
lows my  advice  and  takes  time  by  the  forelock’^  he  can  find  that  gun 
and  the  tents.  He  claims  to  have  50  or  GO  fighting  men,  and  with  two- 
thirds  of  that  number  he  can  scour  the  whole  country. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

WM.  B.  AYERY, 
Captain^  Commanding  Lancer. 

Col.  William  A.  Howard, 

Commanding  Marine  Artillery  and  Post,  Boanolce  Island. 


OCTOBER  3,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  near  Franklin,  Va. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  Virginia. 
No.  2. — Maj.Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Suffolk,  including  affair 
near  Zuni. 

No.  3. — Col.  J.  K.  Marshall,  Fifty-second  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

1^0.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  TJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  3, 1862—9.30  p.  m. 

Last  night  General  Peck,  by  my  order  and  direction,  sent  a force  of 
nearly  2,000  cavalry,  artillery,  and  infantry  from  Suffolk  to  Franklin, 
on  the  Blackwater,  intending  to  attack  the  enemy  at  that  point  this 
morning  early,  and  if  possible  cripple  the  floating  bridge  he  has  thrown 
across  the  river.  Between  2 and  3 this  morning  two  scoundrels  from 
New  York,  belonging  to  Dodge’s  Mounted  Rifles,  one  of  them  an  orderly 
at  General  Peck’s  headquarters,  deserted  to  the  enemy  and  were  seen 
riding  rapidly  through  our  lines.  Couriers  were  sent  out  to  recall  the 
troops  and  a strong  force  was  dispatched  to  support  them.  I have  not 
yet  heard  of  their  return.  We  have  reconnoitered  the  enemy  closely 
several  times  with  no  loss,  except  one  horse  killed  and  one  man  shot 
through  the  hand.  Suffolk  has  been  put  in  good  condition,  and  we  have 
no  concern  of  attack.  Two  of  the  four  new  regiments  you  i^romised  have 
arrived.  They  are  very  raw,’^but  when  I get  the  other  two  I shall  f^el 
entirely  at  ease  at  all  points. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 


^For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Leo,  Commander  H.  K.  Davenport,  Lieut. 
Commander  C.  W.  Flusser,  Acting  Vol.  Lieut.  E.  R.  Colhouu,  and  Actg.  Master  C.  A. 
IJenph,  XJ.  S.  Navy,  see  Aunual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1, 1862. 


16 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Fort  Monr'oe,  Ya.,  October  5, 18G2 — 12.4G  p.  m. 

1 planned  an  expedition,  as  I advised  yon,  to  destroy  the  floating  bridge 
the  enemy  liad  thrown  over  the  Blackwater  at  Franklin.  We  were  to 
have  had  the  co-operation  of  the  gunboats  from  Albemarle  Sound  by  or- 
der of  Admiral  Lee,  but  I think  they  must  have  met  with  obstructions, 
as  they  did  not  come.  Our  troops,  less  than  2,000  in  number,  under 
Colonel  Spear,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  held  the  enemy,  greatly 
superior  in  force,  at  bay  at  tile  river  for  several  hours  w^aiting  for  the 
gunboats.  They  behaved  with  great  coolness,  and,  as  we  think,  killed 
and  wounded  from  70  to  100  of  the  enemy.  0,ur  loss  was  1 killed  and  G 
wounded  and  missing. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 

General  Halleck,  General-m- Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  7, 18G2. 
Major-General  Peck  telegraphs  mo  as  follows: 

Our  affair  at  Fraukliii  was  of  more  importance  than  wo  judged.  From  an  examina- 
tion of  several  persons  who  were  on  the  other  side  of  the  Blackwater  I learn  that  the 
enemy’s  loss  was  over  200. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 


No.  2. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Rech.  TJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  at  Suffolk, 
including  affair  near'Zuni. 


Suffolk,  October  4, 18G2. 

The  gunboats  were  about  10  or  15  miles  below  Franklin  yesterday. 
They  fired  a good  many  shots,  but  did  not  appear  during  the  day.  Had 
they  not  met  obstructions  tliey  would  have  come  up.  They  heard  the 
enemy’s  guns  doubtless,  as  I did.  They  have  three  heavy  guns,  one  a 
32-pounder,  commanding  the  swinging  bridge.  Colonel  Spear  reports 
not  less  than  8,000  up  and  down  the  river.  Yesterday  they  were  massed 
near  Zuni.  Knowing  the  boats  were  on  the  way  they  will  expect  our 
concert  and  may  mask  Franklin.  There  is  great  uncertainty  in  opera- 
tions with  gunboats.  Had  they  waited  until  the  9th  our  risk  would 
have  been  much  less.  Now  the  move  is  adventured  to  Weldon  and 
Petersburg  it  looks  risky.  The  bridge  can  be  rebuilt  in  a few  hours, 
and  the  fords  are  low.  I will  carrj^  out  your  instructions  if  you  will 
send  them.  « 


Major-General  Dix. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  October  4,  18G2. 

Have  been  out  on  the  advance  nearly  all  day.  Troops  all  in.  Spear 
had  a nice  fight.  Loss,  1 killed  and  some  G wounded  and  missing. 
After  full  inquiry  as  to  the  affair  I judge  70  to  100  of  the  enemy  were 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  THE  BLACKWATER. 


17 


injured.  Within  a day  or  two  the  enemy  has  been  disposed  to  hold  our 
pickets  away  from  the  river.  Yesterday  he  occupied  Windsor  with 
about  300  cavalry  and  some  infantry.  At  dawn  I pushed  Dodge’s  cav- 
alry in  there,  and  to-day  we  have  recovered  nearly  all  the  territory. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 

General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  October  4, 1862. 

My  troops  are  in,  but  they  have  had  service,  being  out  two  nights 
and  a day,  and  need  rest. 

Colonel  Spear  left  the  vicinity  of  Franklin  after  midnight.  No  firing 
has  been  heard  to-day,  and  I conclude  boats  did  not  reach  that  place. 
My  last  telegram  may  give  some  information  not  at  hand  when  your 
last  was  received,  and  I wait  your  reply. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 

General  Dix. 


Headquarters, 
Suffolk^  yi%.,  October  9,  1862. 

Colonel  : On  the  2d  instant  I was  advised  that  the  rebel  pickets 
had  been  advanced  nearly  to  Carrsville  at  points  some  4 or  5 miles  from 
the  Hlackwater.  This  information,  in  connection  with  the  possibility 
of  the  appearance  of  our  gunboats,  in  consequence  of  certain  proposi- 
tions made  by  Major-General  Dix,  but  not  perfected,  induced  me  to  dis- 
l)atch  Col.  S.  P.  Spear,  of  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  with  a 
section  of  Follett’s  battery  and  about  1,700  men,  in  the  night  to  Carrs- 
ville, with  instructions  to  make  a thorough  reconnaissance  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Frankbn  and  the  Black  water.  He  moved  at  9 p.  m.  and  reached 
Cairrsville  before  daylight.  Early  on  the  3d  he  commenced  his  advance 
and  soon  met  the  enemy’s  pickets.  Some  skirmishing  ensued,  the  rebels 
falling  back  upon  their  support  with  a view  of  checking  his  advance. 
This  was  of  no  avail,  and  pickets  and  supports  were  all  driven  confusedly 
down  to  the  bank  and  over  the  river. 

Colonel  Spear  advanced  cautiously,  and  was  soon  opened  upon  by  a 
32-pounder  and  other  heavy  guns  in  battery  across  the  stream.  After 
looking  to  the  immediate  safety  of  his  command  the  colonel  made  a 
careful  examination  of  the  position,  placed  Whitney’s  section  and  two 
small  howitzers  in  action  at  favorable  points  with  proper  supports,  and 
sent  out  i^arties  for  observation  on  his  flanks. 

A furious  cannonade  continued  for  an  hour,  when  the  enemy  ceased 
his  fire  %nd  fell  back  to  a new  position  where  he  could  act  in  concert 
with  newly-arrived  and  fresh  troops. 

At  this  juncture  Graham’s  celebrated  Petersburg  battery  and  a rocket 
battery  arrived,  and  the  action  was  renewed  on  his  part  witb  great 
vigor.  Shot,  shell,  grape,  and  rockets  were  fired  in  great  profusion, 
but  with  little  or  no  damage  to  our  well- posted  troops.  The  Thirteenth 
Indiana  Regiment,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dobbs,  was  moved  down 
to  the  bank  on  the  right,  where  it  opened  so  sharp  and  close  a fire  upon 
the  rebels  that  they  terminated  the  action  by  falling  back  out  of  range. 

On  learning  that  Colonel  Spear  had  proceeded  with  less  than  1,300 
men,  instead  of  1,700,  and  that  his  ammunition  was  nearly  exhausted, 
that  the  river  could  not  be  crossed,  and  the  object  of  the  expedition 

2 R R — VOL  XVIII 


18 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[Chap.  XXX. 


having  been  fully  attained,'!  directed  him  to  return,  which  he  did  with- 
out any  disturbance  from  the  enemy. 

rarticular  mention  is  made  of  the  gallantry  and  good  conduct  of 
Lieutenant-Colonels  Stetzel,  Dobbs,  Maxwell,  and  Gray,  and  of  Lieu- 
tenant Whitney.  Colonel  Spear  has  added  to  his  former  high  reputa- 
tion by  his  coolness  and  good  management  on  this  occasion. 

The  force  consis’ted  of  detachments  from  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania 
Cavalry,  Ninety-sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  One  hundred  and  third 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  and  Thirteenth  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry, 
and  a section  of  FolletCs  artillery,  and  the  commander  speaks  in  the 
highest  terms  of  all  his  officers  and  men. 

The  loss  was  2 killed,  5 wounded,  and  1 missing,  which  was  extremely 
small,  in  view  of  the  great  superiority  of  the  enemy  in  numbers.  The 
rebel  loss  has  been  reported  from  75  to  200. 

On  the  3d  instant  several  hundred  of  the  enemy  crossed  the  river  in 
the  vicinity  of  Zuni  and  occupied  Windsor,  having  among  other  de- 
signs that  of  tearing  up  the  Petersburg  Eailroad.  At  dawn  of  the  4th 
Colonel  Dodge,  a meritorious  officer,  was  advanced  with  a portion  of 
the  New  York  First  Mounted  Kifles,  who  promptly  occupied  the  place, 
aud  during  the  day  forced  the  enemy  across  the  Blackwater. 

Characterized  by  that  earnestness  which  is  an  essential  element  of 
success,  these  affairs  are  very  gratifying,  and  fortify  the  confidence 
already  reposed  in  th^  troops. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 

Col.  D.  T.  Van  Buren, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Seventh  Corj^s. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  K.  Mar  shall  y Fifty -second  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

Headquarters, 
FranJcliny  Va.,  October  4,  1862. 

General:  After  having  rested  the  night  before  at  N^w  South  Quay 
the  enemy  steamed  up  the  river  in  their  gunboats  yesterday  morning 
and  commenced  pouring  shot  aud  shell  upon  us  at  daybeak.  They 
brought  with  them  three  boats,  two  of  which  were  small,  carrying  two 
guns  each ; the  other  large,  carrying  four,  one  a 64-pounder.  Soon  after 
the  shelling  commenced  I dispatched  Lieut.  [John  M.]  Alexander  (com- 
manding Company  A,  Fifty-second  Begiment  North  Carolina  Troops) 
with  orders  to  commence  firing  upon  them  at  Crum])ler’s  Bluff  so  soon 
as  the  last  boat  should  have  ])as8ed.  In  obedience  to  orders  he  com- 
menced a well-directed  and  effective  fire  upon  them,  and  succeeded  in 
silencing  their  guns  for  a short  while,  but  they  quickened  their  time 
and  succeeded  in  reaching  a poiiit  of  the  river  edged  on  both  sides  by 
an  apparently  impassable  marsh.  Here  they  recommenced  their  work 
ot  throwing  shot  and  shell  in  every  direction,  and  in  the  mean  time  mov- 
ing  up  by  degrees  in  the  direction  of  Franklin.  Pending  this  condition 
of  things  I sent  Capts.  [John  C.]  McCain  [and  Eric]  Erson,  aud  Lieut. 
(James  M.]  Kincaid,  of  the  Fifty-second  liegiment,  together  with  Ciqit. 
[James  T.]  Mitchell,  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Begiment,  pickets,  holding  theii’ 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  ZUNI,  VA. 


19 


respective  comm  an  ds,  to  the  neighboring’ bluffs  with  instructions  to  meet 
the  boats  on  their  return.  Col.  [D.  D.]  Ferebee  with  a large  ijortion  of 
his  command  took  position  along  the  road,  first,  where  the  old  wharf 
formerly  stood,  and  Capt.  [William]  Sharp’s  company,  of  the  same  com- 
mand, was  sent  to  meet  and  fire  upon  the  boats  from  any  point  they 
could  suitable  for  such  work,  but  they  penetrated  the  marsh,  which  was 
very  deep,  and  drove  in  between  60  and  80  sharpshooters  which  had 
been  thrown  out  from  the  gunboats.  ]S[ow  a general  fire  commenced 
on  both  sides,  in  which  Colonel  Ferebee  and  his  command  took  [part] 
to  a very  considerable  extent,  but  the  boats  found  the  work  too  hot  for 
them  and  were  forced  to  recede,  and  continued  to  move  back,  though  con- 
tinually throwing  out  an  occasional  shell.  As  they  passed  the  bluffs 
every  man  who  showed  himself  on  deck  or  at  the  port-holes  was  cut 
down.  As  they  passed  down  the  river  Captain  Norfleet  with  his  men 
l)ursued  them,  killing  ali  who  could  be  seen.  Here  I will  state  that  the 
])ilot  was  hid  from  view  and  sand-bags  were  placed  along  the  decks  of 
the  boats.  As  I stated  before,  the  shelling  commenced  at  daybreak  and 
the  boats  remained  in  the  river  until  10.30  a.  m. 

Our  loss  is  2 wounded,  viz.  Private  Stroup,  of  the  Fifty-second  Kegi- 
ment,  and  Private  Parker,  off  the  Fifty -ninth  Eegiment. 

About  1 p.  m.  a large  force  appeared  across  the  river,  consisting  of 
four  full  regiments  of  infantry,  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  six  pieces  of 
artillery,  with  one  or  two  sections  of  rocket  guns.  One  of  Captain 
Graham’s  pieces  (rifle)  was  placed  at  the  depot  and  the  other  carried 
to  the  bridge.  For  about  two  hours  Captain  Graham  with  his  rifle 
piece  at  the  depot  and  Lieutenant  Britton  at  the  bridge  entertained 
them  handsomely.  At  3.30  or  4 o’clock  they  retired,  leaving  on  the  field 
a few  overcoats  and  one  horse. 

The  enemy  must  have  lost  a large  number  on  their  boats  and  lost 
some  on  the  field,  but  how  many  I cannot  say. 

One  yawl- boat  was  left  in  the  river  near  one  of  the  bluffs.  The  force 
brought  in  the  afternoon  was  intended  to  co-operate  with  the  gunboats, 
but  came  too  late. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  MABSHALL, 
Golonelj  Commanding  at  Franklin, 

General  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


OCTOBER  25,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Zuni,  Va. 

Eeport  of  Maj,  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  27,  1862. 
An  exj)edition  was  sent  from  Suffolk  on  Saturday  night  to  the  Black- 
water.^  It  took  a wrong  road  and  did  not  arrive  till  "noon,  instead  of 
daybreak,  on  Sunday.  The  cavalry  swam  the  river,  and  some  howitzers 
were  sent  over  in  canoes.  The  enemy  were  cleared  from  the  bank  of 
the  river  by  our  infantry.  Much  valuable  information  was  obtained. 
Lieut.  William  Wheelan,  of  the  Mounted  Bifles,  a very  meritorious 
officer,  was  killed  j our  only  casualty.  We  captured  a sergeant  and  4 


20 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CllAF.  XXX. 


men  of  a Georgia  cavalry  regiment.  I have  directed  Major  General 
Peck  to  keep  a part  of  bis  force  in  motion  constantly,  so  as  to  accustom 
them  to  marcliing  instead  of  rusting  in  camp. 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 


OCTOBER  31,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Franklin,  Va. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  0.  Peclc.,  TJ.  S.  Army. 

Suffolk,  Ya.,  November  2, 1862. 

Sir:  On  Friday  night,  October  31,  we  surprised  the  enemy  at  Frank- 
lin about  4 a.  m.,  and  shelled  him  with  75  projectiles  before  he  opened. 
As  ordered,  the  command  at  once  moved  away  and  reconnoitered  as  far 
as  Zuni,  Isle  of  Wight,  &c. 

After  withdrawing  Follett’s  battery  the  enemy  opened  and  kept  up  a 
lire  on  the  woods  until  nearly  11  a.  m.,  supposing  we  were  there.  Colonel 
Spear  was  in  command  of  the  advance,  and  thinks  the  execution  was 
great.  He  reports  five  regiments  there,  one  at  Ivor,  and  a force  at 
Wakefield,  but  numbers  unknown  j others  scattered  along  the  river. 
Xo  accident  on  our  side.  Ferry  was  in  command.  Wessells  is  ill. 
Lougstreet  has  been  at  Petersburg  and  may  be  at  Wakefield,  from 
which  he  can  move  to  any  threatened  point. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

General  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


NOVEMBER  1-12,  1862. — Expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  including 
skirmishes  (2d)  at  Little  Creek  and  Rawle’s  Mill. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  North 
Carolina. 

No.  2. — Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  command- 
ing brigade,  of  skirmishes  at  Little  Creek  and  Rawle’s  Mill. 

No.  3. — Capt.  Job  Arnold,  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Infantry,  of  skirmishes  at  Little  Creek 
and  Rawle’s  Mill. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster ^ JJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  the  De- 
partment of  No7'th  Carolina. 

• Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  November  12,  1862. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  agreeably  to  my  letter  of 
the  30th  idtimo  informing  you  of  my  intention  to  make  an  expedition 
through  the  eastern  counties  of  this  State  and  stating  the  object  of  the 
move,  1 left  this  post  on  the  31st  ultimo,  and  have  just  arrived  here  on 
my  return. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


21 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 

I aui  happy  to  inform  you  that  although  the  original  plan  for  the  cap- 
lure  ot  the  three  regiments  foraging  in  that  section  was,  owing  to  the 
condition  of  the  roads,  frustrated,  the  expedition  will  be  of  great  service 
to  our  cause  in  this  department. 

The  First  Brigade,  under  the  command  of  Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory,  together 
with  the  artillery,  cavalry, and  wagon  train,  was  marched  from  this  point 
across  the  country  to  Washington.  The  balance  of  my  forces,  including 
the  Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Stevenson,  and  the  Third  Brigade,  Colonel 
Lee,  were  embarked  on  transports  and  landed  at  Washington,  where  tliey 
were  joined  by  Colonel  Amory^s  command  on  Saturday  evening,  the  1st 
instant. 

On ‘Sunday  (the  2d)  all  the  forces,  amounting  to  5,000  men,  includ- 
ing twenty-one  pieces  of  artillery,  left  Washington  iimler  my  command 
for  Williamston.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  we  encountered  tlu' 
enemy,  posted  in  a strong  position  at  a small  creek,  called  Little  Creelv'. 
1 immediately  ordered  Colonel  Stevenson,  •commanding  the  Second 
Brigade,  who  was  then  in  the  advance,  to  make  all  haste  in  driving 
them  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  creek,  and  push  on  at  once.  The 
engagement  lasted  for  one  hour,  when  the  enemy,  being  driven  from 
their  rifle-pits  by  the  effective  fire  of  Belger’s  Bliode  Island  battery, 
retired  to  Bawle’s  Mill,  1 mile  farther  on,  where  they  made  anotlier 
stand  in  a recently-constructed  field  work.  Belger’s  battery  and  two 
batteries  of  the  Third  New  York  Artilleiy  were  immediately  ordered 
into  position,  and,  after  a spirited  engagement  of  halt  an  hour,  suc- 
ceeded in  driving  the  enemy  from  their  works  and  across  a bridge, 
which  they  burned.  That  night,  Avhile  the  pioneers  rebuilt  the  burned 
bridge,  the  forces  bivouacked  on  the  field  and  proceeded  the  next 
morning  to  Williamston,  where  we  arrived  about  noon.  We  started 
from  there,  after  a short  rest,  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  bivouacking 
about  5 miles  from  that  ])lace. 

On  the  following  day  we  reached  and  occupied  the  fortifications  at 
Rainbow  Banks,  3 miles  below  Hamilton,  and  then  pushed  on  to  Ham- 
ilton. Here  we  expected  to  find  some  iron-clad  boats  said  to  be  in 
jmocess  of  construction  at  Hamilton,  but  discovered  nothing  of  the  kind. 

On  the  Gth  left  Hamilton  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  toward  Tarborough, 
and  encainped  on  the  same  night  within  10  miles  of  that  ])lace.  It  was 
my  intention  to  pursue  the  enemy  to  Tarborough,  but  the  exhausted 
condition  of  my  men,  most  of  whom  had  been  sick  during  the  last  two 
mouths  and  had  not  yet  recovered  their  strength,  and  tlie  provisions 
being  entirely  exhausted  so  that  1 had  to  subsist  the  command  by  for- 
aging, as  well  as  the  fact  that  the  enemy  were  being  largely  re-enforced 
by  railroad,  changed  my  plans,  and  on  the  following  morning  (the  7th 
instant)  I countermarched  the  column,  reaching  Hamilton  the  same 
night,  where  we  remained  until  the  next  morning,  when  we  marched 
for  Williamston  in  the  midst  of  a severe  snow-storm.  At  Williamston 
we  remained  a day  in  order  to  give  the  men  an  opportunity  to  rest. 

At  dajTight  the  next  day  (10th  instant)  we  started  for  Plymouth, 
where  we  arrived  that  night. 

The  following  day  the  troops  were  all  re-embarked  for  New  Berne. 

During  the  engagement  at  Rawle’s  Mill  and  at  Hamilton  we  captured 
5 prisoners,  who  were  paroled  at  Williamston.  The  loss  on  our  side  con- 
sisted of  6 killed  and  8 wounded. 

The  expedition  was  instrumental  in  saving  the  town  and  forces  at 
Plymouth  from  destruction  and  capture,  as  1 found  upon  my  arrival  at 
the  place  that  the  enemy’s  forces  while  lying  in  the  vicinity,  besides 


22 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


heiu!?  engajjed  in  foraging,  had  reconstructed  a bridge  over  the  creek, 
3 miles  outside  the  town,  for  the  transportation  of  their  artillery  to  the 
opposite  bank.  I also  learned  from  information  gathered  on  the  spot 
that  an  immediate  attack  was  to  have  been  made  on  the  place,  but  upon 
hearing  of  my  advance  from  Washington  and  seeing  the  danger  of  their 
capture  they  beat  a precipitate  and  hasty  retreat. 

The  navy,  under  command  of  Commander  H.  K.  Davenport,  senior 
officer,  CO  operated  heartily  with  me  during  the  whole  time  by  sending 
five  gunboats  to  Hamilton,  and  there  placing  four  boat  howitzers  with 
their  crews  at  my  disposal. 

1 desire  to  mention  particularly  the  efficient  conduct  of  Colonel  Ste- 
venson, commanding  the  Second  Brigade,  and  Colonel  Potter,  of  the 
First  North  Carolina  Union  Volunteers. 

I recommeud  that  Colonel  Stevenson,  for  his  efficient  services  on  this 
march  and  in  the  affair  of  Little  Creek  and  Rawle’s  Mill,  as  well  as  pre- 
vious services  at  the  battles  of  Eoanoke  and  New  Berne,  be  promoted  to 
the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  to  date  from  November  3,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEB, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.-  S.  Army.,  Washington,  J>.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry, commanding  brigade,  of  skirmishes  at  Little  Greek  and  Raivle’s 
Mill. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  November  15,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  result  of  the 
skirmishes  in  which  my  brigade  was  engaged  on  Sunday  night.  No-, 
vein  her  2,  1862 : 

At  about  dusk,  as  the  advance  guard,  composed  of  the  Marine  Artil- 
lery, a company  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut,  and  a portion  of  cavalry, 
were  crossing  Little  Creek,  on  the  road  from  Washington  to  Williamstou, 
they  were  suddenly  fired  upon  by  the  enemy  from  the  opposite  side  of 
the  creek,  concealed  in  the  woods  on  the  right  of  the  road.  The  cav- 
alry and  infantry  retired,  the  Marine  Artillery  opening  fire.  Two  com- 
])anies  of  the  ForU^-fourtli  were  then  ordered  to  deploy  on  the  other  side 
of  the  creek.  In  crossing,  the  enemy  opened  a brisk  fire  on  them  which 
was  immediately  returned  with  good  effect,  but  their  ammunition  get- 
ting wet  they  were  ordered  to  retire,  whicli  was  done  in  good  order, 
with  a loss  of  1 killed  and  6 wounded.  In  the  mean  time  Captain  Bel- 
ger’s  battery  had  taken  ])osition  in  a corn  field  on  the  left  of  the  road 
and  opened  fire,  the  enemy  returning  with  musketry  and  artillery,  which 
the  well-directed  lire  of  Cai)tain  Belger’s  battery  soon  silenced.  Two 
com])anies  of  the  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  were  then  ordered  to  the 
front,  but  the  enemy  again  opened  fire,  killing  1 and  wounding  1.  J 
then  ordered  them  to  fall  back.  Cai)tain  Belger  o])ened  fire  once  more 
on  the  enemy  and  in  a short  time  caused  them  to  retreat. 


CirAi*.  XXX.J 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


23 


The  column  then  moved  forward  slowly,  the  road  being  blocked  np 
by  trees  cut  by  the  retreating  enemy  to  retard  our  advance  which  for 
two  hours  was  very  slow.  A breastwork  was  found  on  our  left  which 
had  the  appearance  of  having  been  hastily  deserted.  The  advance, 
(‘om])osed  of  the  Twenty -fourth  Massachusetts,  soon  came  upon  a bridge 
burning  over  the  creek  by  Eawle’s  Mill.  The  Twenty-fourth,  whilst  ex- 
tinguishing the  flames,  w^ere  fired  upon  by  the  enemy,  with  both  mus- 
ketry and  artillery,  in  position  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  creek  parallel 
with  the  main  road,  the  Twenty-fourth  losing  1 killed  and  2 wounded. 
Captain  Belger  soon  got  his  battery  in  position,  when  he  opened  fire 
and  completely  routed  the  enemy. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  Captain  Belger  and  his  command 
I'or  the  masterly  manner  in  which  his  guns  were  maneuvered,  and  for 
the  coolness  and  discipline  displayed  by  all. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  G.  STEVENSON^, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  Job  Arnold,  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Infantry,  of  sldrmishes 
at  Little  Creek  and  Ramie’s  Mill,  N.  C. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Eeot.  Ehode  Island  Volunteers, 

Camp  Anthony,  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  November  13,  1862. 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Fifth  Ehode  Island  in  skirmishes  of  Sunday,  November  2, 
1862 : 

At  the  commencement  of  the  action  we  received  orders  to  support 
Belger’s  Ehode  Island  batterj^  We  formed  in  line  to  the  right  and 
rear  of  the  battery,  in  the  corn  field  to  the  right  of  tlie  road.  When 
the  battery  moved  to  take  its  position  we  filed  down  the  road  and 
formed  a line  about  20  paces  in  the  rear  of  the  battery  in  the  field  to 
the  left  of  the  road,  our  right  resting  toward  the  road,  and  there  re- 
mained till  ordered  to  follow  the  battery  across  the  ford.  We  had 
nearly  reached  the  road  when  we  were  ordered  to  remain  to  support  a 
section  of  Belger’s  battery,  left  in  its  former  position. 

We  then  formed  in  line  in  rear  of  a rail  fence  to  the  left  and  rear  of 
the  ])ieces,  our  left  resting  on  the  woods.  As  soon  as  the  battery  was 
ordered  forward  we  joined  the  main  column,  and,  crossing  the  ford,  pro- 
ceeded with  it  np  the  road  to  the  rifle-pits  this  side  of  Eawle’s  Mill,  and 
remained  within  supporting  distance  of  the  battery  while  it  was  engaged 
in  shelling  the  enemy.  At  about  1 o’clock  we  entered  the  ri tie-pits  and 
there  remained  until  daylight.  At  one  time  the  regiment  was  under 
quite  heavy  fire,  and  it  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  state  that  both  ofh- 
cers  and  men,  without  exception,  behaved  with  the  most  perfect  coolness. 

JOB  AENOLD, 
Ca])tain,  Commanding. 

Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson, 

Comdg.  Second,  Br  ig.,  First  Biv.,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina. 


24 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


roiiAp.  XXX. 


NOVEMBER  11,  1862. — Demonstration  on  New  Berne,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Thomas  J.  C.  Amory,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding 
Brigade. 

No.  2. — Capt.  J.  Waldo  Denny,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  James  M.  Drennan,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Henry  M.  Richter,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Capt.  John  F.  Moschell,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  J.  G.  Amory.,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry., 

commanding  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  brigade,  First  Division, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  November  12,  1862. 

Major  : I liave  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding,  that  on  yesterday  evening  a report  reached  me  that  a force 
of  the  enemy,  composed  of  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry,  estimated  as 
being  a br  igade  of  at  least  four  or  five  regiments,  had  made  its  appear- 
ance in  front  of  onr  pickets  on  the  Trent  road,  about  Jackson’s  house, 
and  was  gradually  advancing  as  our  pickets  retired  in  this  direction, 
their  supposed  intention  being  an  attack  on  New  Berne  during  the  tem- 
porary absence  of  a portion  of  our  forces.  1 had  returned  from  Plymouth 
with  a portion  of  mj^  brigade  only  a few  hours  previous,  and  Colonel 
Nurtz,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  supposing  himself  still  in  command 
of  the  post,  failed  to  communicate  immediately  to  me  the  information 
he  had  received  of  the  enemy’s  advance,  but  meanwhile,  as  he  afterward 
reported  to  me,  took  the  precaution  to  warn  the  gunboats  and  troops 
here  to  be  in  readiness.  Major  Garrard,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  with 
the  two  mountain  howitzers,  had  also  been  sent  out  on  the  Neuse  road. 

Toward  9 o’clock  p.  m.  Colonel  Kurtz,  by  my  order,  reported  to  me, 
and  at  the  same  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mix,  commanding  Third  New 
York  Cavalry,  gave  me  an  account  of  the  disposition  already  made  of 
our  forces,  and  confirmed  the  information  1 had  previously  received  as 
to  the  force  of  the  enemy. 

At  this  time  the  only  regiments  which  had  returned  from  Plymouth 
were  the  Seventeenth,  Twenty-fourth,  part  of  the  Twenty -third,  and 
about  150  men  of  the  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts.  None  of  the  artil- 
lery had  yet  arrived. 

To  make  the  best  possible  disposition  according  to  my  judgment  of 
the  sujall  force  then  at  my  disposal,  I withdrew  all  the  pickets  on  the 
Trent  road,  picketing  the  line  of  the  edge  of  woods  in  front  of  Fort  Tot- 
ten, extending  the  line  from  the  Trent  to  the  Neuse  River,  keeping 
mounted  patrols  on  the  Neuse  road  as  far  as  the  cross-road  to  railroad, 
withdrawing  the  remainder  of  cavalry  with  mounted  howitzers.  I was 
unaware  at  this  time  that  the  railroad  monitor  was  witli  the  two  com- 
panies of  infantry  at  the  bridge,  0 miles  from  town.  As  soon  as  possi- 
ble I sent  orders  for  this  force  to  fall  back,  but  in  the  mean  time  the 
enemy  had  got  between  them  and  New  Berne,  having  cnt  them  off  by 
the  cross-road  from  Trent  road  past  the  red  house.  At  about  2 o’clock 
a.  m.  tliese  comi)anies  were  attacked,  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded  of  the 
Twentyfourth  Alassachusetts,  and  the  enemy  dis])ersed  by  a shell  thrown 
from  the  monitor. 


Chap.  XXX.l  DEMONSf RATION  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  25 

I recalled  the  company  of  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  stationed 
at  Evans’  Mill,  8 miles  from  here.  They  arrived  this  morning  at  the 
camp  of  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  and  have  since  then  returned. 
1 dispatched  a locomotive  and  train  at  1.30  a.  m.  for  Captain  Lee’s  bat- 
tery (Rocket  Battalion)  and  all  the  available  force,  consisting  of  four 
companies  infantry  and  about  30  cavalry  at  Newport  Barracks.  They 
arrived  at  8 o’clock  this  morning.  The  infantry  and  cavalry  returned 
bj^  the  morning  train ; the  battery  remains  waiting  further  orders. 

The  Ninth  New  Jersey,  Fifth  Rhode  Island,  and  Belger’s  battery 
having  arrived  during  the  night  with  the  gunboat  Hunchback,  I posted 
these  troops  at  various  points  as  reserves  to  the  line  of  pickets  with  or- 
ders to  the  infantry  in  case  of  an  attack  to  occupy  the  rifle-pits  extend- 
ing across  the  peninsula. 

At  daylight  this  morning  I ordered  out  forces  on  the  difierent  roads 
to  reconnoiter  the  position  of  the  enemy,  still  supposing  him  to  be  in 
force  somewhere  in  our  front.  The  whole  cavalry  force  under  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Mix  was  ordered  to  scout  the  Neuse  road  as  far  as  Batchel- 
der’s  Creek. 

Tlie  Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  under  command  of  Major  Chambers, 
advanced  along  the  railroad  as  far  as  the  btidge,  and  leaving  one  com- 
pany to  re-enforce  those  in  charge  of  the  monitor,  returned  this  evening 
without  having  seen  the  enemy. 

From  all  the  information  I have  been  able  to  obtain  I am  inclined  to 
believe  that  the  force  of  the  enemy  which  came  down  upon  our  pickets 
was  much  smaller  than  at  first  supposed,  perhaps  not  over  300  men, 
infantry  and  cavalry.  Whether  or  not  a larger  force  remained  in  their 
rear  I have  not  been  able  to  learn  with  certainty. 

Our  regular  pickets  have  since  been  re-established,  those  on  the  Trent 
road,  consisting  of  four  companies  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts,  extend- 
ing out  as  far  as  Jackson’s.*  The  enemy  burned  the  negro  houses  oppo- 
site Jackson’s  house.  I think  if  one  or  two  light  howitzers  could  be 
posted  with  the  reserves  of  this  force  it  would  be  well. 

I would  also  beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  general  command- 
ing to  the  fact  that  none  of  the  block-houses  are  yet  armed  with  guns. 

The  earthwork  at  the  head  of  county  bridge,  on  Trent  River,  was 
manned  partly  by  a platoon  of  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts. 

A permanent  guard  well  drilled  at  the  heavy  guns  would  be  an  ad- 
vantage. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  J.  C.  AMORY, 
First  Division^  New  Berne,  N,  G. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Division,  New  Berne,  N.  C, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Gapt.  J.  Waldo  Denny,  Twenty-fifth  Massaehusetts  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Camp  Harkness, 

November  14,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  the  11th  instant,  by  your  permis- 
sion I ordered  a party  of  50  men,  under  command  of  Lieut.  J.  M.  Dren- 
naii,  of  Company  f',  of  my  command,  to  ])roceed  by  an  iudi(;ated  route 
to  the  red  house,  and  thence  to  tlie  Trent  load,  at  a point  near  the 


26 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Grapevine  House,  so  called,  near  the  Deep  Gully,  and  from  that  point 
to  return  to  this  camp.  The  report  of  that  scout  by  Lieutenant  Drennan 
is  inclosed  herein  and  made  a part  of  this  report;  also  report  of  Lieut. 
11.  M.  llichter,  officer  of  the  day,  who  rendered  efficient  service  with  a 
small  force  of  pickets  in  defending  our  lines  from  the  attack  of  the  enemy. 

Li)on  learning  of  the  attack  upon  our  lines  at  about  4 o’clock  p.  m.  I 
immediately  caused  my  command  at  this  camp — Companies  F,  G,  and 
K,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Kegiment — to  fall  in,  and  followed 
your  connnand  of  cavalry  to  the  scene  of  action,  dispatching  orders  to 
Company  H,  encamped  1 mile  below  this  camp,  to  follow  with  all  haste. 
L][)on  reaching  the  corner  of  the  road  going  to  the  rear  of  French’s 
lioLise  I met  a private  of  your  command  riding  his  horse  back  from  the 
(mgagement  upon  a run.  He  cried  out  to  me  to  bait,  as  the  enemy  were 
coming  down  fast  and  in  force.  Supposing  the  order  came  from  you  I 
baited  my  command  and  proceeded  on  the  road  alone,  being  mounted, 
until  I reached  Lieutenant  Tew  with  a reserve  infantry  force,  being 
those  wbo  in  ])art  composed  the  scouting  party.  This  officer  stated 
that  bis  men  were  exhausted,  and  that  my  companies  could  be  of  serv- 
ice. 1 immediately  ordered  my  command  forward  and  approached  the 
Ivocky  Run  under  a fire  of  shell  from  the  enemy,  and  turned  to  the 
right  from  the  Trent  road  to  the  rear  of  the  position  held  by  you  with 
your  command.  I reported  to  you  at  this  point,  and  immediately  after 
ordered  Captain  Wageley,  of  Company  G,  to  take  up  position  on  the 
left  of  the  Trent  road  so  as  to  cover  the  bridge  by  his  fire. 

After  remaining  in  our  position  for  fifteen  minutes,  upon  information 
that  the  enemy  were  attempting  to  flank  us  on  our  right,  I withdrew  my 
(U)mmand  to  the  road  in  rear  of  French’s  house,  holding  position  in  the 
narrow  belt  of  timber  upon  that  road  and  the  right  of  Trent  road,  when 
we  were  joined  by  your  command,  taking  position  on  the  road  in  our 
lear.  I sent  a messenger  to  Captain  Wageley  informing  him  of  our 
change  of  position  and  ordering  him  to  join  us  in  case  of  any  strong 
jittack  upon  him  from  the  front  or  any  appearance  of  an  attack  upon 
onr  flanks. 

At  this  point  Lieutenant  Foster,  in  command  of  Company  H,  Twenty- 
fi  fth  Massachusetts  Regiment,  reported  to  me  with  his  command.  Hold- 
ing this  position  for  some  time  we  finally  retired  from  it,  with  your  ap- 
l)roval,  to  gain  a stronger  position  near  the  wood  west  of  Mr.  Eubanks’ 
lionse.  This  was  a strong  position,  where  I flanked  two  companies 
upon  each  side  of  the  road,  guarding  the  position  so  we  could  not  be 
llank(Ml  on  either  side  without  our  knowledge.  Veiy  soon,  however, 
JMajor  Garrard,  of  your  regiment,  who  had  arrived  and  assumed  com- 
mand, ordered  me  to  retire  with  my  command  to  our  camp,  where  he 
oi-(l(‘r(Hl  me  to  place  two  companies  in  the  clearing  at  Mr.  W'hitford’s 
hous(',  on  the  other  side  of  Blakely’s  Branch,  to  support  a howitzer 
]>Ia(*.ed  in  the  road  at  that  point.  He  also  ordered  me  to  ])lace  two  com- 
])anies  in  the  yard  of  tlie  Harrison  liouse,  both  of  which  orders  were 
ex(*cnted.  In  about  thirty  minutes  Major  Garrard  informed  me  he  had 
orders  from  Colonel  Kurtz,  in  commaml  at  Kew  Berne,  to  retire  to  that 
city,  and  ordered  me  to  retire  with  ray  command,  taking  such  valuables 
as  we  could  carry.  We  withdrew  in  order  and  marched  as  far  as  the 
belt  of  woods  on  the  Trent  road,  next  to  Fort  Totten,  where  I was  or- 
dered to  deploy  my  detachment,  which  I did.  In  a short  time  I receiv^ed 
ord(‘rs  from  Major  Gai’rard  to  withdraw  to  the  (aty  with  my  command, 
Avhich  I did,  taking  quarters  tor  the  night  at  Camp  Oliver.* 

The  next  morning,  upon  orders  from  Colonel  Amory,  commanding 
brigade,  1 returned  to  this  camj),  tinding  the  tents  unmolested. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


DEMONSTRATION  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N*.  C. 


27 


Only  two  of  ray  coramand  were  slightly  wounded,  one  in  the  face  and 
another  in  the  left  hand. 

1 desire  to  call  attention  particularly  to  the  coolness  and  bravery  of 
Lieutenant  Drennan  and  the  raen  under  his  comraand,  Avho  twice  drove 
back  an  overpowering  force  of  tlie  enemy  and  held  them  in  check  for 
nearly  or  quite  an  hour  and  a half.  I thiidt  the  advance  ot  the  einatiy 
would  have  been  disastrous  to  ns  had  it  not  been  for  the  brave  conduct 
of  Lieutenant  Drennan. 

All  the  officers  and  raen  of  ray  command  behaved  themselves  gallantly 
under  lire. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

J.  W.  DE^^NY, 

Captain,  25th  Massachusetts,  Commanding  Detachment. 

Captain  Moschell, 

Third  New  Yorlc  Cavalry,  Commanding  Post. 

[Indorsement.] 

Received  November  15, 1862,  10  a.  m.,  and  approved.  Forwarded  to 
Colonel  Amory,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts. 

JKO.  F.  MOSCHELL, 
Captain,  Commanding  Outpost. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  James  M.  Drennan,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Camp  Harkness,  November  — , 1802. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Tuesday  morning  I caused 
to  be  detailed  by  your  orders  from  the  three  companies  in  this  camp  a 
force  of  50  men,  3 corporals,  and  3 sergeants,  with  Lieutenant  Tew,  and 
started  on  a foraging  expedition,  traveling  as  near  as  possible  the  route 
indicated  by  you. 

We  met  with  little  success  until  we  arrived  near  the  red  house, 
where  we  came  onto  cattle  and  swine.  We  soon  shot  down  and  dressed 
what  we  wanted  and  started  for  camp,  taking  the  road  nearest  to  Deep 
Gully.  Being  in  the  enemy’s  lines  we  advanced  with  caution.  Soon, 
or  about  3 o’clock  p.  m.,  my  advance  guard  reported  a force  of  cavalry, 
which  I discovered  as  the  enemy’s.  I deployed  part  of  my  command  as 
skirmishers  in  the  woods,  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  with  the  remainder 
under  Lieutenant  Tew  as  a reserve,  and  advanced  immediately  on  the 
place  we  last  saw  them.  I gave  orders  not  to  fire  unless  fired  on.  As  we 
came  out  on  the  Trent  road  the  enemy  were  leaving  the  house  at  the 
grapevine,  near  the  gully,  and  made  all  speed  for  the  latter  place.  I did 
not  deem  it  prudent  to  follow  them,  for  many  reasons,  but  started  for 
camp,  throwing  out  an  advance  and  rear  guard.  After  stopping  about 
fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  to  rest  about  1 mile  this  side,  we  resumed  our 
march  for  camp,  and  had  barely  time  to  get  inside  our  vedettes  when 
they  attacked  in  force,  driving  in  the  outpost. 

1 immediately  ordered  our  wagons  to  camj),  and  with  6 men  went  to 
the  front  to  give  them  check.  My'men  labored  under  the  disadvantage 
of  having  the  bright  sun  in  their  eyes  and  on  their  ])ieces,  but  we  drove 
tliem  from  the  open  field  into  the  woods.  They  rallied.  1 sent  for  the 
remainder  of  the  first  platoon  and  deployed  them  as  skirmishers.  A 


28  NORTH  CAROiHNA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CiiAr.  XNX. 

) 

brisk  fire  was  kept  up  for  some  time  by  both  i)arties  until  tlie  enemy 
•^ave  way  and  ran  for  tbe  woods  aj^ain.  We  followed  them,  driving 
them  baek  in  the  woods  out  of  sight  (but  not  out  of  hearing,  as  much 
abusive  language  passed  back  and  forth).  We  occupied  the  ground 
held  by  them  for  about  ten  minutes.  Ijudged  their  game  was  to  draw 
us  on."  I had  previously  heard  the  rumbling  of  artillery  back  of  them,  ^ 
and  I fell  back  on  the  rise  of  ground  to  my  first  position  in  close  order. 
They  charged  down  the  road  to  the  i)osition  they  had  occupied  and  I 
had  just  left,  and  deployed  again,  I doing  the  same  behind  the  fence  in 
my  position.  In  this  relative  position  the  firing  was  brisk  on  both  sides. 
The  enemy  opened  with  two  pieces  of  artillery  and  a heavy  line  of 
skirmishers,  throwing  out  a force  on  both  my  flanks.  I remained  as  long 
as  I deemed  it  prudent,  then  fell  back  in  good  order  on  the  Jackson 
house,  and  finally  crossed  the  creek  and  took  up  a ijosition  just  this 
side,  removing  the  planks  from  the  bridge,  &c. 

I remained  in  this  last  position  until  Captain  MoschelPs  cavalry  com- 
pany came  up  and  Lieutenant  Eichter,  with  the  reserve  pickets;  also 
your  own  command. 

My  force  kept  the  enemy  in  check  about  one  hour  and  a half  in  the 
fight  and  I think  three  hours  from  the  time  we  first  saw  them.  The 
men  of  my  command  behaved  splendidly  under  fire  and  deserved  much 
credit. 

You  knowing  so  well  the  lay  of  the  land  I have  not  appended  a dia- 
gram. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

J.  M.  DEENEAN, 

Lieut.  Comdg.  Co.  F,  Twenty -fifth  Regiment  Mass.  Yols. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Denny, 

Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 


Ho.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Henry  M.  Richter.^  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Harrison’s  House, 

November  12,  1862. 

Sir  : Yesterday  afternoon  at  about  3 o’clock  I heard  firing  in  front 
of  the  outpost  while  I was  visiting  the  pickets.  I supposed  the  firing 
came  from  the  foraging  ptirty  which  had  left  camp  in  the  morning  at  8 • 
o’clock,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Drennan,  so  1 rode  slowly  back, 
waiting  for  an  increase  or  continuation  of  the  firing.  About  a mile  this 
side  of  Jackson’s  house  I heard  heavy  mnsketry,  and  was  informed  by 
a messenger  that  the  outpost  was  attacked  b^^  infantry,  cavalry,  and 
artiller^^,  while  Lieutenant  Drennan  held  the  Jackson  house  witb  his 
fatigue  party.  I at  once  dispatched  all  my  ])ickets  double-quick  to  tlie 
bridge  about  oO  ])aces  this  side  of  Jackson’s  house,  where  1 relieved 
Lieutenant  Drennan,  who  took  the  reserve,  deploying  my  men  16  strong 
as  skirmishers  and  holding  bridge  and  creek. 

The  enemy  in  front  of  me  was  infantry,  covered  by  an  elevation  of 
the  ground,  so  that  1 had  no  object  to  fire  on.  The  fire  of  the  enemy 
had  no  elfect  wliatever,  as  my  men  laid  low  and  were  covered  by  trees. 
We  only  fired  a few  shots  at  the  enemy  when  lie  showed  himself,  with 
what  eflect  1 cannot  say. 


Chap.  XXX.]  DEMONSTRATION  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  29 

Lieiiteiitant  Ebbs,  of  the  Third  IS'ew  York  Cavalry,  informed  me  that 
the  rebels  were  trying  to  flank  me  by  the  way  of  Taylor’s  house  in  strong 
force.  I kept  the  creek  about  ten  minutes  longer,  and  as  I could  not 
see  any  re  enforcements  on  our  side  (the  cavalry  having  taken  another 
position  not  known  by  me)  I went  slowly  in  retreat  across  the  held 
toward  the  roads,  the  enemy  charging  in  line  of  battle  at  my  former 
position,  their  shots  having  no  eflect  on  my  men.  At  the  same  time 
the  right  of  the  enemy  charged  the  bridge  with  cavalry,  and  placing  a 
howitzer  on  a blutf  on  the  right  of  the  road  they  sent  a few  shells  over 
us  without  doing  any  damage. 

At  French’s  gate  I formed  my  squad  in  line  on  one  side’  of  the  road  to 
give  you  a cliance  to  pass  down  with  your  fresh  command,  which  was 
approaching  me.  , As  my  men  were  tired  out  by  running  up  to  the  place 
of  action  I took  position  in  your  rear,  tlirowing  out  pickets  to  the  right 
of  the  road  toward  French’s  house,  which  road  leads  to  Taylor’s,  Lieu- 
tenant Drennan  doing  the  same  on  tlie  left  of  the  road  leading  to  the 
mill  near  Jackson’s  house.  There  I reported  to  you  when  the  battalion 
fell  back,  and  dismissed  u)y  pickets  to  their  respective  companies. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

HEFTKY  M.  RICHTER, 

First  Lieut.  Twenty-fifth  liegt.  Mass.  Vols..,  Officer  of  the  Day. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Denny,  Commanding  Battalion. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Capt.  John  F.  Moschellj  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Outpost  on  Trent  Road, 

Harrison’’ s House.,  November  13,  1862. 

On  the  11th  instant  I authorized  Lieutenant  Drennan  and  Lieutenant 
Tew,  of  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts,  to  go  out  near  the  red  house  to 
get  some  fresh  meat,  they  having  failed  to  supply  us  any  from  the  sub- 
sistence department  at  New  Berne.  On  the  way  back  they  came  across 
a force  of  rebels,  with  three  cannon,  some  cavalry,  and  infantry.  They 
kept  them  at  bay  from  2.30  p.  m.  until  3.30,  and  fell  back  to  my  cavalry 
vedettes ; they  fired  at  them,  and,  the  infantry  assisting  them,  kept  them 
back  until  word  was  sent  to  me  at  this  place.  I immediately  went  to 
their  assistance  with  the  balance  of  my  force.  I also  sent  word  down 
to  the  commanding  otficer  at  New  Berne,  Colonel  Kurtz;  he  sent  Major 
(larrard  out  with  three  more  companies  of  cavalry  and  the  two  mount- 
ain liowitzers  belonging  to  the  regiment,  when  I was  relieved  from  com- 
mand by  him.  He  ordered  my  forces  to  fall  back  to  camp  and  after- 
waid  to  New  Berne,  leaving  ail  the  Government  and  private  property 
belonging  to  the  command.  Fortunately  the  rebels  did  not  come  down 
any  farther  than  the  Jackson  house. 

As  tar  as  1 could  ascertain  the  enemy’s  force  consisted  of  two  com- 
panies of  artillery,  four  of  cavalry,  and  three  or  four  regiments  of  in- 
tantry.  It  is  re])orted  they  are  out  about  8 miles  from  New  Berne,  on 
the  Trent  road,  now. 

Respectfully  reported.  ‘ 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  4&c., 

JNO.  F.  MOSCHELL, 

Captain.,  Third  New  York  Cavalry.,  Comdg.  Outpost. 

Major-General  Foster. 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XXX. 


JO 


Headquarters  Outpost  at  Harrison’s  House, 

On  Trent  Eoad,  N.  6’.,  November  13,  1802. 

Colonel:  I Lave  the  honor  to  make  the  folio vyiag  report  for  the  in- 
formation of  the  commanding  general : 

On  Tuesday,  the  11th  instant,  I gave  Captain  Heuiiy  ])ermissiou  to 
send  Lieutenants  Hrennan  and  Tew,  with  50  men,  out  beyond  the  lines 
toward  the  red  house  to  get  some  fresh  meat  (the  subsistence  depart- 
ment having  failed  to  sup])ly  them  any  for  some  time)  for  his  detach- 
ment. On  their  way  back  they  came  across  a force  of  the  enemy  which 
they  drove  back  toward  the  Deep  Gully  about  3 o’clock  p.  m. 

Lieutenant  Brennan  then  came  on  toward  camp,  and  when  he  arrived 
at  onr  outpost,  or  vedettes,  they  were  followed  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry 
and  some  artillery,  which  they  posted  near,  and  fired  a couple  of  shot 
with  a G-pounder.  Lieutenant  Brennan  made  a stand,  together  with 
our  cavalry,  and  fired  several  rounds,  but  finally  falling  back  to  the 
Jackson  Creek  Bridge.  One  of  the  cavalry  vedettes  (Henry  Raucier) 
was  wounded  in  the  calf  of  his  leg  (flesh  wound). 

Information  being  sent  me  that  we  were  attacked  on  the  outpost  by 
cavidry,  artillery,  and  infantry,  I immediately  proceeded  with  my  com- 
])uny,  and,  ordering  Captain  Benny  with  his  infantry  detachment  to 
follow,  1 arrived  at  the  creek  bridge  just  as  Lieutenant  Brennan  had 
crossed,  and  a shot  from  the  cannon  striking  near  did  not  deem  it  pru- 
dent to  take  my  whole  force  across. 

Lieutenant  Ebbs  and  a couple  of  my  company  went  across  to  see  what 
position  they  were  in.  I had  four  men  tear  up  the  planks  of  the  bridge 
to  make  it  impassable  for  the  artillery  to  cross. 

L formed  my  men  on  the  right  of  tbe  road  and  sent  Lieutenant  Ebbs 
with  two  or  three  men  behind  Mr.  French’s  house  to  the  road  leading 
to  the  red  house,  and  a couple  to  the  road  leading  toward  Taylor’s  to 
lirevent  a flank  movement. 

i also  ordered  Lieutenant  Brennan  to  fall  back  a little,  for  his  men  and 
himself  were  completely  jaded  out.  When  Lieutenant  Eichter  came  up 
with  a squad  I ordered  him  to  deploy  on  my  right  as  skirmishers.  Then 
I withdrew  a little  more  ou  account  of  the  enemy  coming  up  in  full  force 
with  infantry  and  forming  in  front  of  us,  and  their  cavalry  on  their  left, 
with  a piece  of  artillery. 

A ])iece  of  artillery  at  the  Jackson  house  was  worked  with  shell,  which 
exploded  over  the  left  flank  of  my  company.  At  this  time  (it  getting 
quite  dark)  1 ordered  Captain  AVageley  and  his  company  (G)  on  the  left 
of  the  road  to  watch  the  bridge  and  to  prevent  their  crossing  at  the 
mill,  and  ordered  Captain  Benny  with  the  balance  of  the  infantry  to 
fall  back  to  the  junction  of  the  road  leading  from  Trent  road  to  the  red 
house  this  side  Air.  French’s  house,  and  afterward  fall  back  with  my  com- 
pany to  the  house  known  as  Ben.  Ansley’s,  this  side  French’s,  but  leav- 
ing nine  mounted  vedettes  at  three  points  (three  in  each  jilace).  At  this 
jilace  Sergeant  Middaugh,  in  chai'ge  of  Alajor  Garrard’s  advance  guard, 
came  up.  I ordered  Captain  Benny  and  the  infantry  to  fall  back  and  form 
on  the  right  and  left  of  the  road  at  the  5-mile  ])ost,  and  ordered  Lieu- 
tenant Ebbs  to  form  my  company  in  rear  of  them  behind  a skirt  of  pine 
timber.  At  this  time  Lieutenant  Chamberlain  came  up  and  delivered  a 
message  from  Alajor  Garrard  for  me  to  have  the  infantry  fall  back  to 
camj),  and  after  the  infantry  fell  back  to  camp  to  have  my  company  fall 
back  and  cover  their  retreat.  1 posted  at  six  difiei  ent  places  with  three 
mounted  vedettes  in  a ]dace,  and  after  visiting  them  went  back  and  re- 
ported to  Alajor  Garrard. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


OPERATIONS  ABOUT  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


:u 


JMijJor  Garrjird  immediately  ordered  me  to  eall  in  ail  my  vedettes, 
wliieli  I immediately  did.  * 

One  of  tlie  vedettes  lost  bis  revolving  ritle  in  falling  back;  the  strap 
broke  and  in  the  dark  could  not  find  it. 

The  men  behaved  well  in  every  instance.  Lieutenant  Tibbs  saw  three 
regimental  colors  and  three  cannons  drawn  by  mules,  and  four  guidons. 

1 have  the  honor,  colonel,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

JNO.  F.  MOSOHELL, 

Captain,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  Commanding  Outpost. 

Col.  John  Mix, 

Commaiiding  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 


NOVEMBER  12-14,  1862. — Operations  about  Suffolk,  Va.,  including  skir- 
mishes (12th)  at  Providence  Church  and  (14th)  at  Blackwater  Bridge 
and  Zuni,  Va. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Feck,  JJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  at  Sujfolk. 

Suffolk,  November  14,  1802. 

About  11  o’clock  p.  m.  on  the  12th  Colonel  Claiborne,  with  300  men, 
attacked  our  picket  of  New  York  Mounted  Eifles  at  Providence  Church, 
and  was  repulsed,  retiring  to  the  Blackwater.  Last  evening  the  same 
picket  was  fired  upon  again.  Colonel  Hodge  was  sent  out  to  recou- 
noiter,  and  reached  Windsor  about  midnight.  At  dawn  he  moved  for 
Blackwater  Bridge j had  a brisk  skirmish;  drove  their  guard  over; 
crossed  a few  men ; captured  three  tents  complete,  canteens,  camp  ket- 
tles, two  muskets,  and  all  the  camp  equipage  of  the  guard  of  30  men. 
Strong  breastworks  were  discovered  a short  distance  back  from  the 
ford.  He  then  moved  up  to  Joyner’s  Ford,  which  was  .barricaded ; 
Next  to  Zuni,  where  a strong  guard  offered  much  resistance.  After 
bringing  up  his  howitzers  they  fell  back.  They  have  strong  rifle-pits 
there,  from  which  they  kept  up  a sharp  fire  upon  our  dismounted  skir- 
mishers. All  their  cooking  utensils,  seven  rifles,  cartridge.-boxes,  a 
sword,  and  many  other  things,  with  two  of  the  guard,  fell  into  our 
hands.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  much  greater  than  ours,  which  is 
3 wounded. 

These  affairs  are  very  handsome,  and  follow  close  upon  the  two  late 
ones  near  Zuni  and  Franklin. 

I trust  these  operations  will  meet  your  approval. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Hix, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia. 


32 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[CHAr.  XXX, 


NOVEMBER  16,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Gloucester  Point,  Va. 

TiEFORXS- 


No.  1. — Brig.  Geu.  Henry  M.  Naglee,  U.  S.  Airay,  commanding  at  Yorktown. 

No.  2. — Col.  William  W.  H.  Davis,  One  hundred  and  fourth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee^  U.  S.  Army.,  Commanding  at  York- 
town. 


Headquarters, 
Yorktoivn,  Va,  November  16,  1862. 

Colonel  : I would  respectfully  report  that  at  4 o’clock  this  moruiug^ 
a dash  was  made  upon  the  picket  line  at  Gloucester  Point,  and  1 man 
of  the  One  hundred  and  fourth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  was  killed,  3 
were  wounded,  and  3 made  prisoners. 

The  picket  was  an  advanced  one  of  12  persons,  made  by  Colonel 
Davis,  beyond  supporting’  distance  from  the  main  picket  line,  within 
the  last  four  days,  and  without  my  knowledge  j and  that,  although  ad- 
vised at  11  p.  m.,  live  hours  in  advance,  that  ihe  enemy  were  lurking 
ui)on  the  road,  no  proper  order  was  given  to  support  the  advance  picket 
or  to  withdraw  it. 

This  attack  was  made  after  Captain  Hall  had  gone  over  the  same 
road  at  midnight,  as  reported  to  you  by  this  mail,  and  nothing  was 
seen  or  known  by  either  of  the  movements  of  the  other. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 


Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Col.  D.  T.  Van  Buren, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  William  W.  H.  Davis,  One  hundred  and  fourth  Pennsyl- 
vania Infantry. 

Headquarters, 

Gloueester  Point,  Va.,  November  16,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  last  night  about  11  o’clock 
1 received  information  through  a contraband  that  a force  of  rebel  cavalry, 
said  to  be  600  strong,  was  on  the  road  to  Gloucester,  2 miles  in  front  of 
my  picket  lines.  1 immediately  sent  two  companies  to  strengthen  the 
pickets,  and  wrote  a note  to  Major  Hall,  Avho  with  his  force  was  still 
within  the  lines,  giving  the  information  to  him.  He  had  lelt,  however, 
before  my  messenger  reached  his  camp,  and  didniot  get  the  information 
which  might  have  proved  valuable  to  him. 

Things  remained  quiet  until  about  4 o’clock  this  morning,  when  a picket 
stationed  on  the  Gloucester  road  discovered  a ])arty  of  cavalry  approach- 
ing them.  AVhen  challenged  they  answered,  lirst,  “Eederals^”  and  then 
“One  hundred  and  seventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,”  and  immediatelv 
l)oured  two  volleys  into  the  pickets  drawn  up  in  the  road.  Our  loss  is  *1 
killed,  3 wounded,  and  3 missing.  It  is  not  known  whether  any  loss  was 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  FRANKLIN,  VA. 


33 


snstaiiied  by  tbe  enemy,  but  a colored  man  who  was  nearby  thinks  some 
of  them  were  hurt.  The  man  who  was  killed  was  first  made  prisoner, 
bat  was  shot  because  he  refused  to  mount  behind  a cavalryman.  His 
body  was  left  lying  in  the  road,  but  was  recovered  and  brought  into 
camp  this  morning 

A negro  came  to  the  lines  this  morning  and  states  that  the  enemy  was 
about  75  strong,  and  w'as  concealed  near  the  Hook  store  waiting  for  our 
cavalry  to  pass  out.  A corporal  who  lately  deserted  from  the  One  hun- 
dredth New  York  Eegiment  was  with  the  party  of  the  enemy  and  direct- 
ing their  movements.  The  point  where  the  attack  was  made  is  about  a 
third  of  a mile  outside  the  iiicket  lines,  and  the  men,  12  in  number,  were 
thrown  out  as  an  advance  post.  I am  informed  that  when  the  enemy 
left  the  ground  they  announced  that  they  intended  to  return  to  King 
and  Queen  County. 

If  I learn  anything  additional  I will  immediately  communicate  it  to 
you. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  H.  DAVIS, 

Colonel  One  hundred  and  fourth  Pennsylvania  Vols.^  Comdg. 

Capt.  GEORas  H.  Johnston, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


NOVEMBER  17,  1862.— Affair  near  Carrsville,  Va. 

Report  of  Majl  Gen.  John  J.  Pech,  U.  8.  Army. 

Suffolk,  November  17,  1862. 

General:  At  noon  Major  Wetherill  with  150  men  came  upon  400 
cavalry  half-way  between  Holland’s  Corners  and  Carrsville.  He  re- 
l>orted  fighting  and  retiring  slowl}^  From  not  hearing  from  him  I in- 
fer that  he  is  all  right. 

My  exi)edition  left  at  1 o’clock  to-day  and  I hope  for  results. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


NOVEMBER  18,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Franklin,  Va. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peehy  U.  8.  Ar7ny^  commanding  at  8uffolk. 

Suffolk,  Nove^yibqr  18,  1802 — 1 p.  m. 

General  Wessells  reports  that  the  enemy  has  been  re-enforced  at 
Franklin  in  infantry  and  artillery,  and  that  he  is  strong  there.  The 
fords  have  been  blocked,  the  approaches  closed,  and  the  crossing  is 
had.  A smart  skirmish  at  the  river,  with  only  a horse  wounded.  It 
looks  like  rain. 


General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 
3 R R — VOL  XVIII 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


34 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  Novemher  18, 18G2. 

General  : I advised  you  this  afternoou  of  the  reports  from  Wessells. 
The  boats  broke  last  night  en  route,  and  they  were  not  able  to  make  the 
bridge  support  the  artillery.  During  the  morning  the  enemy  were  in 
order  of  battle  back  from  where  he  proposed  to  cross.  He  has  shelled 
their  camps.  About  noon  he  moved  down  in  front  of  Franklin  and 
was  shelling  the  place.  They  are  superior  in  numbers,  and  he  thinks 
liave  from  eight  to  twelve  pieces.  Only  one  wounded.  Have  advised 
him  to  move  in  near  the  Deserted  House  and  come  in  to-morrow.  A 
larger  infantry  force  is  needed  for  this  position  to  enable  us  to  cross 
that  river  in  the  presence  of  the  force  there,  and  the  supports  that  may 
be  sent  by  two  railways.  They  could  easily  have  re-enforced  from 
Weldon  during  the  day  or  from  Wakefield  or  Ivor. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


NOVEMBER  22,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Williamsburg,  Va. 


Keport  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  Novemher  23, 1802. 

A reconnaissance  was  made  from  Williamsburg  yesterday  toward  the 
Ohickahominy.  Killed  2 and  captured  6 of  the  enemy  and  took  11 
horses.  No  loss  on  our  side. 


Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


NOVEMBER  25,  1862. — Capture  of  the  United  States  steamer  Ellis,  New 

River,  N.  C. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Defenses 

of  Cape  Fear  River.* 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  C.,  Novemher  28,  1802. 

General  : I have  the  pleasure  of  reporting  that  Captain  Newkirk, 
of  the  cavalry,  and  Captain  Adams,  wdth  a section  of  a field  battery, 
have  destroyed  a steam  gunboat  of  the  enemy  on  New'  River.  Her 
(uew'  escaped.  Her  armament,  ammunition,  small-arms,  and  many  ar- 
ticles of  value  will  be  saved.  The  enemy  attempted  to  lire  her,  but 
being  of  iron  but  little  damage  wms  done.  Great  credit  is  due  to  Cap- 
tains Newkirk  and  Adams  and  their  officers  and  men. 

V ery  resiiectful  1 y , 


W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 
jMaj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  , 

Commanding,  &c.,  Richmond,  Va.  / 


* For  reports  of  Coinniaudcr  II.  K.  DavGiix)ort  and  Lient.  William  B.  Cashing,  U.  S, 
Navy,  see  Animal  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  1,  180;^. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  ON  .THE  BLACKWATER. 


35 


DECEMBER  2,  1862. — Skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  near  Franklin,  Va. 

E,E3?ORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Ocii.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Dcxmrtmcut  of  Virginia. 
No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Pock,  U.  S.  Army. 

Ko.  1. 

Keports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix.,  U.  8.  Army^  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  Decemher  2,  1802. 
All  expedition  sent  out  from  Suffolk  yesterday  by  Major-General 
Peck  captured  to-day  the  celebrated  Petersburg  Eocket  Battery,  which 
was  taken  from  our  army,  and  drove  the  enemy  across  the  Blackwater 
at  Franklin.  We  have  thirty  odd  firisoners,  and  are  jiicking  up  more  in 
the  woods.  Alany  of  the  enemy  killed  and  wounded;  our  loss  trifling. 
I will  furnish  details  by  mail. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe j Va.^  Decemher  4,  1802. 

General  : I sent  you  a message  the  day  before  yesterday,  by  tele- 
graph, in  regard  to  an  action  near  the  Blackwater  between  a party  of 
the  enemy  and  a portion  of  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  sent 
out  from  Suffolk  by  Major-General  Peck  the  previous  day.  Colonel 
Spear,  of  that  regiment,  who  commanded  the  expedition,  returned  last 
night,  bringing  back  his  entire  force,  consisting,  in  addition  to  apart  of 
his  own  regiment,  of  portions  of  the  Thirty-ninth  Illinois,  Colonel  Os- 
born; Sixty-second  Ohio,  Colonel  Pond;  One  hundred  and  thirtieth 
New  York,  Colonel  Gibbs;  Sixth  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Follausbee; 
One  hundred  and  third  Pennsylvania,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Maxwell;  two 
sections  of  Davis’  Massachusetts  Light  Battery  and  one  section  of  How- 
ard’s battery.  Fourth  U.  S.  Artillery;  in  all,  about 3,100  men.  The  ex- 
l)edition  was  sent  out  in  pursuance  of  the  object,  heretofore  ex])lained 
to  you,  of  keeping  a part  of  my  force  in  constant  motion,  and  also  to  as- 
certain the  truth  of  information  reported  to  Major-General  Peck  in  regard 
to  the  movement  of  the  enemy  in  the  vicinity  of  Franklin.  While  Colonel 
Si)ear’s  force  was  breakfasting  his  pickets  were  driven  in,  and  a charge 
wiis  made  by  about  500  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  with  a section  of  a rocket 
battery.  It  was  gallantly  met  by  Colonel  Spear,  at  the  head  of  300  of 
his  regiment,  and  the  enemy,  thrown’  into  confusion  by  his  impetuous 
attack,  recoiled,  and  was  driven  over  his  floating  bridge  at  Franklin, 
which  is  protected  by  a battery  of  heavy  guns.  Ten  or  12  of  the  enemy 
were  killed  and  20  were  taken  prisoners.  We  also  captured  14  horses, 
a (juantity  of  harness,  7 saddles,  42  rifles,  70  rockets  of  12  and  15  pounds, 
and  other  miiior  articles.  We  sustained  no  loss  either  in  men  or  horses. 
General  Peck  speaks  in  high  terms  of  the  gallantry  of  Colonel  Spear, 
who  has  distinguished  himself  on  more  than  one  occasion  by  his  prompt 
and  spirited  movements;  and  the  colonel  mentions  with  coramendatioi} 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  8.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


I Chap.  XXX. 


36  ' 


Major  Stratton  and  Lieutenants  Bnttz  and  Koper,  of  liis  regiment.  The 
enemy  retreated  so  suddenly  that  our  artillery  and  infantry  were  not 
hronght  into  action.  The  enemy’s  lioating  bridge  swings  from  one  bank 
of  the  Blaekwater,  which  is  verj^  narrow,  to  the  other,  and  is  withdrawn 
Irom  our  side  as  soon  as  his  forces  cross. 

Col.  J.  B.  Griffin  and  Major  Boggs  commanded  the  insurgents.  Gen- 
eral K.  A.  Pryor  has  just  taken  command  at  Franklin. 

With  the  means  of  crossing,  the  enemy’s  position  at  Franklin  might 
easily  have  been  attacked,  and  in  all  probability  carried. 

I am,  very  respectfull}^,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major- General. 

]\laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Ualleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  PeeJe,  U.  S.  Army. 


Suffolk,  December  2,  1862. 

Our  expedition,  of  which  I advised  you  yesterday,  has  been  a great 
success.  Spies  were  sent  in  and  a trap  was  sprung,  but  the  rebels  were 
caught.  They  attacked  the  advance  this  morning  be3mnd  Carrsville. 
We  repulsed  them,  capturing  the  famous  Petersburg  Pocket  Battery, 
and  drove  the  whole  force  over  the  river.  We  are  now  shelling  Frank- 
lin, having  no  means  of  crossing. 

General  Poger  A.  Pryor  in  command  at  Franklin  ; Col.  Joel  P.  Griffin 
commanding  the  cavalry  and  Mnjor  Boggs  the  artillery;  thirty  odd 
prisoners  now,  more  being  found  in  the  woods;  many  of  the'enem^^ 
killed  and  wounded.  Our  loss  trifling. 

Colonel  Spear  led  his  cavaliy  most  gallantly  upon  the  enemy’s  ad- 
vance. 


jMajor-General  Hix,  Fort  Monroe. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  December  2,  1862. 

In  view  of  operations  elsewhere,  and  of  the  fact  that  Spear  has  no 
means  of  crossing  except  with  much  loss  and  some  risk  of  failure,  1 
have  directed  him  to  hold  on  and  shell  the  idace,  coming  in  to-night. 
The  vidory  is  now  complete,  but  a repulse  in  crossing  would  take  off 
the  edge.  The  rebels  liave  been  tearing  up  the  rails,  so  that  we  are 
not  able  to-da^'  to  use  more  than  8 or  10  miles.  Parties  are  out  at 
work.  Will  we  get  any  pontoons  ? 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

JMnj or- General  J)jx,  Fort  Monroe. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  3,  1862. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st,  contrabands  reported  that  the  rebels  were 
throwing  up  works  near  the  railway,  1 miles  this  side  of  Franklin,  I 


SkiRMIStlES  A'V  AND  ABOUT  ZUNI,  VA.  3t 


ordered  Colonel  Si)ear  to  proceed  there  during’  the  night  with  portions 
ot*  the  Thirty-ninth  Illinois,  Colonel  Osborn;  Sixty-second  Ohio,  Colonel 
Uond;  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  ^ew  York,  Colonel  Gibbs;  Sixth 
Massachusetts,  Colonel  Follansbee ; One  hundred  and  third  Pennsyl- 
vania, Lieutenant-Colonel  Maxwell;-  two  sections  of  Davis’,  one  of 
Howard’s  artillery,  and  a portion  of  his  cavalry — in  all  3,100— for  infor- 
mation, and  to  drive  off  any  force  that  he  found  there. 

No  works  were  found,  but  while  breakfasting  his  pickets  were  driven 
in  and  a furious  charge  was  made  by  some  500  cavalry,  with  a section 
of  a rocket  battery. 

Colonel  Spear  took  300  of  his  cavalry  and  gallantly  led  them  upon 
the  head  of  the  column,  which  recoiled  under  this  imx)etuous  attack. 
Confusion  ensued;  many  jumped  off'  and  fled  into  the  woods,  while 
others  i^ut  about  for  Franklin. 

The  cannoneers  and  horses  being  disabled,  the  gallant  Pennsylvanians 
made  quick  work  with  the  battery,  and  chased  the  Georgian  squadrons 
to  their  floating  bridge  under  the  guns  of  Franklin.  Besides  driving 
the  enemy  over  the  river  and  cai^turing  his  section,  10  or  12  were  killed 
and  20  made  x)risouers.  Fourteen  horses,  harness,  7 saddles,  42  rifles, 
70  rockets  of  12  and  15  i)Ound,  and  other  minor  articles  fell  into  our 
hands. 

No  portion  of  the  artillery  or  infantry  was  called  upon,  and  1 am 
happy  to  say  that  no  loss  of  men  or  horses  was  sustained.  Col.  J.  E. 
Griffin  and  Major  Boggs  commanded.  General  E.  A.  Pryor  had  just 
assumed  command  and  was  making  his  reconnaissance  toward  Suffolk. 

This  brilliant  affair  entitles  Colonel  Spear  to  great  credit  and  adds 
to  his  already  high  reputation.  He  m>entious  favorably  Major  Stratton 
and  Lieutenants  Buttz  and  Eoper. 

Very  respectfully. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Oommanding  Department  of  Virginia^  &c. 


DECEMBER  8-12,  1862. — Reconnaissances  from  Suffolk  to  the  Blackwater 
and  skirmishes  at  and  about  Zuni,  Va. 

V R,E:P»OIiTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  .Joliii  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  Virginia. 
No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  .Tolin  .J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Suffolk,  Va. 

No.  3. — Capt.  .J.  II.  Sikes,  Company  D,  Seventh  Confederate  States  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen,  John  A.  Dix^  V.  8.  Army,^  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroi-],  Va.,  Decemher  8,  1802. 
The  troops  in  this  department  will  be  ready  to  move  at  short  notice. 
Banks’  expedition,  which  came  here  wanting  large  amounts  of  quarter- 
master, commissary,  and  ordnance  stores,  has  drawn  ns  very  low,  but 
fresh  supplies  have  been  ordered.  In  furtherance  of  Foster’s  move- 


38 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  SXX. 


lueDt  a cavalry  force  from  Suffolk  was  thrown  down  upon  the  Chowan, 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Blackwater,  to-day.  At  midnight  to-night  South 
Quay  camp  will  be  shelled.  On  Thursday  a dash  will  be  made  on  Ivor, 
near  Zuui.  All  this  with  a view  to  keep  the  enemy  busy  and  to  draw 
off  his  attention,  and,  if  possible,  his  troops  from  Weldon,  &c. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  12, 18G2. 
Some  of  our  cavalry  got  across  the  Blackwater ; captured  a captain,  a 
sergeant,  and  11  privates  and  killed  a considerable  number  of  the  en- 
emy. Our  loss,  1 killed  and  11  wounded. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  ETalleck, 

General-in-Chief. 


IIdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  13,  18G2. 

General:  The  demonstrations  were  made  as  promised.  On  Mon- 
day we  had  a considerable  force  near  the  mouth  of  the  Blackwater,  or 
its  junction  with  Chowan.  On  Tuesday  we  shelled  South  Quay.  On 
Thursday  we  were  to  have  been  at  Zuni,  but  from  the  badness  of  the 
roads  General  Ferry  did  not  get  there  till  yesterday  morning  (Friday). 
There  was  sharp  lighting  during  the  day,  but  we  did  not  succeed  in 
crossing,  except  with  a small  part  of  our  cavalry. 

We  killed  a considerable  number  of  the  enemy,  caxitured  a captain,  a 
sergeant,  and  11  men,  and  drew  a large  force  there — part,  as  we  sup- 
pose, from  Weldon.  We  had  1 man  killed  and  11  wounded. 

I heard  from  General  Peck  last  night,  and  he  supposed  the  object  of 
the  demonstration  accomplished.  Tliere  was  an  article  in  the  Xorthern 
papers,  which  went  to  Bichmond,  of  course,  stating  that  General  Emory 
had  sailed  from  this  post  to  re-enforce  3mu,  and  1 fear  this  false  report 
has  induced  the  enemy  to  strengthen  himself  in  your  front. 

Hoping  to  hear  favorable  news  from  you,  I am,  respectfully  and 
truly,  general,  yours, 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  Forth  Carolina. 


Xo.  2. 

Deports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Feel',  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Snffolh,  Va. 

Suffolk,  Va.,  December  8,  18G2. 
Besides  giving  Foster  Wessells’  old  brigade  I proposed  making  a se- 
ries of  demonstrations  toward  Blackwater  for  his  benefit,  if  practicable. 


CHAr.XXX] 


SKIRMISHES  AT  AND  ABOUT  ZUNI,  VA.  ' 


39 


Accordingly  Colonel  Dodge  will  be  on  the  Chowan  at  noon  this  day,  at 
Manny’s  Ferry,  and  give  the  impression  that  he  is  looking  for  a cross- 
ing. Only  14  miles  from  railway  but  20  from  Suffolk.  About  midnight 
South  Quay  camp  will  be  shelled.  Thursday  night  dash  at  Ivor  or 
Franklin. 

Had  Wessells’  old  troops  remained,  proposed  making  clean  thing  of 
Franklin ; but  I am  weaker  than  before.  These  new  men  do  not  know 
their  facings,  and  their  hearts  are  not  in  warfare,  judging  from  their 
desertions.  Can  you  loan  me  two  old  regiments  for  four  or  five  days, 
to  arrive  light  on  Wednesday*?  We  must  not  fail  if  we  attempt  on 
Franklin.  Nottoway  Bridge  being  done  brings  Weldon  within  two 
hours’  time. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  December  8,  18G2. 

I alluded  to  the  arrival  of  two  regiments  at  Franklin  this  morning. 
This  is  confirmed  ,*  also  that  a third  one  was  sent  down  on  Friday  to 
Wakefield  and  marched  across  to  Franklin.  I have  a man  who  left 
Petersburg  on  Friday.  He  says  all  the  approaches  are  being  fortified  j 
that  infantry  and  artillery  were  sent  to  Wakefield;  that  Jackson’s  in- 
fantry was  falling  back  to  Eichmond.  He  was  told  that  a brigade  of 
Stuart’s  cavalry  was  coming  to  the  Blackwater;  that  the  troops  of 
General  French  had  been  ordered  this  way.  He  heard  that  5,000  had 
gone  from  here  to  Carolina. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  December  9,  18G2. 

We  shelled  the  rebel  camps  about  midnight  at  South  Quay. 

Has  been  very  cold;  ice  thick  enough  to  bear  aliorse. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  December  9,  18G2. 

We  threw  seventy  odd  shells  into  the  South  Quay  camps  with  effect. 
Found  the  Chowan  strongly  picketed  and  watched.  A brigade  and  500 
cavalry  on  the  Lower  Blackwater,  below  Franklin. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  12,  18G2. 

Ferry’s  command  was  all  night  on  the  route,  in  consequence  of  the 
numerous  detentions,  and  bad  no  sleep.  The  demonstrations  since  Mon-  ' 
day  having  been  very  successful  in  drawing  the  very  marked  attention 
of  the  enemy,  I have  directed  the  return  to-morrow  of  the  commands. 
One  captain,  1 sergeant?  and  11  privates  were  captured  on  the  other 


40 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXN. 


l)aiik  iu  the  rifle-pits.  Some  of  oiir  horse  got  over.  The  river  was 
liigh,  not  fordable,  and  filled  with  obstructions,  so  that  they  could  not 
bridge  it  under  fire.  Our  loss,  1 killed  and  11  wounded.  Enemy’s  loss 
considerable. 

JOHiT  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Major-General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  Deeemher  12, 18G2.  ’ 

General  Perry’s  demonstration  is  having  the  effect  of  drawing  troops 
in  that  quarter,  so  that  on  the  whole  line  we  shall  greatly  benefit  Gen- 
eral Poster.  lie  reports  the  river  all  blocked  with  trees  and  other  ob- 
structions; long  lines  of  rifle-pits  heavily  lined  with  sharpshooters. 
Brigade  of  cavalry  has  arrived  at  IW.  This  last  was  reported  to  me 
by  a man  I have,  and  is  confirmed.  Has  not  crossed.  Sharp  firing  now. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  December  12, 18G2. 

Franklin  has  been  heavily  re-enforced.  Pryor  was  at  Carrsville  on 
Tuesday,  and  remained  with  5,000  infantry,  with  his  advance  near  Hol- 
land’s Corners.  Spear  is  at  Carrsville  watching  the  flank  of  Ferry. 
This  corroborates  my  information  sent  yon  from  deserters  and  contra- 
bands. Firing  in  direction  of  Zuni. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


[Addenda.] 


Memorandum  of  understanding  between  Captain  Flusser  and  General  Fos- 
ter^ Deeeinber  G,  18G2. 

1st.  Caiitaiu  Flnsser  to  furnish  iiilots  for  the  Chowan  Fiver  to  the 
army  transports. 

2(1.  On  the  11th  to  be  in  the  Upper  Chowan  with  one  or  two  gunboats; 
more  gunboats  if  he  can  furnish  them.  These  are  to  be  re-enforced  by 
two  or  more  army  gunboats,  to  be  under  Captain  Flnsser’s  command.  • 

3(1.  To  communicate  with  Major-General  Peck,  commanding  at  Sull'olk, 
by  means  of  parties  sent  from  Winfield.  The  letter  to  be  so  written 
that  if  it  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  he  will  think  that  the  at- 
tack is  to  be  made  on  the  Blackwater  in  earnest  instead  of  being  a 
demonstration.  The  word  “ co-operate  ” will  express  this  idea  to  Gen- 
eral Peck  in  speaking  of  your  assistance.  This  letter  must  be  sent  at 
once.  The  general  impression  to  be  given  to  those  who  may  communi- 
c.nte  to  the  enemy  is  that  a serious  attack  is  to  be  made  on  the  Black- 
water. 

4th.  The  coal-schooner  to  be  brought  up  by  Captain  Graves  is  to  be 
sent  back  lo  Boanoke  Island  as  soon  as  the  immediate  wants  of  the 
gunboats  are  satisfied.  • 


CuAV.XXX.] 


41 


SKIRMISHKS  AT  ANt>  ABOUT  ZUNI,  VA. 

5tli.  The  (lemonstratiou  on  the  Blackwater  is  to  continue  for  one  week 
from  the  11th,  unless  Captain  Flnsser  Bears  from  General  Foster  to  the 
contrary,  and  even  then  the  strong  show  of  force  is  to  continue  for  a 
few  days  longer,  and  even  until  General  Foster  sends  to  inform  him 
that  the  main  attack  is  completed.  The  force  then  is  to  make  some 
hostile  demonstration  on  the  11th,  to  keep  it  iq)  until  the  lOth,  and  then 
to  maintain  a hostile  attitude  until  he  hears  from  General  Foster. 

Gth.  General  Foster  will  write  to  General  Peck  through  the  canal, 
hut  this  is  not  to  prevent  Captain  Flnsser  sending  a letter  also.  The 
rough  draught  of  a suitable  letter  is  inclosed. 

C.  W.  FLUSSEPv, 
Lieutenant-  Commander, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-  General,  Commanding . 

* 

Memorandum  of  understanding  between  Major-General  Feclc  and  General 
Foster,  December  2,  18G2. 

1.  Wessells’  brigade  to  be  at  the  landing  on  the  Chowan,  near  Gates - 
ville,  some  time  during  the  day  or  night  of  the  Gth  (weather  ijermitting), 
the  transports  being  there  to  receive  them. 

joHi^  J.  peck;, 

Major-  General. 


2.  It  is  probable  that  a movement  will  commence  as  follows,  viz  : 

3.  Get  down  at  night  to  mouth  of  North  River,  Albemarle  Sound. 

4.  Staft  them — the  transports — to  the  Chowan. 

5.  Arrive  at  mouth  of  river  (Chowan). 

G.  Come  up  river. 

7.  Embark. 

8.  Start  for  W. 

9.  Arrive  at  W. 

10.  Prepare  for  march. 

11.  Start  out  8 miles. 

12.  March  to  K. 

13.  Attack  K. 

14.  March  toward  G.  / 

15.  Make  preliminary  attack.  « 

1().  Forcible  attack. 


17. 

18. 
19. 


Pretty  sure  of  being  before  G. 


J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  12,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster:' 

Yours  of  the  11th  just  received.*  My  troops  left  yesterday,  and  are 
fighting  now. 

Captain  Flnsser  has  misunderstood  the  tenor  of  my  message.  My 
iuteiition  w'as  to  release  him  from  co-0]3eration  on  F.  [Franklin],  as 


Not  found. 


42 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.*  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


that  was  not  the  point  I had  decided  to  strike.  Lest  the  courier  should 
be  captured  I could  not  specify  the  place  on  the  Blackwater. 

A copy  of  my  communication  of  this  date  is  inclosed,  which  will  more 
fully  inform  you. 

In  haste, 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

' Major- General. 


Suffolk,  December  12,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

The  brigade  of  Wessells  was  ahead  of  time  and  reached  you  in  good 
order  and  will  do  good  service. 

My  pontoons  did  not  arrive.  I found  the  enemy  re-enforcing  F.  after 
we  took  the  Eocket  Battery  from  him,  and  I resolved  to  strike  else- 
where, and  communicated  to  Captain  Flusser  my  intentions. 

Accordingly,  on  Monday,  I sent  parties  to  the  Chowan  to  look  for 
crossings,  &C.5  on  Tuesday  morning  shelled  South  Quay,  &c.  These 
operations,  as  intended,  brought  additional  force  to  F.  and  the  lower 
river  line. 

At  noon  yesterday  all  my  available  force  left  for  the  demonstrations 
on  the. river.  The  command  should  have  been  across  Blackwater  at 
daylight,  but  has  been  delayed  by  the  terrible  condition  of  the  roads, 
five  hours  having  been  required  to  move  4 miles. 

At  this  hour  (11  a.  m.)  firing  is  heard  from  the  vicinity  of  Zuni,  where 
the  Petersburg  Eailroad  crosses  the  Blackwater.  Unless  we  draw  very 
heavily  from  Weldon  and  Petersburg  by  rail  some  results  should  attend 
ill  addition  to  aiding  j^our  operations,  the  success  of  which  I have  much 
at  heart. 

Your  favors  of  the  5th  and  8th  arrived  at  noon  yesterday. 

In  haste,  very  truly, 

JOHE  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — Three  thousand  were  reported  in  F.  on  the  2d,  and  now  12,000 
at  F.  and  vicinity.  Heavy  additions  have  been  made  all  along  the  river 
up  to  Zuni. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  12,  1862. 

Major-General  Foster, 

Neic  Berne^  A.  G. : 

Have  sent  communications  to  you  via  Norfolk  and  Winfield,  giving 
you  some  details  of  my  series  of  demonstrations.  When  we  parted  the 
enemy  had  in  Franklin  about  3,000,  and  perhaps  as  many  more  in  the 
vicinity,  and  I was  inclined  to  strike  there.  Finding  the  river  wide  and 
deep  below  and  no  pontoons  to  be  obtained,  and  re-entbrcements  arriv- 
ing there,  I was  compelled  to  change  my  point  of  attack,  and  accord- 
ingly released  Captain  Flusser  from  his  co-operation.  Fearing  capture 
of  the  messengers,  I did  not  tell  the  captain  where  I should  make  the 
demonstrations. 

On  Monday  I sent  cavalry  and  artillery  to  the  Chowan,  at  Manny’s 
Ferry,  with  a view  to  draw  the  enemy’s  attention  in  that  quarter,  which 
was  entirely  successful.  About  1 a.  np  on  Tuesday  the  camp  in  the 
vicinity  of  South  Quay  Avas  shelled. 


OiiAP.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISHES  AT  AND  ABOUT  ZUNI,  VA. 


43 


Yesterday  I sent  a large  foree,  eavalry  and  artillery,  in  tlie  vicinity  ot 
Carrsville  and  Franklin,  and  from  Colonel  Spear,  commanding,  I learn 
that  some  12,000  men  are  in  that  immediate  locality.  His  force  is  still 
in  that  quarter. 

Besides  the  movement  toward  Franklin  I sent  yesterday  noon  every 
available  man  to  demonstrate  hear  the  crossing  of  the  Petersburg  Eail- 
way  and  the  Black  water  Eiver.  The  command  is  still  in  that  direction 
and  has  occupied  the  attention  of  the  enemy  very  much,  who  have  been 
re-enforcing  by  railway,  4&c.,  all  day. 

Truly,  yours, 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


No.  3. 

Ueport  of  Capt.  J.  H.  Slices,  Company  D,  Seventh  Confederate  States 

Cavalry.. 

Sir  : According  to  your  order  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  to  you  a 
report  of  the  engagement  my  command  had  with  the  enemy  at  Joyner’s 
Ford,  Blackwater  Eiver,  Virginia,  on  December  12: 

I was  ordered  by  Coh  [W.  0.]  Claiborne  to  leave  Ivor  on  the  10th 
and  repair  to  Joyner’s  (distant  G miles)  with  my  company  and  take  com- 
mand at  that  place.  About  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  12Bi  I re- 
ceived information  that  the  enemy  were  moving  in  the  direction  of  the 
ford  in  considerable  force  and  to  prepare  for  an  early  attack.  My  camp 
was  about  1 mile  west  of  the  ford.  I ordered  my  men  into  line.  After 
inspection  I marched  to  Joyner’s  house,  200  yards  west  of  the  ford.  I 
there  halted,  dispatched  to  the  guard  (who  were  in  the  rifle-pit)  the  in- 
formation I had  received  and  that  I had  arrived  at  the  house.  After 
light  sufficient  had  appeared  we  discovered  the  enemy  had  taken  posi- 
tion in  our  front,  and  for  200  yards  above  and  below  the  ford,  behind 
trees,  stumi)s,  and  logs,  of  which  there  are  an  abundance,  it  being  a 
cypress  swamp.  Their  artillery  were  in  position  on  an  eminence  in  a 
field  some  400  yards  from  the  river.  I divided  my  company,  taking  15 
men  with  me  in  the  rifle-pit  (which  was  rudely  and  hastily  constructed) 
and  ordered  Lieut.  [P.  A.  S.]  Morris  [Comiiany  D],  with  12  or  15  men, 
to  deploy  down  the  river  below  the  ford  to  watch  the  enemy  and  report 
to  me  if  they  attemi)ted  to  cross.  I found  9 picket  guard  in  the  rifle- 
pit  (Capt.  [F.  E.]  Burke,  of  the  same  regiment).  Immediately  on  my 
entering  the  rifle-pit  the  enemy  opened  upon  us  a heavy  fire  of  small- 
arms.  We  replied  with  equally  as  good  will,  and,  am  proud  to  say,  with 
a great  deal  better  effect.  After  receiving  their  fire  for  some  time  and 
discovering  superior  numbers,  I dispatched  to  Colonel  Claiborne  my 
condition.  After  an  almost  incessant  fire  for  more  than  an  hour  from 
their  infantry,  and  failing  to  dislodge  us,  they  ceased  firing  for  a short 
time  for  the  purpose,  as  the  New  York  Herald’s  correspondent  states, 
of  a novel  cavalry  charge.  He  states  General  Peck  ordered  two  com- 
l)anies  of  infantry  to  be  mounted  behind  two  of  cavalry,  cliarge  across 
tlie  river,  dismount  the  infantry,  drive  us  from  our  position  or  force 
us  to  surrender.  They  formed  in  a field  to  our  left  and  came  down 
the  public  road  (which  runs  at  right  angles  with  the  river  until  within 
200  yards  of  the  ford,  when  it  turns  to  the  left  and  runs  nearly  i)arallel 
with  the  stream)  in  columns  of  fours  in  beautiful  and  almost  i)erfect 
order.  W^hen  they  arrived  oi)posite  the  rifle-pits  and  were  in  the  act  of 
forming  platoons  (as  they  could  have  crossed  in  columns  of  platoons, 


44 


north  CAROLINA  ANL  S.  L.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap. 


tlie  ford  being  sufficiently  wide)  we  opened  a volley  upon  them  which 
had  the  effect  of  emptying  a number  of  saddles  and  tnrowing  the  whole 
into  disorder.  While  attempting  to  reform  we  fired  so  rapidly  upon 
them  that  without  orders,  so  far  as  we  could  hear  (and  we  were  suffi- 
ciently near  to  hear  every  order  distinctly,  the  rivw  not  being  over  30 
yards  wide),  they  right-about  and  made  the  quickest  possible  time  to 
get  into  the  thick  woods. 

After  the  retreat  of  the  cavalry  the  enemy,  who  were  x)osted  behind 
trees  and  stumps,  poured  a perfect  volley  of  oaths  and  imprecations  ni)on 
us,  exx)ressive  alike  of  their  cowardice  and  degradation.  They  soon 
renewed  the  attack  with  both  infantry  and  artiller^^,  and  proving  unsuc-. 
cesslul  from  their  position,  they  moved  two  howitzers  down  the  road 
within  100  yards  of  the  rifle-pit  and  opened  with  shell  and  canister, 
which  they  kept  playing,  I suppose,  for  more  than  an  hour,  during  which 
time  we  took  chances  and  fired  occasionally^  About  this  time,  fearing 
they  would  make  another  charge  under  the  protection  of  their  artillery, 
I disi)atched  3 men  to  camps  to  secure  our  horses,  as  I was  determined 
to  hold  the  x)ass  to  the  last  'extremity.  1 dispatched  2 also  up  the 
river  to  watch  their  movements.  They  soon  returned  with  the  infor- 
mation that  the  enemy  were  crossing  above  the  ford.  I immediately 
moved  uj)  the  river  with  all  my  force  except  3 men,  whom  I left  in  the 
rifle-i)it  with  orders  to  fire  as  rapidly  as  possible.  My  object  was  to 
prevent  their  crossing  until  re-enibrcements  could  arrive,  which  I was 
momentarily  expecting.  The  stream  divides  just  above  the  ford  and 
forms  a small  island.  They  had  only  crossed  one  branch  and  had 
halted  on  the  island  and  discovering  our  movements  returned  in  their 
boats. 

AVhile  I was  preparing  to  meet  them  above  they  had  effected  a cross- 
ing below  the  ford  by  means  of  pontoon  boats  at  a deep  bend  of  the 
river  under  the  cover  of  dense  thicket.  As  soon  as  I discovered  they 
had  landed  we  started  in  double-quick  for  Joyner’s  house,  as  that  was 
our  only  chance  to  make  a stand,  they  having  landed  ten  to  our  one. 
They  discovered  our  design  and  rushed  to  cut  us  off,  and  succeeded  in 
doing  so.  Our  only  chance  for  defense  then  was  a rail  fence  diagonally 
to  our  right.  The  labor  and  exposure  we  had  been  subject  to  for  eight 
or  ten  hours  had  very  much  exhausted  us.  We  were  nearly  surrounded 
before  arriving  at  the  fence.  The  enemy  halted  and  fired  (one  company).. 
The  result  was  one  of  my  men  was  instantly  killed.  1 received  a severe 
wound  in  the  muscles  of  the  right  shoulder.  I also  received  a wound  in 
the  hand  while  in  the  rifle-pit,  which  caused  considerable  loss  of  blood. 
1 fell  on  receiving  the  wound  in  the  shoulder  and  my  men  halted  around 
nie,  and  in  a few  utoments  we  were  surrounded  by  three  companies  of 
the  Thirteenth  Indiana  Kegiment.  We  were  immediately  taken  over 
the  river  and  hurried  in  the  direction  of  Suffolk.  Soon  after  we  had 
crossed  the  river  our  artillery  came  up  and  opened  upon  the  enemy, 
which  had  the  effect  to  hasten  their  move  toward  Suffolk. 

Our  loss  was  as  follows : Killed — Private  Thomas  Barker;  danger- 
ously wounded— Corpl.W.R  .Green;  taken  prisoners — Privates  William 
U.  Dean,  G.  VV.  Gaffbrd,  Thomas  J.  Hasty,  Chandler  Smith,  M.  B.  Smith, 
Jackson  0.  Spinks,  George  W.  Baily,  A.  M.  Brady,  Jeff'.  Whitehead,  ami 
AV.  B.  Whitehead. 

Lieutenant  Morris’  men  were  so  posted  down  the  river  as  only  to  bring 
3 of  his  men  in  the  action. 

IMy  whole  force  in  the  rifle  pit  did  not  at  any  time  exceed  24,  making 
a total  of  only  27  actually  engaged  with  the  enemy.  Before  our  ca])- 
ture  my  forces  were  greatly  reduced  by  sending  couriers  and  men  to 
secure  horses,  &c. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ATTACK  ON  PLYMOUTH,  N.  C. 


45 


I feel  it  but  just  to  state  here  that  more  resolute  and  determined 
bravery  could  not  have  been  shown  than  that  which  was  exhibited  by 
our  little  baud  in  defending  the  ford  for  more  than  four  hours  against  an 
enemy  of  an  overwhelming  force.  Their  forces  cannot  be  accurately 
stated,  but  from  their  own  ])nblished  accounts  they  had  at  and  near  tbe 
lord  eight  regiments  of  infantry,  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  one  bat- 
tery of  artillery.  They  report  men  killed  and  wounded  out  of  live  dif- 
ferent regiments. 

The  enemy’s  loss  has  been  variously  estimated  by  citizens  living  on 
their  side  of  the  river.  Some  say  they  lost  over  100  in  killed  and 
M'ounded.  We  may  safely  say  from  what  we  saw  and  heard  while  we 
,Avere  prisoners  that  their  loss  was  all  of  50  men  killed  and  wounded. 

The  object  of  the  enemy  was  very  apparent  from  the  fact  they  had  a 
large  train  of  wagons,  fifteen  or  twenty  i^on toon-boats  (a  portion  of  which 
they  burned  on  their  retreat),  quite  a number  of  ambulances,  and  every- 
thing necessary  for  the  advance  of  a well-appointed  army. 

Before  closing  this  report  1 feel  it  due  the  officers  in  whose  iiands  we 
fell  to  mention  that  we  received  every  kipdness  we  could  expect.  We 
lacked  nothing  for  our  comfort  they  could  reasonably  supi^ly. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  SIKES, 

Captain  Company  D,  Seventh  C,  8.  Cavalry. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding  Department. 

[Indorsement.]  * 

Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  14,  18G3. 

Eespectfully  forwarded.  This  is  a record  of  a very  successful  skirmish 
on  the  Blackwater,  in  which  Captain  Sikes  and  his  men  greatly  distin- 
guished themselves. 

S.  G.  FEEXCH, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


DECEMBER  10,  1862. — Attack  on  Plymouth,  H.  C. 

REIPOTiTS.* 

No.  1.— Capt.  Barnabas  Ewer,  jr.,  Third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  2. — First  Lieut.  Jouathan  T.  Mizell,  Comi^any  C,  First  North  Carolina  Infantry 
(Union). 

No.  — Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French,  C.  S.  Army. 

Ko.  1. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Barnabas  Ewer,  jr.,  Third  Massachusetts  lafantry. 

Plymouth,  K.  C.,  December  10,  1802. 
Sir:  At  4.30  o’clock  this  morning  our  inckets  were  driven  in  by  a 
foi'ce  (as  near  as  we  can  estimate)  of  four  companies  of  infantry  and  one 
of  cavalry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery.  They  came  in  immediately,  driv- 
ing all  before  them.  Our  forces  (some  200  men),  after  making  all  the 

* For  rei)orts  ot  Lieut.  Commander  Flusser  and  Acting  Volunteer  Lieutenant  Behiu, 
U.  S.  Navy,  sec  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1803, 


46 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIA1>.  XXX. 


resistance  possible,  took  refuge  in  the  custom-house.  The  artillery  was 
planted  so  as  to  fire  upon  us  there,  by  which  means  considerable  damage 
was  done.  The  town  was  fired  in  many  places,  and  this  morning  is  pretty 
much  destroyed,  including  the  building  used  for  headquarters  and  all 
things  therein. 

At  the  third  discharge  of  the  enemy’s  artillery  the  gunboat  Southfield 
received  a shot  through  the  boiler,  which  disabled  her,  but  her  captain 
kept  up  as  brisk  firing  as  his  crippled  condition  would  allow.  The  gun- 
boat Commodore  Perry  hearing  the  firing  came  to  our  assistance,  but 
was  too  late,  as  tbe  enemy  had  left. 

At  roll-call  this  morning  some  30  men  were  missing;  several  are 
wounded,  one  dangerously.  I am  in  hopes  some  of  the  missing  will  come 
in,  but  some  are  no  doubt  prisoners.  A number  of  the  enemy  are  known 
to  have  been  shot,  as  they  were  seen  to  fall,  but  were  carried  away  by 
their  comrades. 

Purther  particulars  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  we  can  obtain  them. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  EWEE,  Jr., 
Captain j Commanding  Post, 

General  Poster. 


Headquarters, 

Plymouth,  JST,  (7.,  December  11,  1802 — 7 p.  m. 

•Sir  : I send  this  in  addition  to  my  first  (yesterday’s)  report  of  the 
attack  upon  this  place.  The  attack  was  made  by  cavalry , infantry,  and 
artillery,  their  combined  force  being  greatly  superior  to  our  own.  By 
their  artillery  they  were  enabled  to  cripple  the  only  gunboat  (Southfield) 
then  near  the  town,  and  to  inflict  considerable  injury  upon  the  custom- 
house, where  the  greater  part  of  our  forces  had  taken  refuge. 

After  the  Southfield  had  drifted  a short  distance  down  the  river  she 
was  met  by  the  Commodore  Perry,  who  towed  her  up,  and  the  two  boats 
now  lie  oiiposite  the  town.  The  rebels  had  already  left  after  having- 
been  here  over  an  hour. 

The  town  is  more  than  half  burned.  All  the  principal  buildings  on 
tlie  street  where  the  hotel  was  situated  are  gone.  Everything  in  head- 
quarters was  burned,  including  the  record  of  those  who  had  taken  the 
oath  of  allegiance,  and  some  muster  and  i:>ay  rolls  which  were  to  be  for- 
warded to  other  garrisons  in  this  part  of  the  State.  Company  I lost  15 
missing,  1 of  whom  is  doubtless  killed,  and  2 wounded,  1 dangerously. 

All  this  day  they  have  been  stationed  just  outside  the  town,  their 
pickets  being  within  a mile* of  the  river.  We  have  not  sufficient  force 
to  warrant  an  attack  upon  them,  being  simply  able  to  perform  guard 
and  picket  duty,  and  even  this  comes  so  often  that  it  is  seriously  affect- 
ing the  liealth  of  the  men,  and  in  my  judgment  the  necessity  of  sending 
more  men  to  assist  in  that  duty  is  quite  apparent,  and  if  we  are  ex- 
pected to  do  anything  more  than  simply  to  stand  watch  over  the  site  of 
the  town  a much  larger  force  seems  indispensable.  The  citizens  are 
pretty  generally  ffeeing,  and  not  much  besides  negroes  will  soon  be  left. 
The  gunboats  are  ready,  however,  and  by  their  assistance  we  will  try 
to  give  the  rebels  a reception  worthy  of  the  cause,  should  they  again 
become  the  attacking  party. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  EWEE,  Jr., 
Captain,  Commanding  Post, 

General  Foster. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


47 


ATTACK  ON  PLYMOUTH,  N.  C. 


[ludorscment.] 

Write  to  Captain  Flusser,  asking  for  a statement  of  the  way  the  trooi)S 
behaved,  &c.* 

j.  G.  r. 

Headquarters, 

Ply  mouth  j N,  (7.,  December  30,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  December  10,  a little 
before  5 o’clock,  our  pickets  were  driven  in  by  a force  consisting  (as 
near  as  we  can  learn  from  apparently  reliable  sources)  of  at  least  GOO 
men,  composed  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery.  After  making  all 
possible  resistance  our  forces,  of  not  more  than  150  men  in  line,  mostly 
infantry,  retreated  to  the  custom-house.  This  movement  was  made  in 
accordance  with  the  plan  of  defense  which  has  always  contemplated  the 
hring  by  the  gunboats  upon  the  town  if  attacked  by  a large  force.  The 
artillery  was  planted  so  as  to  fire  upon  the  gunboat.  Only  one  boat 
(Southfield,  Captain  Behm)  was  here  (although  there  are  generally  two 
and  frequently  more),  and  she  arrived  the  day  before.  The  captain  was 
not  acquainted  with  the  avenues  of  approach  to  the  town.  The  third 
shot  from  the  artillery  passed  through  the  boiler  of  the  boat,  letting  the 
steam  out  and  crippling  her.  She  slowly  drifted  down  the  stream,  firing 
as  she  went. 

The  enemy  proceeded  to  set  fire  to  the  town,  and  after  an  hour  thus 
spent,  during  which  our  men  annoyed  them  as  they  could,  they  hur- 
riedly withdrew. 

Three  of  Company  I were  wounded  (one  of  whom  has  since  died)  and 
15  are  missing,  one  of  whom  is  supposed  to  be  dead  and  the  others 
l)risouers. 

I herewith  transmit  Lieutenant  Fogerty’s  report  of  his  loss.  I also 
send  estimates  of  the  loss  sustained  by  each  company.! 

Several  of  the  enemy  were  seen  to  fall,  and  loud  calls  were  made  for 
their  ambulances.  Several  deserters  have  since  arrived,  who  report 
that  seven  companies  of  the  Seventeenth  North  Carolina  Eegiment  com- 
posed the  infantry. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

B.  EWEB,  Jr., 
Captain,  Commanding  Post. 

Colonel  Eichmond. 


[Inclosure.] 


Plymouth,  December  30, 1862. 

Dear  Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  order  I send  you  the  correct  list  of 
the  men  wounded  and  taken  prisoners  in  my  company  at  the  attack  on 
Plymouth  the  night  of  the  10th.  We  had  1 man  wounded,  3 taken  x)ris- 
oners,  and  none  killed.  This  is  a correct  statement  of  the  attack. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  J.  FOGEETY, 

First  Lieutenant,  Comdg.  First  North  Carolina  Cavalry. 
Captain  Ewer. 


^See  “Addenda,”  p.  48, 


tNot  found. 


48 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAI’.  XXX. 


[Addenda.] 


United  States  Steamer  Commodore  Perry, 
Fly  mouthy  N.  C-,  Fcccmher  30,  1862. 


Mcij.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Comdg.  of  North  Carolina^  New  Berne^  N.  C. : 

Pear  General:  Admiral  Lee  wishes  me  to  remove  tlie  guns  from 
Cobb’s  Point  and  further  demolish  the  battery,  if  you  have  no  objection. 

Coneerning-  the  behavior  of  the  troops  here  the  other  day,  I hear  that 
Sergeant  Clift  and  some  of  the  F'orth  Carolinians  behaved  well.  I found 
some  of  the  Massachusetts  men  and  some  of  the  North  Carolinians  at 
the  custom-house  when  I arrived. 

Captain  Ewer  w’as  on  board  the  Southfield,  miles  down  the  river. 
I asked  where  his  men  were,  and  he  said  he  did  not  know,  but  hoped 
most  of  them  were  in  the  swamp.  The  fact  is,  so  soon  as  the  Soutlifield 
fell  back  (which  she  ought  maybe  not  to  have  done)  Ewer^ot  fright- 
ened, left  his  men,  and  went  on  board.  The  Avhole  affair  was  disgrace- 
ful, and  the  more  so,  as  it  has  since  been  ascertained  that  the  attacking 
])arty,  those  who  entered  the  town,  did  not  exceed  200  men.  I shall 
write  you  again  to-morrow. 

Kind  regards  to  your  staff. 

Sincerely,  yours, 

C.  W.  ELUSSEE, 

• Lieutenant- Coimnander, 


No.  2. 

lleport'of  First  Lieut.  Jonathan  T.  Mizell,  Company  0,  First  North  Car- 
olina Infantry  [Union). 

Plymouth,  N.  C.,  Deeemher  16,  1862. 

Sir  : 1 resume  my  seat  for  the  purpose  of  informing  you  of  the  attack 
the  rebels  made  upon  our  little  village,  and  1 shoukl  judge  from  all  the 
information  I can  gather  and  from  what  1 saw  they  numbered  some  450 
strong — 300  infantry,  3 pieces  of  artillery,  and  70  cavalry.  About  4.30 
o’clock  tliey  drove  our  pickets  in  with  a volley  from  their  infantry, 
and  in  fifteen  minutes  our  company  was  in  line,  and  as  the  odds  Avere 
too  great  for  our  little  force  I deemed  it  most  x>i*udent  to  fall  back  in 
the  rear  of  the  custom-house,  and  before  we  could  all  get  in  the  build- 
ing they  had  planted  their  pieces  of  artillery  on  the  Avharf  and  had 
fired  some  three  rounds  at  the  Southfield,  and  the  third  fire  disabled 
her  boiler.  After  they  found  she  was  disabled  and  drojiiied  down  the 
river  they  moved  their  field  ineces  on  the  corner  op])Osite  headquarters, 
but  not  without  loss  of  some  men.  They  commenced  to  shell  the  cus- 
tom-house, and  as  they  iiassed  down  the  street  in  small  groups  our  men 
would  let  the  lead  lly  at  them  to  the  best  advTintage,  and  I do  assure 
you  our  little  North  Carolina  volunteers  behaved  most  nobly.  They 
were  calm  and  collected,  much  more  so  than  I exx)ected.  Sergeant 
Clift  was  informed  that  the  rebels  lost  15  killed  and  30  wounded,  some 
mortally  and  some  slightly,  and  the  information  he  got  yesterday  cor- 
roborates the  other  statements  we  received.  I heard  they  had  four 
wagon  loads  of  killed  and  wounded.  Our  men  never  received  a scratch. 
The  North  Carolina  cavmlry  lost  3 men  i)risoners  and  1 wounded.  Com- 
])any  1,  of  jMassachusetts,  lost  14  xnisoners,  1 Avounded,  and  1 missing. 
One  man  on  the  Southfield  lost  a leg.  We  sustained  considerable  loss 
from  fire.  Tlie  best  and  most  of  the  i)rincii)al  jAart  of  the  town  are 


Chap.  XXX.] 


RECONNAISSANCE  .'1  ROM  YORKTOWN,  ETC. 


49 


biirued  up.  The  families  of  our  men  were  left  without  a change  of 
clothing,  and  they  are  in  a distressed  condition.  Besides,  we  have  lost 
all  of  our  books,  pay  and  muster  rolls,  and  a quantity  of  clothing  be- 
longing to  the  men  ; some  ammunition.  They  captured  nothing  from 
the  Government,  but  pillaged  private  dwellings,  &c.  I believe  I have 
given  all  of  the  particulars  that  I can  think  of  at  present. 

1 must  speak  of  something  else  in  your  last  communication.  You 
wrote  to  send  the  names  of  the  twelve  men  that  are  to  be  transferred  to 
the  cavalry  company,  and  inclosed  you  will  find  them  on  a piece  of  paper, 
and  when  you  write  to  me  I would  be  glad  if  you  will  send  me  the  orig- 
inal muster-roll,  so  we  can  get  the  time  of  enlistment  of  them,  as  all  of 
ours  were  destroyed  by  fire  in  Sergeant  Clift^s  house,  with  all  of  his 
property.  Also  please  send  me  a morning- rejmrt  book;  monthly  and 
weekly  reports  also.  I should  be  glad  to  have  a descriptive  and  com- 
pany clothing  book ; and  by  complying  you  will  greatly  oblige. 

Yours,  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  T.  MIZELL, 

First  Lieut.j  Comdg,  Company  (7,  First  N.  C.  Infantry. 


Col.  E.  E.  Potter. 


P.  S.— Dear  Sir  : We  have  not  yet  received  our  equipments  that 
were  left  at  Eoanoke  Island,  and  as  soon  as  I can  make  it  convenient  I 
shall  dispatch  Sergeant  Clift  for  them.  Please  answer  soon. 


m.  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French^  C.  S.  Army. 

Petersburg,  Va.,  December  12,  1862. 

Plymouth,  N.  C.,  was  attacked  by  our  forces  under  Lieut.  Col.  [John 
C.]  Lamb,  of  the  Seventeenth  Horth  Carolina  Eegiment,  and  captured 
on  the  10th  instant  at  5 a.  m.  The  enemy’s  loss  severe ; 25  prisoners 
and  75  negroes  taken.  Town  reduced  to  ashes.  We  had  1 captain  and 
6 men  wounded ; none  killed.  The  gunboat  protecting  the  town  was 
driven  away  disabled. 

S.  G.  FKEl!7CH, 

Major-  G eneral. 

General  S.  Cooper. 


DECEMBER  11-15,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Yorktown  to  Gloucester, 
Matthews,  King  and  Queen,  and  Middlesex  Counties  Va. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade, 

Yorktown j Fct.,  December  10,  1802. 

Colonel  : I would  respectfully  report  that,  being  in  command  dur- 
ing the  absence  of  General  Keyes  and  believing  a little  active  employ- 
ment would  be  of  service  to  the  men,  on  the  11th  instant,  at  0.30  a.  m., 
I ordered  the  Fifty-second  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Dodge;  Eleventli 
Maine,  Colonel  Plaisted ; the  One  hundredth  New  York,  Colonel  Dandy ; 
the  Fifty-sixth  New  York,  Major  Wheeler ; Battery  H,  First  New  York, 
4 R R— YOL  xvm 


50 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CuAP.  XXX. 


Lieutenant  Mink,  and  two  squadrons  of  tlie  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 
Major  McCaudless,  to  proceed  to  Gloucester  Court-House,  where  I fol- 
lowed and  arrived  at  6 p.  m. 

The  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry  were  thrown  out  at  1 a.  m.  of  the 
12th  to  the  North  End  Mill,  on  the  Piankatank  Kiver  road,  preparatory 
to  the  landing  a few  hours  later  of  Captain  Hall,  with  90  of  the  Sixth 
New  York  Cavalry,  below  Matthews  Court-House,  where  he  had  been 
conveyed  and  landed  in  an  admirable  manner  by  Capt.  Foxhall  Parker, 
under  the  i)rotection  of  the  crew  and  guns  of  the  Mahaska,  assisted  by 
one  company  of  the  Independent  Battalion  of  New  York,  Colonel  Com- 
fort. 

The  only  opposition  here  made  was  by  some  40  rangers,  who  immedi- 
ately fell  back,  and  continued  to  do  so  as  Captain  Hall  approached,  re- 
peatedly dispersing  into  the  woods  and  swamps  whenever  he  charged 
upon  them  and  as  often  reassembling. 

After  the  cavalry  arrived  and  reported  to  me,  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
12th  instant,  the  Fifth  was  ordered  to  Wood^s  Cross-Koads  and  found 
the  picket  of  the  King  and  Queen  Cavalry  advanced  to  that  place.  The 
main  road  to  Scuffletown  was,  on  the  morning  of  the  13th,  thoroughly 
examined  beyond  that  place,  and  after  finding  no  enemy  in  force  in  that 
direction,  with  40  of  the  Sixth  New  York  and  the  cavalry  of  Major  Mc- 
Candless  I pushed  the  reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of  Buena  Vista, 
the  headquarters  of  the  King  and  Queen  Cavalry.  At  2 miles  from  that 
place  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  were  held  in  reserve,  and  Captain  Hail, 
with  30  men,  was  sent  to  feel  the  x^osition  of  the  King  and  Queen  Cav- 
alry. He  soon  came  in  contact  with  their  ifickets,  but  they  gave  way ; 
he  got  within  300  yards  of  their  main  force,  but  they  would  not  stand. 
After  rei)eated  attempts  he  got  within  150  yards  and  dismounted ; fired 
a volley,  which  wounding  several,  they  again  retreated.  Hall  mounted 
and  x^ursued  and  ran  them  through  their  encamx^ment  and  2 miles  be- 
yond it  to  Centre viile.  I then  directed  the  barracks,  stables,  and  all 
of  their  commissary  stores  to  be  burned  and  some  arms  found  on  the 
jiremises  to  be  brought  away.  It  being  now^  late  in  the  afternoon,  the 
One  hundredth  New  York,  Colonel  Handy,  was  ordered  forward  to 
Wood’s  Cross-Eoads  and  the  cavalry  to  bivouac  for  the  night  at  that 
X)lace. 

On  the  following  day,  at  G a.  m.,  Major  McCandless’  cavalry  and  those 
of  Captain  Hall  were  sent  into  Middlesex  County,  some  G miles  beyond 
the  Dragon  Ordinary,  to  destroy  a large  tannery,  which  was  manufact- 
uring a large  quantity  of  leather  for  the  use  of  the  rebel  army,  the  ma- 
chinery, buildings,  and  2,000  tanned  hides  being  destroyed.  Several 
wagon  loads  of  finished  leather  were  brought  away,  with  the  x^rox)rietors 
of  the  establishment,  whom,  I would  recommend,  should  take  the  oath 
Jiot  to  aid  the  rebel  army  in  future. 

On  the  night  of  the  14th  the  One  hundredth  New  Y^ork,  followed  by 
th(‘,  Sixth  New  York  Cavalry,  retired  from  Wood’s  Cross-Eoads,  by  the 
way  of  Belle  Eoy,  while  the  rest  of  the  command  marched  directly  to 
Gloucester  Point,  followed  by  Major  McCandless,  and  by  4 x>.  m.  of  the 
loth  instant,  with  the  excex)tion  of  the  cavalry,  all  had  returned  to  their 
encami)ments  at  Y^orktown,  without  the  loss  of  a man  or  an  animal. 
^Ve  found  irregular  cavalry  (rangers)  formed  in  Matthews,  Gloucester, 
King  and  Queen,  and  Middlesex.  The  most  of  them  were  not  in  uni- 
form, and  were  engaged  in  catching  runaway  negroes  and  in  forward- 
ing supplies  to  Eichmond.  As  soon  as  they  were  attacked  they  scat- 
tered, and  it  was  imj)ossible  to  xnirsue  them.  The  only  means  1 could 
advise  to  meot  the  difficulty  was  to  take  horses  and  arms  from  the  citi- 


ETC. 


51 


Chap.  XXX.]  RECONNAISSANCE  FROM  YORKTOWN, 

zeiis,  which,  from  the  eftect  immediately  apparent,  I believe  the  most 

®^rfound  several  large  herds  of  bogs  and  sheep  on  the  road  to  the 
^ ,t  nt  Riehinond  and  I did  not  hesitate  to  turn  their  direc- 

tion toward  our  lines.  With  almost  equal  want  of  hesitation  I directed 
!rq.iLt6rmaster  to  take  horses,  cattle,  sheep,  and  cows  those 

who\ad  an  abundance,  and  report  to  me  an  accurate  account  of  eve  j 
thing  taken,  and  from  whom  taken,  that  a proper  record  be  kept  to 

'"tmong“llor2"^^^^^^^  taken,  one-half  of  them  were  of  the 
armv  I found  Captain  Seawell,  a prominent  citizen  of  the  counties 
named  that  dragged  Virginia  into  secession,  and  who  I found  engaged 

charged  fnd  ran  five  times  his  number  of  the  King  and  Queen  Cavalry 
throimh  their  encampment.  His  command  marched  over  90  miles,  and 
nerformed  their  duties  to  my  entire  satisfaction.  , , t * 

^ Major  McCandless  deserves  special  notice,  but  I regret  that  I cannot 
include  his  commpd,  some  of  whom  procured  whisky  by  threatening 

''*^To'*Colcmel  Placed  and  his  regiment  I return  unqualified  thanks  for 
the  unexceptionable  manner  they  performed  every  duty. 

The  militW  conduct  of  the  rest  of  the  command  was  good,  but  much 
censure  is  due  to  the  officers  and  their  men  for  petty  thieving  practiced 
nnTthe  neoDle  of  the  country.  The  conduct  of  the  Fifty-sixth  >.ew 
Trk  was  disSaceful  in  this  respect,  and  I have  arrested  the  command- 
ino-  officer  and  shall  prefer  charges  against  him. 

In  conclusion  I would  report  that  the  four  days  reconnaissance  to 
Alatthews  Gloucester,  King  and  Queen,  and  Middlesex  was  entirely 
successful’,  and  that  the  objects  for  which  it  was  made  have  been  fully 
accomplished. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  HENRY  M.  NAGLEB, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieut.  Col.  D.  T.  Yan  Buren,  . . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  DeparGnent  of  Virginia. 


[Chai*.  XXX, 


52  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

PEGEMBEE 11-20, 1862. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C* 

ow  the;  eemncie^e,  extents, 

'Dec.  11-12,  1862. — Skirmislies  on  tlie  Kinston  Road. 

12- 15,  1862. — Naval  operations  on  the  Neuso  River. 

13- 14,  1862. — Skirmislies  at  Southwest  Creek, 

14,  1862, — Engagement  at  Kinston. 

15,  1862,— Affair  at  White  Hall  Bridge. 

16,  1862. — Engagement  at  White  Hall. 

Affairs  at  Mount  Olive  Station  and  Goshen  Swamp. 

17,  1862. — Raid  on  Dudley  Station. 

Engagement  at  Goldshorough  Bridge. 

Skirmish  at  Thompson’s  Bridge. 

EEEOETS.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  North 
Carolina. 

No.  2. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  3. — Capt.  David  A.  Taylor,  Third  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Chief  Signal  Officer. 

No.  4. — Col.  James  H.  Ledlie,  Third  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Chief  of  Artillery, 
commanding  Artillery  Brigade,  of  operations  December  11-17. 

No.  5. — Capt.  Edwin  S.  Jenney,  Battery  F,  Third  New  York  Light  Artillery,  of  en- 
gagements at  Kinston  and  White  Hall,  December  14  and  16. 

No.  6. — Maj.Chas.  Fitz  Simmons,  ThirdNew  York  Cavalry,  of  operationsDec.  15audl7. 

No.  7. — Maj.  Jeptha  Garrard,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  of  operations  Dec.  15-17. 

No.  8. — Capt.  John  F,  Moschell,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  of  operations  Dec.  11-16. 

No,  9. — Capt.  Newton  Hall,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  of  operations  December  12-16. 

No.  10. — Capt.  Ferris  Jacobs,  jr..  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  of  operations  Dec.  13-14. 

No.  11. — Capt,  George  W.  Cole,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  of  operations  Dec.  12-16. 

No.  12. — Col.  Thomas  J.  C.  Amory,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding 
First  Brigade,  First  Division,  of  engagements  at  Kinston,  White  Hall,  and 
Goldsborpugh  Bridge,  December  14,  16,  and  17. 

No.  13.— Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Fellows,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  engage- 
ments at  Kinston,  White  Hall,  and  Goldshorough  Bridge,  Dec.  14, 16,  and  17. 

No.  14. — Maj.  John  G.  Chambers,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  operations 
December  11-16. 

No.  15. — Col.  Charles  L.  Holbrook,  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  16. — Col.  Charles  R.  Codman,  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  engagements 
at  Kinston  and  White  Hall,  December  14  and  16. 

No.  17. — Col.  Augustus  B.  R.  Sprague,  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  18. — Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  com- 
mauding  Second  Brigade,  of  engagements  at  Kinston,  White  Hall,  and 
Goldshorough  Bridge,  December  14,  16,  and  17. 

No.  19. — Lieut.  Col.  Robert  Leggett,  Tenth  Connecticut  Infantry,  of  engagement  at 
Kinston,  December  14. 

No.  20. — Col.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding 
Third  Brigade. 

No.  21. — Maj.  Josi.ah  Pickett,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  22. — Lieut.  Col.  William  S.  Shurtleff,  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  23. — Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry,  First  Brigade,  Second 
Division. 

* For  report  of  Commander  A.  Murray,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Reijort  of  the  Secro' 

tary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


Chap,  xxi.j  NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH.  53 

No.  24. — Maj.  Abram  Zabriskie,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

No.  25. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade,  Peck’s 
Division,  of  ox^erations  December  5-21. 

Ro.  26. — Lieut.  Col.  Abijah  J.  Wellman,  Eighty-fifth  New  York  Infantry,  of  engage- 
ment at  Kinston,  December  14. 

^o.  27. — Col.  Lewis  C.  Hunt,  Ninety-second  New  York  Infantry,  of  engagement  at 
Kinston,  December  14. 

No.  28. — Capt.  George  W.  Hinds,  Ninety-sixth  New  York  Infantry,  of  engagement  at 
Kinston,  December  14. 

No.  29. — Col.  Joshua  B.  Howell,  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  of  operations 
December  13-17. 

No.  30. — Maj.  Alexander  W.  Taylor,  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  of 
engagement  at  Kinston,  December  14. 

No.  31. — Lieut.  Col.  Wilson  C.  Maxwell,  One  hundred  and  third  Pennsylvania  In- 
fantry, of  engagement  at  Kinston,  December  14. 

No.  32. — Lieut.  Col.  Horace  A.  Manchester,  First  New  York  Marino  Artillery,  of  naval 
operations  on  the  Neuse  Eiver,  December  12-15. 

No.  33. — Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  North 
Carolina  and  Southern  Virginia,  of  operations  December  13-18. 

No.  34. — Lieut.  Col.  Walter  H.  Stevens,  C.  S.  Engineers,  of  operations  December  16-17. 
No.  35. — Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans,  C.  S.'Army,  commanding  Brigade,  of  operations 
December  13-17. 

No.  36. — Col.  Peter  Mallett,  North  Carolina  Battalion,  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  De- 
cember 14. 

No.  37. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  L.  Clingman,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Brigade,  of  en- 
gagement at  Goldsborough  Bridge,  December  17. 

No.  38. — Lieut.  Col.  Stephen  D.  Pool,  C.  S.  Artillery,  of  engagement  at  Goldsborough 
Bridge,  December  17. 

No.  39. — Brig.  Gen.  Beverly  H.  Robertson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Brigade,  of  en- 
gagement at  White  Hall,  December  16. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster^  IT.  IS.  Army^  commanding  the  De- 
partment of  North  Carolina. 

Headquarters  Department  op  North  Carolina, 

Kinston^  December  14,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I left  New  Berne  for 
this  place  on  tlie  11th,  but  that  owing  to  the  bad  roads  and  consequent 
delays  to  train,  &c.,  I did  not  reach  Southwest  Creek  (5  miles  from 
^this  town)  till  the  afternoon  of  the  13th.  The  enemy  were  posted  there, 
but  by  a heavy  artillery  fire  in  front  and  vigorous  infantry  attack  on 
either  flank  I succeeded  in  forciug  a passage  and  without  much  loss. 

This  morning  I advanced  on  this  town  and  found  the  enemy  strongly 
posted  at  a defile  through  a marsh  bordering  a creek.  The  position 
was  so  well  chosen  that  very  little  of  our  artillery  could  be  brought  in 
play.  The  main  attack  therefore  was  made  by  the  infantry,  assisted  by 
a few  guns  pushed  forward  on  the  roads.  We  succeeded,  after  five 
liours’  hard  fight,  in  driving  the  enemy  from  their  position.  We  fol- 
lowed them  rapidly  to  the  river ) the  bridge  over  the  Neuse  at  this  point 
was  prepared  for  firing  and  was  fired  in  six  places,  but  we  were  so  close 
behind  them  that  we  saved  the  bridge.  The  enemy  retreated  precipi- 
tately by  the  Goldsborough  and roads.  Their  force  was  about 

6,000  men,  with  twenty  pieces  of  artillery.  The  result  is  w^e  have  taken 
Kinston,  captured  eleven  i)ieces  of  artillery,  taken  400  or  500  i)risoners, 


54 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiTAP.  XNX. 


jind  foiiud  a large  amount  of  quartermaster’s  and  commissary  stores. 
Our  loss  will  not  probably  exceed  200  killed  and  wounded. 

I march  to-morrow  at  daylight  ou  Goldsborougb.  From  that  point  I 
return  to  New  Bernej  whence  I will  make  a more  detailed  report. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEK. 

Major-General  IIalleck. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Oaroihna, 

Ncio  Berne,  AT.  C.,  Deeember  20,  1802. 

General:  Eeferring  to  mine  of  the  14th  instant,  from  Kinston,  I have 
the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I succeeded  in  reaching  Goldsborough  and 
in  burning  the  railroad  bridge  of  the  Weldon  and  AVilmington  Eailroad 
at  that  i)oint.  The  bridge  at  Mount  Olive  I also  destroyed,  and  about  4 
miles  of  track.  I encountered  and  defeated  the  enemy  at  Kinston , White 
Hall,  Thompson’s  Bridge,  and  Goldsborough. 

My  loss  in  killed,  Avounded,  and  missing  will  not  exceed  400.*  The 
enemy’s  loss  I have  not  ascertained.  I have  taken  nine  i)ieces  of  artil- 
lery, about  500  lArisoiiers,  and  destroyed  some  quartermaster’s  and  com- 
missary stores. 

1 am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE. 

Maj.  Gen.  IT.  W.  Halleck. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Neto  Berne,  N.  C,,  December  27,  1802. 

General  : Eeferring  to  my  letters  of  December  10, 14,  and  20, 1 have 
the  honor  to  report  that  I left  this  town  at  8 a.  m.  of  the  11th  with  the 
following  forces : 

General  Wessclls’  brigade  of  General  Peck’s  di\dsion  (kindly  loaned 
to  me).  Colonel  Amory’s  brigade,  Colonel  Stevenson’s  brigade.  Colonel 
Lee’s  brigade — in  all,  about  10,000  infantry  j six  batteries  Third  New 
A"ork  Artillery,  30  guns ; Belger’s  battery  First  Ehode  Island  Artillery, 

0 guns  5 section  of  Twenty-fourth  New  York  Independent  Battery,  2 guns; 
section  of  Twenty-third  New  York  Independent  Battery,  2 guns — total, 
40  guns;  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  about  G40  men. 

AYe  marched  the  first  day  on  the  main  Kinston  road  about  14  miles, 
Avhen,  finding  the  road  obstructed  by  felled  trees  for  half  a mile  and  over, 

1 biA^ouacked  for  the  night,  and  had  the  obstructions  remoA^ed  during  the 
night  by  the  pioneers. 

I ])ushed  on  the  next  morning  at  daylight.  My  cavalry  advance  en- 
countered the  enemy  Avhen  about  4 miles  from  the  bivouac  of  the  pre- 
Aious  night,  and  after  a sharp  but  brief  skirmish  the  enemy  were  routed 
Avith  some  loss.  On  arriving  at  the  Vine  SAvamp  road  I ordered  Captain 
Hall,  Avith  three  companies  of  cavalry,  to  push  on  up  the  main  Kinston 
road  as  a demonstration,  while  the  main  column  i)roceeded  by  the  Vine 
Swamp  road  to  the  left,  thereby  aAmiding  the  obstructions  and  the  enemy 
on  the  main  road.  Captain  Hall  encountered  the  enemy  in  some  force, 
but  after  a seA^ere  liglit  Avhi})ped  them,  taking  18  prisoners  and  killing 
a number.  The  march  of  the  main  column  Avas  someAvhat  delayed  by 
the  bridge  over  Beaver  Creek  being  destroyed.  This  was  rebuilt,  and 
I l)ushe(i  on,  leaAung  a regiment  (Fifty-first  Alassachusetts)  and  a sec- 
tion of  artillery  (Twenty-third  NeAV  York)  at  the  bridge  to  hold  it  and 
to  protect  the  intersection  of  the  main  road  and  the  road  I Avas  on,  to 

* But  see  revised  statemeut,  p.  CO. 


(}\uv.  new  BERNE  TO  GOLOSBORDUOiFr.  S5 

support  Captain  Hall,  and  to  prevent  any  force  driving  liim  back  and 
occupying  tlie  cross-roads  in  tbe  rear.  The  main  column  pushed  on 
about  4 miles  'and  bivouacked  for  the  night.  There  was  some  cavalry 
skirmishing  during  the  day. 

On  Saturday,  the  13th,'  we  again  started,  leaving  the  second  main 
road,  the  one  i was  on,  to  the  right,  and  leaving  at  this  intersection  the 
Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  and  one  section  of  artillery  (Twenty-fourth 
New  York)  to  hold  the  position,  and  feint  on  the  second  main  road.  We 
reached  Southwest  Creek,  the  bridge  over  which  was  destroyed,  and 
tlie  enemy  posted  on  the  opposite  "bank,  some  400  strong,  with  three 
pieces  of  artillery.  The  creek  was  not  fordable,  and  ran  at  the  foot  of 
a deep  ravine,  making  a very  bad  position  for  ns.  I ordered  a battery 
in  as  good  a position  as  could  be  obtained,  and  under  their  fire  the 
Ninth  New  Jersey,  which  had  the  advance,  pushed  gallantly  across  the 
creek  by  swimming,  by  fragments  of  the  bridge  and  by  a mill-dam,  and 
formed  on  the  0])posite  bank.  At  the  same  time  the  Eighty-fifth  Penn- 
sylvania, of  General  Wessells’  brigade,  forced  a i)assage  by  the  felling 
of  trees  and  fording  about  half  a mile  below  the  bridge,  and  engaged 
the  enemy’s  left,  who  thereux^on  retired  and  deserted  his  breastworks. 
I had  ordered  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  of  Colonel  Amory’s 
brigade,  to  cross  at  the  mill  to  sux^port  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  and  also 
crossed  the  remainder  of  General  Wessells’  brigade.  Colonel  Heck- 
man, with  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  advanced  and  was  fired  upon,  when 
about  1 mile  from  the  creek,  with  canister  and  musketry.  The  regi- 
ment charged  at  double-quick,  drove  the  enemy,  took  some  prisoners, 
and  cax:)tured  a C-x>ounder  gnu,  caisson,  &c.,  complete.  General  Wes- 
sells bivouacked  on  the  farther  side  of  the  creek  with  the  Ninth  in  the 
advance.  The  balance  of  the  command,  with  the  artillery,  remained  on 
this  side  of  the  creek.  The  Ninth  New  Jersey } Company  K,  Third  New 
York  Cavalry,  and  Morrison’s  battery  Third  New  York  Artillery,  had 
quite  a skirmish  with  the  enemy,  but  drove  him  and  encamped  for  the 
night.  From  the  south  side  of  the  creek  I sent  a company  of  cavalry  to 
strike  and  proceed  up  the  Kinston  road.  No.  2 (I  was  on  No.  3).  The 
(iomi)any  x)roceeded  up  the  road  toward  Kinston,  and  found  the  enemy 
l)osted  by  a bridge,  which  was  prexiared  to  be  destroyed.  The  company 
charged  them,*  and  they  retired  with  some  loss,  destroying  the  bridge. 
The  enemy’s  force  at  this  x^lace  was  estimated  at  one  regiment  and  four 
X)ieces  of  artillery.  Major  Garrard,  with  three  companies  of  cavalry 
and  one  gun  of  Allis’  section  of  artillery,  x^roceeded  on  a reconnaissance 
on  a road  leading  to  White  Hall.  After  following  this  road  about  10 
miles,  and  having  met  with  no  ox^position,  they  rejoined  the  main 
column. 

Sunday,  the  14th  instant,  I advanced  the  column,  and  when  about  1 
mile  from  Kinston  encountered  the  enemy  in  strong  force.  They  were 
posted  in  strong  x>osition  in  the  wood,  taking  advantage  of  the  ground, 
which  formed  a natural  breastwork.  Their  position  was  secured  on  their 
right  by  a deep  swamx)  and  their  left  was  partially  xn^otected  by  the 
river.  The  Ninth  New  J ersey  was  dex)loyed  as  skirmishers,  and  General 
Wessells’  brigade,  with  Morrison’s  batterj"  Third  New  York  Artillery, 
was  ordered  to  advance  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  the  battery 
being  sent  to  our  extreme  right  supx)orted  by  one  of  General  Wessells’ 
regiments.  Colonel  Amory’s  brigade  Avas  then  advanced,  the  Seven- 
teenth Massachusetts  Volunteers  being  sent  to  support  Colonel  Heck- 
man on  the  right,  and  two  regiments  (Twenty-third  and  Forty-fifth 
Massachusetts)  advanced  up  the  road.  My  artillery  (three  batteries)  1 
l)osted  in  a large  field  on  the  right  of  the  road  and  about  three-fourths 
of  a mile  in  rear  of  our  line  of  attack,  the  only  position  they  could  be 


56 


:nORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.XXN, 


placed  in.  I then  ordered  Colonel  Stevenson’s  brigade,  with  Belger’s 
Ehode  Island  battery,  forward.  The  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  sup- 
ported this  battery,  and  the  Fifth  Ehode  Island,  Tenth  Connecticut,  and 
Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  were  ordered  forward,  the  two  former  on  the 
left  of  the  road  and  the  latter  on  the  right,  to  support  the  regiments 
there  in  pushing  the  enemy  and  turning  that  flank. 

The  Tenth  Connecticut  advanced  steadily  to  the  extreme  front,  re- 
lieving two  of  Wessells’  brigade,  which  were  short  of  ammunition,  and 
after  receiving  a terrible  fire  for  some  twenty  minutes  made  a most  gal- 
lant charge  in  conjunction  with  the  Ninety-sixth  Eegiment  New  York 
Volunteers  of  General  Wessells’  brigade,  which,  with  the  advance  al- 
ready made  (slowly,  but  surely)  of  the  entire  line,  forced  the  enemy  to 
retreat  precipitately  for  the  bridge  over  the  Neuse,  which  they  crossed, 
firing  the  bridge,  which  had  been  prepared  for  that  purpose.  Several 
regiments  were  so  close,  however,  that  about  400  prisoners  were  taken 
from  the  enemy.  A line  was  formed  to  the  river  and  the  fire  extin- 
guished before  great  damage  was  done. 

The  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Eegiments 
and  General  Wessells’  brigade  were  at  once  crossed,  pushed  into  the 
town,  and  halted.  I ordered  the  bridge  to  be  at  once  repaired  for  the 
crossing  of  cavalry  and  artillery. 

‘General  Evans  retired  about  2 miles  from  town  with  his  command 
and  formed  line  of  battle.  I sent  ^a  flag  of  truce  to  inquire  whether  he 
proposed  to  surrender.  He  declined.  I immediately  prepared  to  at- 
tack him,  but  knowing  that  he  had  three  light  batteries  and  one  section 
to  start  with,  was  unwilling  to  sacrifice  my  men,  and  waited  for  my  ar- 
tillery to  cross.  I ordered  Batteries  E and  I,  Third  New  York  Artillery, 
to  shell  the  enemy  with  their  20-pounder  Parrotts  (four  in  number)  from 
the  opposite  bank,  and  crossed  Colonel  Amory’s  brigade  Avith  all  dis- 
patch ; but  before  I could  attack  the  enemy  they  had  retired,  and  it  being 
by  this  time  night  I was  unable  to  pursue ; moreover,  my  object  was 
accomplished. 

The  troops  bivouacked  in  the  field  beyond  the  town  that  night;  a 
provost  guard  was  established  for  the  protection  of  the  town  and  all 
necessary  precautions  were  taken.  I sent  Captain  Cole,  Company  K, 
Third  Eegiment  New  York  Cavalry,  down  the  east  bank  of  the  Neuse  to 
a work  commanding  the  river.  He  reported  it  deserted,  with  six  guns 
in  position,  and  the  Avork  to  be  of  great  strength.  I sent  the  company 
back  with  teams  to  bring  up  the  guns  and  blow  up  the  magazine. 
Captain  Cole  being  unable  to  remove  the  two  heavy  guns,  one  8-inch 
columbiad  and  one  32-pounder,  destroyed  them,  and  brought  back  four 
field  pieces  complete.  These,  with  two  others  deserted  by  the  enemj" 
and  the  one  taken  by  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  I sent  to  New  Berne,  un- 
der escort  of  Captain  Cole’s  company  (K)  Third  New  York  CaAmlry. 

The  next  morning,  the  15th,  I recrossed  the  river  and  took  the  river 
road  for  Goldsborough.  I left  a strong  guard  of  cavalry  in  the  toAvn, 
under  Major  Fitz  Simmons,  to  make  a demonstration  on  the  Goldsbor- 
ough road  on  that  side  of  the  river.  Colonel  Ledlie,  Third  New  Y^ork 
Artilleiy,  remained  to  destroy  commissary  and  quartermaster’s  stores 
mid  burn  the  bridge.  Major  Fitz  Simmons  adAmnced  some  0 miles  in 
the  direction  of  Goldsborough,  when,  hearing  the  whistle  of  a locomo- 
tive, he  fired  three  shots  in  the  direction  of  the  sound,  upon  Avhich  the 
train  immediately  returned  in  the  direction  of  Goldsborough.  Colonel 
Ledlie,  before  leaving  Kinston,  destroyed  a locomotiA^e,  a railroad  mon- 
itor, &c. 

I advanced  without  opiiosition  to  Avithin  3J  miles  of  White  Hall, 
where  I halted  for  the  night.  I sent  Major  Garrard  Avith  three  com- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


kew  Berne  to  goldsborough. 


61 


panics  of  cavalry  to  make  a reconnaissance  to  White  Hall.  He  fomul 
one  regiment  and  four  guns  on  our  side  of  the  bridge  over  the  Keuse, 
blit  they  quickly  retreated  as  he  ai^proached,  firing  the  bridge  effect- 
ually. 

Tlie  next  morning  (16th)  I ordered  Major  Garrard,  with  five  compa- 
nies Third  New  York  Cavalry  and  one  section  of  artillery  Twenty-third 
New  York,  to  proceed  to  Mount  Olive,  a station  on  the  Wilmington  and 
AVeldon  Eailroad,  14  miles  below  Goldsborough.  In  i)assing  White 
Hall  cn  route  for  Mount  Olive  his  command  was  fired  upon  from  the 
opposite  side  of  the  river.  He  placed  his  guns  in  position  and  returned 
the  fire  until  the  main  column  arrived,  when  he  limbered  up  and  pro- 
‘ceeded  toward  Mount  Olive,  which  point  he  reached  without  opposition. 
Here  he  destroyed  the  railroad  track  for  about  a mile.  He  then  pro- 
ceeded along  the  line  of  the  railroad  for  4 miles  and  destroyed  the  bridge 
over  Goshen  Swamp.  The  track  between  Mount  Olive  and  the  Goshen 
Swamp  Bridge  was  torn  up  and  burned  in  five  places. 

The  column  having  arrived  at  White  Hall  and  finding  the  bridge 
burned  and  the  enemy  in  some  force,  with  infantry  and  artillery  on  the 
other  side,  and  this  being  the  direct  road  to  Goldsborough,  I determined 
to  make  a strong  feint,  as  if  to  rebuild  and  cross.  The  Ninth  New  Jersey 
and  Colonel  Amory’s  brigade  were  sent  forward  and  posted  on  the 
bank  of  the  river  to  engage  the  enemy.  I then  ordered  up  several  bat- 
teries and  posted  them  on  a hill  overlooking  the  enemy’s  intrenchments. 
'They  opened  on  and  silenced,  after  an  hour’s  firing,  the  enemy’s  guns. 
’The  enemy  still  maintained  their  admirable  position  with  sharpshooters, 
but  deeming  my  object  accomplished  I moved  my  command  forward 
toward  Goldsborough,  leaving  sharpshooters  in  rear  to  continue  the 
fight.  We  bivouacked  that  night  8 miles  from  Goldsborough,  encoun- 
tering no  further  opposition. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  I advanced  on  Goldsborough.  I ordered 
Major  Fitz  Simmons,  with  two  companies  of  cavalry,  to  make  a feint 
in  the  direction  of  Dudley  Station  and  Everettsville.  They  scattered  a 
small  force  of  the  enemy  there  in  every  direction,  burned  two  trestle- 
work  culverts,  destroyed  a train  of  four  railroad  cars,  water-station,  depot, 
&c.,  as  well  as  some  small-arms,  which  they  were  not  able  to  carry  off*, 
and  captured  a flag  of  the  enemy.  They  then  returned  by  a short  cut 
to  the  main  column.  I also  ordered  Ma;jor  Garrard,  with  four  com- 
jiauies  of  cavalry  and  one  section  of  artillery,  to  make  a feint  in  the 
direction  of  a bridge  over  the  Neuse,  on  our  right,  called  Thompson’s 
Bridge.  He  found  the  enemy  in  force,  .supposed  to  be  one  regiment  of 
infantry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery,  and  the  bridge  already  burned.  1 
then  directed,  in  order  to  make  the  feint  more  complete  and  to  further 
distract  the  enemy,  one  regiment  (Forty-third  Massachusetts)'  and  An- 
;gers  battery  Third  New  York  Artillery  to  the  support  of  the  cavalry 
land  engage  the  enemy,  which  they  did,  silencing,  after  an  hour’s  brisk 
^engagement,  the  enemy’s  fire. 

Colonel  Lee’s  brigade  was  in  advance  of  the  main  column  and  came 
’upon  the  enemy  in  small  force  on  the  edge  of  the  wood  lining  the  rail- 
road track.  Riggs’  battery  Third  New  York  Artillery  was  placed  iv 
position  and  opened  on  them,  when  the  enemy  retired.  The  Ninth  New 
Jersey  and  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  were  ordered  to  strike  the  rail 
B-oad  track  and  follow  it  up  direct  to  the  liridge,  which  they  were  to  burn. 
Three  regiments  of  Colonel  Lee’s  brigade  were  ordered  to  their  sui^iporl 
(the  Twenty-fifth,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Third  Massachusetts);  the  re- 
maining regiment  v/as  thrown  on  the  left  to  ])rotect  onr  Hank  in  that 
quarter.  General  Wessells’  brigade  was  advanced  and  formed  on  the 
hill  overlooking  the  track,  &c.;  'three  regiments  were  thrown  to  the  left, 


1)8 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[tJiiAr.NNN. 


1111(1  tlie  reniaiuhig  regiments  in  lines,  to  be  available  at  any  point.  ATy 
artillery  was  bronglit  forward  and  idaced  in  position,  firing  to  the  front 
and  left,  principally  at  tlie  bridge.  The  enemy  replied  with  artillery 
from  the -other  side  of  the  river.  Colonel  Heckman  advanced  steadily 
up  the  track,  fighting  the  enemy’s  infantry  posted  at  the  bridge  anil 
receiving  a fire  from  the  artillery  in  a monitor-car  on  the  track  of  tlie 
bridge.  iAfter  two  hours  he  reached  the  bridge,  and  under  a heavy  fire 
laeiUenant  Graham,  Twenty-third  New  York  Battery,  acting  as  aide- 
de  caini)  to  Colonel  Heckman,  fired  the  bridge.  All  who  had  previously 
attempted  it  were  picked  off,  as  was  wounded  Lieut.  B.  N.  Alann,  Sev- 
(‘iiteenth  Alassachusetts,  who  accompanied  him. 

I brought  all  jny  artillery  to  bear  to  prevent  any  effort  to  save  the 
bridge,  and,  when  the  fire  was  doing  its  work,  ordered  a countermarch 
for  New  Berne,  leaving  Colonel  Lee  to  form  the  rear  guard.  Colonel 
Lee  was  forming  his  brigade  to  leave  the  field,  deeming  the  fight  over, 
when  three  regimental  colors  were  seen  across  the  railroad  track,  the 
men  protected  by  the  embankment  on  which  the  track  was  laid.  Colonel 
Lee  placed  Alorrison’s  battery  in  position  and  recalled  his  regiments  in 
line.  The  enemy  advanced  with  cheers  across  the  railroad,  steadily  in 
line,  u])on  Colonel  Lee’s  brigade.  Morrison’s  battery  opened  on  the  ad- 
vancing line  with  spherical  case  and  with  good  effect,  but  they  advanced 
steadily  until  within  300  yards  of  the  battery,  when,  unable  to  stand 
the  fearful  loss  they  were  sustaining  from  the  batter3^,  they  broke  and 
retreated.  Their  retreat  was  unexpectedly'  covered  by  a masked  bat- 
tery in  the  woods  on  our  left.  Belger’s  Ehode  Island  battery,  which 
Imd  been  brought  back,  opened  in  reply  to  the  battery  and  on  two  regi- 
ments which  came  in  view,  supporting  their  guns.  Biggs’  battery 
Third  New  York  Artillery  was  placed  on  an  eminence  on  our  left  and 
in  line  with  the  enemy^,  thus  bringing  a cross-fire  to  bear.  They  were 
thereby  forced  to  retire,  as  was  also  a regiment  in  the  woods  on  our  right. 

Colonel  Lee,  haAung  orders  not  to  attempt  any  further  move,  again 
formed  his  brigade  and  batteries  and  proceeded  to  join  the  column, 
which  1 had  halted  on  hearing  the  firing  from  Colonel  Lee. 

This  was  a bold  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  entrap  and  secure  Colonel 
Lee’s  brigade  and  Alorrison’s  battery.  Owing  to  the  efficiency  of  Colonel 
Lee  and  Alorrison’s  battery  it  was  a disastrous  failure.  With  a strong 
cavalry  rear  guard  I then  started  on  my  return  by^  the  direct  road,  took 
and  transported  my'  sick  and  wounded  men  from  White  Hall  and  Kin- 
ston, carrying  them  all  safely  to  this  point. 

On  the  13th  a fleet  of  small  boats  left  New  Berne,  under  Commander 
Murrays,  U.  S.  Navy,  to  attack  the  works  on  the  river  at  Kinston,  but 
owing  to  the  lowness  of  the  water  in  the  river  only  one  small  boat,  the 
Allison,  under  Colonel  Alanchester,  Marine  Artillery,  Av^as  brought  into 
action.  The  works  being  too  strong  she,  after  a gallant  resistance,  was 
obliged  to  retire,  having,  however,  effected  a good  purpose  b.y  mysti- 
fying General  Evans  as  to  where  the  attack  was  to  come  from,  and  in- 
duced him  to  retain  several  regiments  on  the  Kinston  side  of  the  Neuse, 
thus  diminishing  the  force  opposed  to  us. 

In  conclusion  I take  great  pleasure  in  reporting  on  the  conduct  of  the 
ofiicers  and  men  under  my^  command.  It  was  most  excellent,  and  main- 
tained fully  their  high  reputation. 

General  Wessells’  brigade,  of  General  Peck’s  division,  behaved  like 
veterans,  and  reflected,  by  their  drill,  discipline,  and  steadiness  under 
lire,  the  qualities  of  their  commanding  officer. 

Colonel  Heckman,  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey',  Avas,  AA'ith  his  admirable 
regiment,  always  in  advance,  and  displayed  the  greatest  courage  and 
eff^ciency^ 


Chap,  XXX.j 


NEW  Berne  to  GOLDSBOROtron. 


59 


The  Tenth  Eegiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Leggett  (as  they  always  have  done),  behaved  in  the  most  gal- 
lant and  dashing  manner,  making  a charge  under  a fire  which  in  twenty 
minutes  killed  and  wounded  90  men  out  of  340. 

Colonel  Potter,  of  the  First  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  acted  on  my 
staff,  and  was  of  the  greatest  aid  and  assistance  to  me  by  his  coolness 
and  observation. 

I must  particularly  mention  the  conduct  of  Lieut.  George  W.  Gra- 
ham, Twenty-third  New  York  Battery,  acting  as  aide  to  Colonel  ITeck- 
man.  Tliroughout  the  entire  march  he  was  conspicuous  for  his  venture- 
some courage,  and  at  Goldsborough,  in  company  with  Lieut.  B.  N.  Mann, 
Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  advanced  and  fired  the  bridge 
under  the  fire  of  the  enemy^s  infantry  and  artillery.  He  only  escaped 
capture  by  jumping  from  the  bridge  down  the  bank.  Lieutenant  Mann 
was  wounded. 

The  artillery  force,  under  Colonel  Ledlie,  was  well  placed  and  well 
served,  and  the  commanding  officer  and  the  batteries,  without  excep- 
tion, did  most  excellent  service. 

The  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  though  not  acting  as  a regiment,  were 
in  all  cases  prompt,  brave,  and  efficient,  as  'shown  in  the  body  of  my 
report. 

Much  credit  is  due  to  Mr.  H.  W.  Wilson,  engineer,  who,  in  charge  of 
the  pioneers  and  a force  of  contrabands,  did  most  excellent  service  in 
building  bridges,  repairing  roads,  &c. 

I inclose  to  General  E.  A.  Hitchcock  the  lists  of  paroled  prisoners, 
numbering  496.* 

I herewith  inclose  lists  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  showing 
an  aggregate  of  90  killed,  478  wounded,  and  9 missing.f 

Among  the  killed  I must  mourn  Colonel  Gray,  of  the  Ninety-sixth  New 
York  Eegiment.  He  was  killed  at  the  head  of  his  regiment  at  the 
Kinston  Bridge.  Though  but  a few  days  in  this  department  he  had 
already  won  the  high,  esteem  of  all  here. 

In  the  charge  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut  they  lost  Capt.  H.  A.  Wells 
and  Lieuts.  W.  W.  Perkins,  T.  I).  Hill,  and  J.  C.  Coffing,  all  good  and 
excellent  offiijers,  who  died  doing  a gallant  duty. 

For  many  details  of  distinguished  services  of  individual  officers  I beg 
to  refer  to  the  brigade  and  regimental  reports  herewith  inclosed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

Major-General^  Commanding  Dejgartment. 

Maj.  Gen.  IT.  W.  Halleck, 

General-m-ChieJ]  U.  S.  Army^  Washington^  D.  G. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  81.  1 N'ew  Berne  J JDecemher  26,  1862. 

The  commanding  gmieral  desires  to  thank  the  troops  under  his  com- 
mand for  the  new  proof  of  tlieir  courage  and  steadiness  afforded  by  the 
recent  expedition.  The  veteran  brigade  of  General  Wessells  and  the 
troops  of  this  department  alike  did  their  duty  as  soldiers  well. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

SOUTHAED  HOFFMAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Omitted. 


t But  sec  revised  statement,  p.  GO. 


[Chap.  1^%^. 


60  " NORTH  CAROLliTA  AND  S.  E.  VlROlNiA. 

Gene.RAL  Orders,  ) IIdqrs.  Bigiiteentii  Army  Corps, 

jNo.  18.  i Neiv  Berne^  January  15,  18G3. 

In  coni^Mcleration  of  and  as  a reward  for  tlieir  brave  deeds  at  Kinston, 
White  HaH,  and  Goldsborongli,  the  commanding  general  directs  that  the 
regiments  .and  batteries  which  accompanied  the  expedition  to  Golds- 
borough  inscribe  ui)oii  their  banners  those  three  victories: 

Kinston,  Deceml)er  14,  1862. 

White  Hall,  December  16, 1862. 

Goldsborou.gh,  December  17,  1862. 

The  commanding  general  hopes  that  all  future  lields  will  be  so  fought 
that  the  record  of  them  may  be  kept  by  inscription  on  the  banners  of 
the  regiments  emgaged. 

By  command  of  Map  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

[SOUTHAED  HOFFMAN,] 

Assifita^it  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  2. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces.  * 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  etc.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

j Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

j Officers. 

Enlisted  men.' 

TOtll ...  - 

3 

8 

6 

83 

100 

Jirl  Afn,s«a,f*.iinsftt,t,a  

2 

2 

fit'll  ATnesnp.bnsot.ts 

7 

7 

ATn.aanp.linsfti.ts  . . 

1 

4 

25 

2 

32 

9;{i1  AT  nfisnoTiiispitts  

12 

2 

53 

67 

^,4tB  \f 

1 

7 

8 

2.')th  Massachusetts ..... ..... 

1 

3 

1 

.5 

27th  Massachusetts 

1 

2 

3 

42fl  ATa,«sa,r,linsot,t.s 

2 

1 

1 

4 

4Jt,li  ATaasa.i'.lmaetta 

8 

13 

21 

A.fitli  M a.ssa elm sot.ta 

18 

1 

58 

77 

ATa.sisar.hn.sott.^  . . 

1 

3 

4 

filst,  Ma,ssaf’,hnsot,t.'^  

2 

nth  Now  ,Torft(»,y  ..  ..  

5 

1 

85 

4 

95 

rtd  Now  York  Ca.va.lrv  

G 

4 

10 

3(1  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Batteries  B,  E,  F,  H, 

5 

2 

25 

32 

I,  and  K. 

Ncav  York  Light  Artillery,  24th  Battery  (section) 

1 

1 

New  York  Marine  Artillery 

1 

2 

3 

85th  New  Yoi'k 

3 

3 

92d  New  York 

3 

1 

]5 

19 

9()th  New  York 

1 

1 

7 

85th  Pennsyl vani.a 

1 

8 

9 

i 103d  Pennsylvania 

16 

1 

52 

69 

Ist  Ithode  Island  Liglit  Artillory,  Battory  F 

2 

5 

7 

.5th  Bhode  Island 

1 

3 

4 

■'Total 

4 j 

88 

19 

468  1 

1 

12 

591 

1 

1 

OJTK^ere  killed:  Capt.  Henry  A.  Wells,  Lieuts.  William  W.  rerlcins  and  Theron  1).  Hill,  Tcntli  Cou- 
*>ccticu<;,  and  Col.  Cliarles  O.  Gray,  Ninety-sixth  Now  York,  at  Kinston,  December  14. 

OjDicer.s  mortally  wounded:  Lieuts.  John  C.  Coiling  and  John  M.  Simms,  Tenth  Connecticut. 


Emluviw.s  lo.SHcs  in  skinuislics  on  the  Kinston  road,  December  11  and  12;  skir- 
mishes .a^t  .Southwest  Creek,  December  13-14;  engaj^emcnt  at  Kinston,  D<icemberl4; 
•enoajrcMi^iut  at  Wltite  Hall,  December  16;  skirmish  at  Thompson’s  Bridge  and  en- 
gagement at  Gold.sboronglt  Bridge,  December  17. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


61 


No.  3. 

Jiejjort  of  Caj)t,  David  A,  Taylor ^ Third, New  YorTc  Light  Artillery^  Chief 

Signal  Officer. 

IlDQRS.  Signal  Detachment,  Dept,  of  N.  C., 

New  Berne ^ Decemher  22,  1862. 

Sir  : Supplementary  to  the  report  already  made  out  (but  which  I was 
unable  to  forward  before  this  time),  I forward  the  following  report  of  the 
l)roeeedings  of  the  detachment  under  my  command : 

On  the  11th  day  of  December,  1862,  I accompanied  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G. 
Foster  on  an  expedition  to  Goldsborough,  taking  with  me  the  following- 
named  officers  with  their  men,  viz:  Joseph  Fricker,  first  lieutenant. 
Eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  and  acting  signal  officer;  F.  Schlach- 
ter,  first  lieutenant,  Eleventh  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  acting  signal 
officer;  Henry  T.  Merrill,  second  lieutenant.  Seventeenth  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  and  acting  signal  officer;  0.  0.  F.  Keith,  second  lieutenant. 
Twenty-third  New  York  Volunteer  Artillery;  Edward  S.  Moffatt,  second 
lieuteiiant.  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers,  and  acting  signal  officer;  and 
N.  S.  Barstow,  second  lieutenant.  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers, and  acting  signal  officer. 

Unfortunately  Lieutenants  Merrill  and  Barstow  were  taken  sick  soon 
after  the  expedition  marched,  and  consequently  were  unable  to  take  an 
active  part  in  any  of  the  battles  which  were  fought  on  this  march. 

On  Sunday,  the  14th  instant,  the  battle  of  Kinston  was  fought.  As 
the  battle  was  fought  in  a thick  swamp  there  was  no  possible  oppor- 
tunity for  signaling  until  just  at  the  close  of  the  action,  after  the  en- 
emy was  driven  into  the  open  ground  and  across  the  Neuse  Kiver 
Bridge,  when  I saw  a favorable  opportunity  to  charge  upon  and  cap- 
ture two  regiments  of  rebels,  and  accordingly  I signaled  back  to  Gen- 
eral Foster  to  send  forward  a light  battery  and  the  cavalry  which  were 
already  across  the  bridge;  but  the  general  instead  sent  up  a flag  of  truce 
and  asked  them  to  surrender,  which  of  course  they  did  not  do,  but  suc- 
ceeded in  escaping,  as  before  treating  they  demanded  and  obtained  a 
half  houFs  time,  during  which  time  the  Union  forces  should  remain 
halted  at  Kinston.  I was  most  of  the  time  occupied  in  carrying  orders 
and  placing  troops  in  position  and  was  with  my  flagmen  a fourth  of  a 
mile  in  advance  of  the  leading  regiment. 

At  night  I accompanied  a company  of  cavalry  to  the  rebel  batteries, 
4 miles  below  Kinston,  and  assisted  in  bringing  off  four  field  pieces 
and  destroying  an  8-inch  columbiad  and  a 32-pounder  siege  gun,  which 
were  in  position  in  the  batteries,  and  with  which  the  enemy  had  in  the 
early  part  of  the  day  driven  oft  our  gunboats. 

On  the  16th  instant  General  Foster  fought  the  battle  of  White  Hall, 
on  the  Neuse  Eiver.  As  soon  as  the  battle  commenced  I placed  my 
ohicers  in  the  most  prominent  positions  on  the  field,  and  accompanied 
by  Private  Jacob  A.  Keed,  Gompany  I,  Third  New  York  Artillery, 
went  in  with  the  leading  regiment  and  examined  the  position  of  the 
enemy.  After  obtaining  a close  and  accurate  survey  of  their  works 
and  position,  I opened  a station  under  a severe  fire  of  musketry  and 
called  for  some  field  guns  to  be  sent  to  me,  which  General  Foster  im- 
mediately forwarded.  Ui)on  their  arrival  I placed  them  in  position  and 
twice  sighted  the  guns  myself.  The  fire  of  the  guns  was  very  effectual. 


62 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


driving  the  enemy  out  of  the  works  they  occupied;  also  completely  rid- 
dling a half-finished  gunboat  which  the  enemy  had  on  the  stocks  upon 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river^  and  were  occupying  as  a rifle- work  at  the 
time. 

While  sending  the  message  for  the  guns  I was  hit  by  a musket-shot 
on  the  index  finger  of  the  right  hand^  but  fortunately  was  not  much 
hurt.  My  flag  received  three  shots  through  it.  Private  Eeed  behaved 
with  great  coolness  all  through  the  engagement.  Toward  the  close  of 
the  action  I was  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  withdraw  the  artillery 
and  pick  out  and  post  as  many  sharpshooters  as  would  cover  the  en- 
emy’s position,  which  I accordingly  did,  under  one  of  the  severest 
musketry  fires  I have  ever  seen. 

On  the  17th  instant  General  Foster  fought  the  battle  of  Goldsborough. 
Tlie  object  of  the  action  was  to  gain  possession  of  the  railroad  bridge 
over  the  Neuse  Kiver.  The  action  was  a double  one,  the  first  being  in 
tlie  morning,  the  second  in  the  evening.  In  the  morning  the  rebels, 
after  a little  skirmishing,  retreated  across  the  railroad  bridge,  but  kept 
up  a sharp  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  on  our  advance.  I went  im- 
mediately on  to  tho  railroad,  placing  Lieutenant  Schlachter  with  Gen- 
eral Foster  and  other  officers  with  different  brigadiers  and  artillery. 
After  getting  on  the  railroad  I went  immediately  forward  of  the  skir- 
inishers,  and  at  every  favorable  point  made  close  observations  of  the 
enemy’s  position,  and  finding  it  impossible  to  cross  the  bridge  I called 
for  artillery,  which  immediately  came  forward,  took  position,  and  com- 
menced shelling  the  enemy  with  very  decided  effect. 

After  the  bridge  was  carried  and  burned  and  our  batteries  had  silenced 
the  enemy’s  fire,  General  Foster  drew  off*  his  forces,  supposing  the  bat- 
tle was  over;  but  after  about  three  hours  the  enemy  came  on  with  two 
brigades  of  infantry  and  one  battery  from  some  crossing  of  the  river  above 
the  bridge  and  commenced  an  attack  upon  our  rear,  of  which  Lieutenant 
Keith  immediately  informed  me  by  signal  and  I informed  the  general. 
The  battle  now  renewed  was  soon  ended,  with  very  severe  loss  to  the 
enemy  and  very  slight  loss  to  us. 

On  account  of  the  exceedingly  difficult  nature  of  the  country  and  the 
inexperience  of  my  officers  less  signaling  was  done'  than  otherwise 
Avould  have  been.  Both  officers  and  men  behaved  as  became  soldiers 
and  gentlemen,  and  when  this  detachment  shall  have  had  sufficient 
field  iiractice  they  will  compare  favorably  with  any  that  I am  acquainted 
with.  I take  this  occasion  to  recommend  to  your  favorable  considera- 
tion Lieuts.  0.  0.  F.  Keith,  E.  S.  Mofi'att,  F.  Schlachter,  and  Joseph 
Fricker  as  capable  and  efficient  officers;  and  Privates  Jacob  A.  Peed, 
Company  I,  Third  Kew  York  Artillery ; Samuel  N.  Kogers,  Company  A, 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers;  William  K. "Baker,  Company 
1),  Eighth  Pennsylvania  Eeserve  Volunteer  Corps;  Pulaski  Ilindes, 
Company  G,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers,  and  William  J.  Lindsay, 
First  Pennsylvania  Eifles,  as  cool,  brave,  energetic  men,  always  ready 
for  any  undertaking,  however  desperate,  attentive  to  their  duties,  intel- 
ligent and  cai)able,  precisely  the  men  needed  in  this  corps,  and  1 take 
pleasure  in  recommending  them  to  the  department,  and  hope  they  will 
receive  a suitable  promotion. 

Although  somewhat  foreign  to  this  rejmrt,  I cannot  refrain  from  men- 
tioning the  conduct  of  Privates  H.  P.  Baker,  Company  E,  Tliird  New 
York  Artillery,  and  Lucius  D.  Craft,  Company  D,  Eighth  Pennsylvania 
Eilles  Volunteer  Corps,  who,  just  at  the  close  of  the  battle  of  Kinston, 
rode  a mile  or  so  to  the  left  of  the  line  of  battle  and  captured  and 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


63 


brouglit  ill  ii  major,  ii  captain,  and  some  30  non- commissioned  officers 
and  privates.  An  act  of  rash  bravery  rarely  equaled. 

All  which  is  respectfnll}^  submitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  A.  TAYLOE, 

Captain  and  Chief  Acting  Signal  Officer ^ Dept,  of  N.  C. 

Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Signal  Officer ^ U.  S.  Army. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  James  R.  Ledlie,  Th  ird  Neiv  Yorlc  Light  Artillery Chief  of 
Artillery^  commanding  Artillery  Brigade. 

EIeadquarters  Artillery  Brigade, 

Reiv  Berne.,  N.  6\,  December  24,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations 
of  this  brigade  in  connection  with  the  recent  expedition : 

The  artillery  under  my  command  consisted  of  Batteries  B,  E,  F,  Ef, 
I,  and  K,  Third  New  York  Artillery^  Battery  F,  First  Ehode  Island 
Artillery,  and  a section  each  of  the  Twenty-third  and  Twenty-fourth 
New  York  Independent  Batteries. 

Leaving  New  Berne  December  11,  at  7 a.  m.,  marched  14  miles, 
About  5 p.  m.,  December  12,  the  Twenty-third  New  York  Independent 
Battery,  Captain  Ransom,  Avas  left,  with  the  Fifty-first  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  to  guard  the  bridge  over  Beaver  Creek,  13  miles  from  Kins- 
ton. Captain  Ransom  remained  there  until  the  14th,  when  he  moved 
toward  Kinston,  and,  supported  by  a company  of  the  Fifth  IMassachu- 
setts  Volunteers,  was  assigned  to  the  defense  of  a bridge  near  there. 
On  the  15th  he  rejoined  the  main  column. 

About  9 a.  m.  December  13  the  right  section  of  Battery  B,  Third  New 
York  Artillery,  under  Lieutynant  Day,  which  had  been  sent  in  advance 
of  the  main  column  with  a squadron  of  cavalry,  engaged  a force  of  the 
enemy  at  Southwest  Creek  and  shelled  an  earthwork  commanding  the 
bridge.  The  remaining  two  sections  of  Battery  B,  under  Captain  Mor- 
rison, were  shortly  after  brought  up  and  fired  about  40  rounds.  Bat- 
teries E,  F,  H,  and  K,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  were  brought  into 
liosition  on  the  center  and  left  of  our  line,  but  did  not  open  fire. 

December  14,  the  skirmishers  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers 
having  engaged  the  enemy,  the  right  section  of  Battery  B,  Third  New 
York  Artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Day,  was  sent  forward  and  took  posi- 
tion in  the  road  leading  to  the  river  bridge.  The  remaining  sections  of 
the  battery,  under  Ca]>tain  Morrison,  were  posted  in  an  open  held  on 
the  right  of  the  road  and  shelled  the  woods.  Battery  F,  Third  New 
York  Artillery,  Captain  Jeniiey,  came  into  battery  on  the  left  of  the 
road,  200  yards  in  rear,  and  fired  at  the  bridge  at  the  distance  of  1} 
miles,  the  direction  and  distance  being  given  by  a guide.  Batteries  F 
and  I,  Third  NeAV  York  Artillery,  were  ordered  to  the  support  of  Cap- 
tain Morrison,  and  a section  of  Caiitain  Jenney’s  battery,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Birchmeyer,  Avas  then  ordered  to  the  siqijiort  of  Colonel  Heck- 
man, Ninth  New  Jersey,  on  the  extreme  right,  and  opened  on  the  enemy 
with  great  effect.  The  remaining  two  sections  of  the  battery  Avere  soon 
aft/u  sent  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Heckman,  and,  moving  down  within 


64 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CuAP.  XXX. 


a short  distaiice  of  the  bridge,  opened  a destructive  fire  upon  the  enemy 
attempting  to  cross,  etfectually  cutting  olf  their  retreat.  Under  cover 
of  this  fire  a part  of  the  cannoneers  of  Battery  U,  assisted  by  a few  of  the 
Ten  til  Connecticut,  extinguished  the  fires  which  the  enemy  had  kindled 
on  the  bridge.  Battery  B,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  which  was  now 
moved  forward  and  posted  on  the  left,  opened  with  canister  on  the 
woods,  and  Batteries  E and  I,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  took  position 
in  a field  on  the  right.  At  this  time  41  privates  and  2 commissioned 
officers,  belonging  to  the  enemy,  surrendered  as  prisoners  to  Captain 
Morrison,  of  Battery  B,  who  sent  them  to  the  rear  under  guard.  About 
one  hour  later  Batteries  E and  I moved  forward  to  the  bank  of  the  river 
and  shelled  the  enemy  over  the  town.  Action  closed  about  1 p.  m. 

Loss  in  artillery  brigade  at  Kinston:  Battery  B,  Third  New  York 
Artillery,  1 man  wounded  j Battery  E,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  5 men 
wounded.  Loss  in  horses  quite  heavy. 

The  Twenty-fourth  New  York  Independent  Battery,  Capt.  Lee,  Avhich 
had  been  ordered,  December  13,  up  the  main  road  to  a point  7 miles  from 
Kinston,  encamped  there  with  the  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  one  piece,  under  Lieutenant  Cady,  was 
sent  up  the  road  with  a detachment  of  cavalry,  and  opened  on  the 
enemy,  who  were  behind  intrenchments,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery,  at 
a point  where  Southwest  Creek  crosses  the  direct  road  to  Kinston.  The 
enemy  retired  after  a brisk  engagement  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour, 
and  after  the  battle  of  Kinston  the  Twenty -fourth  Battery  rejoined  our 
main  column,  December  16. 

The  affair  at  White  Hall,  Tuesday,  December  16,  commenced  about 
9.30  a.  m.  by  a skirmish  between  a detachment  of  the  Third  NeAv  York 
Cavalry,  accompanied  by  the  Twenty-third  New  York  Independent  Bat- 
tery, Captain  Kansom,  and  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters.  Tffiis  skirmish 
lasted  but  a few  minutes,  after  which  the  cavalry  and  battery  moved 
forward  past  the  enemy’s  position.  Shortly  after,  the  Seventeenth  Mas- 
sachusetts, Lieutenant-Colonel  Fellows,  having  enga'ged  the  enemy. 
Battery  F,  Captain  Jenney,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  was  posted  on 
the  hill- side  directly  opposite  the  enemy’s  works  and  opened  fire.  One 
gun  of  this  battery  burst  at  about  the  twentieth  round. 

At  10.30  a.  m.  Battery  K,  Captain  Angel,  Third  New  York  Artillery, 
was  sent  to  the  support  of  Captain  Jenney  and  posted  on  his  right. 
The  right  section  of  Captain  Jenney ’s  battery,  under  command  of  Lieut. 
J.  F.  Dennis,  was  then  sent  forward  and  posted  on  the  left  of  the  bridge, 
across  the  river.  Battery  E,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  Lieutenant 
Ashby  commanding,  and  Battery  F,  First  Khode  Island  xArtillery,  Cap- 
tain Belger,  were  shortly  afterward  put  in  position  on  the  hill  above 
Batteries  F and  K,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  and  opened  fire.  The 
Twenty-fourth  New  York  Battery,  Captain  Lee,  was  then  posted  in  the 
swamp  on  the  right  of  our  line.  Battery  I,  Third  New  York  Artillery, 
Lieutenant  Thomas,  was  sent  forward  to  the  left  of  the  bridge,  and  a 
section  of  Battery  K,  Third  New  York  Artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Mer- 
sereau,  was  also  brought  up  to  that  point.  Battery  H,  Third  New  York 
Artillery,  Captain  Biggs,  was  now  placed  at  about  the  center  of  our 
line,  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  and,  together  with  Captain  Belger’s  bat- 
tery, which  had  been  posted  on  the  right  of  the  bridge,  opened  upon 
the  enemy  at  a point-blank  range.  The  action  terminated  a little  aftei 
12  m.,  the  enemy’s  batteries  having  been  comi)letely  silenced. 

I desire  particularly  to  mention  the  gallant  conduct  of  Lieut.  J.  F. 
Dennis,  commanding  the  advanced  section  of  Battery  F,  Third  New 


Chap.  XXX, ] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


65 


York  Artillery,  who  maintained  his  position  until  his  ammunition  was 
exhausted,  under  a very  severe  fire  from  the  enemy^s  sharpshooters, 
and  worked  at  his  guns  liimself  after  a large  number  of  his  men  had 
been  shot  down. 

The  Twenty-third  Few  York  Independent  Battery,  Captain  Eansom, 
after  passing  White  Hall  on  the  morning  of  the  IGtii,  marched  with  the 
cavalry  command  of  Major  Garrard  to  Mount  Olive,  on  the  Wilmington 
and  Weldon  Eailroad,  and  assisted  in  tearing  up  the  railroad  track, 
burning  the  trestle-work,  and  destroying  the  telegraph  at  that  point. 
Thence,  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  marched  to  Thompson’s  Bridge, 
on  the  Feuse,  9 miles  below  Goldsborough.  At  that  point  a brisk  en- 
gagement ensued,  during  which  two  sections  of  Battery  K,  Third  Few 
York  Artillery,  Captain  Angel,  came  to  Captain  Eansom’s  support. 
After  thirty  minutes  the  combined  efforts  of  these  batteries  completely 
silenced  the  enemy’s  fire,  both  of  musketry  and  artillery.  About  mid- 
night they  rejoined  the  main  column. 

Loss  in  artillery  brigade  at  White  Hall : Battery  E,  Third  Few  York 
Artillery,  3 men  wounded ; Battery  F,  Third  Few  York  Artillery,  5 
men  v^^ounded ; Battery  I,  Third  Few  York  Artillery,  1 man  wounded ; 
Battery  K,  Third  Few  York  Artillery,  2 men  killed,  5 men  wounded ; 
Battery  F,  First  Ehode  Island  Artillery,  2 men  killed,  2 men  wounded; 
Twenty-fourth  Few  York  Independent  Battery,  1 man  killed.  Loss  in 
horses  very  heavy. 

About  11  a.  m.  Wednesday,  December  17,  the  skirmishers  of  the 
Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  Finth  Few  Jersey  Volun- 
teers having  engaged  the  enemy.  Battery  H,  Third  Few  York  Artillery, 
Captain  Eiggs,  was  ordered  to  the  front  and  posted  on  an  elevation  over- 
looking the  railroad  track.  A few  rounds  of  spherical  case  scattered 
the  enemy,  Avho  took  refuge  in  the  woods.  Battery  B,  Third  Few  York 
Artillery,  was  then  brought  into  position  on  the  right  of  and  close  to 
the  railroad  track,  and  opened  upon  the  bridge,  which  was  visible  at 
about  200  yards  distance.  Batteries  E and  I,  Third  Few  York  Artil- 
lery, Maj.  T.  J.  Kennedy  commanding,  now  moved  forward,  opening 
upon  the  railroad  monitor  and  the  enemy’s  battery  on  the  other  side  ot 
the  bridge.  The  effect  of  this  concentrated  fire  was  very  destructive. 
The  railroad  bridge,  which  had  been  fired  by  Lieutenant  Graham,  aide- 
de-camp  to  Colonel  Heckman,  was  torn  down  in  about  half  an  hour 
and  the  enemy’s  battery  and  monitor  completely  silenced.  The  bat- 
teries then  retired.  Captain  Morrison  taking  position  on  an  elevation 
commanding  the  Avhole  open  field.  Between  3 and  4 p.  m.,  after  our 
forces,  with  the . exception  of  Colonel  Lee’s  brigade,  had  taken  up  the 
line  of  march,  two  regiments  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  formed  across  the 
railroad  track,  cheering  and  waving  their  colors,  and  charged  upon 
Captain  Morrison’s  battery.  He  opened  upon  them  first  Avith  spherical 
case  and  then  with  double  canister  with  deadly  effect,  literally  mowing 
them  down.  Belger’s  Ehode  Island  battery  was  ordered  up  and  opened 
fire  to  the  left,  where  the  woods  Avere  lined  with  rebel  infantry.  The 
enemy  then  opened  a well-directed  fire  upon  us  from  a concealed  bat- 
tery. Battery  H,  Third  Few  York  Artillery,  Captain  Eiggs,  was  or- 
dered to  the  support  of  Captain  Belger  and  posted  on  his  left,  opposite 
the  enemy’s  right  Hank.  After  an  hour’s  Augorous  cannonading  the 
enemy’s  fire,  both  of  musketry  and  artillery,  was  completely  silenced 
by  Captains  Belger  and  Eiggs,  and,  as  night  was  closing  in,  orders  were 
received  to  retire,  Avhich  was  done  in  the  best  order.  One  section  of 
Battery  H,  under  Lieutenant  Clark,  was  left  with  the  rear  guard. 

Loss  in  artillery  brigade  at  Goldsborough : Battery  B,  Third  Few 
5 R R— VOL  XVIII 


-66  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

York  Artillery,  2 men  wounded ; Battery  K,  Third  New  York  Artillery, 
1 man  wounded  j Battery  F,  First  Khode  Island  Light  Artillery,  ^ men 
wounded.  Loss  in  horses  slight. 

The  officers  of  the  various  batteries,  without  exception,  handled  their 
commands  with  coolness  and  skill,  and  when  all  did  so  well  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  particularize. 

I desire  to  mention  Majors  Stone  and  Kennedy,  who  commanded  the 
reserve  artillery,  for  the  i)rompt  manner  in  which  they  brought  their 
batteries  into  action,  and  the  efficiency  with  which  they  were  served ; 
also  the  members  of  ray  personal  staff,  Lieut.  Alexander  H.  Davis, 
Lieut.  E.  P.  Peters,  and  Chaplain  William  Hart,  volunteer  aides-de- 
camp,  who  were  constantly  under  fire  during  the  engagements,  for  the 
promptness  displayed  by  them  in  performing  the  various  duties  assigned 
them.  Lieut.  Frederick  W.  Prince,  acting  brigade  quartermaster,  was 
also  indefatigable  in  his  exertions. 

JAMES  H.  LEDLIE, 

OoL,  Comdg.  Arty.  Brig,  and  Chief  of  Arty. ^ Dept,  of  B'.  G. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.^  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  5. 

Deport  of  Capt.  Edwin  S.  Jenney,  Battery  F,  Third  New  York  Light  Ar- 
tillery^ of  engagements  at  Kinston  and  White  Kallj  December  14  and  16. 

Hdqrs.  Battery  F,  Third  New  York  Vol.  Artillery, 

New  Berne^  N.  (7.,  December  21,  1862. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your 
order  my  battery  joined  the  First  Brigade,  commanded  by  Colonel 
Amory,  and  marched  from  New  Berne  Thursday,  the  llth  instant.  On 
the  14th  instant  we  arrived  within  2 miles  of  Kinston,  without  anything 
occurring  except  the  usual  casualties  of  a march  in  an  enemy’s  country. 
By  your  order  my  battery  then  came  into  battery  in  an  opening  on  the 
left  of  the  road  for  the  purpose  of  shelling  Kinston.  After  expending 
about  120  rounds  of  ammunition  I ceased  firing,  by  order  of  Major-Gen- 
eral Foster,  and  sent  my  left  section,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Birch- 
meyer,  to  support  Colonel  Heckman’s  position,  on  our  right  flank,  and, 
by  your  order,  posted  my  other  two  sections  about  half  a mile  nearer 
Kinston,  in  a field  on  the  right-hand  side  the  road.  Lieutenant  Birch- 
meyer’s  position  was  about  600  yards  in  front  of  the  rebel  battery,  which 
was  upon  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  and  which  was  defended  by 
breastworks,  the  river  and  an  open  field  being  between.  He  held  this 
position  alone,  and  did  fine  execution,  until  his  fuse-shells  were  ex- 
pended, when  the  rest  of  my  battery,  by  your  order  proceeded  into 
the  same  position.  After  shelling  the  rebel  battery  for  a short  time 
the  enemj^  retreated  from  that  place,  and  Colonel  Heckman  commenced 
a fiank  movement  toward  the  bridge. 

The  infantry  marched  directly  across  the  field,  while  my  battery,  by 
order  of  Colonel  Amory,  crossed  to  the  left,  nearer  the  bridge,  and 
commenced  a vigorous  fire  of  canister  and  shell  upon  the  retreating 
enemy.  About  four  rounds  had  been  discharged  when  I observed  the 
rebels  were  firing  the  bridge.  I immediately  moved  my  battery  to  the 
end  of  the  bridge,  arriving  there  before  any  other  troops — by  this  move- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


67 


ment  cutting  off  the  retreat  of  some  of  the  enemy,  who  were  yet  upon 
this  side  of  the  river.  Lieutenant  Birchmeyer,  commanding  left  section, 
and  First  Sergeant  Van  Heusen,  commanding  center  section,  brought 
forward  their  cannoneers  with  watering  buckets,  and,  assisted  by  a 
very  few  volunteers  from  the  Tenth  Connecticut,  extinguished  the  fire 
upon  the  bridge,  Lieutenant  Dennis  supporting  them  by  a rapid  fire  of 
canister  from  his  section.  My  loss  at  this  place  was  as  follows : Three 
men  wounded — James  H.  Dunlap,  guidon,  in  the  thigh  5 Alexander  Ful- 
lerton, corporal,  in  the  arm  j Charles  Baughman,  private,  in  the  breast; 
and  5 horses  killed. 

We  encamped  in  Kinston,  and  the  next  morning  we  resumed  our 
march.  In  the  afternoon  Lieutenant  Dennis,  with  his  section,  was  or- 
dered forward  with  the  cavalry  to  White  Hall,  where  he  opened  fire 
upon  a rebel  gunboat  in  process  of  construction  and  succeeded  in  par- 
tially destroying  it,  when  he  returned  to  the  battery,  which  was  en- 
camped with  the  division. 

On  the  16th  instant  we  resumed  the  march,  my  battery  being  in  the 
advance.  When  near  White  Hall  I was  ordered  forward  and  opened 
fire  upon  a rebel  battery,  situated  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river, 
about  1,000  yards  distant.  My  right  section  was  posted  upon  the  bank 
of  the  river,  where  the  bridge  had  been  burned,  about  200  yards  distant 
from  the  enemy^s  battery.  I kept  up  a continuous  fire  until  my  ammu- 
nition was  exhausted,  when  I retired  by  your  order.  During  the  hot- 
test of  the  fire  one  of  my  guns  burst,  injuring  no  one. 

My  losses  at  this  place  are  as  follows : Six  men  wounded  and  8 horses 
killed.* 

Immediately  after  the  engagement  we  moved  on  with  the  column. 

Our  ammunition  being  exhausted  we  did  not  participate  in  the  en- 
gagement near  Goldsborough. 

We  arrived  at  our  camp  on  the  20th  instant. 

My  total  casualties  are  as  follows : Kine  men  wounded ; 13  horses 
killed. 

I desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  meritorious  conduct  of  First 
Sergt.  Stephen  Yan  Heusen,  who  commanded  my  center  section,  and 
behaved  gallantly  both  at  Kinston  and  White  Hall.  I beg  leave  to 
recommend  him  for  x3romotion  to  a lieutenancy.  My  non-commissioned 
officers  and  privates  fought  bravely,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  dis- 
criminate between  them. 

I am,  colonel,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  S.  JENNEY, 

Captain^  Comdg.  Battery  jP,  Third  New  York  Vol.  Artillery. 

Col.  James  H.  Ledlie, 

Commanding  Artillery  Brigade. 


No.  6. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Charles  Fitz  Simmons,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  of 
operations  December  15  and  17. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  15th 
instant  I proceeded  along  the  Goldsborough  road  from  Kinston  with 

Nominal  loss  omitted.  Casualties  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  60. 


68 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[CiiAV.  XXX.. 


Companies  B,  E,  and  H,  and  one  of  Allis’  mountain  howitzers,  all  of  this- 
regiment.  My  instructions  were  to  simply  make  a feint  toward  Golds- 
borougli  and  to  capture  any  of  the  stragglers  that  might  he  found.  I was 
also  cautioned  not  to  delay  any  longer  than  it  was  necessary  to  allow  the- 
main  column  to  recross  the  bridge  at  Kinston ; then  to  countermarch  and 
act  as  rear  guard.  After  going  G miles  my  advance,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant  Greig,  Company  H,  came  up  with  12  mounted  vedettes  of 
the  enemy.  After  a brisk  chase  of  3 miles  they  got  away ; not,  however, 
before  one  of  them  was  wounded  by  the  lieutenant.  About  800  yards 
distant  from  the  spot  where  I concluded  the  farther  chase  to  be  fruit- 
less I imagined  I heard  the  noise  of  an  engine;  and,  as  I thought  the 
feint  would  be  more  effective  if  cannon  shots  were  fired,  I ordered  the 
howitzer  in  position  and  fired  five  rounds  of  spherical  case-shot.  After 
the  third  discharge  the  engine  whistled  and  went  toward  Goldsborough. 
I sent  some  men  forward,  under  Captain  Willson,  of  Company  H,  to  re- 
connoiter.  They  took  2 prisoners,  South  Carolinians,  who  refused  to- 
give  anj’  information  further  than  that  the  train  came  down  from  Golds- 
borough that  morning  with  troops,  and  had  retired  upon  finding  us  ad- 
vancing. 

I returned  to  Kinston  without  further  casualties  and  joined  the  maiui 
column. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

• CHAS.  FITZ  SIMMONS, 
Major,  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry, 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry. 


Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  December  17,  instant,. 
I was  detached  from  the  main  column  of  General  Foster’s  army,  then  en> 
route  to  Goldsborough  Bridge,  with  Company  B,  Captain  Moschell,  and 
Company  C,  Lieutenant  Mayes,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  rail- 
road at  Dudley  Station,  a point  5 miles  distant  from  Goldsborough) 
Bridge,  on  the  Goldsborough  and  Wilmington  Kailroad.  Upon  enter- 
ing the  town  the  enemy’s  pickets,  some  20  in  number,  scattered  right 
and  left  in  the  direction  of  Mount  Olive  and  Goldsborough.  I in  pur- 
suance of  orders  proceeded  to  tear  up  the  track,  destroying  the  rails 
by  piling  up  and  interspersing  them  with  dry  lumber  found  at  the  sta- 
tion. 1 also  burned  two  trestle-work  culverts,  a train  of  four  railroad 
cars,  water-station,  depot,  and  storehouse.  In  the  storehouse  were  some 
50  muskets  and  10  sabers,  of  no  great  value,  and  having  no  means  of 
transportation  I threw  them  into  the  flames.  With  the  arms  was  a rebel 
flag,  “the  Stars  and  Bars,”  which  I took  away  with  me. 

Having  remained  at  Dudley  two  hours,  to  be  sure  that  no  attempt 
Avhich  might  be  made  to  save  the  railroad  would  be  successful,  I re- 
turned by  a short  cut  to  the  main  column,  which  I found  engaged  wirF 
the  enemy  at  Goldsborough  Bridge.  • 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

CHAS.  FITZ  SIMMONS, 
Major,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 


Ohap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


6,9 


No.  7. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Jeptha  Garrard,  Third  New  Yorlc  Cavalry,  of  operations 

December  15-17. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  orders  from 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster  I took  three  companies  of  the  Third  New  York 
Cavalry  and  one  section  of  Jenney’s  battery  Third  New  York  Artillery 
on  the  evening  of  December  15  and  marched  to  White  Hall,  on  the 
Neuse  Kiver.  No  enemy  was  found  on  the  south  side  of  the  river. 
The  artillery  threw  eight  or  ten  shells  into  a skeleton  gunboat  on  the 
opposite  side.  Private  Butler,  of  Company  C,  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 
volunteered  to  swim  the  river  and  set  fire  to  the  boat.  He  did  swim 
over,  though  shot  at  three  times,  and  returned  safely.  The  command 
then  marched  to  camp. 

Very  respectfully, 

JEPTHA  GARRARD, 

Major,  Third  New  Toric  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 


Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  orders  from 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster  I marched,  on  December  16,  with  two  guns  of 
Ransom’s  battery  Twenty-third  New  York  Artillery  and  five  companies 
of  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  to  Mount  Olive  Station,  on  the  Golds- 
borough  and  Wilmington  Railroad,  14  miles  below  Goldsborough.  The 
railroad  was  destroyed  at  this  point  for  about  1 mile.  Four  miles  be- 
yond this  point,  toward  Wilmington,  a bridge  over  the  Goshen  Swamp 
was  destroyed,  and  between  Mount  Olive  Station  and  this  bridge  the 
road  was  torn  up  and  burned  in  five  places. 

The  object  of  the  march  being  fully  accomplished  the  command  re- 
turned to  camp. 

Yery  respectfully, 

JEPTHA  GARRARD, 

Major,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 


Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  December  17,  in  obedience 
to  orders  from -Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  I marched,  with  four  companies 
Third  New  York  Cavalry  and  two  guns  of  Ransom’s  battery  Twenty- 
third  New  York  Artillery,  to  Thompson’s  Bridge  to  burn  said  bridge. 
The  bridge  was  found  to  be  already  burned  by  the  enemy.  The  enemy 
was  found  to  be  in  force  (artillery  and  infantry)  on  the  opposite  side. 
Re-enforcements  of  four  guns  of  Angel’s  battery  Third  New  York  Ar- 
tillery and  Forty-third  Regiment  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Holbrook,  were 
sent  to  hold  the  place  until  further  orders. 

At  8 o’clock  next  morning  the  command  rejoined  the  army. 

I wish  to  mention  Captain  Jacobs,  Company  E,  Third  New  York 
'Cavalry,  for  good  conduct  in  charging  down  to  the  bridge  under  fire. 

Very  respectfully, 

, JEPTHA  GARRARD, 

Major,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 


Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix. 


70 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Capt.  John  F,  Moschell^  Third  Few  Yorlc  Cavalry^  of  opera- 
tions December  11-16. 


Hdqrs.  Company  B,  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 

New  Berne ^ N.  C.,  December  20,  1862. 

Colonel:  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  instant  I,  in  command  of 
Companies  A and  B,  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  as  the  advance 
guard,  proceeded  on  the  Trent  road  as  far  as  the  Deep  Gully  (some  0 
miles)  and  halted  for  further  orders.  Orders  coming,  I went  on  some 
5 or  6 miles  farther,  capturing  one  of  the  enemy^s  pickets  without  firing 
a shot,  and  found  the  road  so  blockaded  as  to  impede  the  farther  ad- 
vance of  the  column  until  the  obstructions  were  removed.  Sending 
Lieutenant  Chamberlin  and  30  men  of  Company  A,  dismounted,  in  the 
woods  as  skirmishers  they  captured  a man  and  horse  of  the  enemy. 

While  waiting  to  have  the  pioneers  remove  the  obstructions  we  were 
sent,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mix,  to  make  a reconnais- 
sance to  the  left  of  the  main  road  about  a mile.  Ketnrning  we  biv- 
ouacked for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th  I proceeded  on  the  main  road  as  far  as- 
the  junction  of  the  Kinston  road,  where  Companies  B and  K,  Third 
New  York  Cavalry,  and  two  companies  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  formed 
the  advance  guard.  We  proceeded  on  the  Kinston  road  some  3 miles 
and  encountered  a force  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  about  100  strong,  as  the 
prisoners  reported.  I charged  on  them  with  Company  B for  about  IJ 
miles,  when,  coming  upon  an  ambush  of  some  150  infantry  behind  a 
ditch  and  rail  fence  in  the  pine  wood,  I ordered  a retreat,  and  rallied 
a quarter  of  a mile  this  side  of  the  ambush,  at  the  corner  of  a road 
leading  to  a house  on  the  right  of  the  road. 

I found  2 men  wounded — Private  Butler,  slightly  in  the  thigh  with 
buck-shot  (subsequently  cut  out  by  Surgeons  Palmer  and  Douglas),, 
and  Private  Kingsley,  severely  wounded  in  the  thigh  with  a musket- 
ball — and  4 men  missing,  viz,  Privates  Brightman,  Coon,  Good  speed 
(wounded),  and  Hart,  said  Butler’s  horse  being  killed  and  9 horses 
missing.  The  cause  of  so  many  horses  missing  was  a deep  ditch  filled 
with  water,  where  the  horses  fell,  throwing  their  riders,  and  recovering 
ran  away  into  the  enemy’s  lines. 

We  captured  1 lieutenant,  9 men,  and  2 horses.  We  also  killed  1 cap- 
tain and  4 men,  wounding  1 colonel  (Baker)  and  several  meu. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  both  officers  and  meu,  who  showed  personal 
bravery  and  efficiency  in  the  charge.  I cannot  close  this  report  with- 
out particular  mention  of  Lieutenant  Ebbs;  also  First  Sergt.  William 
B.  Shearer  and  Corporal  Kent  aud  Farrier  Allen.  The  sword  of  First 
Sergeant  Shearer  did  not  return  to  its  sheath  without  vengeance  on 
the  enemy,  as  their  arms  and  heads  plainly  show. 

I have  the  honor,  &c., 

JNO.  F.  MOSCHELL, 

Captain^  Commanding. 

Col.  John  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry. 


On  the  morning  of  the  13th  I was  sent  with  Company  B,  Third  New 
York  Cavalry,  on  a reconuaissance  on  the  Kinston  and  Trent  road,, 
where  it  branches  off,  some  9 miles  from  Kinston.  I proceeded  about 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOi^DSBOROUGH. 


71 


2 miles  and  came  across  4 mounted  pickets  at  a farm  or  plantation 
liouse.  My  vedettes  fired  upon  them  and  succeeded  in  capturing  a car- 
bine and  saddle,  but  the  men  and  horses  escaped  across  the  field  to  the 
woods.  I continued  on  this  road  some  3 miles  and  came  in  sight  of  1 
mounted  and  2 foot  pickets.  The  vedettes  fired  at  them,  one  running 
one  way,  the  other  two  the  other  way.  Continuing  on  a mile  farther 
we  came  upon  several  pickets  at  a bridge  about  3 miles  from  Kinston. 
They  fired  upon  my  vedettes,  who  returned  the  fire. 

Owing  to  limited  instructions  I returned  the  same  road  and  joined 
the  main  column  at  the  church,  some  6 miles  south  of  Kinston. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  F.  MOSCHELL. 


Ko.  9. 

Report  of  Capt.  Newton  Hall^  Third  Neiv  York  Cavalry^  of  operations 

December  12-16. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  afternoon  of  December 
12  I was  ordered  by  Major-General  Foster,  in  command  of  the  forces 
then  marching  against  Kinston,  to  take  three  companies  of  the  Third 
New  York  Cavalry,  viz.  Companies  A,  D,  and  G,  with  one  piece  of 
Lieutenant  Allis’  section  of  artillery,  under  his  (Lieutenant  Allis’)  com- 
mand, and  march  forward  on  the  direct  road  to  Kinston,  feeling  the 
enemy  and  making  as  strong  a demonstration  as  possible  with  my 
command.  I was  also  ordered  to  retire  after  having  made  this  demon- 
stration, to  build  large  camp  fires  for  the  night,  and  hold  the  road  until 
commanded  to  retire.  I immediately  moved  forward,  throwing  a platoon 
of  Company  A,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Chamberlin,  armed  with 
carbines,  in  front  of  the  column,  with  orders  to  proceed  cautiously  and 
give  immediate  notice  of  the  j)resence  of  the  enemy.  Proceeding  in 
this  manner  about  2 miles  our  advance  came  upon  two  cavalry  vedettes, 
dismounted,  with  their  horses  saddled,  but  unbridled,  and  tied  near  the 
road.  We  were  so  close  upon  them  that  they  were  unable  to  mount, 
and  started  off  across  the  field  for  the  wood  on  foot.  A shot  from  a 
carbine  caused  them  to  halt  and  they  were  taken  prisoners.  We  again 
moved  forward,  and,  having  gained  the  information  that  part  of  a com- 
pany of  infantry  was  stationed  at  a large  white  house  within  three- 
quarters  of  a mile  of  the  rebel  forces  encamped  at  Wise’s  Cross-Roads, 
I determined  if  possible  to  surprise  them.  Moving  with  even  greater 
caution  than  before,  we  had  advanced,  as  I judge,  nearly  half  the  dis- 
tance when  our  advance  came  unexiiectedly  upon  two  mounted  pickets, 
and,  charging  forward  upon  the  instant,  captured  them  without  noise 
or  alarm.  Sending  them  to  the  rear  we  again  advanced,  and  when  within 
about  a mile  of  the  main  guard  we  came  upon  an  infantry  picket,  and, 
learning  from  him  the  distance  to  the  house,  charged  in  a body.  As 
our  advance  approached  the  rebel  station  the  rebels  rushed  in  alarm 
and  confusion  from  the  house,  and  as  they  endeavored  to  get  into  line 
fired  a few  shots  at  us,  when,  unable  to  withstand  our  onset,  they  fled. 

The  skirmish  here  lasted  but  a few  minutes,  our  men  using  their  car- 
bines and  revolvers  freely,  leaving,  as  was  subsequently  ascertained,  13 
dead  and  dying  rebels  upon  the  ground  and  taking  11  prisoners,  be- 
sides those  previously  captured,  among  whom  was  1 commissioned  offi- 
cer. The  men  killed  and  11  of  the  prisoners  taken  belong  to  the  Twenty- 
second  South  Carolina  Regiment  j the  others  were  a part  of  Major 


72 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Nethercutt’s  command.  After  I had  secured  the  prisoners  I ordered  the 
house  to  be  set  on  fire,  which  was  done,  and,  firing  a shell  from  the 
howitzer  as  a parting  salute,  I slowly  retired  2 or  3 miles,  built  large 
camp  fires,  posted  a strong  guard,  and  encamped  for  the  night,  keeping 
the  horses  saddled  and  ready  to  mount  at  an  instant’s  notice. 

There  was  no  alarm  during  the  night,  nor  at  any  subsequent  time 
while  I remained  on  the  road,  which  I did,  having  no  order  to  retire, 
until  the  15th,  when  I moved  up  to  Kinston  Bridge,  and,  learning  there 
that  messengers  had  been  sent  for  me,  proceeded  with  my  command  to 
within  4 miles  of  White  Hall,  where  I encamped  for  the  night. 

The  next  morning  as  the  command  was  passing  White  Hall  it  was 
fired  upon  by  the  rebel  sharpshooters  from  the  other  side  of  the  river. 
I immediately  ordered  forward  the  howitzer,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Allis,  who  opened  upon  them  with  shell  and  canister.  After 
three  rounds  were  received  by  them  they  ceased  firing  and  we  passed 
without  further  molestation,  joining  the  main  column  the  evening  of  the 
same  day  near  Goldsborough,  not  having  lost  a man  killed,  wounded, 
or  missing. 

I omitted  to  mention  that  the  prisoners  taken,  to  the  number  of  20, 
were  turned  over  to  the  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Eegiment,  then  acting 
as  rear  guard,  previous  to  our  leaving  the  Kinston  road.  This  number, 
however,  did  not  include  3 who  were  subsequently  taken,  among  whom 
was  a sergeant  of  Major  Kethercutt’s  band,  and  were  paroled  at  Kinston 
on  our  return,  making  the  whole  number  of  prisoners  captured  by  us 
while  absent  from  your  command  23. 

While  finding  nothing  to  censure  and  much  to  praise  in  the  conduct 
of  every  officer  and  soldier  of  the  command,  I cannot  but  think  that 
the  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Chamberlin  and  Sergeant  Beecher,  of  Com- 
pany A,  who  were  in  charge  of  the  first  platoon  in  the  attack  upon  the 
rebel  pickets,  deserves  especial  commendation.  Much  of  the  success  at- 
tending the  attack  can  be  attributed  to  the  soldierly  qualities  and  good 
conduct  displayed  by  them. 

I must  not  neglect  to  mention  Lieutenant  Allis  and  his  howitzer, 
which  was  always  ready  when  wanted,  and  did  us  good  service  at 
White  Hall. 

1 might  mention  others,  but  when  I say  that  the  conduct  of  all  would, 
I think,  have  fully  met  your  expectations  and  merited  your  approval  if 
you  had  been  present,  I have  said  enough. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  HALL, 

Captain^  Third  JTetv  Yorh  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix. 


Ko.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  Ferris  Jacobs,  jr.,  Third  New  YorJc  Cavalry,  of  operations 

December  13  and  14. 

Kew  Berne,  K.  C.,  December  21,  1862. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  13th 
instant,  pursuant  to  an  order  from  Major-General  Foster,  I proceeded 
with  my  command,  of  less  than  50  men,  on  the  road  to  the  right  of  my 
camp  until  it  intersected  a road  leading  into  the  main  highway  from 
Kew  Berne  to  Kinston  about  14  miles  from  the  point  of  intersection. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


73 


Ascertainiug  a few  minutes  after  my  arrival  that  a equadron  of  cav- 
alry had  passed  down  the  road  toward  New  Berne  about  one  hour  be- 
fore, I immediately  dismounted  my  command  and  x>osted  it,  so  as  to  cut 
oft’  the  retreat  of  the  enemy,  and  sent  a messenger  to  General  Foster 
with  the  intelligence.  He  returned  with  a piece  from  Belger’s  battery 
and  permission  to  remain  as  long  as  I thought  necessary.  I had  also 
been  told  by  a contraband  here  that  the  enemy  had  directed  him  to 
draw  a load  of  corn  into  Kinston  for  them,  threatening  to  kill  him  on 
their  return  if  he  did  not  do  it.  He  was  about  to  do  so  when  I came  on 
the  ground. 

After  lying  perdu  for  one  and  a half  hours  I took  a small  party  and 
reconnoitered  in  the  direction  ol*  Kinston,  and  after  i:>roceeding  about 
three-quarters  of  a mile  found  a bridge  in  the  midst  of  an  almost  im- 
penetrable swamp  and  broken  down,  the  stringers  being  cut  oft*.  Very 
naturally  concluding  that  no  cavalry  force  would  attempt  to  return  to 
Kinston  on  that  road  1 returned  to  camp  and  reported  as  above  to  the 
general  and  yourself. 

The  next  morning  (14th  instant),  upon  a written  order  from  General 
Foster  to  again  proceed  to  the  above-mentioned  intersection  and  ‘‘hold 
and  occupy  the  place,’^  with  verbal  permission  to  skirmish  across  the 
broken  bridge  if  I found  my  force  sufficient,  I proceeded  with  my  com- 
mand of  the  day  previous,  and  one  piece  (3  inch  Parrott)  from  Captain 
Lee’s  battery,  under  Lieutenant  Cady,  to  the  intersection,  posted  the 
piece  on  a knoll  about  one-half  mile  from  and  overlooking  the  broken 
bridge  and  a breastwork  and  rifle-pits,  which  I had  found  lay  behind 
the  bridge  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  run,  and  went  forward  with  30 
cavalry  to  the  point  where  the  road  enters  the  wood,  and  about  40  rods 
from  the  intrenchment.  The  skirmishers  then  went  forward,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Richardson,  through  the  morass  to  the  run  and  engaged  the  en- 
emy’s skirmishers  on  the  other  side.  The  range  was  short,  a few  yards, 
and  Lieutenant  Richardson  reported  it  to  have  been  quite  eft’ective.  I 
then  (near  noon)  opened  fire  with  the  piece  from  the  knoll,  and  continued 
to  throw  shell  into  the  intrenchment,  at  short  intervals,  for  about  two 
hours;  but  finding  that  the  enemy  was  too  well  sheltered  to  be  materi- 
ally damaged  at  that  distance  1 moved  the  piece  up  to  the  edge  of  the 
wood  and  opened  fire  with  grape  and  canister  at  a range  of  less  than  40 
rods.  About  40  cavalry  (mounted)  were  drawn  up  in  line  in  advance 
and  to  the  right  of  the  piece,  but  sheltered  by  the  wood  and  a slight 
acclivity.  To  this  the  enemy  (who  up  to  this  time  had  only  engaged 
the  skirmishers)  replied  from  the  intrenchment  with  grape  and  canister. 
After  exchanging  12  or  15  shots  a few  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  appeared 
about  the  bridge  as  though  i)reparing  a crossing,  and  fearing  a sudden 
charge  of  a su])erior  force  on  my  feebly-sui)ported  X)iece,  I ceased  firing 
and  sent  the  piece  back  to  the  eminence  it  before  occupied.  Very  soon 
the  skirmishers  reported  that  they  had  crossed  the  run  into  the  intrench- 
nient,  found  that  the  enemy  had  withdrawn,  leaving  behind  a number 
of  muskets  (Valley  Forge  pattern),  haversacks,  knapsacks,  &c. 

Previous  to  this  I had  sent  Lieutenant  Richardson  to  burn  a bridge 
half  a mile  up  the  run  and  on  our  right  flank.  This  he  did  without  op- 
position. Captain  Lee,  of  the  artillery,  having  arrived,  together  with 
two  companies  of  the  Fifth  Massachusetts,  upon  consultation  with  him 
it  was  concluded,  from  the  sound  of  the  musketry,  that  General  Foster 
had  advanced  and  was  at  or  near  the  Kinston  Bridge.  Captain  Lee 
repaired  the  bridge,  with  the  assistance  of  the  infantry  and  without 
tools,  in  an  almost  incredibly  short  time.  Cautiously  advancing  about 
one-fourth  of  a mile  and  no  enemy  being  seen  I gave  Sergeant  Gibbs, 


74 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


of  CompaDy  E,  permission  to  dash  on  with  5 men  until  he  either  en- 
countered the  enemy  or  ran  on  the  Federal  pickets.  In  less  than  half 
an  hour  he  returned  with  the  intelligence  that  he  met  the  Federal 
pickets  about  1 mile  from  the  bridge  we  had  just  crossed  and  in  sight 
of  the  town. 

The  citizens  estimated  the  force  of  the  enemy  at  1,200  infantry  and 
four  pieces  of  artillery,  and  their  loss  at  6 or  7 killed  and  wounded. 
Five  prisoners  were  captured,  4 from  the  infantry,  who  said  their  regi- 
ment was  the  Twenty-fifth  South  Carolina,  numbering  850  men,  and 
that  they  lost  but  1 man.  One  said  he  belonged  to  Ehett’s  -South 
Carolina  Battery,  and  that  they  had  four  pieces  at  the  bridge  but  could 
only  get  two  in  position.  The  prisoners  also  stated  that  their  officers 
variously  estimated  our  forces  to  be  from  5,000  to  10,000  at  that  place. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

F.  JACOBS,  Jk., 
Captain,  Commanding  Detachment. 

Lient.  Col.  John  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  JTeiv  YorJc  Cavalry. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  W.  Cole,  Third  Neiv  Yorlc  Cavalry,  of  operations 

December  12-16. 

Sir  : Having  been  ordered  to  take  the  advance  on  the  morning  of 
December  12,  nothing  of  importance  occurred  to  my  command  till  on  the 
morning  of  the  13th,  when  I was  ordered  to  make  a charge  via  Sandy 
Foundation  and  obtain  a bridge  on  Southwest  Creek,  about  5 miles 
from  Kinston,  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  it  and  hold  the  position  if 
possible.  This  I proceeded  to  do,  capturing  three  pickets  and  thus 
surprising  the  rebels  destroying  the  bridge,  and  by  dismounting  12  of 
my  men  and  advancing  under  partial  cover  obtained  the  first  volley, 
but  received  in  return  a shower  of  canister  from  a gun  placed  back  of 
the  bridge,  and  musketry,  which  severely  wounded  Jack  Costello,  of 
Philadelphia  (canister-shot  through  the  head).  We  succeeded  by  rapid 
sharpshooting  in  keeping  them  from  the  bridge  and  gun  (which  as 
often  as  they  endeavored  to  load  we  would  pick  them  off)  for  over  an 
hour,  till  relieved  by  the  skirmishers  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Regi- 
ment. 

After  the  bridge  was  repaired  General  Wessells  ordered  me  to  report 
to  Colonel  Heckman,  who  ordered  me  to  feel  of  the  enemy.  On  ad- 
vancing we  were  fired  into  by  concealed  enemies  in  force,  and  B.  F. 
Chapman,  of  Syracuse,  was  severely  wounded  by  a rifle-ball  in  the 
thigh.  After  sharp  skirmishing  the  rebels  fell  back  and  we  encamped 
on  the  field,  advancing  with  the  company  of  skirmishers  in  the  morn- 
ing, and,  wliile  the  battle  was  raging,  frequently  changing  i)osition  to 
the  right  and  left,  as  the  enemy’s  batteries  got  our  range,  till  ordered  by 
General  Foster  to  make  a detour  to  our  right,  capturing  4 prisoners, 
and,  endeavoring  to  cross  the  bridge  to  make  a charge  in  the  rear  of  the 
flying  column,  1 was  ordered  by  you  to  return  and  charge  up  the  river. 
I did  as  far  as  the  ground  permitted,  and,  as  there  was  no  appearance 
of  any  enemy  or  tracks,  returned  and  crossed  the  bridge,  being  then 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


75 


ordered  to  make  a reconnaissance  down  the  river  and  obtain  informa- 
tion of  a battery.  About  3 miles  from  town  we  found  a battery  wagon 
just  deserted,  and  pushing  on  deployed  as  foragers,  after  examining 
the  position,  and  charged  across  the  rifle-pits  and  through  their  works, 
finding  in  the  first  works  extensive  barracks  and  a secure  work  con- 
taining four  10-pounder  guns  loaded,  with  limbers,  and  one  long  32- 
pounder  ship-gun.  A few  hundred  yards  down  we  found  a strong 
bomb-proof  and  earthworks,  on  which  was  an  8-inch  columbiad,  still 
warm,  with  lots  of  loaded  shell,  but  no  powder  in  magazine.  Throwing 
out  skirmishers  I hastened  to  spike  the  two  heavy  guns  and  to  gallop 
to  town  for  teams  to  draw  off  the  10-pounders,  and,  obtaining  these, 
drew  off  in  the  night  the  four  guns,  securely  spiking  the  other  two  and 
setting  on  fire  the  carriages,  magazine,  barracks,  &c.,  slowly  covering 
the  retreat  to  Kinston  of  the  teams  and  guns,  starting  in  the  morning 
of  the  15th  for  Kew  Berne  with  seven  guns,  by  order  of  General  Foster. 
After  proceeding  some  6 miles  on  the  Keuse  road  my  advance  guard 
observed  a party  of  the  enemy  on  a Cross-road,  and  charging  down  with 
a platoon  I took  7 prisoners  from  a South  Carolina  and  1 from  a North 
Carolina  Begiment,  arriving  safely  in  New  Berne  with  guns  and  pris- 
oners December  16,  turning  over  guns  to  Lieutenant  Prouty  and  pris- 
oners to  Captain  Messinger. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  above  report. 

Eespectfully,  &c., 

GEO.  W.  COLE, 

Captain  Company  K,  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 
Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  J.  C.  Amory^  Seventeenth  Massaehusetts  Infantry y 
commanding  First  Brigade,  First  Division,  of  engagements  at  Kinston, 
White  Hall,  and  Goldsborongh  Bridge,  December  14, 16,  and  17. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Dept,  of  N.  C., 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  21, 1862. 

Major:  I hav^e  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  brigade  under  my  command  in  the  several  actions  of  the 
14th,  16th,  and  17th  instant: 

The  First  Brigade,  consisting  of  the  Seventeenth,  Twenty-third,  Forty- 
third,  Forty-fifth,  and  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Eegiments  (the  last  three 
being  nine  months’  volunteers),  marched  from  New  Berne,  with  the  army 
under  Major-General  Foster,  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  instant.  The 
brigade  numbered  at  this  time  nearly  3,500  men.  Of  these,  about  100 
were  sent  back  on  our  second  day  out,  being  mostly  convalescents  from 
hospital  who  were  found  unfit  to  continue  the  march. 

On  our  arrival  at  Southwest  Creek  on  the  13th  I was  ordered  to  form 
my  brigade  in  two  lines  on  the  left  of  the  road,  detaching  one  regiment 
to  line  the  bank  of  the  creek,  the  passage  of  which  was  disputed  by 
the  enemy.  I sent  forward  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  which 
crossed  at  the  mill-dam,  the  bridge  having  been  destroyed;  this  regi- 
ment remained  on  the  opposite  bank,  and  rejoined  my  command  on  the 
march  next  morning.  The  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  had  previously  been 


76 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


detached,  with  orders  to  remain  at  Beaver  Creek,  guarding  our  rear; 
this  regiment  rejoined  my  command  on  the  evening  of  the  14th. 

On  approaching  the  battle-field  of  Kinston  on  the  morning  of  the  14th, 
by  order  of  the  commanding  general  I detached  the  Twenty-third  and 
Forty-third  Massachusetts  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  respectively, 
in  support  of  batteries.  The  Seventeenth  was  sent  to  the  extreme  right 
to  support  Colonel  Heckman,  Kinth  New  Jersey,  in  advance.  While 
superintending  this  movement  on  the  right  the  Twenty-third  and  Forty- 
fifth  were  ordered  forward  in  the  center,  and  opened  fire  in  the  wood, 
gradually  advancing,  as  did  the  entire  line,  driving  the  enemy  to  the 
bridge.  On  the  right  I posted  the  Forty-third  to  cut  off  the  forces  of 
the  enemy  on  the  river  road  from  the  bridge,  and  a portion  of  these,  some 
60  in  number,  shortly  afterward  surrendered  to  Major  Chambers,  Twenty- 
third  Massachusetts. 

In  this  action  the  Forty-fifth  suffered  most  severely,  as  indicated  by 
their  return  of  the  killed  and  wounded,  hereto  annexed,*  together  with 
the  reports  of  regimental  commanders,  to  which  I beg  leave  to  refer  for 
particulars.  The  different  regiments  of  my  brigade  were,  during  most 
of  the  action,  scattered  through  the  wood  or  separated  in  support  of  bat- 
teries. All  who  came  under  my  observation  conducted  themselves  with 
commendable  steadiness  and  gallantry. 

J 11  the  action  at  White  Hall  on  the  16th,  my  brigade  being  in  advance, 
three  of  the  regiments  (the  Seventeenth,  Twenty-third,  and  Forty-fifth) 
were  immediately  engaged,  with  what  effect  could  not  be  ascertained, 
as  the  enemy  was  posted  in  intrenchments  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river,  which  was  not  fordable.  These  regiments  did  their  whole  duty, 
remaining  under  fire  as  far  in  advance  as  possible,  until  I was  directed 
to  withdraw  them  in  order  to  allow  the  artillery  to  occupy  this  position, 
which  was  done,  and  the  guns  of  the  enemy  soon  afterward  silenced.  In 
resuming  the  march  from  White  Hall  I was  directed  to  detach  the  Seven- 
teenth to  re-enforce  the  advance  guard,  under  Colonel  Heckman,  Ninth 
New  Jersey.  The  remainder  of  my  brigade  took  position  in  the  rear  of 
the  column. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  I was  further  directed  to  detach  a regi- 
ment with  the  battery  which  was  to  hold  Thompson’s  Ford,  5 miles 
above,  which  order  I complied  with,  sending  the  Forty-third  Massachu- 
setts under  Colonel  Holbrook. 

In  the  engagement  at  Goldsborough  Bridge  the  three  remaining  regi- 
ments of  my  brigade  were  not  brought  into  action.  Colonel  Heckman, 
of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  will  doubtless  report  upon  the  conduct  of  the 
Seventeenth  in  that  action.  Their  list  of  wounded  proves  them  to  have 
been  com])letely  engaged,  and  the  successful  accomidishment  of  the 
object  of  the  expedition  in  the  destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge  is  the 
only  comment  I need  make  on  their  efficiency. 

When  all  did  their  duty  well  it  seems  unnecessary  to  mention  names, 
but  I feel  compelled  in  this  place  to  testify  to  the  fidelity  with  which 
Dr.  Galloupe,  the  senior  surgeon  of  my  brigade,  discharged  his  duties. 
His  efficiency  at  all  times,  and  his  care  of  the  wounded,  merits  the 
highest  praise. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  J.  C.  AMOEY, 

Col.  Seventeenth  Massaehusetts  Comdg  First  Brigade. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  New  Berne^  N.  C. 


See  revised  statement,  p.  60. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


' NEW  BERNE  TO  GOEDSBOROUOH. 


77 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Felloics,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry.^ 
of  engagements  at  Kinston^  White  Hally  and  Goldsborough  Bridge,  De- 
cember  16,  and  17. 

Hdqrs.  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  "22,  1862. 
Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  following  report  of 
the  movements  of  the  regiment  under  my  command  on  the  late  expedi- 
tion to  Goldsborough : 

As  nothing  of  particular  interest  occurred  until  Sunday,  the  14th 
instant,  that  is  not  already  known  to  the  commander  of  the  brigade,  1 
will  commence  at  the  time  I was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Wessells. 
Soon  after  the  battle  of  Kinston  commenced  General  Wessells  ordered 
me  forward  to  support  Morrison’s  battery,  which  was  stationed  on  the 
right  of  the  road  and  in  great  danger  of  attack  from  the  enemy.  In 
about  half  an  hour  the  battery  was  withdrawn  to  another  position,  and 
I was  ordered  to  the  edge  of  the  wood.  Soon  after  I was  ordered  to 
advance  to  the  right  to  support  another  battery  at  that  place.  I found 
the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  Colonel  Heckman,  preparingjo  advance,  and  as 
I received  an  order  to  do  the  same  the  two  regiments  proceeded  to- 
gether. I was  then  notified  that  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  Seventeenth 
Massachusetts  were  to  act  together,  under  command  of  Colonel  Heck- 
man. We  pushed  on  over  the  open  space  in  front  and  soon  reached  the 
bridge,  which  we  crossed  together,  being  the  first  regiments  to  go  over. 
We  took  several  prisoners  and  then  marched  to  the  town,  when  I was 
ordered  on  provost  duty.  This  order  was  afterward  countermanded  and 
the  regiment  was  ordered  to  rejoin  the  brigade  on  the  other  side  of  the 
bridge.  On  the  way  back  I was  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  remain, 
as  the  brigade  w^as  to  advance,  and  after  joining  the  brigade  was  again 
ordered  on  provost  duty. 

On  Monday  we  were  again  ordered  to  march,  the  Seventeenth  being 
in  advance  with  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  and  this  order  of  march  was 
continued  on  Tuesday,  the  16th.  Upon  approaching  White  Hall  the 
Ninth  New  Jersey  was  fired  upon  and  deployed  upon  the  banks  of  the 
river,  where  we  followed,  and  remained  some  two  or  three  hours,  the 
enemy  firing  upon  us  from  the  opposite  bank.  Attempts  were  made  ta 
find  a ford,  but  the  water  was  found  to  be  from  8 to  12  feet  deep.  Dur- 
ing this  time  Lieutenant  Day  and  11  men  were  wounded.  Upon  resum- 
ing the  march  the  Seventiienth  was  in  the  advance. 

The  next  morning,  being  yet  in  the  advance,  1 sent  forward  two  com- 
panies of  skirmishers.  Companies  F and  C,  under  command  of  Captain 
Fuller,  and  upon  approaching  the  battle-ground  they  were  attacked, 
but  drove  the  enemy  before  them.  The  enemy  appearing  to  be  in  force 
in  a wood  to  the  left,  I received  orders  from  Colonel  Heckman  to  pro- 
ceed by  a road  through  the  wood  and  obtain  possession  of  the  railroad. 
This  was  successfully  accomplished,  with  the  loss  of  but  1 man.  Ser- 
geant Hardy,  of  Company  F. 

My  next  order  was  to  take  the  regiment  upon  the  railroad  and  pro- 
ceed toward  the  bridge  and  to  take  advantage  of  the  banks  of  the  road 
for  the  protection  of  the  men.  We  advanced,  after  leaving  two  com- 
panies to  observe  the  enemy,  and  were  soon  fired  upon  by  artillery  and 
infantry  j and  to  avoid  the  raking  fire  from  the  artillery  the  men  were 
ordered  to  the  banks  of  the  railroad  and  thus  continue  the  advance. 
Our  march  was  necessarily  by  the  flank,  and  upon  arriving  within  10 


78 


NOETH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


feet  of  the  bridge  a heavy  fire  from  artillery  and  musketry  in  front  and 
musketry  from  each  side  and  in  the  wood  was  opened  upon  us,  while 
the  shells  from  our  own  guns  fell  and  burst  between  us  and  the  bridge. 
Not  being  willing  to  lose  the  men  by  the  fire  from  our  own  side  I again 
ordered  them  to  the  banks  of  the  road  and  sent  a messenger  to  the 
artillery  to  change  the  direction  of  their  fire ; but  as  the  shells  continued 
to  fall  in  the  same  place  I was  compelled  to  go  myself  and  represent  to 
the  oflScer  in  command  of  the  guns  that  his  fire  was  endangering  our 
own  men.  As  I returned,  Morrison’s  battery  came  up  and  took  position 
near  the  bridge,  and  I directed  the  captain’s  attention  to  the  depot  be- 
yond, where  a train  of  cars  had  just  arrived  with  re-enforcements  for  the 
enemy.  Directing  his  guns  with  much  j udgment  he  sent  a shell  directly 
into  them  and  continued  to  keep  up  a vigorous  and  effective  fire  until 
the  bridge  was  destroyed.  He  then  retired  and  I drew  off*  my  men  to 
support  a battery  which  continued  to  play  farther  to  the  right.  After 
the  firing  ceased  and  the  battery  retired  I rejoined  the  Ninth  New  Jer- 
sey and  marched  with  them  from  the  field. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  adding  my  testimony  to  the  admi- 
rable conduct  of  the  men  of  my  command.  While  under  fire  no  sign  of 
faltering  was  observed  among  any  of  them.  They  behaved  like  vet- 
erans accustomed  to  such  scenes,  and  deserve  all  praise  for  their  stead- 
iness and  prompt  obedience  to  orders. 

Lieut.  B.  N.  Mann,  our  former  adjutant,  deserves  especial  mention 
for  his  efforts  to  destroy  the  bridge,  receiving  in  the  attempt  a severe 
wound. 

Adjutant  Oheever  also  behaved  with  coolness  and  bravery,  being 
always  at  hand  to  attend  to  the  execution  of  orders,  and  the  officers 
and  men  generally  performed  their  duty  to  my  entire  satisfaction. 

Captain  Fuller,  with  the  companies  left  to  watch  the  enemy,  did 
great  service  in  preventing  a flank  movement,  and  captured  two  of 
their  cavalry  who  had  ventured  inside  of  the  line  of  skirmishers. 

Our  loss  upon  the  railroad  was  18  wounded,  and  in  view  of  our  ex- 
posed position  and  the  fire  which  was  kept  up  upon  us  the  smallness  of 
the  number  seems  marvelous.  The  wounded  men  are  in  good  spirits, 
and  one  of  them  after  his  wound  was  dressed  desired  to  go  back  to  the 
scene  of  action. 

Inclosed  I send  an  official  report  of  the  killed  and  wounded:  Killed, 
1 5 wounded,  29.  Aggregate,  30.* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  FELLOWS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Comdg.  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Yols. 

Lieut.  E.  T.  Parkinson, 

A,  A.  A.  G.j  First  Brig.,  First  Div.^  JDept.  of  W.  C. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  G.  Chambers,  Tiventy -third  Massachusetts  Infantry, 
of  operations  December  11-16. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-third  Eegt.  Massachusetts  Yols., 
Camp  Pendleton,  December  23,  1862. 
Sir  : In  accordance  with  General  Orders,  Nos.  29  and  31, 1 left  camp 
with  my  command  on  the  morning  of  December  11  and  took  my  posi- 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  60. 


Chap.  XXX.l 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


79 


tion  in  the  general  column.  The  regiment  numbered  641  enlisted  men 
and  20  commissioned  officers,  not  including  surgeons  and  quartermas- 
ter. Upon  mustering  for  the  march  on  the  second  day  I found  that 
about  100  of  the  enlisted  men  who  had  started  had  been  unable  to 
stand  the  fatigue  of  the  march,  and  had  been  sent  back  to  New  Berne 
by  the  surgeons. 

In  the  forenoon  of  the  second  day  (12th  instant)  Private  John  H. 
Montgomery,  of  Company  I,  who  had  straggled  from  the  ranks  into 
the  wood,  was  shot  through  the  foot  by  one  of  the  enemy’s  scouts. 

About  noon  on  the  13th  instant,  the  enemy  having  been  discovered 
in  force  at  Southwest  Creek,  my  command  was  among  the  various  in- 
fantry regiments  ordered  forward.  The  position  assigned  me  was  one 
on  the  left  of  the  main  road,  facing  the  creek.  I then  deployed  a com- 
pany of  skirmishers  to  ascertain  the  course  of  the  creek  and  if  there 
was  any  enemy  in  the  front.  Shortly  after,  by  order  of  Colonel  Potter, 
I marched  my  regiment  across  the  creek  at  the  dam  and  was  then 
ordered  to  report  to  General  Wessells. 

That  night  the  regiment  was  placed  on  picket  duty  in  a swamp  about 
midway  between  the  creek  above  mentioned  and  Kinston. 

During  the  afternoon  of  this  day  Corpl.  William  K.  Worth  accident- 
ally shot  himself  through  the  hand. 

The  next  morning  I received  orders  to  report  to  Colonel  Heckman  for 
skirmish  duty,  but  owing  to  an  unavoidable  delay  in  receiving  extra 
ammunition  the  order  was  countermanded  and  I was  again  placed  in 
your  brigade,  where  I remained  until  shortly  after  the  commencement 
of  the  action  before  Kinston,  when  I was  again  ordered  to  report  to 
General  Wessells.  General  Wessells  next  sent  me  to  report  to  Colonel 
Howell,  of  the  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Eegiment.  In  accordance 
with  his  orders  I formed  my  line  in  the  swamp  on  the  left  of  the  road 
and  about  70  paces  in  the  rear  of  the  Eighty-fifth. 

Although  subjected  to  a heavy  fire,  being  in  the  second  line,  my  men 
were  kept  lying  down  and  thus  escaped  with  but  2 wounded,  and 
those  not  severely.  While  marching  forward  I discovered  a number 
of  the  enemy  making  through  the  wood,  and  immediately  sent  out  a 
detachment,  to  which  2 officers  and  58  enlisted  men,  belonging  to  the 
Twenty-second  South  Carolina,  surrendered.  They  had  thrown  away 
their  arms.  Had  I been  permitted  I could,  undoubtedly,  have  secured 
a larger  number  j but  being  in  the  second  line  and  under  the  orders  of 
the  commander  of  the  first  I could  not  move  forward  without  his 
sanction. 

We  left  Kinston  early  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant.  Nothing 
unusual  occurred  on  the  road  until  about  noon  on  the  16th  instant, 
when,  as  we  were  approaching  a place  called  White  Hall,  the  firing  in 
front  denoted  that  we  had  again  come  upon  the  enemy. 

The  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  having  the  right  of  the  brigade,  was 
the  first  regiment  ordered  in,  and  my  regiment  was  immediately  formed 
in  line  and  shortly  ordered  forward.  I marched  it  through  a small 
piece  of  swamp  under  a heav^y  fire  and  came  to  the  edge  of  the  Neuse 
Eiver,  my  left  resting  near  where  the  bridge  had  been  destroyed.  The 
enemy  were  on  the  opposite  bank,  secreted  behind  trees  and  stumps, 
and  opposite  my  left  they  had  a log  fort.  I immediately  commenced 
firing,  which  we  continued  until  we  had  expended  about  40  rounds  ol 
ammunition,  when  we  were  ordered  out  to  give  place  to  a battery 
which  had  been  i)osted  in  the  open  space  in  our  rear. 

After  the  action  at  White  Hall,  our  brigade  being  placed  in  the  rear, 
we  did  not  participate  in  the  action  near  Goldsborough. 


80 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


In  both  actions  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  behaved  admi- 
rably, each  seeming  to  vie  with  the  other  as  to  who  should  best  perform 
his  duty. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  G.  CHAMBERS, 

Major^  Commanding  Tweyity-tliird  ^lassacliusetts  Volunteers. 
Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory, 

Comdg.  First  Brigade^  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  L.  Ilolhrooh,  Forty  third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-third  Regt.  Massachusetts  Vols., 

Camp  Rogers.,  December  23,  1862. 

Sir  : At  your  request  I respectfully  submit  the  following  statement 
of  such  matters  of  importance  as  occurred  in  this  regiment  during  the 
campaign  from  which  we  have  just  returned: 

The  regiment  has  taken  no  active  part  in  any  of  the  engagements, 
but  at  the  battle  of  Wliite  Hall  we  lost  1 man. 

On  the  march  of  the  column  toward  Goldsborough  this  regiment  was 
detached  and  ordered  to  Spring  Bank  Bridge,  when  four  companies 
were  detailed  as  skirmishers  and  the  remaining  companies  bivouacked 
for  the  night.  Captain  Tyler,  of  Company  I,  had  1 man  killed,  and 
Captain  Doane,  of  Company  E,  had  1 wounded.  The  regiment  marched 
at  12.30  a.  m.  to  join  the  column  on  their  return  from  Goldsborough. 

I).  A.  Jackson,  jirivate  Company  I,  reports  having  been  taken  pris- 
oner the  second  day  out,  and,  after  being  stripped  of  everything  and 
kept  for  half  a day,  he  was  paroled.  He  then  marched  beyond  Kins- 
ton till  he  met  the  hospital  wagons  returning  with  the  wounded  from 
White  Hall;  he  got  in  and  rode  back  to  Kinston.  He  returned  to 
New  Berne  in  one  of  the  gunboats. 

The  men  are  suffering  severely  from  their  feet  being  badly  blistered 
and  the  opinion  of  the  surgeon  is  that  they  should  have  rest  for  three  or 
four  days,  and,  with  your  approval,  I propose  to  dispense  with  all  drills 
until  after  Christmas. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  L.  HOLBROOK, 
Colonel  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  E.  T.  Parkinson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  R.  Codman,  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry.^  of 
engagements  at  Kinston  and  White  Hally  December  11  and  16. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Militia, 

December  22,  1862. 

Lieutenant:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  eight  companies  of 
this  regiment  (two  being  on  detached  service)  were  engaged  in  two 
actions  during  the  late  expedition  into  the  interior  of  North  Carolina. 


Chap.  XXX,  1 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


81 


On  the  14th  instant,  the  regiment  being  on  the  inarch  toward  Kin- 
ston, I received  orders  from  Major  Hoffman,  chief  of  the  staff*  of  the 
general  commanding,  to  advance  into  the  wood  on  the  south  side  of  the 
Sense  Eiver  to  support  the  troops  of  Wessells^  brigade,  then  engaged 
and  said  to  be  hard  pressed.  I was  directed  to  act  under  General  Wes- 
sells’  orders.  In  compliance  with  this  order  the  regiment  proceeded 
along  tlie  road  until  directed  by  General  Wessells  to  file  to  the  right, 
when  it  jiroceeded  to  enter  a wood,  which,  as  afterward  appeared,  was 
ex]iosed  to  a cross-fire  from  the  enemy.  Upon  entering  the  wood  the 
regiment  oi)eued  fire  upon  the  enemy,  who  were  found  to  be  in  front 
and  whose  fire  for  a time  was  very  sharp.  The  regiment  continued  to 
advance,  occasionally  lying  down  to  rest  and  to  avoid  the  enemy’s  fire 
when  hottest,  and  finally,  after  penetrating  the  wood,  it  found  that  the 
, enemy  had  fled. 

1 should  add  that  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Eegiment,  during  one  of  the 
periods  when  this  regiment  was  halted,  advanced  gallantly  through  the 
wood  to  its  assistance,  and  both  regiments  penetrated  the  wood  at  nearly 
the  same  time. 

The  conduct  of  the  troops  was  excellent  throughout.  The  action  con- 
tinued for  more  than  an  hour,  during  which  time  the  regiment  suff'ered 
a loss  of  1 corjioral  and  12  men  killed,  or  who  have  died  of  their  wounds, 
and  1 sergeant,  5 corporals,  and  38  privates  wounded. 

On  the  16th,  in  the  battle  near  White  Hall,  this  regiment  was  ordered 
by  Colonel  Amory,  commanding  the  brigade,  to  form  upon  the  White 
Hall  road,  to  act  as  circumstances  might  require.  By  further  order 
from  Colonel  Amory  the  men  were  directed  to  lie  down.  The  regiment 
did  not  move  from  its  place  during  the  action  except  to  take  position  a 
few  feet  in  the  rear  of  the  road,  but  nevertheless  met  with  some  casual- 
ties, sustaining  a loss  of  1 sergeant  and  3 i)rivates  killed,  and  2 ser- 
geants, 2 corporals,  and  12  privates  wounded.  The  conduct  of  the  men 
was  in  this  instance  also  admirable. 

I beg  to  add  that,  from  the  statements  of  i^risoners  and  from  other 
(dreum stances,  I am  satisfied  that  in  the  battle  of  Kinston  it  was  the 
fire  of  this  regiment  that  first  made  untenable  the  position  of  the  enemy 
upon  the  road  on  the  south  side  of  the  Keuse  Eiver. 

The  present  effective  state  of  the  eight  companies  now  in  camp  at  New 
Berne  is  29  officers  and  582  men,  and  of  the  companies  at  Morehead 
City  and  Fort  Macon  4 officers  and  181  men ; a total  of  33  officers  and 
763  men. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully, 

CHAELES  E.  CODMAN, 
Colonel,  Comdg.  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Militia, 

Lieut.  E.  T..  Parkinson, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  First  Brig.,  Dejit  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Col.  Augustus  B.  R.  SpraguCj  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

IlDQRs.  Fifty-first  JMassachusetts  Volunteers, 

Foster  Barracks,  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  21,  1862. 

In  obedience  to  Department  General  Orders,  No.  77,  and  Brigade 
General  Orders,  No.  31,  I reported,  with  my  command,  778  rank  and 
file,  on  the  Trent  road  in  light  marching  order  at  7 o’c4ock  on  the  morq^ 
6 R R--VOL  XVIII 


82 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


iiig  of  Thursday,  11th  instant,  remaining  with  the  brigade  en  route  till 
the  afternoon  of  Friday,  when  we  were  detached,  in  company  with  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  under  command  of  Captain  Eansom,  to  guard  the 
Beaver  Creek  Bridge,  the  main  road  to  Kinston,  and  the  road  to  Tren- 
ton, in  rear  of  the  advancing  column. 

Eeceiving  orders  from  Major-General  Foster  at  1.30  o’clock  on  Sunday 
morning  to  join  the  main  force  without  delay,  we  marched  at  sunrise, 
having  in  charge  21  prisoners  (taken  by  the  cavalry  on  the  main  road 
to  Kinston),  which  were  turned  over  to  the  provost-marshal  upon  our 
arrival  at  Kinston  on  Sunday  morning. 

We  advanced  with  the  brigade  on  Monday  morning,  arriving  at  the 
scene  of  action  at  White  Hall  about  11  a.  m.  on  Tuesday  morning,  and, 
though  not  participating  in  the  engagement,  were  within  range  of  the 
enemy’s  guns  on  the  right  of  the  artillery,  which  was  engaged. 

At  this  ])oint,  in  obedience  to  orders  of  Major-General  Foster,  Lieu- 
tenant Sanderson,  with  a detachment,  was  detailed  to  examine  Ihe  river 
below  the  bridge,  to  ascertain  the  practicability  of  fording  it.  After  a 
careful  examination  of  the  river  for  nearly  a mile  he  reported  that  it 
was  not  fordable. 

Tuesday  afternoon,  passing  up  with  the  main  column  on  the  left  baidi 
of  the  Keuse,  we  bivouacked  at  night  about  12  miles  from  Goldsborough, 

On  Wednesday  we  were  detailed  to  guard  the  baggage  train,  from 
which  duty  we  were  relieved  in  the  afternoon  when  the  baggage  train 
and  troo[)S  were  countermarched,  after  the  burning  of  the  railroad 
bridge  by  the  advance,  keeping  our  place  on  the  return  on  Thursday, 
Friday,  and  Saturday. 

We  encamped  on  Saturday  night  near  Deep  Gully  and  arrived  at 
our  barracks,  on  the  Trent,  at  11  o’clock  on  Sunday  morning,  my  men 
considerably  jaded  and  foot-sore. 

The  orders  in  regard  to  pillaging  and  foraging  were  enforced,  and  the 
men  suffered  in  consequence  of  an  insufficient  supply  of  meat. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  this  regiment  had  been  but  a 
week  in  the  field  and  received  their  arms  only  two  days  before  they 
received  marching  orders,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  they  behaved 
well  during  the  entire  march. 

Kone  were  killed,  2 wounded,  and  none  missing. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  E.  SPEAGUE, 

Colonel  Fifty-first  Massaeliusetts  Volunteer  Regiment. 

Lieut.  E.  T.  Parkinson,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  First  Brigade. 


Ko.  18. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson.,  Tu'cnty  fourth  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry, comma, nding  Second  Brigade,  of  engagements  at  Kinston,  ^yhite 
Ball,  and  Goldsborough  Bridge,  Becember  14,  IG,  and  17. 

Hdqhs.  Second  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Dept,  of  K.  0., 

Neic  Berne,  N.  G.,  Becember  21,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  result  of  the 
part  taken  by  the  Second  Brigade  in  the  late  expedition  : 

Agreeably  to  orders  from  headquarters  this  brigade  joined  the  column 
the  morning  of  December  11  on  the  Trent  road,  being  third  in  position. 
Nothing  of  importance  occurred  until  the  morning  of  Sunday,  Decem- 
ber 14,  when  within  a few  miles  of  Kinston  the  advance  was  attacked 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


83 


by  the  enemy  in  force.  The  Tenth  Connecticut  and  Forty-fourth  Mas- 
sachusetts AYore  ordered  into  position  on  right  of  road  in  support  of 
battery;  the  Fiftli  Ehode  Island  and  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  on 
left  of  road  to  su])port  Belger’s  battery.  .The  Tenth  Connecticut,  Fifth 
Khode  Island,  and  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  were  then  ordered  for- 
ward to  the  advance. 

^JTe  Tenth  Connecticut  made  a gallant  charge,  under  a very  galling 
tire,  on  the  enemy,  who  were  rapidly  retreating  over  the  bridge  which 
had  been  set  on  lire.  The  Tenth  Connecticut  i)oured  in  a very  destruc- 
tive tire,  capturing  a rebel  stand  of  colors  and  a number  of  prisoners. 
By  the  exertions  and  gallant  conduct  of  this  regiment  the  bridge  was 
saved,  they  being  the  first  to  cross.  As  soon  as  the  fire  on  the  bridge 
was  put  out  our  forces  crossed,  the  enemy  retreating  in  all  directions. 
No  more  resistances  being  offered,  my  brigade  bivouacked  on  the  out- 
skirts of  the  town. 

Next  morning  we  recrossed  the  riA^er,  continuing  the  line  of  march 
toward  Goldsborough. 

On  the  morning  of  December  IG  the  enemy  made  another  stand  at 
White  Hall,  occupying  a strong  ])osition  on  the  other  side  of  the  river, 
having  burned  the  bridge.  The  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  and  Tenth 
Connecticut  were  ordered  into  i)osition  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  on  the 
left  of  the  road  leading  to  the  bridge.  BelgeFs  battery  Avas  then  or- 
dered to  shell  the  woods,  the  enemy ^s  sharpshooters  being  so  com- 
pletely concealed  that  tlie  fire  of  our  infantry  had  but  little  effect.  The 
line  of  march  Avas  then  taken  up  toward  Goldsborough,  the  Fifth  Ehode 
Island  and  a few  sharpshooters  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts 
being  left  behind  to  engage  the  rebel  sharpshooters  till  the  rear  of  the 
column  had  x)assed. 

At  noon  on  the  17th  arrived  at  railroad  bridge  OA^er  the  Neuse  Eiver. 
Cax)tain  Belger’s  battery  Avas  ordered  to  the  front,  and  did  signal  serv- 
ice in  repelling  the  charges  of  the  enemy.  I formed  my  brigade  in  line 
of  battle  on  the  hill  on  the  left  of  the  road.  The  enemy  having  been 
defeated,  I was  ordered  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  toward  New  Berne ; 
had  got  but  a few  miles  when  I received  orders  to  countermarch  and 
supi)ort  a piece  of  artillery  posted  on  the  Everettsville  road,  where  I 
remained  about  an  hour.  X then  received  orders  to  march  on  once  more 
toAvard  New  Berne,  arriving  here  last  evening  (December  20). 

I cannot  close  this  report  Avithout  referring,  as  I do  with  gratitude, 
to  the  manner  in  which  Col.  F.  L.  Lee,  commanding  the  Forty-fourth 
Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia;  Lieut.  Col.  E.  Leggett, 
commanding  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Volunteers;  Maj.  E.  H.  Steven- 
son, commanding  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers ; Captain 
Arnold,  commanding  the  Fifth  Ehode  Island  Volunteers,  and  Captain 
Belger,  commanding  the  Ehode  Island  battery  (Avhich  was  attached  to 
my  brigade  for  the  occasion),  have  seconded  all  my  efforts  through- 
out the  Avhole  expedition.  Their  prompt  and  efficient  action  has  facili- 
tated every  movement  which  has  been  undertaken. 

The  Amluable  services  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Volunteers  at  Kin- 
ston, as  of  Captain  Belger’s  battery  at  White  Hall  and  at  Everettsville, 
Avere  not  rendered,  I regret  to  say,  Avithout  lieaA^y  loss,  as  indicated  by^ 
the  list  of  killed  and  wounded,  Avhich  I transmit.* 

THUS.  G.  STEVENSON, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Second  Brigade^  First  Division. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  60. 


84 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Ohav. 


Ko.  19. 

Report  of  TAeiit.  Col.  Robert  Leggetf  Tenth  Connecticut  Infantry^  of  en- 
(jagernent  at  Kinston^  December  14. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  this  regiment  in  the 
action  of  December  14  and  the  losses  sustained  by  it.  According  to  an 
order  received  from  General  Foster  I advanced  my  regiment  over  three 
regiments  already  formed  in  line  in  the  woods.  On  reaching  the  second 
line  the  regiment  came  under  a severe  fire  from  the  enemy,  but  went 
steadily  forward  to  the  first  line,  which  was  engaged  with  the  enemy 
and  somewhat  in  disorder.  The  regiment  formed  in  line  witli  the  ad- 
vance and  opened  tire  upon  the  enemy.  After  being  under  fire  about 
thirty  minutes  the  fire  of  the  regiment  was  directed  to  the  bridge,  across 
whi(;h  the  enemy  were  retreating  and  which  they  were  endeavoring  to 
burn.  In  some  five  minutes  the  enemy  broke  and  my  regiment  moved 
at  a double-quick  down  the  road.  A portion  of  the  enemy  formed  in 
line  of  battle  in  a corn  field  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bridge  and 
oi)ened  tire  on  us  as  we  came  on.  Immediately  on  taking  the  bridge, 
wliere  we  captured  about  50  of  the  enemy,  we  extinguished  the  flames. 
As  soon  as  the  enemy  found  we  had  taken  the  bridge  they  broke  up 
their  line  in  disorder  and  o[)ened  on  us  from  the  ditches  on  each  side  of 
the  rood.  The  regiment  remained  at  the  bridge  about  thirty  minutes, 
keeping  up  a continual  fire  upon  the  enemy,  when  we  crossed  the  bridge, 
taking  a number  of  prisoners  behind  the  intreuchmeuts  and,  pushing 
forward,  formed  in  line  of  battle  opposite  the  city  and  awaited  orders. 
While  in  the  woods  the  regiment  sustained  a loss  of  90  killed  and 
wounded,  including  a captain  and  lieutenant  killed  and  2 lieuten- 
ants wounded.  At  the  bridge  1 lieutenant  was  killed,  1 severely 
wounded,  and  0 or  8 rank  and  file  wounded.  In  the  action  at  White 
Hall  we  lornied  line  of  battle  and  advanced  to  the  river  on  the  left  of 
the,  bridge,  opening  fire  according  to  order  received.  The  enemy  made 
no  res])onse,  and  one  company  was  detailed  to  go  down  the  bank  of 
the  river  in  search  of  a ford.  Finding  none,  volunteers  were  called  for 
to  swim  the  river  and  cut  down  two  tall  trees  on  that  side,  while  two 
were  being  felled  on  this  side,  and  at  the  same  time  a company  was 
sent  to  find  lumber  to  build  a bridge.  The  regiment  was  at  work  form- 
ing a bridge  when  it  received  orders  to  fall  back.  No  loss  was  suflered 
by  the  regiment  at  this  place. 

K.  LEGGETT; 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Comdg.  Tenth  Regiment  Connecticut  Vols. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Col.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty -seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry, 
commanding  Third  Brigade. 

IIdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  21,  1802. 
Sir  : 1 hav(‘.  the  honor  to  rei)ort  the  movements  of  the  Third  Brigade, 
(amsisting  of  tlie  Third,  Fifth,  Twenty-fifth,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Forty- 
sixth  Begiments,  under  my  command,  on  the  late  expedition  to  Golds- 
borongh  : 

We  were  in  line,  as  ordered,  on  Thursday,  December  11,  at  7 o’clock, 
our  position  being  with  the  baggage  train  in  the  rear.  It  was  nearly 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLESBOROUGH. 


85 


10  before  we  were  in  column.  The  nature  of  the  roads  for  a few  miles  out 
from  New  Berne  was  such  that  our  progress  was  quite  slow.  We  ar- 
rived, however,  at  the  camp  assigned  us,  on  the  Trent  road,  at  about 
8 p.  m. 

Friday  (12th)  we  marched  through  the  day,  the  roads  through  the 
swamps  gradually  growing  worse,  the  train  being  constantly  delayed, 
until  10  j).  m.  I had  before  leaving  camp  in  the  morning  ordered  Colonel 
ilichmond,  of  the  Third  Regiment,  to  detail  five  comiiauies  from  his 
regiment  to  march  beside  the  wagons  and  assist  the  teamsters.  Just 
before  dark  I ordered  the  remaining  five  to  fall  back  and  assist  in  the 
same  manner,  as  the  roads  in  many  places  were  almost  impassable. 

Saturday  (13th)  were  in  column  and  moving  by  8 o’clock,  having,  by 
order  from  General  Foster,  detailed  the  Third  Regiment,  with  a-  corps 
of  pioneers,  to  march  as  the  day  before  and  assist  the  train.  Arriving 
about  10  o’clock  at  a cross-road,  up  which  the  main  body  had  passed, 
the  Forty  sixth  regiment,  with  a section  of  Lee’s  battery,  was  left  so 
posted  as  to  commaiAl  the  approach  from  the  main  road  to  Kinston. 
We  arrived  soon  after  noon  at  a field  near  a creek  within  a few  miles 
of  Kinston,  where  the  advance  had  met  and  driven  back  a body  of  the 
enemy.  We  encamped  here  for  the  night,  and  dealt  out  to  the  men  two 
days’  rations  and  20  rounds  extra  of  ammunition. 

Sunday  (14th)  leaving  the  Fifth  Regiment  to  guard  the  baggage 
train,  we  moved  up  the  Kinston  road,  the  Forty-sixth  falling  into  their 
position  in  line  as  we  came,  they  having  been,  by  order  of  General  Fos- 
ter, moved  up  fronx  the  post  where  they  had  been  left  and  occupied  one 
near  us  through  the  night.  We  soon  heard  firing  from  the  front  and 
learned  that  the  advance  had  met  tlie  enemy  near  Kinston.  When  we 
arrived  we  found  General  Wessells’  and  Colonel  Amory’s  brigades  en- 
gaged and  Colonel  Stevenson’s  drawn  up  in  two  lines,  supporting  Bel- 
ger’s  battery  and  one  of  the  Third  New  York  Artillery.  We  Avere  soon 
ordered  to  relieve  Colonel  Stevenson’s  command,  Avhich  moved  forward, 
Ave  occuxAving  their  ])osition.  While  here  the  enemy  retreated  and  Ave 
AA’ent  forward  into  Kinston,  encamxnng  for  the  night. 

Monday  (15th)  we  were  tlie  third  in  column.  General  Wessells  having 
charge  of  the  train,  following  the  First  and  Second  Brigades.  We  re- 
crossed the  river,  inarched  through  the  day,  and  encamped  about  8 
o’clock. 

Tuesday  (IGth)  we  were  not  fairly  out  of  camp  when  firing  Avas  heard 
in  advance  of  us.  We  moved  on  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  found  the 
First  Brigade  engaged  AAitli  the  enemy  at  White  Hall.  The  Second 
Brigade  was  sooji  ordered  to  the  front,  and  we,  under  orders  from  Gen- 
eral Foster,  moved  immediately  on  tOAvard  Goldsborough,  haAung,  as  Ave 
passed,  3 men  wounded,  leaving  a small  detachment  of  the  Twenty- 
fifth  and  Forty-sixth  Regiments  as  sharjishooters.  We  encamxied  at 
sundoAvn  about  8 miles  below  Goldsborough. 

Wednesday  (17th)  Ave  Avere  early  in  line.  Colonel  Ueckman,  with 
the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  and  Ninth  New  eJersey  acting  as  skir- 
mishers, we  moved  forward  and  came  witliin  sight  of  tbe  Wilmington 
1 bill  road. 

About  11  o’clock  a small  body  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  upon  a 
hill-side  near  by.  Riggs’  battery  Avas  i)ut  in  ])Osition  and  a few  shells 
thrown  among  them,  when  they  disappeared.  We  immediately  ad- 
vanced. The  Twenty-fifth  and  Ihventy  seA'enth  Regiments  Avere  moved 
foru'ard  in  line  on  the  left,  the  battery  su})ported  by  the  Tliii*d  and 
Forty-sixth  upon  the  right,  the  Fifth,  which  had  now^  c.ome  up  with  us, 
remaining  in  column.  Emerging  trom  the  Avood  I found  Colonel  Ueck- 


86 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  R.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


man  advancing  up  the  railroad,  and  sent  forward  to  support  him  the 
Twenty-fifth  and  Twenty-seventh  Eegiments,  and  subsequently  the 
Third.  The  Fifth  I formed  on  the  left  in  the  wood,  commanding  a 
road  running  down  from  a mill  on  the  other  side  of  the  railroad.  Dis- 
covering the  appearance  of  troops  near  there,  I sent  forward  a com- 
pany of  skirmishers  from  the  Fifth  Eegiment,  who  reported  that  cav- 
alry and  infantry  were  in  sight  within  the  wood  but  retired  as  they 
advanced.  The  bridge  across  the  IS'euse  was  soon  seen  to  be  on  fire, 
and  orders  came  to  destroy  as  much  of  the  road  as  possible.  This  being 
accomplished  and  the  firing  having  ceased  we  received  orders  to  form 
column  and  follow  the  main  column  en  route  to  New  Berne.  Four  regi- 
ments had  already  formed  and  passed,  most  of  them  across  the  creek, 
in  their  usual  and  regular  order  of  march,  leaving  the  Fifth  to  support 
the  battery. 

At  this  time  a detachment  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry  coming 
up  moved  down  toward  the  burning  bridge,  a few  api)roaching  its  im- 
mediate vicinity.  The  latter  were  fired  upon  apparently  by  a regiment 
of  the  enemy  from  the  edge  of  the  wood  near  the  bridge.  The  cavalry 
then  moved  quickly  to  the  brow  of  the  hill,  followed  by  Captain  Mor- 
rison’s battery,  which  had  been  stationed  midway  between  the  crest  of 
the  hill  and  the  bridge.  Two  or  three  regiments  (three  colors  were 
seen)  then  emerged  from  the  wood  and  quickly  formed  a line  of  battle 
just  behind  the  railroad  track.  Captain  Morrison’s  battery  then  opened 
a rapid  fire  upon  them  Avith  shell,  grape,  and  canister.  A portion  of 
the  enemy  instantly,  with  loud  cheers,  charged  up  the  hill  toward  the 
battery,  and  bore  up  steadil^^  in  the  face  of  a well-directed  and  most 
destructive  fire. 

I immediately  ordered  the  Fiftli  Massachusetts  Eegiment  to  support 
Morrison’s  battery,  and  recalled  the  regiments  that  had  retired  across 
tlie  creek,  and  ordered  up  Belger’s  battery,  which  had  been  assigned 
to  me  on  account  of  its  having  more  ammunition  left  than  Eiggs’. 
AVarned  by  the  rapid  fire  of  the  battery  and  by  the  cheers  of  the  enemy 
they  came  up  rapidly,  whereui)on  I posted  the  Twenty-seA^enth  Massa- 
chusetts Eegiment  on  the  left  to  ]nwent  aflank  attack  in  that  direction, 
and  placed  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  in  support,  believing  the 
main  attack  of  the  enemy  was  in  this  direction,  where  he  was  su])ported 
by  artillery.  On  the  right  I disposed  the  Third  Massachusetts  Eegi- 
ment to  resist  a flank  inoA^ement  in  that  direction,  and  the  Forty-sixth 
Massachusetts  aauis  held  in  reserve  so  as  to  be  readily  available  to  sup- 
l)ort  the  Aveakest  portion  of  the  line. 

The  enemy  meanwhile  had  been  staggered  by  the  crushing  fire  of  the 
batteries,  and  at  sight  of  my  supporting  regiments  broke  and  fled  in 
disorder  to  the  wood.  His  retreat  Avas  coA^ered  by  a liea\"y  fire  from  the 
battery  on  his  right,  which  inflicted  on  my  command  a loss  of  3 killed 
and  19  wounded. 

Hereupon  1 ordered  the  Twenty-seA^enth  Eegiment  to  file  into  the 
wood  and  to  api)roach  the  enemy’s  left  and  open  fire,  Avhich  they  did  ac- 
cordingly. At  this  time  a section  of  Eiggs’  battery  opened  fire  from  the 
eminence  near  the  building  used  as  a hospital,  and  I receiA^ed  orders  from 
Oeneral  Foster  to  retire  under  cover  of  this  fire  unless  closely  pressed 
by  the  enemy.  The  adAmnce  of  tiie  TAventy-seventh  was  checked  by  the 
lire  from  Eiggs’  battery,  but  tlie  regiment  reached  a point  at  which  it 
could  ])ut  in  a few  effective  volleys.  Simultaneously  Captain  Belger’s 
Ehode  Island  battery  took  ])osition  near  my  center  and  replied  to  the 
enemy’s  battery  with  good  effect,  and  also  shelled  the  Avood  that  coA^ered 
his  infantry. 


ClTAP.  XXX. 1 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLBSBOROtJGH. 


8? 


The  last  effort  of  the  enemy  was  made  on  my  right.  He  extended  his 
lines  along  the  wood  and  threatened  my  flank,  when  I ordered  the  Third 
Massachusetts  to  open  Are.  They  did  so,  but  soon  discontinued  as  the 
enemy  retired. 

The  battery  on  my  left  being  silenced  and  the  enemy  making  no 
further  demonstration,  and  having  received  information  that  the  creek 
in  our  rear  v/as  rapidly  rising,  I ordered  my  command  to  withdraw.  In 
crossing  the  creek  the  water  was  up  to  the  waists  of  the  men. 

Before  retiring  the  field  was  carefully  searched  and  the  bodies  of  our 
dead  were  brought  off'.  Our  position  was.  such,  being  just  at  the  crest 
of  the  hill,  that  our  loss  was  quite  small. 

My  column  slowly  and  in  proper  order  now  rejoined  the  main  body. 
We  arrived  at  I^ev/  Berne  on  Sunday. 

It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  for  me  to  say  that  the  old  regiments 
(Twenty -fifth  and  Twenty-seventh)  sustained  their  previous  well-earned 
reputation,  officers  and  men  doing  their  utmost  not  only  to  hold  but  to 
add  to  their  laurels  acquired  in  the  old  First  Brigade.  The  new  regi- 
ments did  nobly,  marching  up  steadily  and  firmly  and  maintaining  their 
line  and  position  without  flinching  even  in  the  most  exposed  situations. 

I received  great  assistance  from  my  acting  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
eral, Bartlett,  and  my  aides.  Lieutenant  Myrick,  of  the  Fifth  Eegiment, 
and  Lieutenant  Marsh,  of  the  Forty-sixth. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  C.  LEE, 

Col.  Twenty -seventh  Mass.  Uegt.^  Gomdg.  Third  Brig. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Maj.  Josiah  Pichett^  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fifth  Eegt.  Massachusetts  Vols., 
Camp  Oliver,  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  29,  1802. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  you  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Twenty-fifth  Eegiment  in  the  late  expedition  to  Kinston 
and  Goldsborough : 

Arriving  from  Plymouth  late  on  the  afternoon  of  the  10 th  with  six 
companies  of  my  regiment,  I found  orders  awaiting  me  to  be  ready  to 
march  at  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  and  assigning  my  regi- 
ment to  the  Third  Brigade,  under  command  of  Colonel  Lee.  I left  New 
Berne  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  with  six  comi)anies  of  the  regiment. 
Captain  Moulton  joined  me  at  the  Harrison  place  (our  outpost  on  the 
Trent  road)  with  the  other  four  companies,  making  an  effective  force, 
exclusive  of  field,  staff’,  and  line  officers,  of  G72  men.  Nothing  occurred 
in  which  the  regiment  or  any  of  it  took  part  worthy  of  note  till  Sunday, 
the  14th  instant,  when  our  forces  arrived  in  front  of  and  commenced 
the  battle  of  Kinston.  Eeceiving  orders  to  sup])ort  Battery  H,  Third 
New  York  Artillery,  I formed  my  regiment  in  line  of  battle  and  took 
]>osition  upon  the  left  of  the  battery.  Eeceiving  orders  shortly  after- 
ward to  sux)port  Belger’s  Ehode  Island  battery  I moved  forward  and 
took  position  upon  the  left.  In  this  latter  position  I remained  until  the 
jiibattle  was  decided.  I then  moved  forward,  crossed  the  bridge,  and 
bivouacked  my  regiment  that  night  in  Kinston. 


S8 


KORtll  CAROLINA  ANO  ft.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


idirAP. 


On  Monday,  the  15th,  the  march  was  resumed. 

On  the  ICth  our  forces  were  engaged  at  White  Hall.  My  regiment, 
though  within  range  of  the  enein'v’s  guns,  was  not  engaged,  but  marcli- 
ing  by  the  flank  through  the  fields  in  the  rear  of  our  batteries  we  took 
up  the  line  of  march  for  Goldsborough.  At  this  time  I was  called  upon 
to  furnish  sharpshooters  for  duty  on  the  banks  of  the  river  in  clearing 
the  woods  on  the  other  side  of  the  enemy’s  riflemen.  About  100  of  my 
men  volunteered  for  this  dangerous  duty.  After  being  posted  they 
rendered  eftective  service.  One  man  was  here  shot  through  the  head 
and  severely  wounded. 

On  the  17th  the  line  of  march  was  resumed,  the  Third  Brigade  hav- 
ing the  advance.  Late  in  the  morning  skirmishing  with  the  enemy’s 
pickets  commenced,  which  continued  until  we  came  upon  their  main 
force  posted  this  side  of  the  railroad  bridge  crossing  the  Neuse  Itiver. 
I was  ordered  forward  to  be  in  readiness  to  support  the  Seventeenth 
Massachusetts  and  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  who  were  sharply  engaged 
with  the  enemy.  I moved  forward  in  line  of  battle,  taking  position  on 
the  right  of  the  railroad  in  the  rear  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachu- 
setts and  quite  near  our  batteries.  I remained  in  this  position  till  the 
bridge  was  burnt  and  the  railroad  torn  u^j,  when  my  regiment  was  with- 
drawn from  the  field.  In  a short  time  the  enemy  again  made  his  aj)- 
pearance,  advancing  in  two  lines  of  battle  with  evident  design  of  charg- 
ing upon  and  taking  one  of  our  batteries.  Eeceiving  orders  to  again 
move  into  the  field  I advanced  by  the  flank  at  double-quick  and  was 
assigned  position  in  the  rear  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  and 
on  the  left  and  supporting  Belger’s  battery.  I ordered  my  men  to  lie 
down,  and  though  exposed  to  a severe  fire  from  the  enemy  which  we  had 
no  chance  to  return  yet  the  men  behaved  with  perfect  coolness.  While 
in  this  position  we  sustained  a loss  of  1 killed  and  3 wounded,  hiight 
brought  an  end  to  the  contest,  and  we  were  withdrawn,'  and  took  u[)  tlie 
line  of  march  for  New  Berne,  which  we  reached  on  Sunday,  the'  21st, 
and  went  into  camj)  on  our  old  ground. 

I cannot  end  without  mentioning  in  terms  of  the  highest  praise  the 
conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  during  the  whole  expedition.  On  the 
march,  in  the  bivouac,  under  fire,  in  everything  that  they  were  called 
upon  to  perform  they  showed  all  the  qualities  of  the  true  soldier,  and 
their  conduct  merits  and  receives  my  heartiest  commendations. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSIAII  PICKETT, 

Major ^ Commanding. 

Lieut.  CtEoege  AV.  Baetlett, 

Acting  Anfiistant  Ad  jut  ant- General.,  Third  Brigade. 


No.  22. 

Beport  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  S.  Shnrtleff.,  Forty -sixth  Mas.saclnisctts  Tn- 

fantry." 

ITDQES.  EoETY-STX^JUT  MASftACIIUSETTft  VWLIJNTEERft, 

New  Bcrne^  N.  C.,  Ikccmher  — , I8(>2. 
Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  re])ort  that  in  pursuance  of  your  Orders,  No. 
IS,  dated  l)(‘cond)er  10, 1802,  the  Forty-sixtli  Begiment  otlMassachusetts 
Volunteer  Alilitia  left  its  camping  ground  ;vnd  entered  upon  its  ])lace  in 
line  of  march  at  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  Thursday,  December  1 1, 1802, 


dllAP.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  OOLOSBOROUGIt. 


89 

and,  ill  company  with  tlie  other  regiments  and  being  third  in  line  of  yonr 
brigade,  were  en  route  toward  Kinston  at  about  9 o’clock  a.  m.,  continu- 
ing the  march  until  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  when  it  went  into  camp  about 
13  miles  from  Kew  Berne,  on  the  Trent  road.  It  recommenced  its  march 
in  the  same  order  at  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  December  12,  and  noth- 
ing of  note  having  transpired  again  encamped  with  the  other  regiments 
of  yours  and  the  preceding  brigades  about  28  miles  from  New  Berne. 

Onr  march  was  again  resumed  on  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  13th, 
at  about  9 a.  m.,  and  continued  for  about  an  hour,  when  our  regiment 
was  detached  from  your  brigade  and  left,  with  two  pieces  ot  Biggs’ 
battery.  Captain  Lee,  to  guard  and  hold  certain  cross-roads  and  the 
approaches  from  the  rear  and  front  of  the  center  road  of  the  three  roads 
leading  to  Kinston. 

The  artillery  having  been  placed  with  excellent  judgment  and  skill 
by  Cajitain  Lee  in  i^osition  to  completely  command  the  approach  in  front 
from  Kinston,  the  Forty-sixth  was  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  behind 
and  in  support.  Pickets  were  thrown  forward  on  the  Kinston  road  and 
one  company  (F),  under  Captain  Conwell,  was  detached  and  posted  at 
two  angles  of  a triangle,  some  200  yards  in  our  rear,  formed  by  a cross 
by-road  connecting  the  road  on  which  our  main  body  was  posted  and 
the  road  taken  by  the  main  body  of  the  army,  so  that  no  approach  upon 
either  road  could  be  made  by  the  enemy  without  our  receiving  timely 
warning.  We  held  this  position  until  sundown,  when  I received  orders 
from  Major  Hoffman  to  advance  my  command  4 miles  nearer  to  Kinston 
up  the  road  on  which  we  were  then  posted,  and  to  hold  and  occupy  cer- 
tain cross-roads  indicated  until  further  orders.  This  order  we  executed, 
making  the  march  after  nightfall.  I detached  Company  1)  (Captain 
Grimes),  to  march  some  50  yards  in  advance,  and  then  threw  forward  10 
men,  under  Lieutenant  Knapp,  as  an  advance  guard  against  surprise. 
Having  arrived  at  the  position  indicated,  the  artillery  was  placed  in 
position  by  CaiJtain  Lee,  the  inlautry  drawn  nx)  in  line  in  sux)i9ort  in  tjie 
edge  of  the  woods  skirting  the  cross-road;  the  several  roads  thoroughly 
picketed;  the  main  road  in  front  and  a cross  road  leading  to  the  right 
by  Captain  Grimes’  comx)any,  divided  so  as  to  make  three  i)osts,  in 
charge,  respectively,  of  Captain  Grimes,  Lieutenant  Knax)p,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Bronson;  the  road  in  our  rear  xhcketed  with  two  x^osts  from 
Captain  Kingsbury’s  comxiany  (B),  and  the  road  leading  to  the  left 
and  toward  the  x^osition  of  the  advance  of  the  army,  and  the  road  in 
onr  immediate  right  and  left  front  by  detachments  from  Captain  Lin- 
coln’s company  (G).  Our  baggage  train  I brought  forward  and  placed 
on  our  left,  on  the  cross-road  leading  to  the  rear  of  the  advance,  and 
of  course  between  our  left  and  our  pickets.  The  men  were  then  ordered 
to  lie  upon  their  arms,  and  of  course  no  camp  tires  were  allowed.  This 
l)osition  we  occuxned  undisturbed  until  morning,  our  pickets  bringing  in 
one  prisoner,  whom  I delivered  to  the  care  of  the  rear  guard;  and  Mien, 
in  pursuance  of  an  order  from  Major  Hoff'man,  received  about  midnight, 
we  proceeded  at  7 a.  m.  of  the  next  day  to  rejoin  the  main  body,  arriv- 
ing just  in  time  to  take  our  prox)er  x>lace  in  line,  where  we  continued 
until,  the  advance  becoming  engaged  near  Kinston,  we  were  sent  by 
your  orders  forward  to  sux)port  a battery,  not  then,  however,  engaged. 
After  the  engagement  at  Kinston  was  over  we  under  your  orders  re- 
sumed our  former  x)Osition  in  line,  and  entering  Kinston  encamx)ed  there 
with  the  rest  of  your  brigade. 

Besuming  our  march  on  the  following  moi  inng  (Monday)  we  preserved 
our  xdace  in  line  until,  the  advance  being  (mgagi'd  at  VVhite  Llall  with 
the  artillery,  under  your  orders  w(‘,  jiassed  I'orward  following  the  Twenty- 


90 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CtTAP.  XXX. 


fifth  Massachusetts  and  formed  in  line  on  its  left,  hut  were  immediately 
after  by  you  ordered  into  line  of  march  again. 

At  this  time  some  50  men  were  detached,  under  orders  purporting  and 
believed  to  come  from  Major-General  Foster,  to  remain  at  White  Hall 
as  sharpshooters.  We  then  proceeded  in  our  proper  place  and  en- 
camped about  6 p.  m.  Our  detachment  of  sharpshooters  all  reported 
to  the  regiment  before  morning,  with  the  exception  of  one,  Chapin,  of 
Company  I,  who  was  wounded  by  a rifle-ball  from  the  enemy’s  sharp^ 
shooters  in  the  arm,  not  dangerously.  Our  march  was  resumed  in  place 
oil  the  following  morning  about  half  past  7 o’clock,  and,  upon  arriving 
near  the  line  of  the  Wilmington  Eailroad,  your  brigade  engaging  the 
enemy,  we  were  ordered  up  and  formed  line  in  support  of  Belger’s  bat- 
tery, in  a position  taken  at  first  but  at  once  changed  before  it  engaged 
the  enemy,  we  following  it  and  supporting  it  in  its  new  position  on  the 
brow  of  a hill  commanding  the  railroad  and  woods  around  the  railroad 
bridge.  This  position  we  occupied  until,  the  bridge  having  been  burned 
and  the  track  torn  up,  the  battery  retired  and  we  were  ordered  to  fol- 
low it  en  route  for  New  Berne. 

Pendiug,  however,  forming  the  line  for  the  march,  the  enemy  reap- 
])eariiig  to  the  right  and  front  of  our  late  position  and  threatening  the 
battery  left  to  cover  our  retiring  force  as  well  as  our  flank,  we  were 
ordered  back  and  at  once  formed  in  rear  of  the  Third  Massachusetts. 
In  this  position  we  remained,  the  men  lying  down,  being  subjected  to 
a somewhat  annoying  fire  of  the  enemy’s  battery  on  onr  left,  but  with- 
out having  any  opportunity  to  engage  any  portion  of  his  force,  until 
under  your  orders  (the  enemy’s  batteries  having  been  either  silenced 
or  withdrawn  and  his  infantry  retired)  we  resumed  our  place  in  line  en 
route  again  for  New  Berne,  having  at  the  outset  to  ford  a mill-stream 
rendered  swift  and  deep  by  the  raising  of  the  flood-gates  by  the  enemy, 
as  Ave  supposed.  In  this  action,  and  while  occupying'  our  position  after 
the  renewal  of  the  engagement,  I regret  to  state  that  we  had  1 man 
(one  Wall,  of  Holyoke,  Mass.,  a member  of  Company  B)  mortally  Avounded 
and  3 others  wounded  by  the  shell  of  the  enemy,  the  details  of  which 

1 giA^e  in  paper  marked  A,  appended  hereto.*  Continuing  our  march,  Ave 
encamped  with  the  rest  of  your  brigade  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.  at  our 
camping  ground  of  the  previous  night,  and,  resuming  our  march  on  the 
following  morning  at  8 o’clock,  reached  camp  at  about  11  o’clock  i).  m. 
after  a march  toilsome  and  harassing  to  the  men  to  the  last  degree. 

Eesumiiig  our  march  at  8 o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  following  day,  after  a 
comparatiA^ely  easy  march  of  some  12  miles  Ave  encamped  about  6 miles 
below  Kinston,  passing  down  the  river  road.  Eesuming  our  march  in  our 
place  in  line  on  the  day  following,  at  8 o’clock  a.  m.,  Ave  again  encamped 
at  0 o’clock  some  13  miles  from  New  Berne,  on  the  TTentroad,  and  fi'oin 
this^  place  our  ambulances  without  halting  AA^ere  sent  forAvard  under 
charge  of  Maj.  James  H.  Waterman,  surgeon  of  our  regiment,  then  in 
charge  of  the  ambulance  train,  to  New  Berne,  our  Avagons  folloAAdng  at 
early  morning  in  adA^auce  of  the  brigade.  Eesuming  our  march  at  7 
o’clock  a.  m.  aa'c  arriA^ed  at  New  Berne  and  our  camihng  ground  about 

2 o’clock  p.  m.,  the  men  A^ery  foot-sore  and  weary,  otherwise  in  good  con- 
dition and  spirits.  I am  happy  to  be  able  to  state  that  from  my  care- 
ful obserA'atioii  of  the  men  under  my  command,  both  under  the  trials  of 
toilsome  nuirches  and  the  excitement  of  anticipated  engagement  Avitli 
tlie  enemy,  I belieA^e  you  have  in  them  a body  upon  Avhoin  you  may 
Avitli  conlidence  rely  should  occasion  require  you  to  use  them  in  any 


Nouiiiial  list  omitted.  See  p.  GO. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  EERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGTT., 


91 


of  the  ways  that  the  exigencies  of  the  service  may  require.  I am 
happy  also  to  bear  witness  to  the  energelic  and  conscientiously  careful 
discharge  of  duty  on  the  part  of  Captain  Lee,  with  whom  1 was  asso- 
ciated, as  1 have  stated,  and  to  whom  I am  greatly  indebted  for  valua- 
ble assistance  and  counsel  on  our  solitary  night  march  and  bivouac, 
and  who,  I am  glad  to  learn,  on  subsequent  detached  duty  added  to  his 
reputation  and  performed  valuable  service. 

I should  deprive  myself  also  of  a ideasure  if  1 omitted  to  call  to  your 
notice  the  fact  that  the  adjutant  of  our  regiment,  James  G.  Smith,  com- 
mencing the  exi^editioii  suffering  from  a i^ainful  accidental  shot  wound 
in  the  leg,  still  insisted  upon  accompanying  the  regiment,  and  though 
having  double  duty  to  perform,  in  the  absence  of  one  of  the  field  officers, 
still  manfully  endured  all  the  toils  of  the  marcii  and  the  field  and  ren- 
dered me  invaluable  service  in  the  management  and  control  of  the  regi- 
ment. I should  also  state  that  Colonel  Bowler  accom])anied  the  expe- 
dition until  after  the  affair  at  Kinston,  but  was  unable  by  reason  of 
indisposition  to  assume  command,  and  felt  constrained  by  increasing 
illness  to  return  to  New  Berne  on  the  morning  of  the  third  of  the  ex- 
pedition. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  S.  SHUBTLEFE, 

Lieut.  Col.^  Gomdg.  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Col.  Horace  C.  Lee, 

Commanding  Third  Brigade^  First  Division. 


Ko.  23.' 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  A.  Heclcman,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry ^ First 
Brigade.,  Second  Division. 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Kegmment  New  Jersey  Volunteers, 

Camp  Reno,  December  21,  18G2. 

Sir  : I have  tlie  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your  order 
I on  the  morning  of  the  11th  with  my  regiment  took  my  position  on 
the  right  of  the  column,  which  position  it  retained  during  the  whole 
march. 

On  the  second  day,  December  12,  we  came  up  with  the  advance  guard 
of  the  enemy.  I immediately  deployed  two  companies  as  skirmishers, 
and  drove  the  enemy  back  without  loss  on  our  side. 

On  the  morning  of  December  13,  at  11  a.  m.,  w'e  came  up  with  the 
enemy,  who  had  two  guns  in  position  on  the  Avest  bank  of  Southwest 
Creek,  supported  by  infantry.  I here  found  Caiitain  Cole,  Third  New 
York  Cavalry,  with  his  men  dismounted,  warmly  engaged  with  the 
enemy.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mix  had  idaced  Lieutenant  Day^s  section 
of  Morrison’s  battery  in  a good  position  and  was  sending  shell  into  them 
rapidljx  I immediately  ordered  Companies  0,  H,  and  G to  cross  the 
stream  on  the  right,  while  with  the  remainder  of  the  regiment  1 crossed 
at  a mill-dam  about  a mile  above  on  the  left.  On  arriving  at  their 
works  from  their  rear  I found  it  deserted  and  the  guns  withdrawn.  My 
whole  command  having  joined  me  I stationed  one  company  at  tlie  bridge 
and  witli  the  balance,  having  sent  you  word  of  my  intention,  proceeded 
up  the  road,  and  wlien  about  a mile  from  the  creek  Avas  saluted  by  a 
round  of  canister  from  a fi-i)Ounder  and  musketry.  I charg(Hl  on  the 


92 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  K.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX^. 


double-quick  aud  Yankee  yell  and  secured  one  d-pounder  and  caisson, 
killed  3,  wounded  several,  and  took  8 of  tbe  enemy  prisoners.  Skir- 
mishing continued  through  the  whole  day,  my  loss  being  1 wounded 
and  1 taken  i)risoner. 

About  3 p.  m.  Cnptnin  Cole,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  reported  to 
me,  by  order  of  General  WesseHs,  to  reconnoiter  forward.  We  had  pro- 
ceeded about  three-fourths  of  a mile  when  our  advance  guard  was  tired 
upon  by  volleys  of  mnsketry  from  both  sides  of  the  road,  wounding  1 
cavalryman.  1 ordered  the  cavalry  to  the  rear  and  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers three  (Companies  on  (‘ach  side  of  the  road.  The  men  advanced 
steadily  and  firmly  under  a heavy  but  wild  tiring  of  two  regiments  of 
infantry  and  two  6-poanders.  Morrison’s  battery  came  to  my  assist- 
ance and  drove  the  enemy  into  their  stronghold.  We  bivouacked  for 
the  night. 

On  Snnday,  December  14,  the  enemy  was  found  iiosted  about  1 mile 
this  side  of  the  village  of  Kinston  in  strong  force.  Four  companies  (C, 
D,  E,  and  I)  were  sent  forward  as  skirmishers.  They  were  opened  on 
by  artillery  and  infantry,  but  stood  their  ground  admirably,  and  doing 
great  injury  to  the  enemy  by  their  well-directed  fire.  Again  Morrison 
came  forward  with  a section  of  his  battery  and  opened  briskly,  a regi- 
ment having  arrived  to  support  the  battery.  With  the  remaining  six 
companies  I moved  to  the  right  to  prevent  being  flanked  from  that 
direction.  We  came  up  with  a regiment  of  them  on  our  right  front, 
engaged  them,  and  in  a few  minutes  forced  them  to  retreat  precipitately. 

1 next  discovered  a regiment  on  my  right  flank.  Captain  , 

with  a section  of  his  battery  (New  York  artillery),  opened  upon  them 
with  splendid  eflect,  and  prevented  them  from  forming  a junction  with 
their  main  column.  Being  re  enforced  by  four  regiments  of  Wessells’ 
brigade  (Eighty-fifth  and  Ninety-sixth  New  York,  ()ne  hundred  and  first 
Pennsylvania,  and  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts)  I formed  the  Eighty- 
fifth,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wellman,  and  the  Ninety-sixth,  Colonel  Gray, 
in  line  of  battle  to  the  right,  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  Seventeenth 
Massachusetts  facing  to  our  original  fronts.  The  Eighty-fifth  and 
Ninety  sixth  advanced  rapidly  about  400  yards,  discovered  the  enemy 
behind  a fence  in  the  edge  of  the  wood,  and  poured  a A'olley  into  them,  at 
which  they  fled  in  confusion,  exposed  to  our  fire.  1 then  ordered  the 
Ninety-sixth,  supported  by  the  Eighty-fifth,  to  advance,  under  cover  of 
the  wood,  ui)on  the  bridge,  and  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  supported  by 
the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  to  advance  in  a direct  line  across  the 
open  ground  to  the  same  point.  The  One  hundred  and  first  remained 
to  support  the  battery. 

On  arriving  near  the  bridge,  shell,  canister,  and  musketry  were  opened 
upon  us  from  the  opposite  baidv  of  the  river.  Firing  continued  from 
both  sides  about  twenty  minutes. 

I regret,  sir,  the  necessity  to  report  that  at  this  point  we  lost  the 
gallant  Colonel  Gray. 

After  the  eneiny’s  guns  had  been  silenced  and  their  forces  dispersed 
the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  aided  bj^  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  and  > 
Eighty-fifth  New  York,  extinguished  the  flames  of  the  burning  bridge 
ami  crossed  in  the  following  order:  Ninth,  Seventeenth,  and  Fighty-  i 
liftlK 

My  regiment  secured  three  fl-pounder  brass  guns,  one  stand  of  colors,  i 
and  a number  of  prisoners  and  small-arms. 

Loss,  killed,  wounded,  and  1 missing.  j 

I take  j)l(‘asure  in  adding  that  tlu^  lamented  Colonel  Gray,  Taeutenant- 
Colonel  Fellows,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wellman,  and  Major  Zabriskie, 


CiiAr.  XXX.]  NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGII.  93 

with  their  commands,  without  exception,  displayed  marked  bravery 
and  coolness,  and  proved  effectually  their  efficiency  and  gallantly. 

As  soon  as  the  bridge  was  sufficiently  rejiaired  to  permit  the  crossing 
of  the  artillery  I received  the  order  forward.  We  marched  through 
the  town,  the  Ninth  having  the  advance  and  the  Seventeenth  Massa- 
chusetts following.  We  marched  along  the  bank  of  the  river,  crossed 
the  railroad,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  about  1}  miles  from  Kinston, 
on  the  Qoldsborough  road. 

At  6 a.  m.,  the  15th  instant,  received  orders  to  return  to  the  bridge. 
On  arriving  at  the  bridge  we  crossed  and  continued  our  march  in  the 
direction  of  White  Hall.  Nothing  of  interest  occurred  throughout  the 
day,  and  at  night  bivouacked  3 miles  from  White  Hall. 

At  7 a.  m.,  16th  instant,  we  were  again  in  motion,  the  Ninth  New 
Jersey  in  advance.  Upon  our  arrival  at  White  Hall  my  advance  guard 
drew  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  who  were  strongly  intrenched  and  fortified 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  having  previously  burned  the  bridge 
to  prevent  our  crossing.  I immediately  ordered  the  fences  thrown 
down  on  each  side  of  the  road  for  the  artillery  to  take  their  position. 
In  the  mean  time  I had  ordered  four  comiiauies  to  deploy  as  skirmish- 
ers, which  they  did,  the  entire  length  of  our  front,  and  the  engage- 
ment soon  became  general.  The  remaining  six  companies  of  the  Ninth 
were  immediately  ordered  forward  to  support  the  skirmishers  and,  when 
an  opportunity  offered,  to  engage  the  enemy.  The  Ninth  warmly  en- 
gaged the  enemy  until  their  ammunition  (60  rounds)  was  expended. 
The  regiment  was  then  ordered  to  retire  and  send  for  ammunition.  The 
Seventeenth  Massachusetts  relieved  us  on  the  left  and  the  Twenty-third 
Massachusetts  on  the  right.  While  Avaiting  for  ammunition  the  column 
was  ordered  forward.  We  received  orders  to  Avait  for  our  supply  and 
bring  up  the  rear. 

Our  loss  Avas  3 killed,  42  Avounded,  and  3 missing. 

I then  received  orders  to  take  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  and 
proceed  in  advance  toAvard  Goldsborough  Bridge.  Bivouacked  the 
night  of  the  16th  about  5 miles  from  the  bridge. 

Morning  of  the  17th  column  again  moving,  SeA^nteenth  Massachu- 
setts ill  advance.  Ninth  New  Jersey  folloAving.  About  2 miles  from  the 
bridge  commenced  driving  in  the  enemy^s  pickets.  On  coming  in  sight 
of  the  bridge  saAV  a regiment  of  the  enemy  passing  along  the  railroad.  I 
immediately  ordered  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  to  send  out  skir- 
mishers and  advance  on  the  left  of  the  road  and  the  Ninth  NeAA"  Jersey 
to  deploy  and  advance  on  the  right  as  far  as  the  railroad.  Found  the 
enemy  here  in  force  on  both  sides  of  the  riAxr.  The  Seventeenth,  on 
reaching  the  railroad,  by  m}^  order  left  one  company  AAFere  the  country 
road  crosses  the  railroad  and  then  marched  doAvn  tlie  railroad  in  the  di- 
rection of  the  bridge.  The  company  left  in  position  on  the  country  road 
were  charged  upon  by  a squadron  of  cavalry  Avliom  they  repulsed,  and 
captured  2 prisoners,  without  loss  on  our  side.  The  Ninth  adAninced 
on  the  right  of  the  Seventeenth  to  Avithin  30  feet  of  tlie  riA^er  and 
bridge.  As  soon  as  the  artillery  arrived  on  the  ground  I withdreAv  the 
Ninth  NeAv  Jersey  and  Sev^enteenth  Massachusetts  to  giA^e  the  artillery 
])osition.  Torches  were  sent  us  and  orders  to  burn  tlie  bridge.  I rode 
u]i  to  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  called  for  voffiiib'ers  to  burn  tlie  bridge. 
Numbers  volunteered  instantly,  but  as  I wanted  but  three.  Lieutenant 
(Iraham,  acting  aide  to  me,  and  two  privates,  one  of  Com])any  E,  William 

Lemons,  and , took  the  port  fires  and  started  on  their  dangerous 

mission.  The  enemy  were  thickly  posted  on  both  sides  of  the  river  and 
all  about  the  bridge,  but  the  volunteers  were  successful,  and  we  soon 


94 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


liad  the  gratification  of  seeing  flames  and  smoke  ascending  in  columns, 
and  the  bridge  was  eflectually  destroyed.  Onr  loss  was  12  wounded. 

The  object  of  the  expedition  having  been  accomplished  I received 
orders  to  countermarch  and  return.  Had  proceeded  about  1 mile  when 
firing  was  heard  in  our  rear,  and  word  came  forward  that  our  rear  had 
been  attacked.  I immediately  ordered  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  into  line 
of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  road  and  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  on 
the  right.  Soon  after  forming  there  I received  orders  to  return  to  the 
scene  of  action,  which  I did,  and  posted  my  regiments  on  the  right  and 
left  of  the  country  road  and  left  of  Belger’s  battery,  which  was  warmly 
engaged  with  the  enemy.  Eemained  in  that  position  about  thirty  min- 
utes, when  we  were  relieved  by  a regiment  of  Wessells’  brigade,  and 
we  started  on  our  return  and  arrived  at  New  Berne  Saturday  evening, 
20th  instant,  having’ marched  the  last  day  30  miles. 

Officers  and  men  displayed  great  coolness  and  bravery.  The  color- 
sergeant  and  color-guard  behaved  nobly. 

I deem  it  my  duty,  however,  to  mention  particularly  Lieut.  George 
Graham,  of  Eocket  Battery,  W.  W.  McOhesney  (citizen),  volunteer 
aides,  for  valuable  services  rendered  throughout  the  expedition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

G.  A.  HECKMAN, 

Colonel. 


General  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Map  Abram  Zabrislde,  Ninth  New  Jerseg  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Eegiment  New  Jersey  Vols., 

December  21,  1862. 

Sir  : I respectfully  forward  to  you  the  report  of  the  part  taken  by 
the  regiment  under  my  command  in  the  expedition,  under  Major-Gen- 
eral Foster,  against  Goldsborough : 

We  started  from  New  Berne  on  the  morning  of  December  11,  this 
regiment  holding  the  advance  of  the  column,  which  position  it  retained 
during  the  whole  march. 

On  the  second  day,  December  12,  we  came  up  with  the  advance  guard 
of  the  enemy.  By  your  order  two  companies  were  sent  forward  as  skir- 
mishers, and  continued  steadily  to  dri^'e  the  enemj^  back  without  any 
loss  on  our  side. 

On  the  morning  of  December  13,  at  11  a.  m.,  we  came  up  with  the 
enemy  in  a strong  position  on  the  west  bank  of  Southwest  Creek. 
Two  of  the  companies  were  ordered  to  cross  the  stream  on  the  riglit, 
while  the  remainder  of  the  regiment  crossed  at  a mill-dam  about  a mile 
above  on  the  left.  When  we  arrived  at  the  breastwork  thrown  up  by 
the  enemy  I found  it  deserted  both  by  their  artillery  and  infantry. 
However,  discovering  the  enemy  half  a mile  farther  up  the  road,  the 
regiment  charged  on  them  at  a run,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  a gun 
and  caisson,  G-pounder,  besides  wounding  3 of  the  enemy  and  taking  6 
or  8 prisoners.  Skirmishing  with  the  enemy  continued  through  the 
whole  day,  our  loss  being  1 man  wounded  and  1 taken  i)risoner. 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


95 


Od  Sunday,  December  14,  the  enemy  were  found  posted  about  1 mile 
this  side  of  the  village  of  Kinston  in  strong  force.  Four  companies  (0, 
D,  E,  and  I)  were  sent  forward  as  skirmishers.  They  were  soon  opened 
on  by  artillery  and  infantry,  but  stood  their  ground  admirably,  holding 
the  position  they  had  taken  and  doing  great  injury  to  the  enemy  by 
their  well-directed  fire.  The  remaining  six  companms  were  sent  on  the 
right  to  flank  the  enemy’s  position.  We  came  up  with  a regiment  of 
them  stationed  in  the  wood  on  the  right,  and  after  a half  hour’s  fight 
succeeded'  in  forcing  them  to  retreat  precipitately.  Then  advancing 
by  your  order  across  the  field  to  the  road  I opened  fire  with  the  head 
ot  column  upon  the  enemy,  who  were  retreating  across  the  bridge,  and 
succeeded  in  preventing  their  escape.  After  crossing  the  bridge  we 
took  three  guns,  one  stand  of  colors,  and  numerous  prisoners. 

Our  loss  in  this  battle  amounted  to  2 killed,  32  wounded,  and  1 miss- 
ing. 

Resuming  our  march,  on  the  16th  we  came  up  with  the  enemy  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Keuse  Eiver,  at  White  Hall,  posted  behind  breast- 
works and  buildings.  The  whole  regiment  was  deployed  along  the  banks 
of  the  river,  kept  up  a brisk  fire  for  about  two  hours,  and  were  at  last 
relieved,  our  ammunition  being  expended  and  our  loss  being  very 
heavy — 3 killed,  42  wounded,  and  3 missing. 

We  again  came  up  with  the  enemy  December  17,  posted  on  the  north 
side  of  the  Keuse,  at  the  railroad  bridge  near  Goldsborough.  The  right 
wing  of  the  regiment  was  deployed  along  the  bank  of  the  river  on  the 
right  of  the  railroad,  while  the  left  companies  were  held  in  reserve. 
The  whole  regiment  was  at  last  drawn  off,  after  the  firing  of  the  bridge, 
to  make  way  tor  the  artillery.  December  17  we  commenced  our  return 
marcli,  and  arrived  in  New  Berne  on  Saturday,  December  20. 

There  were  so  many  instances  of  individual  courage  shown  in  the 
different  battles  that  it  is  difficult  to  mention  particular  names.  How- 
ever, I cannot  forbear  mentioning  with  praise  Captain  Stewart,  Lieu- 
tenant Brown,  Captain  McChesney,  and  Lieutenant  Townley,  not  onlv 
for  personal  bravery  but  for  their  ability  as  commanders  of  their  re- 
spective companies;  and  also  the  names^of  Privates  William  Lemons, 

Comj)any  E,  and , who,  with  Lieutenant  Graham,  set  fire  to 

the  railroad  bridge  near  Goldsborough. 

I inclose  a list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ABEAM  ZABEISKIE, 

, • Major.  Commandlnq. 

Col.  C.  A.  Heckman.  ^ 


No.  25. 

Report  of  nri(j.  Gen.  Jlenry  W.  Wessells,  U.  S.  Ar^mj,  commanding  Third 
Brigade j FecWs  Bivision,  of  operations.  Bccemhcr  5-21. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Peck’s  Division, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Bccemhcr  22,  1862. 
Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  pursuant  to  instructions  from 
Major-General  Peck  I left  Camp  Suffolk,  Va.,  on  the  5tli  instant  with  my 
brigade,  composed  of  the  Eighty-fifth,  Ninety-second,  Ninety-sixth  New 
iork,  and  Eighty-fiftli,  One  hundred  and  first,  and  One  hundred  and 

""  Embodied  in  revised  statement,  j).  60. 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


diy 

tliird  Peimsylvaiiia  Volunteers,  uuder  orders  to  proceed  to  New  Perry, 
oil  the  (Jliowaii,  near  Gatesville,  there  to  report  to  the  commanding  offi- 
.cer  of  the  Dejiartment  of  North  Carolina. 

l\Iy  command  arrived  at  the  point  designated  on  the  Gth  instant,  where 
it  was  met  by  Major-General  Poster  with  transports  for  the  brigade. 
The  troojis  embarked  on  the  following  day,  arriving  at  this  station  on 
tlie  9th.  An  expedition  having  been  planned  and  organized  to  move  in 
the  direction  of  Goldsborongh,  the  column  was  put  in  motion  on  the 
morning  of  the  11th,  the  advance  taken  by  Heckman’s  Nintli  New  Jer- 
sey Volunteers,  followed  by  my  own  brigade,  to  which  Avas  attached 
Morrison’s  battery  Third  New  York  Artillery. 

No  serious  obstacles  ay  ere  interposed  by  the  enemy  until  arriving 
at  South Avest  Branch,  G miles  from  the  toAvn  of  Kinston,  Avhere  it  AAais 
found  the  main  road  crossing  the  creek  was  AA^ell  Avatched  and  strongly 
guarded  both  by  artillery  mid  infantry.  A skillful  feint  having  been 
made  toAvard  this  x)oint,  the  main  body  moved  by  an  upper  road,  cross- 
ing tlie  creek  about  half  a mile  below  on  a mill-dam.  The  bridge  Avas 
found  to  be  partially  destroyed  and  the  enemy  covering  it  with  tAVo  guns 
and  a force  of  infantry. 

This  ])osition  Avas  at  once  reconnoitered  by  the  Ninth  NeAv  Jersey  Vol- 
unteers with  their  usual  intrepidity,  and  a crossing  Avas  eftected  by  the 
mill,  threatening  the  enemy’s  right.  At  the  same  time,  by  direction  of 
the  commanding  general,  I detached  the  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers, Colonel  Howell,  Avith  orders  to  force  a imssage  beloA\^  the  bridge, 
by  felling  trees  or  fording,  and  engage  him  on  the  right.  This  difficult 
duty  Avas  handsomely  performed.  HoAvell’s  skirmishers,  led  by  Captains 
Hooker  and  Phillips,  pushed  boldly  through  the  swamp,  engaged  the  i 
enemy’s  battery  under  a shoAA’er  of  grape,  and  by  a Avell-directed  fire  of  i 
musketry  drove  the  cannoneers  from  the  ground,  and  Heckman’s  ad-  j 
Amice  appearing  simultaneously  from  the  left  the  enemy  fled,  leaAung  j 
one  of  his  guns  in  our  possession.  The  brigade  in  the  mean  time  crossed  I 
at  the  mill,  and  being  joined  by  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Volun-  j 
teers  moved  forAvard  about  3 miles  and  biAmuacked  for  the  night,  the  i 
Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers  Avith  Morrison’s  battery  taking  up  a posi- 
tion about  1 mile  in  advance. 

On  the  folloAviug  day  (December  14)  the  line  of  march  AAns  resumed 
at  an  early  hour  and  in  the  usual  order.  Heckman’s  skirmishers  AA^ere 
soon  engaged  Avith  the  enemy’s  outposts,  and  to  support  him  I directed  , 
the  Jhghty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  to  move  through  the  wood  on  i 
the  left  of  the  road  Avith  a view  to  act  against  the  enemy’s  right.  A sec-  | 
tion  of  Morrison’s  battery  was  also  ordered  forward,  supported  by  the  I 
One  hundred  and  third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  j 
Maxwell,  with  directions  to  take  a suitable  position  and  open  fire.  ; 

The  Eighty-fifth  New  York,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wellman,  was  then  j 
thrown  forAvard  and  to  the  right  of  the  road,  with  instructions  to  en-  i 
gage  the  enemy  on  the  fiank  and  press  him  vigorously  toAvard  the  \ 
left.  This  regiment  Avas  soon  followed  by  the  One  hundred  and  first  i 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Major  Taylor,  and  the  Ninety-sixth  NeAV  York  i 
yolunteers.  Colonel  Gray,  AAuth  similar  orders.  In  the  mean  time  being  t 
informed  that  a portion  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers  Avere  fail- 
ing in  ammunition  I directed  the  Ninety-second  Ncav  York  Volunteers, 
Colonel  Hunt,  to  moA’e  doAAui  the  road  to  relie A’e  or  su])port  Colonel  Heck- 
man as  circumstances  might  require.  All  these  movements  Avere  executed  ■ 
by  the  several  regiments  with  alacrity  and  precision,  deserving  the  highest  : 
praise.  My  Avhole  brigade  Aras  now  in  position  before  the  enemy’s  line  j i 
the  firing  was  heaAty  and  almost  incessant  j the  Av^ounded  were  being  rap-  j 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


97 


idly  bj’oiight  to  the  rear,  and  the  enemy,  concealed  by  the  wood  and  posted 
beliind  aii  almost  impassable  swamp,  maintained  his  position  with  stub- 
born obstinacy.  At  this  time,  and  on  my  application  to  the  major-gen- 
eral commanding,  I was  re-enforced  in  succession  by  the  Seventeenth, 
Twenty-third,  and  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers.  These  fine 
regiments  took  their  positions  with  the  coolness  and  precision  of  vet- 
erans, and  the  whole  line  was  then  directed  to  advance  and  push  the 
enemy  at  every  point.  The  major-general  commanding  having  arrived 
on  the  ground  made  further  disposition  of  the  troops  and  conducted  the 
afi'air  to  a rapid  and  successful  termination. 

Under  my  orders  to  advance,  the  whole  brigade,  supported  on  the  left 
by  other  regiments,  moved  gradually  forward,  converging  toward  the 
enemy’s  line  of  retreat,  driving  him  from  the  church  and  throwing  him 
back  toward  the  bridge,  over  which  the  main  body  escaped,  leaving 
several  huudred  prisoners  in  our  hands. 

The  retreat  of  the  enemy  was  closely  followed  by  the  Eighty-fifth  and 
One  huudred  and  third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  on  the  '^^ft  (the  latter 
sufibring  severely  in  crossing  the  open  field),  while  the  i^iuety-sixth  and 
Eighty -fifth  New  York  and  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers charged  from  the  right ; the  Ninety-second  moved  along  the  road 
in  support  of  the  battery.  The  bridge  was  fired  in  several  places  by 
the  enemy  and  exposed  to  a destructive  fire  of  artillery  and  musketry 
froin  the  opimsite  bank,  but  every  regiment,  including  those  from  other 
brigades,  seemed  to  vie  with  each  othetf  in  emuPation,  and  pressed  for- 
ward Avith  unflinching  determination. 

That  gallant  officer.  Colonel  Gray,  Ninety-sixth  New  York  Volun- 
teers, with  his  face  to  the  foe  and  the  colors  of  his  regiment  first  on  the 
bridge,  fell  mortally  wounded  in  the  hour  of  victory. 

The  flames  were  extinguished  without  serious  injury  to  the  bridge, 
and  my  brigade  being  reformed  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river  con- 
tinued its  march  through  the  village  of  Kinston  and  bAouacked  for  the 
night  on  the  Goldsborough  road. 

The  steadiness  of  the  troops  during  this  short  conflict  gave  me  full 
confidence  of  success,  and  the  conduct  both  of  officers  and  men,  with 
rare  exceptions , merits  the  highest  praise.  For  special  acts  of  gal- 
lantry and  good  conduct  I have  the  honor  to  refer  you  to  the  reports  of 
regimental  commanders  herewith  inclosed.  Captain  Stewart,  assistant 
adjutant- general ; CaiJtains  Webster  and  Hall,  brigade  quartermaster 
and  commissary,  and  my  aides,  Lieutenants  Beegle  and  Foot,  rendered 
most  important  service.  My  orders  were  conveyed  by  these  officers  to 
every  x)art  of  the  field  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight  with  the  most  grati- 
fying coolness  and  intelligence.  Acting  Brigade  Surgeon  Eush  also 
deserves  the  highest  commendation  for  the  i)ronq)t  and  efficient  man- 
ner in  which  the  onerous  duties  of  his  department  were  conducted. 

A list  of  casualties  accomi)anies  this  report.* 

My  brigade,  having  recrossed  the  Neuse,  accompanied  the  expedition 
toward  Goldsborough,  and  its  object  having  been  fully  accomplished  by 
the  destruction  of  the  railway  and  bridge,  the  whole  command  returned 
to  this  station,  arriving  at  New  Berne  on  the  21st  instant. 

Eespectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  WESSELLS, 

Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General Dept,  of  North  Carolina. 

\ Embodied  in  revised  statement,  j).  00. 

7 R R — VOL  XVIII 


98 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


No.  26. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  AMjahJ.  WelhnaUj  Eighty  fifth  New  Yorh  Infantry., 
of  engagement  at  Kinston)  December  14. 


Hdqrs.  Eighty-fifth  Regiment  New  York  Vols., 
New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  22,  1862. 


Captain  : I have  tlie  honor  to  report  that  at  the  engagement  before 
Kinston,  Avhieh  occurred  on  the  14th  instant,  the  Eighty-fifth  New  York 
Volunteers  particijiated  in  the  following  manner: 

Pursuant  to  an  order  received  from  General  Wessells  the  aforesaid 
regiment  was  led  to  the  right  of  the  position  which  was  occupied  by 
the  Union  ibices  during  tlie  earlier  stages  of  the  battle,  and  reported  to 
Colonel  Heckman,  of  the  Ninth*New  Jersey  Volunteers,  as  his  support, 
at  11  a.  in.  In  accordance  with  instructions  from  Colonel  Heckman  my 
regiment  was  then  moved  to  the  extreme  right,  for  the  purpose  of  a 
flank  demonstration.  After  proceeding  .500  yards,  preceded  by  two  com- 
lianies  of  my  command  deployed  as  skirmishers,  a regiment  of  the  enemy 
was  discovered  200  yards  in  advance,  drawn  up  behind  a fence  at  the 
edge  of  the  wood  in  which  we  were.  My  skirmishers  moved  quietly  to 
the  right  of  the  regimeiit  and  opened  a brisk  fire  upon  the  eneinj^,  which 
was  returned  without  effect.  While  the  attention  of  the  latter  was  thus 
engaged  my  own  line  advanced  quickly  and  poured  in  a volley,  at  which 
the  enemy  fled  in  confusion,  some  of  them  across  an  open  field  exposed 
to  our  fire. 

Subsequently  my  regiment  was  directed  to  support  the  Ninety- 
sixth  New  York  Volunteers  in  an  advance  upon  the  bridge,  where  the 
lamented  Colonel  Gray  received  a mortal  wound.  My  line  was  formed, 
immediately  on  our  arrival  at  the  bridge,  along  the  bank  of  the  river 
with  the  left  resting  at  the  bridge,  which  was  being  swej^t  by  grape  and 
canister  together  with  musketry  from  the  opposite  bank.  A'  hot  fire 
from  both  sides  continued  for  twenty  minutes.  After  the  enemy’s  guns 
had  been  silenced  and  their  forces  dispersed,  men  from  Captain  Jenney’s 
battery,  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers,  and  my  own  regiment  extin- 
guished the  flames  of  the  burning  bridge.  The  Ninth  New  Jersey  Vol- 
unteers then  crossed  over  closely  followed  by  the  Seventeenth  Massa- 
chusetts, which  latter  regiment  had  just  at  that  moment  arrived  and 
had  not  participated  in  the  capture  of  the  bridge.  Immediately  after 
the  latter  regiment  lollowed  my  own,  which  thus  had  the  honor  of  be- 
ing the  first  of  General  Wessells’  brigade  which  gained  the  opposite 
bank. 


We  captured  between  20  and  30  prisoners,  besides  a quantity  of  small- 
arms. 


1 take  pleasure  in  adding  that  both  officers  and  men,  without  an  ex- 
ception, disjdayed  much  bravery  and  coolness. 

1 am,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 


A.  J.  WELLMAN, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Gomdg.  Eighty-ffth  New  Yorh  Vols. 


Capt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Wessells’’  Brigade. 


Chav.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBORO  UGH. 


99 


27. 

Report  of  Col.  Lewis  C.  Hunt.,  Ninety -second  Neic  York  Infantry,  of  en- 
(jayement  at  Kinston,  December  14. 

Hdqrs.  Ninety-second  New  York  Volunteers, 

December  21,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  tlie  honor  to  rex)ort  that  my  regiment  took  part  in 
the  battle  of  Kinston,  on  the  14th  instant,  as  follows : 

I was  ordered  Creneral  Wessells  to  relieve  the  Ninth  New  Jersey, 
which  had  for  some  time  been  engaged  and  tbeir  ammunition  rei)orted 
as  running  low.  I found  them  in  a heavily-wooded  swamp,  passed 
their  line  of  battle,  and  dei)loyed  the  regiment  as  skirmishers.  This 
was  done  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy,  which,  fortunately,  passed 
overhead  for  the  most  part  on  account  of  the  peculiar  conformation  of 
the  ground  and  the  usual  tendency  to  overtire,  but  rained  down  the 
leaves  and  branches  ui)on  us.  The  swamp  witli  its  thick  undergrowth 
was  next  to  impassable,  but  the  men  floundered  through  the  bog- holes, 
sometimes  up  to  their  middle,  delivering  their  tire  as  they  advanced. 
The  point  ujion  which  we  were  operating  .seemed  to  be  occupied  by  the 
enemy  in  large  force,  and  1 moved  three  cornpanies  from  the  right  flank 
toward  the  right  and  front,  hoping  to  And  higher  ground  from  which 
1 might  make  a diversion  in  support  of  the  main  body.  1 accompanied 
tliem,  wishing  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  ground  toward  the  right 
and  whether  other  troops  were  assisting  in  the  attack.  I found  higher 
and  more  open  ground  but  no  assisting  forces.  I then  sent  my  adju- 
tant, Lieutenant  Ward,  to  General  Wessells  asking  for  re-enforcements. 
Keturning  to  the  main  body  I found  it  had  moved  ofl'  toward  the  left 
Hank  and  had  charged  upon  a body  of  the  enemy  near  the  junction  of 
tlie  roads,  but  was  received  with  such  a volley  as  compelled  it  to  fall 
back.  I then  formed  my  men  for  another  charge  upon  the  enemy  di- 
rectly in  front,  hoping  to  gain  a ditch  near  the  fence  which  we  might 
hold  until  re-enforced.  I directed  my  men  to  run  up  in  line  without 
tiring,  which  the  enemy  no  sooner  perceived  than  they  poured  in  a 
volley  which  indicated  a force  of  tive  times  our  number,  but  which,  as 
before,  passed  mainly  overhead. 

JVly  men  were  now  completely  exhausted  with  their  two  hours’  work 
in  the  swamp.  We  had  tried  to  get* a foothold  to  the  front  and  on  both 
Hanks  but  had  failed  for  want  of  numbers.  The  enemy  were  reported 
to  me  by  several  as  passing  our  right  flank,  and  1 judged  it  best  to  draw 
back  to  the  higher  ground  in  our  rear  where  I knew  the  One  hundred 
and  third  Pennsylvania  to  have  been  posted.  Here  I received  through 
yourself  authority  from  General  Wessells  to  direct  the  movements  of  the 
several  regiments  in  the  neighborhood.  Having  had  the  opportunity  of 
getting  a good  knowledge  of  the  position  and  its  requirements,  I directed 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Maxwell,  whose  regiment  (the  One  hundred  and  third 
Pennsylvania)  was  nearly  twice  as  strong  as  mine,  to  advance  through 
the  swamp  directly  to  the  front,  occupy  the  ditch,  and,  if  possible,  pass 
on  beyond  the  fence.  The  men  were  fresh  and  went  forward  gallantly 
to  the  task  before  them,  which  I lightened  as  much  as  possible  by  send- 
ing forward  the  Eighty -fifth  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Howell,  lying  in  the 
wood  near  by,  and  pointed  out  the  direction  of  attack.  I presumed  that 
my  adjutant  had  returned  to  the  right  flank  with  the  re-enforcements  I 
had  sent  him  for,  and  so,  while  my  men  were  resting  in  support  of  a sec- 
tion of  Morrison’s  battery  and  on  the  ground  previously  occupied  by  the 


100 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  tcktc. 


One  hundred  and  third,  I sent  forward  four  of  my  officers  in  different 
directions  toward  the  front  with  General  W essells’ orders  that  every 
regiment  should  press  forward.  They  fulfilled  their  mission  to  my  en- 
tire satisfaction,  contributing,  I have  every  reason  to  believe,  to  the 
fliglit  of  the  enemy  which  soon  after  took  place. 

My  officers  behaved  most  creditably,  with  one  exception,  of  whiich  a 
si)ecial  re])ort  will  be  made,  and  the  regiment,  as  a whole,  sustained 
the  re[)utation  which  it  earned  at  the  Seven  Pines  as  a part  of  Oasey^s 
division.  This  is  iiaying  as  high  a complimerft  as  the  regiment  could 
desire. 

Of  the  officers  whom  1 happened  to  notice  I would  mention  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Anderson,  Adjutant  Ward,  Cax^tain  Cleary,  and  Lieutenant 
Cole  for  their  coolness  and  gallantry.  Captains  Bice,  Miller,  and  Merri- 
man,  and  Lieutenant  Babcock  are  highly  spoken  of.  Sergeant  Ball,  of 
Company  — , was  especially  active  and  zealous,  and  deserves  promo- 
tion. Sergeant  O’Neil  and  Private  Pierce,  of  Company  E;  Private 
Sheridan,  of  1),  and  Color-bearer  Sergeant  Thompson  are  especially 
mentioned  by  their  company  commanders.  Surgeon  Edmeston  fol- 
lowed tbe  regiment  into  the  swamp  and  attended  the  wounded  under 
fire,  and,  for  his' zeal,  energy,  and  consideration  during  the  whole  expe- 
dition, deserves  the  highest  praise. 

A special  report  of  the  casualties,  amounting  to  3 killed,  16  wounded, 
and  none  missing,  is  herewith  forwarded.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  0.  HUNT, 

Colonel,  Ninety-second  New  York  Volunteers. 

Oapt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  WesselW  Brigade, 


No.  28. 

Report  of  Gapt.  George  W.  Rinds,  Ninety-sixth  New  York  Infantry,  of  en- 
gagement at  Kinston,  December  14. 

Hdqrs.  Ninety-sixth  New  York  State  Volunteers, 
Camp  near  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  21,  1862. 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  14th  instant,  when  tlje 
brigade  engaged  the  enemy  in  front  of  Kinston,  N.  C.,  in  compliance 
with  the  orders  of  General  Wessells,  this  regiment,  under  command  of 
Col.  Charles  O.  Gray,  moved  down  the  road  leading  to  the  bridge  in 
front  and  filed  into  the  wood  and  moved  by  tlie  right  flank  several 
hundred  yards  to  the  right  of  the  road,  where  it  was  formed  into  line  of 
battle  and  rested  lying  down,  while  a company  of  skirmishers  was  sent 
forward  to  feel  the  enemy’s  position.  Finding  him  in  the  corner  of  the 
wood  to  the  right  in  some  force  we  advanced  in  line  of  battle  under 
fire,  the  Eighty-fifth  New  York  Volunteers  being  on  our  left  and  One 
hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  as  support,  charging  and 
cheering,  the  enemy  retreating.  As  we  advanced  we  commenced  a 
rapid  fire,  which  was  discontinued  after  a few  moments,  the  enemy  get- 
ting out  of  range. 

Soon  receiving  an  order  to  advance  we  moved  toward  the  river,  feel- 


Embodied  iu  revised  statement,  60, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BEENE  TO  GOLO.^^BOBOUOIT. 


101 


ing’  our  way  through  the  strij)  of  wood  leading  to  the  road.  Arriv- 
ing at  the  road  and  seeing  the  enemy  crossing  the  bridge  in  retreat 
we  charged  rapidly  toward  it.  delivering  a rapid  fire  and  receiving  a 
raking  fire  from  artillery  and  musketry.  Arriving  near  the  bridge  our 
regiment  was  cut  in  two  by  the  Tenth  Connecticut  crossing  our  line  of 
march.  Col.  Charles  O.  Gray,  with  two  companies,  charged  up  to  the 
bridge,  arriving,  with  the  regimental  colors,  first  upon  the  end  of  the 
bridge,  where  a portion  of  a rebel  regiment  was  cut  off,  they  throwing 
their  guns  upon  the  burning  timbers  and  retreating  to  the  left.  At 
this  moment  our  noble  colonel  was  shot  through  the  breast  by  a mus- 
ket-ball, from  which  wound  he  soon  died.  Had  it  not  been  for  this  sad 
blow  our  regiment  must  have  been  the  first  to  have  crossed  after  the 
fleeing  enemy. 

Respectfullv, 

GEOEGE  W.  HINDS, 

Captain j Comdg.  Kinety -sixth  Regiment  New  Yorh  Volunteers, 
Capt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Asst,  Adjt,  Oen,,  Third  Brigade^  PecWs  Division, 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Col,  Joshua  B,  Howell,  Eighty -fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  of 
operations  December  13-17. 

Hdqrs.  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
Camp  near  New  Berne,  N.  C,,  December  22,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  December  13  instant, 
while  on  the  march  on  the  recent  exijedition  to  Kinston,  &c.,  at  the 
Southwest  Creek,  when  the  firing  at  that  place  began  I was  ordered 
by  the  general  to  take  my  regiment  to  the  right  of  the  road  leading  to 
the  bridge,  and  on  the  right  of  the  battery  attached  to  our  brigade,  to 
support  the  battery. 

Soon  after  I had  placed  my  regiment  in  the  position  ordered  I was 
ordered  by  the  general  to  send  forward  two  companies  as  skirmishers, 
to  examine  the  wood  and  stamps  as  far  as  the  creek,  to  see  if  a cross- 
ing were  practicable  and  to  feel  for  the  enemy.  In  obedience  to  the 
order  I sent  forward  Companies  B and  D,  under  command  of  Captain 
Hooker  (Company  B),  senior  captain.  Shortly  afterward  I was  ordered 
to  move  the  regiment  forward  and  cross  the  creek  if  at  all  practicable, 
and  attack  and  drive  the  enemy  if  we  found  them  on  that  side  of  the 
road.  By  felling  trees  across  the  creek  and  with  much  difficulty  and 
labor  we  effected  a crossing.  We  had  not  only  the  creek  to  pass  over 
but  swamps  on  both  sides  of  it.  While  crossing  the  creek  we  heard 
sharp  and  rapid  firing  in  the  advance  of  us,  and  on  coming  out  on  the 
road  ascertained  that  the  two  companies  (B  and  D),  under  Captain 
Hooker,  on  their  approach  to  the  road  from  the  wood,  had  come  in 
contact  with  a party  of  the  enemy  (First  Mississippi  Light  Artillery), 
who  had  a piece  planted  on  the  road.  They  were  promptly  attacked  by 
Captain  Hooker  and  driven  from  their  gun — repulsed  with  a loss  of  4 
men  killed. 

In  the  conflict  our  men  received  two  discharges  of  grape  and  canister 
from  the  enemy  before  they  were  ‘driven  from  their  giui.  The  eiiertiy 
were  driven  up  the  road,  and  in  the  earnestness  of  pursuit  it  was  omit* 


102  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

ted,  unfortunately,  to  leave  any  one  in  charge  of  the  piece  captured. 
The  Ninth  New  Jersey,  coming  up  immediately  thereafter,  took  the 
piece  into  their  possession,  and  from  this  circumstance  might  have  the 
entire  credit  of  having  captured  it  awarded  to  them ; whereas  the  credit 
of  the  capture  belongs  to  the  two  companies  of  my  regiment  exclusively. 
I do  not  believe,  however,  that  that  gallant  regiment  would  claim  the 
credit  to  the  prejudice  of  my  companies.  I wish  to  state  here  that  the 
timely  arrival  of  Captain  Hooker  with  the  companies  and  the  gallant 
achievement  in  capturing  the  gun  and  driving  the  enemy  manifestly 
saved  that  brave  regiment  (the  Ninth  New  Jersey)  from  being  seriously 

cut  U|). 

I desire,  captain,  to  communicate  to  the  general,  iii  the  very  highest 
terms  of  commendation  and  praise,  the  promptness  and  gallantry  man- 
ifested by  the  brave  officers  and  enlisted  men  engaged  in  that  affair; 
and  I also  desire  to  do  the  same  justice  to  the  other  gallant  officers  ami 
enlisted  men  of  my  regiment  for  their  untiring  zeal  and  indefatigable 
industry  and  energetic  efforts-  made  and  exhibited  in  effecting  the  cross- 
ing of  tiie  creek,  overcoming  difficulties  that  seemed  almost  insurmount- 
able, and  also  for  the  rapid  movement  forward  (exhausted  as  they  were) 
after  the  crossing  was  effected. 

On  December  14  instant,  at  the  battle  of  Kinston,  I was  directed  by 
the  general,  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  fight,  to  deploy  my  regi- 
ment in  line  and  'move  it  forward  through  the  woods  and  swamps  which 
lay  on  the  left  of  the  road  leading  to  Kinston.  That  order  was  i)romptly 
obeyed — as  i)romptly  as  the  almost  impassable  character  of  the  ground 
admitted  of.  After  getting  through  we  came  to  the  open  field  on  the 
left  of  the  road,  on  the  line  with  the  fire  of  the  enemy  and  in  advance  ot 
the  fire  from  our  side.  We  met  with  some  of  the  enemy  in  our  passage. 
I sent  my  adjutant  back  to  inform  the  general  of  our  position  (having 
received  an  order  to  halt),  and  to  ask  for  further  orders.  The  adjutant 
returneil  with  orders  to  return  to  the  road  and  there  support  the  bat- 
tery which  was  under  the  command  of  Captain  Morrison,  which  order 
was  obeyed.  I found,  however,  a part  of  the  left  wing  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  directly  in  front  of  us.  Our 
position  was  on  the  left  of  the  battery  and  left  of  the  road. 

Shortly  afterward,  in  obedience  to  an  order  of  Lieutenant  Beegle, 
aide  to  the  general,  I moved  my  regiment,  deployed  in  line  of  battle, 
forward,  preceded  by  a part  of  the  left  wing  of  the  One  hundred  and 
third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers.  On  coming  out  of  the  wood  and  swamp 
we  came  to  an  open  field  in  front  of  us,  and  there  we  received  sharp, 
rapid,  and  continuous  fire  from  the  enemy.  I should  think  we  were 
under  fire  there  for  an  hour.  We  returned  their  fire  as  rapidly.  The 
firing  on  our  part  was  splendidly  done.  We  then  moved  rapidly  for- 
ward across  the  field,  driving  the  enemy  from  the  wood  in  front  of  us 
and  from  the  church.  We  passed  through  the  wood  to  a large  open 
field  lying  between  the  wood  and  the  river. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  during  this  time  was  very  heavy,  but  the  gal- 
lant officers  and  enlisted  men  of  my  regiment  and  of  that  part  of  the 
One  hundred  and  third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  which  was  with  ns 
dashed  forward,  with  a shout  and  with  cheers,  through  the  fire  without 
flinching.  When  about  midway  over  the  field  I discovered,  by  ascend- 
ing a slight  elevation  which  we  were  ap])roaching,  that  my  own  regi- 
ment ami  the  One  hundred  and  third,  would  be  cut  to  pieces  by  ])ursn- 
ing  that  line,  and  that  I could  accowii)lish  as  much  by  moving  to  the 
right,  which  1 did.  We  succeeded,  as  1 have  before  stated,  in  driving 
the  enemy  from  our  front  and  from  their  position  in  the  church. 


Chap,  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


103 


It  gives  me  the  greatest  pleasure  to  refer  the  general  to  the  gallant 
conduct  of  my  officers  and  enlisted  men  in  this  engagement  and  to  be 
able  to  speak  in  the  very  highest  terms  of  their  coolness,  firmness,  and 
courage  during  the  whole  time  of  the  fight. 

In  the  engagement  at  White  Hall  and  at  the  railroad  bridge  my 
regiment  was  under  the  eye  of  the  general,  and,  althougli  not  actually 
engaged  in  the  firing,  it  was  in  line  of  battle  and  within  reach  of  the 
enemy’s  fire,  and  behaved  with  coolness  and  firmness,  and  ready  and 
desirous  to  be  led  into  the  fights. 

For  the  good  conduct  and  soldierly  bearing  of  my  regiment  on  the 
march,  going  and  returning,  we  have  already  received  the  commenda- 
tion of  our  general  5 that,  with  the  consciousness  that  we  deserve  it,  is 
our  highest  reward.  There  was  no  straggling  from  my  regiment  of  any 
account,  and  from  all  disgraceful  acts  and  scenes  done  and  perpetrated 
on  that  march  their  skirts  are  free. 

A list  of  the  casualties  has  already  been  furnished  you.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JOSHUA  B.  HOWELL, 
Colonel  Eighty  fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Gapt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  ’WesselW  Brigade. 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Maj.  Alexander  W.  Taylor.,  One  hundred  aiid  first  Pennsylvania 
Infantry^  of  engagement  at  Kinston^  December  14. 

Hdqrs.  101st  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 

New  Berne,  N.  (7.,  December  24,  1862. 

Captain  : As  commander  of  the  One  hundred  and  first  Eegiment 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers  during  the  engagement  near  Kinston,  on  Sun- 
day, the  14th  instant,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  my 
report : 

When  the  firing  commenced  in  the  morning,  by  order  of  the  general 
the  One  hundred  and  first  Regiment  was  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  on 
the  right  of  the  road  near  the  wood.  We  remained  in  this  position 
until  ordered  by  the  general  forward  and  to  the  right  of  the  road  in  rear 
of  the  Ninety-sixth  New  York. 

,Soon  after,  by  order  of  Colonel  Heckman,  we  were  moved  forward 
and  to  the  left  to  the  support  of  a battery  of  the  Third  New  York  Artil- 
lery. We  remained  with  this  battery  until  the  close  of  the  engage- 
ment. 

During  the  entire  engagement  the  conduct  of  the  regiment  was  all 
that  could  have  been  desired. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  W.  TAYLOR, 

Major  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


'^Embodied  in  n-i vised  statement,  p.  60. 


104 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Ko.  31. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Wilson  G.  Maxwell,  One  hundred  and  third  Penn 
sylvania  Infantry^  of  engagement  at  Kinston^  December  14. 

Hdqrs.  103d  Kegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
Camp  near  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  25,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  action  of  the  One  hundred  and 
third  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  in  the  engagement  at  Kinston: 

Sunday,  December  14,  at  9.40  a.  m.,  I was  ordered  to  move  my  regi- 
ment forward  as  a support  to  one  section  of  Morrison’s  battery,  having 
the  right  wing  rest  on  the  right  and  the  left  wing  on  the  left  of  said 
section,  with  orders  to  direct  our  movement  with  the  battery.  After 
advancing  gradually  for  over  50  rods  with  said  battery  we  halted,  when 
the  Kinety-second  New  York  Volunteers  moved  past  us  and  filed  off  in 
front  of  the  right  wing  of  the  One  hundred  and  third.  After  remaining 
not  more  than  one  hour  in  advance  they  fell  back  across  the  right  wing 
and  reformed  their  line  in  our  rear. 

At  this  time  Captain  Stewart,  assistant  adjutant-general,  came  up  and 
ordered  me  to  move  my  regiment  forward  in  advance  of  the  battery. 
We  moved  forward  through  a swamp  of  thick  undergrowth  and  water 
from  1 to  2 feet  deep  and  about  20  rods  wide.  Immediately  after  cross- 
ing said  swamp  we  received  a volley  of  musketry  from  the  enemy’s  line, 
which  we  then  learned  was  but  a few  rods  in  our  advance.  We  de- 
livered a volley,  lay  down  under  cover  of  a small  knoll,  reloaded  and 
fixed  bayonets,  rose,  delivered  another  volley,  and  charged  up  over  the 
bank.  At  this  time  an  order  from  the  Eighty-fifth  Pennsylvania,  w^hicli 
was  moving  up  in  rear  of  the  left  wing,  demanded  us  to  cease  firing,  as 
we  were  firing  into  our  own  men. 

The  enemy’s  fire  in  front  of  our  left  was  immediately  directed  on  our 
right,  making,  in  connection  with  the  fire  from  the  strong  line  in  front, 
a heavy  cross-fire;  also  we  were  in  danger  of  a fire  in  the  rear  from 
the  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts,  whose  line  was  immediately  in  rear  of 
our  right  wing.  Under  this  combined  fire  I gave  the  order  to  lie  down, 
and  from  this  position  we  again  rose,  charged  after  the  enemy  some  20 
rods,  when  their  fire  was  completely  silenced.  We  were  then  ordered 
to  halt  and  await  the  arrival  of  the  battery.  During  this  time  the 
Ninety-sixth  New  York  moved  by  the  flank  from  our  right  and  reached 
the  bridge.  From  the  time  we  first  formed  our  line  as  a support  to  the 
battery  until  we  reached  the  bridge  was  from  9.40  a.  m.  to  2 p.  m.  Our 
loss  during  this  time  out  of  430  actually  engaged  was  14  killed  and  58 
wounded,  some  of  the  latter  mortally.  During  the  whole  of  this  time 
all  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment  behaved  in  an  exemplary 
manner,  showing  entire  coolness.  I will  mention  that  when  we  made 
our  first  charge  the  Tenth  Connecticut  overlapped  our  extreme  right 
two  companies ; from  the  second  charge  we  moved  past  their  line,  pass- 
ing their  left. 

Accompanying  this  you  will  find  a complete  list  of  the  killed  and 
wounded,  made  from  the  surgeon’s  report.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  C.  MAXWELL, 

Lieutenant-Colonel j Comdg.  One  hundred  and  third  Pa.  Vols. 

Capt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Brigade,  Peclds  Division. 


See  revised  statement,  p.  CO. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


lOf) 


m.  32. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Horace  A.  Manchester^  First  New  Yorlc  Marine  Ar- 
tillery j of  naval  operations  on  the  Neuse  River ^ December  12-15. 

Headquarters  Marine  Artillery, 

New  Bernej  N.  0.,  December  IG,  18G2. 

Sir:  In  accordance  with  your  instructions  on  the  12th  instant,  after 
waiting  until  4 p.  m.  at  Willis’  Landing  and  learning  that  your  boats 
could  not  reach  me  for  want  of  water,  Ijjroceeded  on  board  the  steamer 
Allison,  accompanied  by  the  steamers  Ocean  Wave,  Port  Royal,  Wil- 
son, and  North  State,  to  ascend  the  Neuse  River  on  a reconnaissance 
toward  Kinston.  At  dusk  I anchored  in  the  neighborhood  of  Lee’s 
Lnnding,  about  20  miles  from  New  Berne  by  the  river,  making  all  dis- 
])ositions  for  defense  in  case  of  attack. 

At  daylight  on  the  13th  got  under  way,  and,  with  much  difficulty 
and  labor,  worked  our  way  up  to  within  2 miles  of  Kinston,  meeting 
with  but  slight  opposition  from  the  guerrillas  on  shore,  by  Avhose  fire 
1 man  of  the  Allison  crew  was  seriously  wounded.  About  2 miles 
from  Kinston,  upon  a turn  in  the  river,  we  suddenly  found  our  boats  in 
face  of  a 10-gun  battery,  and  penned  up  within  the  banks  of  the  river, 
about  100  feet  wide.  1 immediately  ordered  the  Port  Royal,  Ocean 
Wave,  and  Wilson  to  retire,  the  North  State  not  having  arrived,  and 
interposed  the  Allison  between  the  battery,  which  had  opened  fire,  and 
the  boats.  The  boats  had  to  be  backed  down,  as  the  river  would  not 
admit  their  turning,  and  it  occupied  twenty  or  thirty  minutes.  We 
replied  to  the  enemy’s  fire  with  one  Parrott  gun,  the  first  fire  being 
within  canister  range.  These  shells  were  exploded  within  tlie  batteries 
with  apparent  effect,  as  the  enemy  ceased  their  fire  for  some  time  after. 

It  was  sunset  when  the  firing  commenced,  and  it  became  dark  so  soon 
that  I was  scarcely  able  to  get  the  boats  under  the  protection  of  the 
trees  before  we  were  left  to  grope  in  total  darkness.  The  enemy’s  shell 
exploded  over  and  around  us  with  but  little  damage.  The  Allison  re- 
ceiviHl  three  shots,  one  taking  off  the  tip  of  the  pilot-house ; the  next 
])assing  through  the  roof  and  through  the  smoke-stack,  and  the  third 
cutting  away  some  fender  and  light  work.  Our  boats  were  moved  in 
ilouble  line,  hay,  beef,  bread,  &c.,  being  packed  along  the  sides.  The 
guns  were  ])ut  into  battery  on  the  decks  and  bags  of  oats  spread  over 
the  decks.  In  this  position  we  awaited  until  morning  in  expectation 
of  the  enemy’s  appearance.  Several  attempts  were  made  to  recoiiuoiter 
our  [losition  in  the  early  evening,  which  were  promptly  defeated  by  the 
sentinel’s  fire.  A reconnaissance  was  made  on  theirs  by  Lieutenant 
])oane,  but  little  information  gained. 

Soon  after  taking  up  our  position  for  the  night  we  heard  heavy  firing 
a.  few  miles  to  the  westward  of  us,  which  continued  about  an  hour. 

At  daylight  in  the  morning,  upon  examination,  I found  the  larg(\'<t 
boat  on  the  bottom,  and  that  the  water  had  fallen  during  the  night  over 
11)  inches.  I immediately  ordered  a lighter  boat  to  hitch  on  to  the  Ocean 
Wave  and  drag  her  off'  and  then  drop  down  the  river  to  deeper  water. 
This  was  a slow  oixuatioii,  as  we  had  to  go  stern  foremost,  and  our 
boats  often  grounded.  The  forenoon  was  consumed  in  getting  5 miles. 
ller(‘  we  found  the  North  State,  and  learned  that  a force  of  the  enemy 
was  about  3 miles  below  fo  disj)iite  our  ])assa>ge  down.  We  winded  all 
onr  IxKifs  but  tln‘  Ocean  Wave,  and  droj)i)ed  down  2 miles  farther  wlnm 
we  sncc(M‘d('d  in  turning  In^r.  The  North  vState  was  sent  forward  to  find 
the  enemy’s  ]>o:sition,  the  otliers  following  to  shell  Ihein  out.  About  a 


106 


NORTH  CAROLINA  ANt)  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAP.  XXX. 


mile  Horn  au  old  dam,  on  a turn  where  the  water  was  swift,  we  found 
the  first  party,  who  fled  after  one  of  their  number  had  been  tumbled  into 
the  river  by  a shot.  Occasional  firing  was  kept  up  by  the  enemy  for  5 
miles,  when  we  came  upon  a party  lodged  behind  a log'  house.  They 
stood  but  one  fire  from  our  Parrotts  and  ran,  leaving,  as  we  learned, 
several  of  their  number  killed  and  wounded.  Here  we  learned  from  a 
contraband  that  a party  of  70  had  crossed  early  that  morning  to  obstruct 
tlie  river  at  Oldfield  Bank  Landing,  and  that,  by  the  addition  of  others, 
Ave  might  expect  to  meet  140  men  there.  We  proceeded  at  once  to  tin', 
l)lace,  the  enemy  keeping  up  an  occasional  shot  at  us.  Here  Ave  found 
tbem  in  possession  of  both  sides  of  the  river,  and  occupying  the  turn  so 
as  to  fire  into  the  stern  of  our  boats.  They  opened  on  the  Ocean  Wave 
Avith  a volley  which  Avas  returned  with  interest,  and  the  other  boats, 
seeing  their  position  for  the  fire,  opened  with  grape  and  canister  with 
such  eflect  that  the  last  boat  coming  up  could  find  no  one  to  fire  at.  The 
boats,  after  a brief  delay,  passed  on  to  Streets  Ferry,  Avhere,  meeting 
tlie  boats  of  the  navy,  reported  to  yon. 

In  the  last  fight  Edwin  J.  Perkins,  of  Marine  Artillery,  was  killed,  and 
another  of  that  regiment  and  a member  of  the  Signal  Corps  were  seri- 
ously wounded. 

Our  loss  was  1 killed  and  3 severely  and  scA^eral  slightly  Avounded. 
Of  tbe  enemy,  1 was  shot  from  the  bridge  and  fell  into  the  AA^ater,  and  2 
Avere  blown  to  ineces  on  the  bank.  At  the  log  house  30  men  are  said  to 
haA’^e  been  in  it  Avhen  two  30-pounder  Parrotts,  loaded  with  canister,  ay  ere 
fired  tbrough  it  at  a distance  of  200  feet,  and  at  the  Oldfield  Bank  the 
fire  of  the  Ocean  WaA^e,  North  State,  and  Port  Koyal  Avas  direct  and 
Avithin  400  feet  of  the  enemy. 

The  Ocean  WaA^e  and  Allison  are  somewhat  disabled,  both  by  shot  and 
contact  with  trees ; the  North  State  has  lost  her  rudder.  The  other 
boats  are  in  good  order  for  use. 

Kespectfully, 


H.  A.  MANCHESTER,  j 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Marine  Artillery.  \ 
Commander  A.  Murray,  JJ.  8.  Navy.  | 

. i 


No.  33. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Oen.  Gustavns  W.  Smith,  G.  8.  Army,  commanding  Depart- 
ment o f North  Carolina  and  Southern  Virginia,  of  operations  December 
13-18’. 

Petersburg,  Va.,  Deeemher  13,  1862. 
Tin*  Ibrce  at  Suffolk  is  belieA^ed  to  be  still  strong  and  threatening. 
Evans  has  been  fighting  all  day  in  advance  of  Kinston,  principally  ar- 
tillery. We  AYT,re  retiring  sloAvly,  and  at  night  the  enemy  Avere  near 
tbe  bridge  at  Kinston.  EA^ans  calls  for  re-enforcements.  One  regi- 
ment started  from  here  at  8 o’clock  and  one  more  Avill  start  at  6 o’clock 
in  the  morning  from  this  ])lace  and  one  from  the  BlackAvater.  I Avill 
l)robably  not  leave  this  ])lace  before  to-morrow  afternoon.  Is  there 
anyth ing  from  Fredericksburg'? 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seudon, 

Secretary  of  War. 


1 


(Jhap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGfi. 


m 


Goldsborough,  N.  0.,  December  15,  1862. 

I arrived  here  at  3 p.  m.  The  telegraph  with  General  Evans  is  cut 
off.  By  latest  information  he  was  at  Falling  Greek,  6 miles  this  side  of 
Kinston.  Enemy  now  estimated  at  30,000,  and  scouts  report  re-enforce- 
ments constantly  arriving  from  New  Berne.  Governor  Vance  is  here. 
He  tells  me  that  all  accounts  agree  in  stating  that  our  troops  behaved 
admirably  in  the  engagement  of  yesterday. 

G.  W.  SMITH,  • 
Major-General. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  . 

Secretary  of  War. 


Weldon,  N.  C.,  December  15,  1862. 

Your  telegram  is  received.^*^  I have  ordered  three  regiments  of 
Daniel’s  brigade,  the  three  Mississippi  regiments  and  two  batteries  from 
Richmond,  one  regiment  from  Petersburg,  and  one  from  the  Blackwater 
and  batteries  to  be  sent  as  soon  as  possible  to  Goidsborough.  Please 
ask  the  Quartermaster-General  to  do  everything  in  his  power  to  expe- 
dite their  transportation.  Evans  retired  this  side  the  river  about  dark 
and  burned  the  bridge.  General  Beauregard  will  send  5,000  infantry 
and  three  batteries. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon. 


[Indorsement.] 

Preparation  has  been  made  to  send  forward  all  the  troops  referred  to 
in  this  dispatch  as  soon  as  they  can  be  ready  to-day.  The  three  regi- 
ments of  Daniel’s  brigade  will  march  to  Petersburg  with  the  batteries 
and  take  rail  from  there.  The  Mississippi  regiments  will  go  by  rail  all 
the  way  j start  at  12  m. 

Respectfully, 

A.  0.  MYERS, 

. Quartermaster -General. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  December  16,  1862. 

My  Dear  Sir:  Your  letter  of  Sunday  reached  me  at  this  place  hist 
night.  I received  your  telegram  of  Sunday  night  at  Weldon,  and  from 
that  jilace  by  telegraph  ordered  tropps  forward  to  this  point — one  regi- 
ment of  infantry  from  the  Blackwater,  one  from  Petersburg,  and  six  froro 
Richmond,  with  three  batteries  of  artillery,  leaving  on  the  Blackwater 
two  regiments  of  infantry,  two  of  cavalry,  and  several  batteries ; one 
regiment  at  Petersburg,  a small  guard  at  Weldon,  and  a guard  at  the 
battery  at  the  obstructions  in  the  Roanoke  near  Hamilton.  I arrived 
Ifere  after  3 p.  m.  yesterday,  and  sent  you  by  telegraph  a statement  of 
the  condition  of  affairs.  At  12  o’clock  midnight  it  was  reported  tliat 
tlie  enemy  were  ])assing  up  the  river  on  the  south  side  toward  Dudley 
Station  or  this  xdace.  General  Evans  appealed  strongly  for  cavalry, 
reporting  that  hci  had  but  one  company.  I had  none,  nor  troo])S  of  any 
kind.  I improvised,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Governor,  who  is  liere, 

* See  Confederate  correspondence.  Communication  from  Seddon  to  Smith,  dated 
December  14,  1862,  yosl. 


108  NOkttt  CAROLINA  AND  E.  VlRGlNtA.  [Chap.  itiX. 

tbe  best  means  we  conld  for  obtaining  information  from  the  south  side 
of  tbe  river.  There  were  no  troops  there  whatever,  the  battalion  pick- 
eting on  that  side  below  Kinston  having  been  enveloped  by  the  enem3\ 
General  French  arrived  about  7 o’clock  this  morning  with  one  regiment 
from  Petersburg,  and  has  gone  down  to  Bear  Creek,  about  12  miles,  to 
join  General  Evans.  During  the  night,  not  knowing  when  the  troops 
, from  Petersburg  might  be  expected  to  get  here,  I had  ordered  General 
Evans  to  send  one  regiment  to  a bridge  6 miles  below  here  and  one  to 
this  place  to  guard  the  railroad  bridge  and  common-road  bridge  near 
the  city.  We  can  get  nothing  through  the  telegraph  from  Wilmington. 
Heavy  firing  is  now  heard  distinctly  upon  the  river  below,  supposed  to 
be  at  White  Hall  Bridge,  15  miles  below,  or  perhaps  near  the  Six  Mile 
Bridge.  There  is,  as  usual,  great  dela^y  and  difficulty  in  the  railroad 
transportation.  I hope  soon  to  obtain  information  of  the  enemy’s  move- 
ments, and  on  the  arrival  of  the  troops  from  Eichmond  will  endeavor  to 
strike  an  eflective  blow.  Banks’  fleet  is  reported  by  General  Whiting 
as  certainly  at  Beaufort,  but  it  is  not  known  whether  or  not  they  have 
landed.  They  are  within  ten  or  twelve  hours’  sail  of  him.  Troops  from 
General  Beauregard  were  to  have  arrived  in  Wilmington  this  morning 
early,  but  I have  heard  nothing  from  there  to-day.  We  have  no  cav- 
alry, no  transportation,  and  are  laboring  under  some  other  difficulties. 
My  stafl'is  not  here.  I am  much  pressed  for  time,  and  write  in  great 
haste.  The  troops  are  in  good  heart.  I shall  do  my  best  to  give  a good 
a(5COunt  of  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War. 

P.  S. — A good  many  of  Evans’  troops  were  cut  off  and  are  now  coming 
straggling  in  across  the  river.  The  heavy  guns  in  the  battery  at  th’e 
obstructions  below  Kinston  had  to  be  abandoned  when  General  Evans 
bill  back.  They  had  previously  beaten  back  the  gunboats.  The  200 
men  composing  the  garrison,  with  the  field  battery,  retired  toward  the 
north  and  arrived  here  with  their  pieces  last  night.  General  Evans  has 
not  furnished  me  with  an  estimate  of  his  losses. 


Goldsborough,  K.  G.,  December  16,  1862. 

The  enemy  made  this  morning  a serious  attack  at  White  Hall  Bridge, 
on  the  right  and  rear  of  our  position,  this  side  of  Kinston.  At  2 p.  m. 
a cavalry  force,  estimated  at  500  or  more,  burned  a turpentine  stem  at 
Mount  Olive,  at  the  railroad,  14  miles  from  here;  injured  the  track  and 
(mt  tlie  telegraph  ])oles.  Extent  of  injury  not  known. 

Later. — The  enemy  have  been  driven  back  from  White  Hall  Bridge; 
his  loss  very  severe,  ours  not  so.  They  liave  abandoned  Kinston.  The 
bridges  below  h(‘re  are  burned.  We  are  sadly  in  want  of  cavalry.  Kone 
of  the  troops  from  Richmond  have  arrived. 

G.  W.  SMITH. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon. 


Goldsborougit,  N.  C.,  December  18,  1862. 
The  enemy  yesterday  made  a suddcm  movement  in  large  force  upon 
the  two  bridges  near  this  x)lace,  drove  back  our  pickets,  and  succeeded 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


109 


in  burning  the  railroad  bridge.  Several  brigades  were  afterward  passed 
over  the  county  bridge.  They  attacked  and  drove  the  enemy  back  and 
saved  the  county  bridge.-  The  enemy  were  in  very  large  numbers; 
their  second  position  was  a very  strong  one ; night  was  at  hand;  only 
a portion  of  the  troops  from  Eichmond  had  arrived ; none  of  the  artil- 
lery and  none  of  the  cavalry  from  either  Eichmond  or  Petersburg.  I 
did  not  consider  it  advisable  to  attack  them  again.  The  enemy  retired 
during  the  night.  The  few  mounted  we  have  (about  60)  have. been  sent 
out  to  ascertain  their  position  and  probable  intentions.  It  was  sup- 
posed that  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  was  present.  The  force  was  cer- 
tainly over  15,000.  Without  cavalry  it  is  almost  impossible  to  obtain 
accurate  or  prompt  information  of  the  enemy^s  mo-^emeots  or  num- 
bers. They  are  burning  mills  and  houses  and  devastating  the  country 
in  every  direction.  We  have  not  transportation  sufficient  even  for 
ammunition.  I shall  move  as  soon  as  possible. 

■ G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General, 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters, 

Goldshoroughj  N.  0.,  Deeemher  29, 1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  copies  of  the  reports  of  Briga- 
dier-Generals Evans,  Eobertson,  and  Olingman,  giving  an  account  of 
the  various  affairs  with  the  enemy  in  this  vicinity  in  their  recent  bridge- 
burning  and  pillaging  expedition  from  New  Berne. 

Brigadier-General  Evans,  with  2,000  men,  held  them  in  check  at  South- 
west Creek,  beyond  Kinston,  on  the  13th,  and  on  the  14th  delayed  their 
advance  for  some  time  and  succeeded  in  withdrawing  his  force  with 
small  loss  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Neuse  Eiver  at  Kinston.  He  held 
them  at  bay  until  the  16th,  when  they  advanced  on  the  opposite  side  of 
tbe  river  and  made  an  attack  at" White  Hall  Bridge,  about  18  miles  be- 
low Goldsborough,  in  which  they  were  driven  back  by  General  Eobert- 
son with  severe  loss.  ' Small  re-enforcements  arrived  from  Petersburg 
and  Wilmington  on  the  15th,  one  regiment  of  which  was  placed  in  posi- 
tion to  cover  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Neuse,  near  this  place.  A bat- 
talion of  artillery,  which  ’had  made  a successful  retreat  from  the  works 
at  the  obstructions  below  Kinston  after  the  enemy  occupied  the  latter 
l)oint  in  force,  was  stationed  on  this  side  of  the  river  at  the  railroad 
bridge,  and  about  half  a mile  above  at  the  county  bridge.  On  the  16th 
a regiment  arrived  from  Wilmington  and  one  from  Petersburg,  both  of 
which  were  sent  to  the  right  bank  of  the  river  and  xffaced  under  Gen- 
eral Clingman’s  command  to  protect  the  two  bridges. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  having  no  cavalry  and  being  unable  to 
obtain  information  by  other  means,  I directed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ste- 
vens, of  the  Engineers,  with  two  brigades  and  five  pieces  of  artillery,  to 
make  a reconnaissance  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  position  and 
niind)ers  of  the  enemy.  General  Evans’  brigade  had  then  reached  Golds- 
borough by  rail,  and,  remaining  on  board,  only  awaited  the  clearing  of 
the  track  and  watering  of  the  engines  to  move  by  rail  to  the  x>osition 
already  occupied  by  General  Clingman  with  his  three  regiments,  about 
1^  miles  beyond  the  railroad  bridge.  The  ca])acity  of  the  water-tanks 
being  inadequate  for  the  amount  of  transportation  accumulated  here  at 
that  time,  the  cars  were  delayed  until  after  12  o’clock  for  want  of  water, 
pending  which  the  enemy  appeared  in  force  before  General  Olingman’s 


110 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


three  regiments  and  he  withdrew  across  the  county  bridge  to  this  side 
of  the  river.  The  artillery  of  the  enemy  was  playing  upon  the  railroad 
bridge,  and  Evans’  brigade  had  at  last  to  move  forward  by  the  county 
road  and  cross,  if  at  all,  the  bridge  half  a mile  above  the  railroad. 

About  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  one  bold  and  daring  incendiary  suc- 
ceeded in  reaching  the  bridge,  and  covered  by  the  wire  wall  of  the  abut- 
ment, lighted  a flame  which  soon  destroyed  the  superstructure,  leaving 
the  masonry  abutments  and  pier  intact.  At  that  time  re-enforcements 
which  I had  ordered  from  Eichmond  were  hourly  expected.  It  was  very 
important  for  us  now  to  save  the  county  bridge,  the  only  means  remain- 
ing of  crossing  the  river  in  this  vicinity.  Evans’  and  Olingman’s  bri- 
gades were  ordered  to  cross,  supported  by  Pettigrew’s  brigade,  and  the 
Mississippi  brigade,  just  coming  in,  was  ordered  to  move  forward  at 
once. 

The  enemy  were  driven  back  from  their  position  on  the  line  of  the  rail- 
road, but  on  account  of  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  the  nature  of  the  ground, 
and  the  fact  that  our  artillery,  cavalry,  and  a large  portion  of  the  re- 
enforcements  had  not  yet  arrived,  it  was  not  advisable  to  attack  their 
strong  second  position  that  evening.  During  the  night  the  enemy  made 
a hurried  retreat  to  their  fortifications  and  gunboats,  moving  with  such 
celerity  that  it  was  useless  to  attempt  pursuit  with  any  other  arm  than 
cavalry,  of  which  at  that  time,  unfortunately,  we  had  none.  I passed 
over  the  railroad  from  the  Neuse  Bridge  to  Wilmington  on  the  24th  and 
returned  last  night.  The  bridge  is  fast  being  repaired.  At  present  we 
are  subjected  to  the  temporary  inconvenience  of  transshipment  across 
the  county  bridge,  but  in  a very  few  days  this  will  be  remedied  and 
everything  restored  to  the  .former  condition. 

I regret  that  this  grand  army  of  invasion  did  not  remain  in  the  in- 
terior long  enough  for  us  to  get  at  them'.  As  it  is,  they  burned  the 
superstructure  of  two  bridges,  which  cost  originally  less  than  $10,000 
and  can  be  replaced  at  once,  and  have  utterly  failed  to  attempt  to  take 
advantage  of  the  temporary  and  partial  interruption  of  our  railroad  line 
for  the  purpose  of  striking  a decisive  blow  at  any  important  point  before 
we  could  thoroughly  re-establish  our  communications  with  it. 

1 beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  [W.  H.] 
Stevens,  O.  S.  Engineers,  and  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pool,  as  well  as  to 
those  of  the  three  brigadier- generals  previously  named. 

Our  loss  is  reported  at  71  killed  and  268  wounded,  and  about  400  miss- 
ing. Most  of  the  latter  were  taken  prisoners  at  Kinston  Bridge,  and 
have  since  been  returned  paroled. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond^  Ya. 


No.  34. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Walter  JBT.  Stevens,  C.  8.  Engineers,  of  operations 

December  16-17. 

Headquarters, 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  December  10,  1862. 
General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report: 

On  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  the  16th  instant,  by  your  direction,  I 
posted  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pool’s  battalion  of  North  Carolina  Troops 


Chai*.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBORO  LTGH. 


Ill 


(armed  as  infantry)  at  the  railroad  and  county  bridges  over  the  Nense 
near  this  place.  Two  j^ieces  of  artillery  were  placed  commanding 
the  railroad  bridge,  one  at  the  county  bridge,  and  two  a short  dis- 
tance in  the  rear,  enfilading  a i)ortion  of  the  right  bank  of  the  river 
V hich  Hanked  the  position  immediately  at  the  bridge.  These  disposi- 
tions were  completed  at  7 a.  m.  About  10  a.  m.  I started  with  Colonel 
Cunningham  without  an  escort  to  reconnoiter  the  right  bank  of  the 
river  from  Dudley  toward  White- Hall,  having  been  led  to  believe  that 
the  enemy  were  or  might  be  marching  in  that  direction  with  a view  of 
cutting  the  railroad.  On  arriving  at  Dudley,  hearing  nothing  of  the 
enemy,  in  companj^  with  Colonel  Collier,  of  the  county  militia,  I pro- 
ceeded 4 or  5 miles  on  the  road  to  W^hite  Hall,  seeing  nothing  of  the 
enemy.  1 soon  saw  a large  smoke  in  the  direction  of  Mount  Olive.’  I 
rode  immediately  to  Dudley  and  found  a train  of  cars  that  started  for 
Wilmington  had  turned  back,  finding  the  road  was  burned  at  Mount 
Olive.  1 took  the  train  to  this  place  to  report  to  you  the  cutting  of  the 
road.  On  the  way  to  Goldsborough  I passed  General  Clingman’s  com- 
mand on  the  roadside,  near  where  the 'county  road  crosses  the  railroad. 

Early  the  next  morning  I was  directed  to  make  an  armed  reconnais- 
sance of  the  enemy  with  Generals  Evans’  and  Clingman’s  commands. 
My  instructions  were  to  find  the  enemy,  to  sweep  the  county,  guarding 
the  flanks  well,  and  if  engaging  the  enemy  the  command  should  be  so 
pressed  as  to*  fall  back  before  being  re-enforced,  to  fall  back  fighting 
and  cross  at  the  county  bridge ; or  if  pressed  too  closely  to  try  that,  to 
continue  up  the  river,  crossing  higher  up.  A first-rate  guide  was  fur- 
nished me. 

General  Clingman’s  command  being  on  the  road  to  Dudley,  I informed 
General  Evans  that  his  command  ought  to  go  to  Dudley  by  rail  as  soon 
as  they  could  be  embarked.  As  soon  as  the  troops  were  fairly  aboard 
1 started  with  Captain  Reinhart  and  a part  of  his  cavalry  company  for 
Dudley.  On  reaching  the  county  bridge  I heard  a few  cannon-shot  east 
of  the  railroad.  On  crossing  the  bridge  I found  a portion  of  General 
Olingman’s  command.  Colonel  Shaw  commanding.  I was  informed  by 
Colonel  Shaw  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  in  two  columns,  one  by 
the  railroad,  the  other  by  the  White  Hall  road,  and  that  one  regiment 
(Colonel  Marshall’s)  was  posted  at  tlie  railroad  bridge  on  the  right  bank. 
General  Clingman  then  came  upon  the  ground  and  1 recommended  him 
to  form  his  command  with  two  pieces  of  artillery  obliquely  across  the 
county  road,  covering  the  head  of  the  bridge.  I then  proceeded  to  the 
front  and  right  on  the  county  road  to  a point  where  the  road  turns  to 
cross  the  railroad  on  the  way  to  Dudley.  A steady  fire  of  artillery  w^as 
kei)t  up  by  the  enemy  at  the  railroad  bridge.  I soon  saw  one  regiment 
of  the  enemy  get  on  the  railroad  track,  soon  another,  and  finally  four  in 
all  5 these,  with  four  or  six  pieces  of  artillery,  were  all  the  troops  I could 
see.  They  marched  deliberately  toward  the  railroad  bridge,  then  dou- 
ble-quicked for  a few  instants,  and  finally  disappeared  from  my  view 
either  in  the  woods  or  behind  the  railroad  embankment.  Immediately 
a sharp  fire  of  musketry  ensued.  This  very  quickly  ceased.  I rode  back 
to  the  county  bridge  and  found  General  Clingman’s  command  falling 
back,  one  regiment  double-quicking  on  the  road  from  the  railroad  l)ridge 
to  the  county  bridge.  I then  met  General  Clingman,  who  said  his  men 
would  not  stay  at  the  railroad  bridge,  and  asked  me  if  I thought  he  had 
better  cross  the  bridge.  I thought  if  the  men  would  not  stand  they  had 
better  cross,  and  told  him  so. 

Lieutenant  Fuller,  of  Starr’s  battery,  placed  his  guns  in  position  with 
coolness  and  judgment,  and  worked  them  some  moments  with  ability, 


112 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


only  ceasing  bis  fire  when  all  of  his  command,  save  his  support,  were 
over  the  bridge.  Captain  Eeinhart’s  cavalry  were  cool  and  staid  by  me 
until  ordered  over  the  bridge. 

The  command  with  the  artillery  were  posted  then  upon  the  left  bank. 
1 then  joined  General  Evans,  who  was  near  the  bridge,  and  in  a few  sec- 
onds discovered  the  railroad  bridge  on  fire.  At  his  request  I immedi- 
ately reported  the  fact  to  you.  A sliort  time  after  seeing  you  1 accom- 
panied you  to  the  field.  Cliugman  had  recrossed  and  was  on  the  right 
near  the  railroad.  As  I crossed  in  your  comiiany,  Evans’  command  were 
crossing.  He  was  starting  a regiment  in  toward  the  railroad  bridge 
when  we  crossed.  I then  accompanied  you  to  the  extreme  right  to 
Cliugman’s  position,  from  whence  1 had  informed  you  you  could  see  the 
whole  field.  While  with  General  Clingman  a iiortion  of  his  command 
had  charged  the  enemy  and  rejoined  his  line  while  we  were  in  company 
with  him.  Olingman’s  whole  line  then  advanced,  upon  which  we  crossed 
to  the  left  (General  Evans’ position).  Upon  reaching  General  Evans 
we  found  our  whole  line  up  to  tlm  railroad  embankment.  It  was  then 
dark  and  the  firing  had  ceased.  The  large  number  of  the  enemy, 
strongly  ijosted,  with  numerous  artillery,  the  darkness  and  extreme 
coldness  of  the  night,  induced  me  to  give  my  opinion  in  the  council  in 
favor  of  withdrawing  to  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  which  was  effected 
deliberately  before  midnight. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  report  of  Colonel  Pool. 

Kespectfully  submitted. 

W.  H.  STEVENS, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  of  Engineers. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith. 


No.  35. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  G.  Evans^  C.  S.  Army^  com  manding  Brigade^ 

of  operations  Beeemher  13-17.  i 

Kinston,  N.  0.,  December  14,  1862.  | 

General  Foster  attacked  Kinston  yesterday  with  15,000  men  and  nine 
gunboats.  I fought  him  ten  hours.  Have  driven  ba(?k  his  gunboats.  I 

His  army  is  still  in  my  front.  1 have  only  four  regiments,  and  will  await  [ 

his  attack  this  morning.  I think  I can  hold  my  position.  , 

N.  G.  EVANS,  ! 

Brigadier- General.  i 

General  S.  Cooper.  i 


Headquarters  Evans’  Brigade, 

Near  Goldshorough,  N.  0.,  December  20,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  action 
of  the  troops  under  my  command  in  the  recent  engagements  near  Kins- 
ton, AVhite  Hall,  and  at  the  railroad  bridge  near  this  place: 

On  Saturday,  the  13th  instant,  the  enemy  approached  Kinston  in  con- 
siderable force  and  attacked  the  line  of  pur  forces  under  the  immediate 
command  of  Col.  James  D.  Eadclifie,  North  Carolina  Troops,  who  had 
taken  position  on  the  west  side  of  Southwest  Creek.  At  10  o’clock  f 
arrived  on  the  ground  and  assumed  command,  and  ordered  Colonel  Ead- 
cUlfe  to  take  command  of  the  left  wing  at  the  crossing  of  the  upper  Trent 


Chap.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


113 


road.  The  enemy  then  was  attacked  at  Hines’  Mill  while  he  attempted 
to  cross  the  creek.  After  a sharp  engagement  of  an  hour  I fell  back  to- 
ward the  Neuse  Eiver,  keeping  line  of  battle  and  arresting  his  approach 
about  2 miles  from  Kinston  Bridge.  He  then  attacked  in  considerable 
force,  but  retired  after  an  engagement  of  ten  hours.  1 rested  on  my  arms 
that  night  in  this  jmsition,  the  enemy  ceasing  lire  after  nightfall. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  (Sunday),  being  informed  by  Colonel  Ead- 
clifte  that  the  enemy  was  approaching  his  i)osition,  I directed  him  to  oi)en 
tire  while  I would  attack  his  left.  1 ordered  an  immediate  advance,  and 
soon  became  engaged  with  my  whole  line  with  the  enemy  in  heavy  force- 
supposed  to  be  about  20,000.  The  action  lasted  three  hours,  when,  as- 
certaining his  greatly- superior  force,  I retired  with  my  command  across 
the  Keuse  Bridge,  when  the  enemy  pursued  with  heavy  tire,  stormed  the 
bridge,  and  drove  me  back  to  the  town  of  Kinston,  capturing  about  400, 
including  no  [number  of?]  sick  prisoners.  Eeforming  my  line,  with  the 
additional  re-enforcements  of  Col.  [S.  H.]  Eoger s’ Forty -seventh  Eegi- 
ment  North  Carolina  Troops,  in  a commanding  position  in  rear  of  the 
town,  I again  awaited  the  attack.  About  3 p.  m.  Major-General  Foster 
sent  his  staff  officer  (Colonel  Potter)  to  summon  me  to  surrender,  which  I 
promptly  declined.  In  an  hour  he  commenced  shelling  the  town,  but 
hesitated  to  renew  his  direct  attack.  Taking  advantage  of  my  2)Osition,  I 
retired  in  column  to  Falling  Creek,  where  the  major-general  commanding 
had  forwarded  me  additional  re-enforcements.  At  this  point  (a  very 
strong  position)  I encamped  for  the  night.  Hearing  early  next  morning 
that  the  enemy  had  recrossed  the  river  and  was  advancing  on  White  Hall 
in  my  rear,  I immediately  disi)atched  one  regiment  (the  Eleventh  North 
Carolina  Troops,  Col.  [C.j  Le^  enthorpe)  and  (iOO  dismounted  cavalry,  the 
Avhole  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  B.  H.  Eobertson,  to  imoceed  in 
haste  and  dispute  his  crossing  at  White  Hall,  while  I would  attack  his 
rear  toward  Kinston.  The  report  of  Brigadier-General  Eobertson  is 
herewith  inclosed,  marked  A.*  1 here  sent  Colonel  Eogers  to  march  on 

Kinston,  and  held  my  other  forces  in  readiness  to  move  in  either  direc- 
tion. Finding  the  enemy  had  retired  across  the  river  and  burned  the 
bridge,  I ordered  my  whole  command  to  Mosely  Hall,  a position  where 
1 could  support  General  Eobertson.  At  this  point  I met  Major-General 
French,  commanding  department,  who  immediately  assumed  command 
and  timely  re-enforced  Brigadier-General  Eobertson.  My  force  engaged 
at  Kinston  consisted  of  the  Seventeenth,  Twenty-second,  Twenty-third, 
and  Holcombe  Legion  South  Carolina  Volunteers;  Colonel  Eadcliffe’s 
Sixty-first  Eegiment  North  Carolina  Troops;  Major  Mallett’s  battalion; 
Capt.  [E.]  Boyce’s  light  battery  South  Carolina  Volunteers ; Caiitains 
Bunting’s  and  Starr’s  batteries  North  Carolina  troops.  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Pool,  commanding  North  Carolina  heavy  artillery,  commanded 
the  intrenchments  at  the  obstructions  below  Kinston  and  attacked  the 
gunboats  and  held  them  in  check  while  I regained  my  iiosition  in  rear 
of  the  town.  My  whole  force  amounted  to  2,014. 

From  Mosely  Hall  (after  the  repulse  of  the  enemy  at  White  Hall)  I 
was  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  the  department  to  reiiort 
to  Goldsborough.  On  my  arrival  with  my  command  was  ordered  by  Maj. 
Ceil.  G.  W.  Smith  to  assume  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  T.  L.  Clingman’s 
brigade  and  make  an  armed  reconnaissance  of  the  enemy  aiiproaching 
the  railroad  bridge.  I immediately  ordered  General  Clingman  to  ad- 
vance his  brigade  over  the  river  by  the  county  bridge  and  engage  him; 
that  I Avould  sui)i)ort  his  left.  On  arriving  beyond  the  bridge  about  a 


8 R R— VOL  XVIII 


See  report  No.  39. 


114 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


mile  Geueral  Oliiigman  became  engaged  with  the  enemy  in  heavy  force. 

1 directed  EA^ans’  brigade  to  advance  to  his  support.  On  reaching  the 
railroad  I found  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  marching  up  to 
the  railroad.  I then  directed  my  brigade  to  cross  the  railroad  and  en- 
gage the  enemy,  which  was  done  in  a spirited  manner.  I also  herewith 
inclose  General  Olingman’s  report,  together  with  a list  of  killed  and 
Abounded. 

In  conclusion  I Avould  call  the  attention  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding to  the  gallant  conduct  and  admirable  judgment  of  Colonel 
Eadclifte,  who  had  disposed  his  troops  to  dispute  every  adAmnce  of  the- 
enemy,  and  regret  to  add  that,  holding  his  i^osition  to  the  last  of  the 
light,  he  was  taken  prisoner,  but  readily  paroled.  The  following  officers 
Avere  observed  by  myself  as  conspicuous  in  the  battles  of  Saturday  and 
Sunday:  Col.  P.  Mallett,  North  Carolina  Troops ; Capt.  [M.  G.]  Zeigler, 
Holcombe  Legion ; Adjt.  W.  P.  Du  Bose,  Avounded  while  leading  his 
regiment ; Capt.  [S.  A.]  Durham,  [Company  H],  Twenty-third  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  aa  ounded  severely  leading  his  regiment  in  action 
at  the  railroad. 

To  the  i)romptness  of  General  Clingman  in  obeying  my  orders  I am 
l)articiilarly  indebted  for  the  repulse  at  the  railroad  near  Goldsborough. 

To  my  personal  staff  (Capt.  A.  L.  EA^ans  and  First  Lieut.  Samuel  J. 
Corrie,  aide-de-camp)  I am  much  indebted,  both  for  the  intrepidity 
and  alacrity  with  which  they  obeyed  my  orders,  both  often  leading 
troops  in  action.  I recommend  both  to  the  especial  attention  of  the  ' 
major-general  commanding.  Col.  John  A.  Baker,  Forty-fourth  [Forty- 
hrst]  North  Carolina  Troops,  deserves  especial  notice  j though  suffering 
Avith  a slight  Avound,  Avas  A^ery  energetic  as  my  assistant  through  the 
engagements  of  the  two  days. 

• Colonels  Eadcliffe  and  Mallett  being  paroled  prisoners,  the  reports 
of  their  respective  commands  Avill  be  forAvarded  as  soon  as  exchanged. 

Herewith  please  find  list  * of  killed  and  wounded  in  my  brigade.  The 
lists  from  the  other  commands  haA^e  not  been  furnished  me. 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 


N.  G.  EVANS, 

Brigadier- Genera /,  Commanding. 

Maj.  S.  W.  Melton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Goldsborough.,  N.  G. 


No.  30. 


Report  of  Col.  Peter  Mallett,  North  Carolina  Battalion,  of  engagement  at 

Kinston,  December  14. 


Headquarters  Evans’  Brigade, 

^Vilmington,  N.  C.,  March  20,  1803. 
General  : I liaA^e  the  honor  to  forward  the  report  of  Col.  P.  Mallett, 
commanding  battalion,  of  the  action  of  his  command  at  the  battle  of 
Kinston,  N.  C.  1 forward  this  report  direct,  as  my  report  had  been  sent  i 
in  some  time  since. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

N.  G.  EVANS, 

Br  igadier- Genera  I,  Commanding. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Richmond,  Ya. 


Not  foimd. 


CiiAl’.  XX!X,] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLDSBOROUGH. 


115 


[Inclosure.] 

Fayetteville,  FT.  C.,  February  20,  18G3. 

General  : Confinement  to  my  bed  for  the  last  two  months  will,  I 
trust,  be  apology  sufficient  for  the  delay  in  reporting  to  you  the  jiart 
taken  by  my  command  in  the  battle  near  Kinston,  on  Sunday,  Decem- 
ber 14,  [1862]. 

I arrived  at  Kinston  by  railroad  Sunday  morning  at  7 o’clock  and 
immediately  reported  to  and  was  ordered  by  you  to  take  position  with 
my  battalion  (consisting  of  19  officers  and  460  men)  in  the  rifle-pits  on 
the  east  bank  of  Neuse  Eiver  to  support  a South  Carolina  battery  com- 
manding the  county  bridge. 

At  8.30  we  were  in  iiosition,  and  in  a few  moments  musketry  firing 
commenced  on  the  left  of  the  line  of  battle,  which  Avas  formed  on  the 
west  side  of  the  river,  and  at  9 o’clock  the  first  gun  was  fired  by  the 
artillery. 

At  9.15  I received  an  order  through  one  of  your  aides  to  march  at 
double-quick  across  the  bridge.  Having  crossed,  I met  you  on  the  west 
side  directing  men  pouring  spirits  of  turpentine  on  cotton  placed  upon 
the  bridge.  You  ordered  me  to  take  my  command  through  the  field  on 
the  right  of  the  White  Hall  road  and  engage  the  enemy.  We  passed 
through  the  field  under  a fire  of  shell  from  the  enemy  (losing  1 man)  to 
the  distance  of  a quarter  of  a mile  to  a fence  on  the  edge  of  a swamp, 
on  the  other  side  of  which  the  enemy  appeared  to  be  in  force.  Here 
we  engaged  the  enemy  for  some  time,  but  the  principal  j)oint  of  attack 
appeared  to  be  the  church  known  as  Harriet’s  Chapel,  on  my  left, 
where  was  stationed  a section  of  Starr’s  batteiy,  supported  by  the  Sixty- 
first  Eegiment  Korth  Carolina  Troops,  under  Colonel  Eadclifie.  At 
length  the  firing  u])on  my  part  of  the  line  ceased  almost  entirely.  * 
Being  anxious  to  charge  the  enemy  and  drive  him  back,  I sent  Lieu- 
tenant Little  to  the  section  of  artillery  on  my  left  to  ascertain  the  real 
l)Osition  of  the  enemy  and  of  our  forces,  it  being  iaipossible  to  charge 
through  the  SAvamp  in  my  front.  About  the  time  of  Lieutenant  Little’s 
return  (without  any  accurate  information)  I received  by  courier  a writ- 
ten order  from  you,  as  follows: 

Colonel:  Let  me  know  if  the  enemy  are  in  your  front.  If  not,  join  mo  at  the 
bridge. 

At  this  time,  there  being  no  indication  of  the  enem3^  in  front,  I drcAv 
off  in  good  order  and  returned  to  the  bridge,  but  to  1113^  surprise  you 
Avere  absent,  leaAung  no  order  or  instructions  for  me.  Observing  that 
the  South  Carolina  battery  commanding  the  bridge  had  been  removed 
and  the  bridge  apparently  deserted,  I concluded  you  were  Avaiting  for 
me  on  the  east  side,  and  retreating  toward  Kinston  I proceeded  across 
the  bridge.  In  a few  moments  after  crossing  I was  met  b3^  an  officer  ol 
your  staff  Avith  orders  to  go  back.  This  order  I promptly  obeyed, 
marching  again  at  a double-quick  through  the  same  field  to  103^  former 
l)osition  under  a heavy  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery,  and  Avas  almost 
immediatel3'  hotly  engaged  AAuth  his  infantr3^  In  about  an  hour  I was 
re  enforced  Avith  90  to  100  men  from  the  Sixty-first  Korth  Carolina,  com- 
manded by  Lieut.  Col.  [W.  S.J  Devane,  who  took  position  on  my  right. 
The  enemy  made  a \dgorous  charge  at  this  time  on  my  left,  and  was  as 
vigorously  repulsed.  Old  A'eterans  could  not  have  met  the  foe  Avitli  more 
coolness  and  determination  than  these  newly-tried  men.  He  appeared 
determined  to  force  his  Avay  through  my  lines.  At  the  church  I ordered 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Devane  to  re-enforce  1113^  left.  He  took  his  position 
promptly  and  did  good  service,  and  I here  take  i)leasure  in  testifying  to 


116 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


his  coolness  and  undoubted  bravery.  With  his  assistance  and  the  com- 
pany of  my  right  flank,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  iMcEae,  also  ordered 
to  the  left,  we  held  the  enemy  in  check  some  time.  ammunition 
now  began  to  fail,  and  after  sending  repeatedly  to  the  rear  could  not 
be  replenished.  Ai)prehending  an  attempt  to  turn  my  right  also  Cap- 
tain McRae,  acting  as  my  lieutenant-colonel,  was  directed  to  observe 
closely  and  give  me  immediate  notice  of  any  advance  in  that  direction. 
He  reported  the  enemy  in  force,  but  no  attempt  was  made  to  flank  me 
owing,  1 suppose,  to  the  impenetrable  swamp  between  us. 

At  this  time,  having  held  the  enemy  in  check  for  about  three  hours, 
looking  in  vain  for  re-enforcements,  the  section  of  artillery  near  the 
church  retired,  I since  learn,  for  want  of  ammunition.  Immediately 
after,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Devane  sent  me  word  that  the  enemy  were 
flanking  us  on  the  left,  and  withdrew  his  men  toward  the  bridge.  Find- 
ing myself  alone  and  the  enemy  imessing  upon  us  I ordered  a retreat, 
which  was  made  in  good  order,  the  men  continuing  their  fire  with  effect. 
At  the  bridge  I intended  to  make  another  stand,  but  on  approaching  it 
found  it  on  fire  and  crowded  with  men  endeavoring  to  cross.  A jianic 
ensued.  The  enemy  pressed  upon  us  from  two  directions  at  double- 
quick  in  large  force  and  the  bridge  the  only  means  of  escape.  The 
greater  portion  of  my  command  succeeded  in  crossing,  while  the  other 
was  driven  back  by  the  flames. 

While  endeavoring  to  keep  the  men  back,  fearing  the  bridge  would  fall 
every  moment,  I was  wounded  in  the  leg  by  a Minie  ball  and  obliged  to 
relinquish  the  command  to  Captain  McRae,  whose  self-possession  and 
bravery  should  not  be  left  unnoticed.  Being  under  a heavy  cross-fire 
from  an  overwhelming  force,  mj"  men  and  ammunition  exhausted,  and 
the  bridge  impassable,  I advised  Captain  McRae  to  surrender.  The 
enemy  now  directed  his  fire  upon  the  retreating  troops  on  the  Kinston 
side,  who  spiritedly  returned  the  fire  with  good  effect,  killing  a colonel 
(Gray)  and  others  near  the  bridge. 

The  enemy^s  force  was  between  20,000  and  25,000  men,  with  sevent}^- 
two  ifleces  of  artillery.  General  Foster  admitted  to  me  that  we  had  re- 
pulsed three  of  his  veteran  regiments  with  a loss  of  100  men  5 since  as- 
certained to  be  about  250. 

I regret  to  report  the  loss  of  two  of  my  best  officers,  who  fell  at  the 
close  of  the  engagement:  Lieut.  J.  J.  Reid,  commanding  Company  A, 
fell  by  my  side  near  the  bridge,  and  Lieut.  J.  H.  Hill,  commanding 
Comi3any  C,  while  retreating  on  the  Kinston  side.  Both  led  their  com- 
panies gallantly  through  the  entire  engagement.  Braver  or  more  gal- 
lant young  men  never  drew  a sword. 

Our  loss  was  7 killed,  22  wounded,  8 missing,  and  175  taken  prisoners. 

After  diligent  search  and  inquiry  for  Adjt.  E.  K.  Mann  and  Lieut.  R. 
K.  Williams  I am  reluctantly  forced  to  include  them  in  the  list  of  killed. 

Officers  and  men,  nearly  all  of  whom  were  under  fire  for  the  first 
time,  behaved  with  the  coolness,  determination,  and  bravery  of  veterans. 

It  would  be  almost  invidious  to  discriminate,  but  1 cannot  refrain 
from  mentioning  the  conspicuous  gallantry  and  bravery  of  Lieut.  J.  R. 
McLean,  commanding  Company  F. 

Inclosed  please  find  a list  of  killed  and  wounded.* 

Hoping  I may  be  allowed  to  engage  the  enemy  under  more  favorable 
circumstances,  I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

l‘ETER  MxVLLETT, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Battalion. 

Brig.  Gen.  K.  G.  Evans. 

* Nominal  list  shows  12  killed  and  34  wounded. 


Chai>.  SXX.i 


KEW  BEENE  TO  GOLDSBOEOEOJI. 


11? 


No.  37. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  L.  Clingman,  C.  S.  Ar  mg,  commanding  Bri- 
gade., of  engagement  at  Goldshorough  Bridge,  December  17. 

ITeadquaeters  Olingman’s  Brigade. 

December  21,  1802. 

Captain  : Before  detailing  tlie  particulars  of  the  affair  of  the  17th 
(Wednesday)  I ought  perliaps  to  state  that  I arrived  at  Goldshorough 
early  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  IGth,  accompanied  by  only  the  Eighth 
North  Carolina  Begiment,  commanded  by  Col.  [H.  M.]  Shaw.  From 
IMajor-General  Smith  orders  were  received  to  pass  to  the  south  side  of 
the  Neuse  River  and  take  a x)osition  intermediate  between  Goldshorough 
and  Dudley’s  Depot,  on  the  line  of  the  railroad.  1 selected  a point 
where  the  railroad  is  crossed  by  the  road  from  White  Hall,  along  which 
the  enemy  were  expected  to  approach,  and  which  is  about  IJ  miles 
south  of  the  railroad  bridge.  During  the  day  I was  re-enforced  by  the 
Fifty-first  North  Carolina  Regiment,  of  my  brigade,  commanded  by 
Lieut.  Col.  [ William  A.]  Allen,  just  up  from  Wilmington.  In  the  course 
of  the  night  following  the  Fifty-second  North  Carolina  Regiment,  of 
Pettigrew’s  brigade,  commanded  by  Col.  [J.  K.]  Marshall,  arrived  with 
orders  to  report  to  me,  but  to  be  held  in  reserve  in  the  rear  of  the  other 
two  regiments. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  being  informed  by  one  of  General  Smith’s 
staff  that  he  desired  particularly  to  hear  from  me,  I returned  with  him 
on  the  locomotive  to  Goldshorough,  and  was  instructed  by  General  Smith 
to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Evans  and  with  my  brigade  to  accompany 
him  in  making  a reconnaissance  in  force  to  ascertain  the  position  and 
strength  of  the  enemy.  Within  a fe^v  moments  after  receiving  this  order 
a dispatch  was  placed  in  my  hands  from  my  adjutant-general  stating 
that  the  enemy  were  reported  by  our  scouts  as  being  in  3 miles  of  my 
position.  This  was  read  to  General  Evans  while  he  was  in  the  presence 
of  General  Smith,  and  he  at  once  ordered  me  to  go  on  and  fight  the  en- 
emy, saying  that  he  would  follow  with  his  brigade  to  support  me.  On 
returning  to  my  command  I found  that  the  enemy  in  heavy  force,  both 
of  infantry  and  artillery,  were  advancing  from  the  southeast  across  the 
open  fields  and  also  from  the  south  along  the  line  of  the  railroad,  while 
their  cavalry  were  seen  approaching  along  the  county  road  which  passed 
in  my  rear.  It  ought  to  be  stated  that  the  county  bridge  is  about  half 
a mile  above  that  of  the  railroad,  and  that  the  road  crossing  it  was 
nearly  parallel  with  the  railroad.  Between  the  two  is  a swamp,  but 
infantry  can  pass  along  the  bank  of  the  river  without  much  difficulty, 
and  1^  miles  from  the  river  the  two  roads  are  connected  by  a cross-road 
through  a plantation.  It  being  impossible  with  only  three  regiments 
to  hold  both  the  bridges  and  at  the  same  time  fight  a large  army, 
(Jolonel  Marshall  with  the  Fifty-second  Regiment  was  stationed  in  front 
of  the  railroad  bridge  and  Colonel  Shaw  with  the  Eighth,  supported 
by  a section  of  Starr’s  battery,  was  placed  in  the  field  in  front  of  the 
county  bridge ; Colonel  Allen  with  the  Fifty-first  was  between  the  two 
to  support  either  in  case  of  need.  The  enemy  soon  opened  heavily, 
both  with  artillery  and  musketry,  against  Colonel  Marshall,  evidently 
with  a view  of  reaching  the  railroad  bridge.  I therefore  carried  the 
Fifty-first  Regiment  to  his  sup])ort  and  placed  it  on  his  right  flank.  So 
heavy,  however,  was  the  fire  from  the  large  force  of  the  enemy  that 


118 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  L.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XNN. 


these  regiments  were  broken  and  fell  back.  They  were  soon  rallied  and 
taken  back  to  their  positions.  The  increasing  volleys  of  musketry  and 
the  rapid  falling  of  shells  from  the  numerous  batteries  of  the  enemy,  in 
spite  of  all  my  efforts  to  keep  them  longer  in  position,  caused  them-  to 
give  way  a second  time.  It  being  obvious,  indeed,  that  so  small  a force 
could  not  long  maintain  a contest  against  such  heavy  odds,  they  were 
formed  in  the  rear  and  carried  back  in  good  order  to  the  county  bridge,  and 
with  the  force  stationed  there  recrossed  the  river.  To  defend  the  bridge 
the  two  guns  of  [J.B.]  Starr’s  battery,  [Company  B,  Thirteenth  Battalion 
North  Carolina  Artillery],  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  [T.  C.]  Fuller, 
were  placed  near  it,  and  Colonel  Marshall’s  regiment  lined  the  river  bank 
below  and  Colonel  Allen’s  occupied  it  above,  while  Colonel  Shaw’s  was 
idaced  in  the  rear  as  a reserve.  For  the  defense  of  the  railroad  there . 
was  placed  in  position  on  the  north  side  of  the  river  Colonel  Pool’s 
battalion  with  several  pieces  of  artillery.  After  the  above-stated  dis- 
position had  been  made,  possibly  an  hour  later,  one  of  General  Evans’ 
staff  informed  me  at  the  county  bridge  that  he  desired  to  see  me.  On 
my  going  back  to  the  field  where  he  was  posted  he  told  me  that  it  was 
all  important  to  hold  the  county  bridge  and  that  I must  do  it.  I re- 
iffied  that  I was  satisfied  the  dispositions  made  were  sufficient,  and  on 
my  asking  as  to  the  defenses  of  the  railroad  bridge  he  declared  that 
all  was  secure  there,  but  renewed  his  order  to  me  to  hold  the  county 
bridge.  Not  long  after  my  return  to  it  I was  informed  that  the  railroad 
bridge  was  on  fire.  After  it  was  burned  the  cannonade  of  the  enemy 
ceased. 

At  a later  period  General  Evans  again  sent  for  me,  and  on  my  going 
back  to  his  station  he  ordered  me  to  advance  across  the  bridge  with 
my  entire  command  and  attack  the  enemy  and  feel  his  strength.  The 
Sixty-first  North  Carolina  Eegiment,  of  my  brigade,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Devane,  having  by  this  time  arrived,  it  with  three 
already  under  my  command  and  the  two  field  pieces  above  mentioned 
were  moved  across  the  river.  Skirmishers  were  thrown  forward  in  all 
directions  and  the  enemy  was  found  to  be  posted  from  the  river  foy  I J 
miles  along  the  railroad  in  line  of  battle,  well  protected  by  the  high 
embankment  of  the  road  in  front  of  them.  The  regiments  of  Shaw  and 
Devane  and  the  two  guns  were  moved  along  the  county  road  while  I 
carried  as  rapidly  as  possible  the  regiments  of  Marshall  and  Allen  down 
the  river  bank  and  placed  them  in  line  within  less  than  300  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  right,  but  in  a position  where  they  were  pretty  well  pro- 
tected from  the  artillery.  They  were  instructed  to  lie  down,  to  make 
no  reply  to  the  enemy,  and  no  attempt  to  pass  the  open  field  between 
them  and  the  enemy  until  they  should  hear  our  attack  on  the  right. 
As  soon,  however,  as  that  occurred  they  were  ordered  to  rise  and  with 
a shout  to  move  forward  at  a run  and  carry,  if  possible,  the  embank- 
ment behind  which  the  enemy  were  posted. 

Eejoining  the  other  two  regiments  I led  them  along  the  county  road 
and  from  it  by  the  cross-road  through  the  oi)en  field  against  the  enemy’s 
left  wing.  1 formed  them  in  line  of  battle,  the  right  of  Colonel  Shaw 
resting  on  the  cross-road  while  his  left  and  Colonel  Devane’s  extended 
toward  the  enemy’s  center.  One  of  the  field  pieces,  unfortunately,  from 
the  giving  way  of  the  bridge,  fell  into  a ditch  and  was  not  gotten  out  in 
time  to  take  part  in  the  action.  The  other  piece  moved  along  the  road 
on  the  right  of  our  line  and  was  itself  i)rotected  on  its  flank  by  skir- 
mishers who  covered  the  ground  for  several  hundred  yards.  Before 
we  reached  the  railroad,  however,  theiCnemy  abandoned  it  and  we  occu- 


T 

i C«AP.:^^^.i  NEW  BERNE  to  GOLDSBOROaOH.  119 

pied  it  without  a struggle.  The  two  regiiueuts  stationed  near  the  river 
likewise  advanced  to  it  witliout  loss,  and,  as  I subsequently  learned,  Gen- 
eral Evans’  brigade  soon  fihed  up  the  center.  After  retreating  from  this 
position  the  enemy  occupied  a higher  field  in  our  front  with  a large 
number  of  cannon  and  heavy  bodies  of  infantry  drawn  up  in  two  lines 
with  an  interval  of  100  or  200  yards  between  them.  As  soon  as  Lieu- 
tenant Fuller  opened  on  tliem  with  his  gun  tlieir  artillery,  which  had 
l)reviously  directed  its  fire  against  our  left  where  the  regiments  of 
Marshall  and  Allen  were  stationed,  was  shifted  and  its  concentrated 
volleys  were  poured  upon  our  right.  Their  position  approached  within 
400  yards  there,  while  from  our  left  it  was  more  than  a half  mile  distant. 
With  the  large  number  of  pieces  they  had  in  play  it  is  a wonder  they 
did  not  succeed  in  disabling  a single  gun.  ]!^otwithstanding  the  dis- 
parity of  force  and  the  loss  of  several  of  his  men.  Lieutenant  Fuller, 
with  the  greatest  gallantry,  continued  to  reply  until  darkness  put  an 
end  to  the  contest.  During  the  evening  the  regiments  of  Colonels  Mar- 
shall and  Allen,  by  General  Evans’  order  as  I have  since  learned,  made 
a charge  against  the  enemy’s  position  on  the  hill.  They  advanced  most 
courageously,  but  were  repulsed  by  heavy  showers  of  grape  and  mus- 
ketry. As  they  had  to  move  across  an  open  space  of  1,000  yards,  swept 
by  heavy  batteries  supported  by  large  masses  of  infantry,  it  was  barely 
possible  that  they  could  carry  such  a position.  Their  prompt  and  daring 
attempt  furnished  the  highest  evidence  of  their  courage  and  readiness 
to  obey  orders.  Immediately  after  dark  the  enemy  retreated  with  his 
entire  army,  and  soon  after  we  recrossed  the  river,  the  troops  under  my 
command  following  General  Evans’  brigade  and  bringing  up  the  rear. 
The  entire  force  at  my  disposition  that  day  was  rather  below  2,000  men. 

The  loss  was : 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Marshall’s  regiment 

11 

58 

10 

Allen’s  regiment ■ 

6 

43 

8 

Shaw’s  regiment 

3 

G 

Devane’s  regiment 

Total 

20 

107 

18 

I cannot  give  the  casualties  of  Fuller’s  section  precisely.  I learn  that 
the  loss  in  the  two  first-named  regiments  occurred  mainly  in  the  charge 
above  referred  to;  but  for  this  wo  should  have  had  the  satisfaction  of 
knowing  that  we  had,  with  vastly  inferior  force,  driven  the  enemy  from 
a strong  j^osition  and  obliged  liis  whole  army  to  retreat  almost  without 
loss  on  our  part. 

In  conclusion  I take  ])leasure  in  saying  that  the  officers  and  men  in 
all  the  regiments  behaved  in  a manner  creditable  to  veteran  troops. 

Capt.  Edward  White,  1113'  assistant  adjutant- general,  and  Capt.  A.  M. 
Erwin,  my  aide-de-camx),  were  energetic  and  })romi>t  in  carrying  orders 
to  all  ])arts  of  the  field. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c.,  . 

T.  L.  CLINGMAhT, 

Brigadier- General. 

Capt.  A.  L.  Evans, 

^ Assistant  Adjutant-General.,  Evans'^  Brigade. 


1 


liV'- 


i20 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CwAr.  XXX. 
NTo.  38. 


Re;port  of  Lieut.  Col.  Stephen  D.  Pool,  C.  S.  Artillery,  of  engagement  at 
Goldsborough  Bridge,  December  17. 


Goldsborough,  K C.,  Deeemher  19, 18G2. 

Colonel:  Soon  after  daybreak  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant 
my  command,  consisting  of  Companies  B,  G,  and  H,  Tenth  North  Caro- 
lina Troops,  Company  F,  Fortieth  North  Carolina,  and  Starr’s  battery  of 
artillery,  took  the  x)ositions  assigned  them  on  the  north  side  of  Nense 
Fiver  commanding  the  immediate  approaches  to  the  railroad  and  county 
bridges. 

Everything  remained  quiet  until  about  noon  of  the  17th,  when  the 
enemy,  occupying  the  south  side  of  the  river  and  east  of  the  railroad, 
opened  fire  with  evident  design  of  destroying  the  bridge.  To  effect  this 
their  batteries  employed’for  about  two  hours  shell  and  solid  shot,  occa- 
sionally discharging  shrapnel  along  the  north  bank  of  the  river  to  dis- 
lodge any  force  there.  The  south  bank  of  the  river  west  of  the  railroad 
was  occupied  by  a portion  of  Brigadier- Gen  oral  Clingman’s  brigade, 
the  left  of  the  Fifty-second  North  Carolina  Troops,  Colonel  Marshall, 
resting  against  the  bridge.  Orders  were  sent  me  by  Colonel  Marshall 
not  to  open  fire  with  the  section  of  Starr’s  battery,  commanding  the 
bridge,  until  his  troops  retired.  About  2 p.  m.  the  Fifty -second  broke 
and  in  confusion  retired  from  the  bridge,  leaving  the  south  of  that  im- 
portant structure  entirely  undefended  except  by  the  forces  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  Neuse.  Orders  were  immediately  sent  by  me  to  Captain 
Starr  to  open  fire  with  shrapnel  on  the  mouth  of  the  bridge  to  prevent 
the  enemy  if  possible  from  entering  and  destroying  it.  The  order  was 
immediately  obeyed.  While  the  left  of  the  Fifty- second  was  retiring  I 
saw  a small  force  of  the  enemy  running  down  the  railroad  bank,  shout- 
ing and  yelling  as  if  in  pursuit.  Suspecting  their  design  to  be  to  enter 
and  destroy  the  bridge,  I cautioned  my  men  to  be  on  the  alert  and  as 
soon  as  they  came  within  range  to  pour  their  fire  into  them.  This  was 
done  so  effectually  that  two  were  instantly  killed  j the  others  fled  pre- 
cipitately. Our  fire  having  disclosed  our  exact  position,  the  enemy 
opened  upon  ns  with  a most  severe  fire  of  canister,  shell,  and  shrapnel 
for  about  half  an  hour,  our  guns  replying  with  rapidity  and  effect. 
During  this  fire  my  men  on  the  banks  of  the  river  remained  perfectly 
quiet,  receiving  the  enemy’s  fire  unflinchingly.  Thinking  they  had  dis- 
lodged us,  the  enemy  sent  forward  2 men  to  effect  the  destruction  of 
the  bridge  by  fire.  I cautioned  my  men  of  the  approach  of  the  men, 
and  as  soon  as  they  broke  cover  for  the  bridge  fire  was  opened  upon 
them.  One  fell  back  wounded,  the  other  succeeded  in  reaching  the 
projecting  brick- work,  where  he  was  enabled  to  complete  his  work  in 
perfect  security  from  any  fire  from  the  north  bank  of  the  river.  No 
effort  was  spared  by  my  men  to  reach  him  with  their  fire.  Different 
points  of  the  bridge  were  selected,  and  shot  after  shot  poured  in  in  the 
vain  hope  of  killing  him.  His  work  proved  successful,  and  in  less  than 
ten  minutes  the  entire  southern  and  eastern  faces  of  the  bridge  were  in 
flames.  Seeing  the  destruction  completed,  I gave  orders  to  retire  to 
the  rear  of  the  section  of  Starr’s  battery  posted  on  the  railroad.  Sub- 
sequently my  entire  command  was  ordered  to  the  county  bridge ; two 
pieces  of  the  battery  were  placed  in  position.  Companies  B and  F 
were  posted  on  the  west  side  of  the  bridge,  while  Companies  G and  H 
took  position  on  the  east — all  on  the  north  bank  of  the  river.  Here  we 
remained  during  the  night  and  until  ordered  to  this  point  next  day. 


ClTAP.  XXX.] 


NEW  BERNE  TO  GOLESBOROUGH. 


121 


Late  ill  the  afteiDOon  of  tlie  ITtli  one  section  of  Starr’s  battery,  in 
cliarge  of  First  Lieut.  T.  C.  Fuller,  engaged  the  enemy  south  of  the 
river,  near  the  point  where  the  county  road  crosses  the  railroad.  All 
speak  in  terms  of  praise  of  the  gallantry  displayed  here,  and  of  the  effi- 
ciency of  Lieutenant  Fuller’s  fire.  The  details  of  this  engagement  do 
not  come  within  the  scope  of  this  report.  Justice  will  be  done  by  the 
brigadier- general  commanding  at  that  point. 

1 cannot  close  this  report  without  expressing  my  admiration  of  the 
coolness  with  which  my  officers  and  men  stood  fire  for  more  than  two 
hours  without  an  opportunity  of  returning  it,  and  of  tlie  gallantry  dis- 
])layed  by  all  of  Captain  Starr’s  officers  and  men  engaged.  Killed,  3 ; 
wounded,  G.  Captain  Starr  received  a slight  wound  on  arm  from  frag- 
ment of  silent  shell. 

I luive  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

STEPHEN  H.  POOL, 

Lieutenant- Colonel.)  Co^nmanding  Battalion  Artillery. 


No.  39. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Beverly  II.  Robertson^  G.  S.  Army,  commanding  Bri- 
gade, of  engagement  at  White  Hall)  December  IG. 

Headquarters, 

Goldsborough)  A (7.,  December  19,  18G2. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your 
order  I left  Mosely  Hall,  on  the  Goldsborough  and  Kinston  Kailroad, 
at  11.30  a.  m.,  15th  instant,  and,  with  Leventborpe’s  regiment,  portions 
of  Ferebee’s  and  Evans’  regiments,  and  a section  of  artillery  from  [ J. 
W.]  Moore’s  [Third  North  Carolina]  battalion,  commanded  by  Lieut. 
[N.j  McClees,  proceeded  to  White  Hall,  on  the  Neuse  Kiver,  to  burn  the 
bridge  at  that  point  and  dispute  the  enemy’s  crossing  should  he  attempt 
to  turn  our  right.  Having  no  cavalry  I impressed  a citizen  guide  amt 
pushed  forward  to  recounoiter  in  advance  of  my  command.  Upon 
reaching  White  Hall  I learned  that  the  enemy  had  not  made  his  ap- 
])earance  there.  I then  ordered  my  guide  to  scout  toward  Kinston  to 
])revent  surprise.  One  hour  later  my  force  arrived  and  I made  rajiid 
l)reparatioiis  for  burning  the  bridge.  Making  a personal  examination 
some  miles  to  the  front  without  finding  the  enemy,  I returue.d  to  White 
Hall.  Shortly  afterward  citizens,  with  jaded  horses  and  apjiarently 
much  excited,  announced  the  enemy  was  advancing.  I ordered  Major 
Jackson  and  Lieut.  [W.  N.]  Worthington  to  watch  his  movements,  bat 
they  could  not  find  him.  1 waited  his  approach  until  nearly  dark  and 
determined  to  recross  and  burn  the  bridge,  according  to  my  orders. 
Tlie  torch  had  scarcely  been  applied  when  the  enemy’s  cavalry  appeared 
with  artillery.  They  shelled  the  woods  until  late  at  night,  destroying 
tlie  gunboat  in  iirocess  of  construction  on  this  side.  Several  men,  tak- 
ing ofl*  their  clothes,  attempted  to  cross  the  river  by  swimming,  but 
were  driven  back  by  our  sharpshooters.  From  the  force  displayed  it 
was  evidently  his  intention  to  cross  the  White  Hall  Bridge. 

About  9 a.  m.  on  the  IGth  a brisk  picket  skirmish  commenced.  I visited 
the  bridge,  and  after  giving  the  necessary  instructions  went  back  to 
order  up  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Eegiment,  Col.  [John  Y.]  Jor- 
dan, which  had  arrived  during  the  night,  and  which  I placed  in  posi- 
tion as  much  sheltered  as  circumstances  would  iiermit.  I then  posted 
the  artillery  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  would  admit  and  or- 


122 


NORTH  CAROLINA  ANt)  S.  JG.  VlROlNlA. 


lCnAl>.  NXN. 


(lered  both  shell  and  solid  shot  to  be  fired.  For  some  time  previous  the 
enemy  had  been  firing  from  12  to  18  pounders,  some  of  immense  cali- 
ber. Owing  to  a range  of  hills  on  the  White  Hall  side  the  enemy  had 
the  advantage  of  position.  The  point  occupied  by  his  troops  being 
narrow,  not  more  than  one  regiment  at  a time  could  advantageously 
engage  him.  I therefore  held  Leventhorpe,  Ferebee,  and  Evans  in 
reserve,  leaving  the  artillery.  Thirty-first  Eegiment,  and  two  picket 
companies  in  front.  The  cannonading  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  be- 
came so  terrific  that  the  Thirty-first  Eegiment  withdrew  from  their 
l)osition  without  instructions  but  in  good  order.  I immediately  or- 
dered Colonel  Leventhorpe  forward.  The  alacrity  with  which  the  order 
■was  obeyed  by  his  men  gave  ample  proof  of  their  gallant  bearing, 
which  they  so  nobly  sustained  during  the  entire  fight,  which  raged  with 
intensity  for  several  hours  after  they  became  engaged.  IS’o  veteran 
soldiers  ever  fought  better  or  inflicted  more  terrible  loss  upon  an  enemy 
considering  the  numbers  engaged.  It  was  with  difficulty  they  could  be 
withdrawn  from  the  field.  Three  times  did  they  drive  the  Yankee 
cannoneers  from  their  guns  and  as  often  prevent  their  infantry  regi- 
ments from  forming  line  in  their  front.  In  spite  of  the  four  hostile 
regiments  whose  standards  waved  from  the  opposite  bank  did  these 
brave  men  continue  to  hold  their  ground,  and  finally  drove  the  enemy 
in  confusion  from  the  field.  More  than  100  of  their  dead  and  wounded 
were  left  upon  the  river  bank.  The  conduct  of  this  regiment  reflects 
the  greatest  credit  upon  its  accomplished  and  dauntless  commander. 

Colonel  Ferebee,  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Eegiment,  displayed  the  most  sig- 
nal coolness  and  courage.  For  several  hours,  with  18  men  of  the  i)icket 
guard  belonging  to  the  Eleventh  Eegiment,  he  fought  the  enemy  at  close 
(piarters,  notwithstanding  his  own  command  was  not  in  action. 

The  Fifty-ninth  and  Sixty-third  Eegiments,  although  in  reserve,  were 
nevertheless  exposed  to  a galling  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery.  A 
few  w^ere  killed  and  a number  wounded.  Both  officers  and  men  behaved 
admirably. 

The  section  of  artillery  was  remarkably  well  served.  Lieutenant  jMc- 
Clees  and  his  men  remaining  cool  and  collected. 

My  thanks  are  especially  due  to  Maj.  George  Jackson,  Capt.  Charles 
11.  Gordon,  and  Lieutenant  Worthington,  members  of  my  stall*,  for  their 
efficient  services  and  their  prompt  delivery  of  orders  under  the  heaviest 
fire. 

The  soldierly  qualities  displayed  by  Colonel  Leventhorpe  on  the  march 
and  during  the  action,  to  which  I can  bear  witness,  strongly  recommend 
him  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  the  authorities. 

About  70  stand  of  arms  and  a quantity  of  clothing  were  collected 
from  the  battle-field. 

I regret  having  to  report  the  death  of  Lieut.  [W.  K.  ]\T.]  Means,  Com- 
pany E,  Eleventh  Eegiment  North  Carolina  Troops,  and  also  First  Ser- 
geant Bristol,  Conq^any  B,  of  the  same  regiment.  They  both  fell  like 
brave  men  in  the  faithful  performance  of  tiieir  duty. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy,  though  not  accurately  ascertained,  is  known  to 
have  been  very  heavy. 

I herewith  inclose  a list*  of  killed  and  wounded  on  our  side. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  H.  EOBEETSON, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  A.  L.  Evans, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Hdqrs.  Evans’’  Brigade,  in  the  Field. 

''Nomiual  list  shows  10  killed  and  42  wounded. 


diiAP.  XXX.]  SiaRMISHES  NEA:fe  SUFt^OLK,  EtC.  123 

DECEMBER  22,  1862. — Skirmishes  near  Windsor  and  at  Joyner’s  Ferry,  on 

the  Blackwater,  Va. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Orris  8.  Ferry ^ TJ.  8.  Army. 


Suffolk,  December  23,  18G2. 

General:  Lieutenant-Colonel  Onderdonk,  with  200  of  Dodge’s  cav- 
alry, had  a skirmish  with  a force  of  the  enemy,  consisting  of  artillery, 
cavaliy,  and  infantry,  4 miles  beyond  Windsor  yesterday.  Colonel  Oii- 
derdonk  was  conveying  the  ballot-boxes  to  Smithfield,  and  this  force 
was  sent  across  from  Zuni  to  intercept  him.  He  succeeded  in  extricat- 
ing himself  with  the  loss  of  4 horses,  but  no  men.  He  captured  2 of  the 
enemy,  and  believes  that  he  killed  a number  with  his  rilles. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Stetzel,  of  Spear’s  cavalry,  yesterday  made  a re- 
connaissance to  Joyner’s  Ford  with  four  companies.  He  found  the  enemy 
there  in  considerable  force,  and  had  a sharp  skirmish  across  the  river. 
He  captured  4 of  their  i)ickets  and  1 horse,  without  loss  to  himself. 

O.  S.  FERRY, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


DECEMBER  28, 1862. — Skirmishes  near  Suffolk  and  at  Providence  Church,  Va. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Orris  8.  Ferry ^ U.  8.  Army. 

[December  29,  1802.] 

Colonel  Gibbs,  sent  out  by  me  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.  yesterday  toward 
Carrsville  to  occupy  the  enemy  while  Spinola’s  column  was  moving 
out,  came  in  contact  with  the  enemy’s  scouting  j)arties  a short  distance 
beyond  our  pickets.  He  drove  them  back,  capturing  9 of  them,  and 
bivouacked  about  10  miles  from  here.  The  prisoners  say  that  Pryor 
was  at  Carrsville  with  two  brigades  of  infantry,  two  regiments  of  cav- 
alry, and  nine  pieces  of  artillery.  Colonel  Gibbs  returned  at  daylight 
this  morning.  I send  the  prisoners  to  the  Fortress  to-day. 

On  the  Windsor  road  an  attack  was  made  on  our  vedettes  at  Provi- 
dence Church  at  4 o’clock  p.  m.  yesterday.  The  vedettes  were  driven 
in,  but  the  reserves  attacked  and  repulsed  the  enemy,  driving  them 
back  several  miles  to  a main  body  of  about  300  cavalry. 

O.  S.  FERRY, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


[Chat*. 


124  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  R.  VIRGINIA. 

JANUARY  7-9, 1863. — Expedition  from  Yorktov*rn  to  West  Point  and  White 

House,  Va. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  1).  Keyes j TI.  8.  Army^  commanding  Fourth 

Army  Corps. 

ITeadquahters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Yorlctoioi,  Va.,  January  10,  18G3. 

Sir:  I have  the  lionor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  a suceessfnl 
raid  up  tlie  country  between  the  Pamuiikey  and  Mattapony  Fivers  and 
at  the  White  House. 

A detachment  of  cavalry  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  and  Sixth  New 
A^ork  Eegiments,  under  Maj.  W.  P.  Hall,  and  another  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  lifteenth  New  YMrk  Infantry,  under  Captain  McKittrick,  300 
in  all,  left  Yorktown  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  instant  in  steamers  co- 
operating with  the  strong  naval  forces  on  this  station. 

It  was  concerted  with  Capt.  F.  A.  Parker,*  commanding  the  gunboats 
on  the  York  Fiver,  that  he  would  clear  out  the  Pamunkey  and  destroy 
the  railroad  station,  &c.,  at  the  White  House,  while  the  infantry  should 
liold  West  Point  with  the  aid  of  a gunboat  and  the  cavalry  should  sweep 
the  roads  and  country  on  the  left  bank.  Unfortunately,  however,  the 
water  was  too  low  to  enable  the  vessel  to  reach  the  AVhite  House.  Ma- 
jor Hall  therefore  crossed  the  river  at  that  point  in  a skiff  with  a small 
])arty,  burnt  the  ferry-boat,  also  a small  steamer  called  the  Little  Ma- 
gruder,  two  sloops  loaded  with  grain,  two  barges,  four  iiontoon  boats, 
a storehouse  containing  a thousand  bushels  of  wheat,  &c.,  a quantity 
of  whisky,  soap,  salt,  &c. 

The  torch  was  then  applied  to  the  railroad  depot,  which  contained 
freight  for  Fichmond ; the  tank,  the  rolling  stock,  signal  station,  sutler’s 
buildings,  &c.  When  the  destruction  was  comx)lete  the  party  recrossed 
the  river. 

On  the  left  bank  of  the  Pamunkey  the  cavalry  captured  and  brought 
iu  0 wagons  and  2 carts,  with  26  mules  and  8 horses.  The  wagons  were 
laden  with  ‘‘blockade  goods,”  such  as  salt,  black-lead,  gum-shellac, 
buckles  and  rings,  gutta-percha  belting,  bars  of  tin  and  iron,  brass  wire, 
60  ounces  of  quinine,  and  a lot  of  gold  lace,  stripes,  and  stars  for  rebel 
uniforms. 

The  expedition  got  off  without  its  destination  being  known  or  sus- 
pected by  any  person  except  Captain  Parker  and  myself.  The  conduct 
of  Maj.  W.  P.  Hall,  Sixth  New  York  Cavalry,  entitles  him  to  special 
notice  and  praise.  His  success  was  complete,  and  he  lost  neither  man 
nor  horse.  ^ 

It  will  not,  I trust,  be  deemed  out  of  idace  to  say  that  the  success  of 
tlie  land  part  of  the  expedition  was  largely  indebted  to  Captain  Ihuker’s 
admirable  management  of  Ids  vessels.  On  this  aud  many  other  occa- 
sions I have  noticed  the  zeal  and  good  judgment  of  that  naval  officer. 

J have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

E.  I).  KEATES, 

Major-General,  Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps. 

Alaj or- General  Hix, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia. 


* For  CoiniiiaiKler  Parker’s  report  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
December?,  18(53. 


EXPEDITION  FROM  SUFFOLK. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


125 


JANUARY  8-10, 1863. — Expedition  from  Suifolk  toward  the  Blackwater,  Va. 

Report  of  Col,  Samuel  P.  Spear ^ Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry.* 

Hdqrs.  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Vol.  Cavalry, 

Camp  Snffolh,  Va.,  January  12,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  following  report  of  the  recon- 
naissance made  by  me,  in  obedience  to  instructions  dated  Headquar- 
ters, Suffolk,  Va.,  January  7,  1863: 

I left  Suffolk  on  the  morniug  of  the  8th  instant  in  command  of  the 
following  force,  viz : Howard’s  battery,  six  pieces;  the  One  hundred  and 
fifty-fifth,  One  hundred  and  twelfth,  and  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New 
York  Volunteers;  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Mili- 
tia, and  600  of  my  own  regiment  (Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry),  am- 
bulances, &c.,  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  General  Ferry’s  embarka- 
tion on  the  river  Chowan,  some  37  miles  from  Suffolk.  I encamped  on 
the  night  of  the  8th  near  Holland’s  Corners. 

Next  morning  I started  toward  Carrsville,  as  the  spirit  of  my  instruc- 
tions was  such  as  to  ‘Geave  much  to  my  discretion,”  relative  to  the 
approach  of  the  enemy  from  any  quarter.  At  Carrsville  I received  val- 
uable information  from  Mr.  Whitehead,  which  afterwards  proved  to  be 
correct,  that  Pryor  was  down  in  the  vicinity  of  Barber’s  Cross-Eoads 
Avith  a large  force.  I at  once  got  into  position,  supposing  that  my 
presence  toward  Somerton  would  no  longer  be  necessary.  After  re- 
maining here  for  about  an  hour  a dispatch  was  received  ordering  me  at 
once  to  Somerton  (as  per  original  instructions).  I obeyed  the  order, 
countermarched,  and  had  proceeded  to  the  Quaker  Church,  on  the  Som- 
erton road,  Avhen  another  dispatch  was  received  directing  re-enforce- 
ments to  report  to  me,  and  Maj.  Samuel  Wetherill,  with  three  companies 
of  cavalry  and  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  New  Y^ork  Volunteers, 
reported. 

I encamped  at  the  Quaker  Church,  and  the  next  morning  the  Thir- 
teenth Indiana,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Dobbs,  reported,  Avhen,  according 
to  the  dispatch,  I proceeded  with  the  entire  force  to  Blanchard’s  Cor- 
ners; thence  to  McClenna’s  Station;  thence,  via  Deserted  House,  West- 
ern Branch  Church,  &c.,  to  Windsor.  At  Windsor  my  advance,  com- 
manded by  Lieut.  John  L.  Eo})er,  captured  a dispatch,  directed  to 
General  E.  A.  Pryor,  in  the  hands  of  two  Confederate  cavalry.  These 
])i  isoners,  Avith  their  horses,  were  immediately  sent  to  headquarters,  and 
1 will  here  remark  tliat  great  credit  is  due  to  Lieutenant  Eoper  for  his 
prompt,  energetic,  and  faithful  performance  of  the  important  duty  of 
h'ading  the  advance  of  such  a large  body  of  troops. 

At  this  point  (Windsor)  I sent  out  detachments  of  cavalry  in  cA^ery 
direction  to  ascertain  the  direction  of  the  enemy,  and  in  about  one  hour 
discovered  that  he  had  retired  on  the  road  direct  to  CarrsAulle,  passing 
over  the  same  ground  I occupied  the  previous  day,  and  crossed  the 
liA^er  at  Eranklin  Avith  his  Avagoiis,  stores,  troops,  N:c.  I found  Mr. 
Wliitehead’s  information,  relative  to  the  strength  and  location  of  the 
enemy,  to  be  correct,  and  Avas  of  the  folloAving  strength,  viz  : Fourteen 
])ieces  of  artillery,  l,o()()  to  2,000  cavalry,  and  about  6,000  infantry.  I 
liave  put  this  at  tlie  lowest  estimate;  some  Iuiax  estimated  his  strength 
at  12,000  men,  consisting  of  all  arms. 

'At  Windsor  1 encamped  on  the  same  groand  occupied  by  Pryor  the 
day  previous,  and  sent  a dispatch  to  headquarters  for  rations,  forage. 


See  also  Peck  to  Dix,  Jainiary  10,  in  “ Correspondeuce,  etc.” 


126 


NOETH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


and  other  necessaries,  which  call  was  quickly  and  correctly  responded 
to,  which  gave  great  comfort  to  both  men  and  horses  in  a most  tremen- 
dous rain-storm. 

After  a bivouac  of  about  three  hours,  and  the  return  of  my  detach- 
ments sent  out  in  every  direction,  I had  a consultation  with  all  the  com- 
manders of  the  different  arms  which  resulted  in  the  deter miuation  to 
return  to  Suffolk;  and  it  being  in  accordance  with  instructions  I started 
at  5.50  p.  m.  on  the  Petersburg  road  via  Providence  Church,  draw- 
bridge, &c.,  on  my  return,  and  reported  in  person  to  the  commanding 
general  at  8 p.  m.  on  the  night  of  the  10th  instant.  I found  that  the 
new  regiments  of  infantry  lately  arrived  (One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  and 
One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth)  used  their  entire  three  days’  rations  in 
two,  and  did  not  take  with  them  their  shelter-tents.  I find  these  shel- 
ter-tents to  be  of  indispensable  use  on  reconnaissances,  marches,  &c.,  as 
they  do  for  both  blanket,  bed,  or  tent,  as  the  weather  might  demand. 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  report  the  fact  of  the  valuable  assist- 
ance rendered  by  Colonel  Gibbs,  commanding  the  infantry.  Nearly  the 
entire  three  days  and  nights  he  was  constantly  in  the  saddle,  first  at 
one  point  and  then  at  another,  encouraging  his  men,  supplying  their 
wants,  and  exhibiting  sound  judgment  in  all  his  orders,  positions,  and 
maneuvers,  ever  ready  at  a moment’s  Avarniug  to  place  the  infantry, 
without  noise  or  confusion,  at  any  place  required.  Captain  Howard, 
chief  of  artillery,  was  prompt  and  untiring  in  his  duty  and  always  ready 
to  cheerfully  execute  all  directions  and  orders  in  a true,  spirited  manner. 
He  and  his  officers  are  all  worthy  of  my  best  thanks.  The  cavalry,  under 
command  of  Major  Wetherill,  were  all  that  could  be  desired,  earing  well 
for  their  horses.  ’They  performed  their  arduous  duty  in  such  a manner 
as  to  prove  beyond  a doubt  that  in  ease  of  greater  emergency  their 
pride  will  always  be  to  horse,”  and  their  results  a faithful  execution  of 
existing  orders.  Major  Stratton,  who  first  led  the  cavalry  before  the 
arrival  of  Major  Wetherill,  performed  his  duty  in  his  usual  thorough 
manner,  and  is  to  my  command  a very  useful  and  valuable  officer. 

Colonel  Hodge  reported  at  the  Deserted  House  with  200  cavalry,  and 
very  kindly  offered  his  services  in  any  manner  I might  suggest.  His 
urbanity  and  politeness  is  worthy  of  emulation.  The  entire  command, 
through  rain,  mud,  and  water,  are  <leserving  of  my  warmest  commenda- 
tion in  expressing  their  readiness  at  any  moment  to  execute  any  orders 
and  under  any  circumstances. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  P.  SPEAK, 

Col.  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Yol.  Cav.j  Comely.  Expedition. 

Maj.  B.  B.  Poster, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


JANUARY  9,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Providence  Church,  Va. 

lieport  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peclc,  U.  S.  Ariny. 

Port  Monroe,  Va.,  January  15,  1803. 
The  Kichmond  papers  are  boasting  that  General  Pryor  repulsed  our 
troops  near  Providence  Church  ou  the  9th  instant.  The  following  dis- 
])atch  of  the  10th  from  General  Peck  gives  the  true  vei’sioii  of  the  affair. 
The  attack  was  repulsed  by  our  IMounted  Killes,  under  Maj.  [Janies  N.] 
AVheelan.  It  is  due  to  the  latter  and  to  our  troops  that  the  truth  should 


Chap.  XXX.]  KECONNAISSANCE  AND  SKIRMISHES.  127 

be  known,  and  if  you  see  no  objection  I would  be  glad  to  liave  tlie  dis- 
patcli  published : 

The  enemy  crossed  tlie  Blackwater  in  considerable  force  and  attempted  yesterday 
to  drive  in  our  right  at  Providence  Church.  Infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  were  em- 
])loycd  by  the  rebels,  but  they  were  repulsed  by  Major  Wheelan’s  New  York  Mounted 
Rilies.  At  dusk  the  euemj’s  advance  was  charged  and  driven  back  upon  his  sup- 
port. At  intervals  through  the  night  shells  were  thrown  from  rebel  batteries. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

JOHiT  A.  DIX, 

Major-  Generalj  Commanding/. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief. 


JANUARY  17-21,  1863. — Reconnaissance  from  New  Berne  to  Pollocksville, 
Trenton,  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  Onslow,  N.  C.,  and  skirmishes  (19th)  at 
White  Oak  Creek  and  (20th)  near  Jacksonville. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Simon  H.  Mix,  Third  Now  York  Cavalry. 

No.  2. — Col.  Augustus  B.  R.  Sprague,  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Xo.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Simon  R.  Mix.,  Third  Neio  Yorh  Cavalry. 

Xew  Berne,  X.  0.,  January  22,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  orders  I inarched 
from  Xew  Berne  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant  with  eight  com- 
panies of  my  regiment  and  proceeded  a distance  of  about  12  miles  up 
the  south  bank  of  the  Trent  Eiver  to  Mill  Creek,  near  Pollocksville, 
where  a halt  became  necessary  in  consequence  of  the  destruction  of  a 
bridge  across  that  stream.  The  bridge  was  expeditiously  rebuilt  and 
my  line  of  march  resumed  through  Pollocksville  a short  distance  on  the 
road  toward  Trenton,  where,  at  an  angle  of  a thickly-wooded  road,  three 
shots  in  rapid  succession  were  fired  from  an  ambush  on  the  advance 
guard  of  my  column.  A halt  was  immediately  ordered,  when  it  was 
discovered  that  the  road  was  blockaded  by  trees  felled  .across  it  for  some 
distance  in  front.  I communicated  the  fact  to  Colonel  Amory,  acting 
brigadier-general,  in  command  of  the  expedition,  who  ordered  me  to 
encamp  my  regiment  for  the  night. 

The  obstruction  being  removed  at  this  point,  1 moved  my  regiment 
at  7 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  reaching  Trenton,  13  miles  dis- 
tant from  Pollocksville,  about  11  o’clock  a.  m.  Several  points  on  the 
route,  about  midway  between  Pollocksville  and  Trenton,  were  block- 
aded by  felled  trees,  and  a large  mill-dam,  the  flow  from  which  crosses 
the  road  within  a half  mile  of  Trenton,  was  found  to  be  cut,  with  the 
evident  intention  of  flooding  the  road  to  prevent  my  passage  into  the 
town.  The  cut  in  the  dam  was  repaired  in  season  to  prevent  great  de- 
hiy  in  my  march. 

At  Trenton  I discovered  some  rebel  cavalry,  who  retreated  up  the 
White  Ilall  road  toward  Kinston.  A strong  blockade  of  felled  trees 
across  the  road,  densely  wooded,  and  swamps  on  both  sides  prevented 


128 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


my  pursuit.  Immediate  preparations  were  made  for  removing  the 
blockade,  and  the  bridge  across  the  river  at  Trenton  was  burned  and 
destroyed  to  the  water’s  edge.  The  blockade  of  the  road  in  the  mean 
time  having  been  removed  I marched  up  the  White  Hall  road  about  0 
miles  and  destroyed  a bridge  which  crossed  the  Trent  Kiver  at  that 
point. 

This  accomplished  and  night  arriving  I countermarched  my  regiment 
to  Trenton  and  encamped  for  the  night.  I countermarched  to  Trenton 
as  a matter  of  necessity,  inasmuch  as  the  road  leading  to  Comfort,  as  I 
ascertained,  was  blockaded  to  such  an  extent  as  to  defy  all  farther 
progress  in  that  direction. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  at  7 o’clock,  I marched  from  Trenton 
vdthout  obstruction  to  Young’s  Oross-Eoads,  taking  a road  southward, 
which  intersects  the  main  road  from  Trenton  to  Pollocksville,  4 miles 
Irom  the  latter  place. 

The  distance  from  Trenton  to  Young’s  Gross-Eoads  by  this  route  is 
17  miles.  I reached  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  about  noon  and  found  the 
bridge  across  White  Oak  Eiver,  1 mile  below  Young’s  Oross-Eoads,  on 
the  road  leading  toward  Jacksonville,  destroyed,  and  a strong  barri- 
cade erected  on  the  opposite  bank  to  oppose  its  reconstruction. 

From  this  barricade  my  advance  was  fired  upon  without  efiect  as  it 
neared  the  stream.  A howitzer  was  brought  forward  and  the  barricade 
stormed  with  canister,  which  had  the  effect  to  silence  the  enemy’s  fire 
and  cause  him  to  retreat  from  the  position.  In  so  great  haste  did  the 
enemy  retire  that  he  left  behind  five  sabers  and  a quantity  of  ammu- 
nition. 

Preparations  were  made  to  rebuild  the  bridge  across  White  Oak 
Eiver,  and  my  regiment,  after  carefully  reconnoitering  the  adjacent 
roads,  encamped  at  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  for  the  night.  During  the 
evening  two  contrabands  came  within  our  lines,  who  stated  that  they 
Avere  with  the  enemy  at  the  time  of  my  firing  into  the  stockade  at 
White  Oak  Eiver,  and  that  the  rebel  officer  in  command  received  three 
severe  Avounds  at  the  first  fire  of  the  howitzer.  I retained  these  con- 
trabands as  guides,  and  procured  from  them  reliable  information. 

The  bridge  across  White  Oak  EiA^er  Avas  completed  and  crossed  on 
the  morning  of  the  20th  instant  at  10  o’clock.  Leaving  all  my  trans- 
portation behind  at  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  Avith  the  infantry,  I pressed  my 
regiment  forward  in  the  direction  of  Jacksonville  Avith  great  rapidity. 

FiA^e  miles  from  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  my  adAmnce  guard  met  and 
surprised  a company  of  rebel  caAmlry,  about  50  in  number,  which  Avas 
pursued  at  a gallop  for  nearly  12  miles  by  a portion  of  Major  Cole’s 
battalion,  my  regiment  being  kept  up  at  supporting  distance. 

When  within  about  5 miles  of  Jacksoimlle,  and  about  20  distant 
from  Young’s  Cross-Eoads,  our  pursuit  was  checked  bjAhe  destruction 
of  a bridge  across  Big  Northeast  Eun,  a stream  about  20  feet  in  AAidth, 
Avhich  bridge  had  be(^n  preAuously  arranged  for  speedy  removal ; a 
stockade  had  been  erected  about  100  yards  on  the  opposite  side  of  tliis 
stream,  at  the  end  of  a deep,  wooded  gorge,  from  Avhich  a heavy  volley 
of  buck-sliot  Avas  poured  back  upon  our  advance. 

Tlie  hoAvitzer  Avas  again  brought  to  bear,  the  stockade  cleared,  and 
the  bridge  repaired.  At  this  point  1 had  1 man  killed  and  1 seriously 
but  not  fatally  Avounded  by  the  enemy’s  lire.  M}"  regiment  again  moA^d 
forward  and  reached  the  intersection  of  the  road  leading  from  Comfort 
to  Jacksonville,  3 miles  from  the  latter  jdace,  AAdiere  I halted,  after  as- 
certaining that  the  bridge  across  New  EiA^er  at  Jacksonville  Avould  be 
destroyed  by  fire  on  our  approach  and.  all  communication  with  the  en- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


RECONNAISSANCE  AND  SKIRMISHES. 


129 


emy  iu  that  direction  would  be  cut  off,  he  having  safely  arrived  on  the 
opposite  side. 

After  a short  halt  at  this  last-mentioned  place,  night  approaching 
and  a terrible  storm  of  rain  and  wind  setting  iu,  I countermarched  my 
regiment  to  Young’s  Cross-Eoads,  which  point  was  reached  at  10  p.  m., 
where  I again  encamped  for  the  night.  My  entire  return  march  was 
through  a heavy  storm  of  wind  and  rain,  which  caused  the  road  to  be- 
come very  heavy  and  difficult  to  travel. 

I captured  3 i)risouers  between  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  and  Jackson- 
ville, and  also  took  of  the  enemy’s  transportation  three  wagons  with 
three  pairs  of  mules  attached,  and  one  mule-saddle,  with  holsters,  pis- 
tols, &c.  With  one  of  the  prisoners  a horse  was  captured. 

Believing  my  orders  had  been  obeyed  and  carried  out  to  the  full  ex- 
tent of  my  ability  to  perform  the  same,  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  in- 
stant I returned  with  my  command  to  I^ew  Berne,  IST.  C.,  reaching  that 
place  at  3 o’clock  p.  m. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

[SIMON  H.  MIX, 

Colonel j <&c.] 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Eighteenth  Army  Gorjps. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col,  Augustus  B.  R.  Sprague^  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Foster  Barracks,  January  21,  1863. 

On  the  17th  instant,  in  conformity  to  Special  Orders,  No.  14,  joining 
a portion  of  the  First  Brigade  and  a detachment  of  artillery  and  the 
Third  New  York  Cavalry,  I marched  with  seven  companies  of  my  com- 
mand (Companies  F,  E,  and  G being  on  detached  service)  by  Brice’s 
Creek  and  the  south  side  of  the  Trent  Eiver  to  Pollocksville,  about  13 
miles  distant;  arrived  at  5 p.  m.  and  went  into  bivouac  for  the  night. 
On  the  morning  of  the  18th  two  companies,  under  the  command  of  Major 
Harkness,  marched  with  the  main  column  toward  Trenton,  while  I was 
ordered,  with  the  five  remaining  companies  and  a detachment  of  cav- 
alry, to  guard  the  ai)proaches  and  hold  Pollocksville  till  the  return  of 
the  main  force.  This  was  successfully  accomplished,  and  upon  the  re- 
turn of  the  main  body  at  noon  of  19th  instant,  I received  instructions 
to  move  five  companies  to  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  and  hold  that  point  till 
the  arrival  of  the  main  column. 

Without  a guide  we  passed  the  spot  known  as  Young’s  Cross-Eoads 
(about  7 miles  from  Pollocksville),  and  coming  suddenly  upon  White 
Oak  Creek  my  advance  guard  received  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  outposts 
on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  the  bridge  having  been  destroyed  and  a 
breastwork  of  logs  formed  for  their  protection.  The  advance,  under  the 
direct  command  df  Lieutenant-Colonel  Studley,  returned  the  fire  and 
the  enemy  retired. 

In  obedience  to  instructions  we  bivouacked  at  the  cross-roads,  and  at 
evening  were  joined  by  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry.  Soon  after  day- 
light, 20th  instant,  crossed  W^hite  Oak  Eiver  with  a detachment  and 
established  an  outpost  on  the  Jacksonville  road  to  guard  the  approaches 
while  the  bridge  over  the  creek  was  being  rebuilt.  The  main  force, 
9 R R — YOU  XVIII  • 


NORTH  CAROLINA^ AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


lao 

under  Colonel  Amory,  arrived  and  a portion  of  the  cavalry  pressed  for- 
ward to  a point  near  Jacksonville  and  reported  the  enemy  in  force  at 
that  place.  The  object  of  the  expedition  accomplished,  we  left  Smith’s 
Mill  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  passing  through  Pollocksville,  and  ar- 
rived  at  New  Berne  in  the  evening.  A heavy  rain  during  the  preceding 
night  made  muddy  roads  and  overflowing  streams.  William  P.  Kent, 
of  Company  I,  who  marched  in  apparent  good  health,  was  taken  snd- 
deidy  ill  and  died  in  an  ambulance  on  the  route. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  11.  SPRAGUE, 
Colonel  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Regiment. 

Lieut.  E.  T.  Parkinson, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  First  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina. 


JANUARY  19,  1863. — Scout  from  Williamsburg  and  skirmish  at  Burnt 

Ordinary,  Va. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  G.  AlcCandless,  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Yorhtown,  Va.,  January  21,  1803. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  following  report  of  a scout 
made  on  the  lOth  instant  by  Major  McCandless,  of  the  Fifth  Pennsyl- 
vania Cavalry,  sent  out  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  commanding  that 
regiment,  under  orders  from  myself : 

I left  camp  with  a scoatiug  party,  consisting  of  120  men,  at  9 o’clock  a.  m.  When, 
beyond  the  picket,  at  the  point  where  the  roads  diverge,  I divided  my  command, 
sending  one  party  by  the  York  River  with  orders  to  join  the  main  column  at  the  Six 
Mile  Ordinary  and  another  party  up  the  .Jamestown  road  to  the  Chickahominy  River 
with  instructions  to  go  by  way  of  Centreville  and  join  me  at  the  Burnt  Ordinary, 
while  I proceeded  with  the  remainder  of  my  force  directly  up  the  Richmond  road. 

At  the  Six  Mile  Ordinary  the  party  reported  having  seen  nothing  of  the  enemy.  My 
strength  was  now  about  80  men.  With  this  number  I went  on  up  the  Richmond  road, 
and  when  arrived  at  Mrs.  Pickett’s  gate,  9 miles  from  Williamsburg,  I came  upon  the 
enemy’s  first  post  of  If  mounted  men  and  at  the  brick  church  half  a mile  farther  on  dis- 
covered their  reserve  of  16  men,  who  were  at  once  chased  by  my  advance  guard,  under 
Lieutenant  Vezin,  as  far  as  the  Burnt  Ordinary,  at  which  point  they  were  met  by  a force 
of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  coming  alongside  the  Centreville  road,  and  who,  dashing  upon 
the  head  of  the  advance  guard  with  a sudden  swoop,  succeeded  in  cutting  off  and 
capturing  4 of  our  men,  who,  in  the  excitement,  had  gotten  300  or  400  yards  in  advance, 
and  then  began  instantly  to  draw  up  in  line  of  battle.  Lieutenant  Vezin,  seeing  the 
fate  of  his  men  and  perceiving  that  an  instant’s  delay  would  give  the  enemy  time  to 
form,  and  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  ho  had  but  13  men  with  him,  ordered  the 
rest  of  the  advance  guard  to  “draw  saber  and  charge,”  which  was  done  in  the  most 
gallant  manner  and  in  the  face  of  a volley  from  the  enemy’s  gnus. 

The  flashing  of  our  sabers  in  air  and  the  shouts  of  the  men  as  they  charged  upon  the 
foe  was  more  than  the  enemy  could  stand,  and  breaking  at  once  "in  every  direction 
they  fled  jirecipitately,  about  20  returning  up  the  Ceutrevilhi  road  and  the  balance 
taking  the  Diascund  road,  which  party  being  the  larger  wo  pursued  and  succeeded  in 
retaking  3 of  our  captured  men,  with  their  horses  and  arms,  and  in  capturing  4 of 
the  enemy,  besides  wounding  one  other,  who,  however,  escaped  through  the  woods, 
leaving  his  horse  in  our  hands.  I regret  to  have  to  report  the  loss  by  cai)turc  of  Pri- 
vate McNeill  and  the  injury  of  Private  John  Brown,  who  was  shot  in  the  side.  We 
pursued  the  enemy  3 miles  beyond  the  Burnt  Ordinary,  but  tlieir  horses  being  fresh 
and  fleeter  than  ours  they  all,  with  the  exception  of  those  above  mentioned,  made 
good  their  escape. 

Having  learned  the  force  of  the  enemy  to  consist  of  one  regiment  of  infantry  and 
500  cavalry  stationed  at  Diascund  Bridge  I returned  to  cam])  by  the  Centreville  road, 
and  was  joined  on  the  road  by  the  x)arty  who  went  to  the  Chickahominy  River.  They 
reported  no  enemy  in  sight  on  either  side  of  tliat  river. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


KECONNAISSANCES. 


131 


The  activity  and  energy  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylva- 
nia Cavalry  and  the  uniform  success  which  has  attended  their  numerous 
scouts  during  the  last  three  months  are  worthy  of  notice. 

Very  respectfully,  jmur  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General.,  Commanding  Corps. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps  and  Dexjt.  of  Virginia. 


JANUARY  27-28,  1863. — Reconnaissances  on  the  Neiise,  Dover,  and  Trent 

Roads,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  John  Richter  Jones.,  Fifty -eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Outposts,  Camp  EiFTY-EioriTH  Regt.  Pa.  Vols., 

January  28,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  order  to  close  our  lines  effect- 
ually and  at  the  same  time  to  obtain  information  of  the  position  of  the 
enemy  on  my  front,  I yesterday  dispatched  strong  parties  on  the  Keuse 
aud  Dover  roads j also  on  the  railroad  and  on  the  Trent  road.  My  di- 
rections were  to  feel  the  enemy,  capturing  his  small  x>arties  aud  out- 
posts but  avoiding  those  which  showed  strength,  and  to  obtain  as  much 
intelligence  as  i)0ssible.  My  sevetal  parties  returned  this  evening. 

On  the  Keuse  and  Dover  roads  the  bridges  over  Core  Creek  were 
found  broken  down,  and  no  posts  on  this  side,  and  no  jiarties  met  ex- 
cept one  of  a few  men  near  the  creek  on  the  Keuse  road,  who  retired 
hastily  and  escaped  into  the  woods.  There  were  no  pickets  on  the 
Dover  road  crossing  or  the  railroad,  but  a very  small  one  at  the  Keuse, 
beyond  the  creek. 

The  railroad  bridge  at  Core  Creek  was  found  standing,  but  the  up- 
rights are  chopped  nearly  off  close  to  the  Avater,  so  as  to  fall  readily. 
‘From  the  information  obtained  the  enemy  seem  to  have  retired  to  Sandy 
liidge,  some  2^-  miles  beyond  Core  Creek,  where  they  are  fortifying  them- 
selves. They  also  have  blocked  uxi  the  cross -roads  between  the  railroad 
and  the  Dover  road.  The  force  at  Sandy  Eidge  is  reported  by  residents 
of  the  vicinity  to  be  two  companies,  and  they  also  report  that  General 
Evans  is  in  command  at  Kinston,  but  Avith  Avliat  force  they  do  not  know 
or  choose  to  say. 

On  the  Trent  road  Avhile  a working  party  Avhich  I sent  to  finish  block- 
ing the  roads  on  the  fiank  of  Deep  Gully  Avas  tlius  engaged,  the  escort, 
Comx)any  K,  of  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  under  Cai)t. 
Cecil  Clay,  moved  in  adAmnce.  On  the  Trent  road,  near  the  14-mile 
post,  a blockade  Avas  found  obstructing  effectually  the  i)assage  of  artil- 
lery and  cavalry,  and  continuing  more  or  less  coinjilete  to  beyond  the 
eighteenth  post.  At  the  forks  of  the  Trent  road  Captain  Clay  dis- 
coA’^ered  a post  of  the  enemy,  Avhich,  by  judicious  arrangements,  he  sur- 
rounded and  surprised,  cai)turing  the  Avhole  x)arty — 8 infantry  and  2 
cavalry.  In  this  little  affair,  Cax)tain  Clay  reports  that  good  service  Avas 
rendered  by  Lieutenant  Wells  (Company  F),  Avho,  being  Avith  him  for 
topographical  purposes,  had  command  of  the  squad  which  made  the 
actual  capture;  also  that  his  men  behaA^ed  admirably. 


132 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


The  arms  and  horses  taken  will  be  turned  over  to  the  proper  depart- 
ment. The  prisoners,  10  in  number,  I send  to  headquarters  under  charge 
of  Captain  Olay. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  RICHTER  JONES, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Outposts. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.j  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


JANUARY  30,  1863. — Engagement  at  Deserted  House,  or  Kelly’s  Store, 

near  Suffolk,  Va. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Jolin  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Col.  Samuel  P.  Spear,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Col.  Wilhani  McEvily,  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Roger  A.  Pryor,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  JoJm  J.  Pech,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

SuffoUc,  Va.,  February  4,  1863. 

On  January  29  information  reached  me  that  General  Pryor  had  been 
encamped  at  Holland’s  Corners,  14  miles  distant,  with  a force  of  all 
arms,  the  preceding  night.  Captain  Ward,  of  the  Eleventh  Pennsyl- 
vania Cavalry,  was  promptl^^  dispatched  to  procure  reliable  data  and 
watch  his  movements.  Late  in  the  afternoon  this  most  valuable  and 
daring  officer  reported  that  General  Pryor  had  gone  in  the  direction  of 
the  Deserted  House,  with  some  2,000  infantry,  500  cavalry,  and  a num- 
ber of  pieces  of  artillery.  Parties  were  sent  to  the  indicated  point  and 
returned  about  8 p.  m.  with  information  of  his  arrival  there.  I at  once 
organized  a special  force,  consisting  of  the  following : Eleventh  Penn- 
sylvania Cavalry,  Colonel  Spear  j Follett’s  (Fourth  U.  S.  Artillery)  bat- 
tery; Davis’  (Seventh  Massachusetts)  battery;  two  mountain  howitzers; 
the  Thirteenth  Indiana,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dobbs;  the  Sixth  Massa- 
chusetts, Colonel  Follansbee ; the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Thorp ; the  One  hundred  and  sixty-seventh  Penn- 
sylvania, Colonel  Knoderer;  the  Sixty-ninth  New  York,  Colonel  Mur- 
phy, and  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York,  Colonel  McEvily; 
Colonel  Gibbs  commanding  the  infantry  (amounting,  by  the  morning 
reports  of  that  day,  to  some  4,800  total),  and  placed  it  under  the  'Com- 
mand of  Brig.  Gen.  IM.  Corcoran. 

lie  left  about  1 a.  m.,  with  instructions  to  proceed  cautiously,  ascer- 
tain the  locality  of  the  enemy  and  force  him  from  his  position,  inflicting 
all  the  loss  possible.  About  3.20  a.  m.  the  cavalry  came  upon  the  rebel 
])icket,  driving  it  in  and  back  upon  the  enemy’s  main  line  of  battle. 
Follett’s  battery,  supported  by  the  Thirteenth  Indiana  Regiment,  and 


CHAi-.XXX.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  DESERTED  HOUSE.  133 

I 

two  sections  of  Davis’  battery,  supported  by  the  One  hundred  and  thir- 
tieth New  York  Eegiment,  were  pushed  forward  to  an  open  space  in 
front  of  the  enemy  by  the  light  of  the  camp-fires.  At  3.40  a.  m.  Follett 
opened  his  lire  and  was  immediately  replied  to  by  all  the  Confederate 
artillery.  Davis’  battery  joined  in  and  the  cannonade  was  continued 
without  cessation  until  G a.  m.  General  Corcoran  ordered  the  infan- 
try to  advance  at  5.15  a.  m.,  but  the  order  was  not  promptly  executed, 
although  given  more  than  once.  He  says  the  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
seventh  Pennsylvania  became  a confused  mass,  mixed  up  with  other 
regiments,  and  filled  up  the  entire  road,  leaving  it  imi)assable  and  cre- 
atiug  a temporary  confusion  among  some  other  regiments  in  the  rear. 
At  the  request  of  the  lieutenant-colonel  it  was  sent  to  the  rear  to  restore 
confidence  and  reform. 

About  G a.  ni.  one  section  of  artillery  was  placed  in  the  road,  with  the 
Thirteenth  Indiana  on  the  right  and  the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New 
York  on  the  left,  supported  by  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 
and  the  whole,  under  Colonel  Spear,  advanced  upon  the  enemy.  Other 
regiments  were  formed  in  successive  lines,  supporting  the  movement. 
Upon  the  approach  of  this  determined  mass  the  enemy  faltered  and 
commenced  his  retreat.  He  was  pursued  vigorously  until  the  troops 
reached  a thick  wood  and  marsh.  The  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New 
York  and  cavalry  were  sent  forward  to  reconnoiter  and  found  the  en- 
emy well  posted  at  the  distance  of  2 miles.  A section  of  Davis’  battery 
and  the  Sixty-ninth  New  York  took  position  on  the  road  and  opened 
upon  the  enemy. 

As  it  was  now  10.15  a.  m.  a halt  was  ordered  to  give  the  men  break- 
fast, while  awaiting  fresh  supplies  of  ammunition  and  re- enforcements 
called  for  after  the  opening  of  the  engagement. 

Soon  after  11  o’clock  Colonel  Poster  joined,  with  the  One  hundred  and 
twelfth  New  York  and  three  pieces  of  the  Second  Wisconsin  Battery, 
and  the  ammunition,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  infantry.  At 
12  o’clock  the  plan  of  flanking  by  the  Franklin  road  was  given  up  and 
an  attack  in  front  ordered.  The  One  hundred  and  twelfth  New  York, 
a section  of  Wisconsin  guns,  and  two  companies  of  cavalry  were  de- 
tailed to  hold  the  Deserted  House,  and  the  command  moved  on  again. 

The  enemy  had  commenced  his  retreat,  but  all  possible  haste  was 
made  to  overtake  his  fleeing  battalions.  At  Pecosin  Creek  a sharp 
skirmish  occurred  between  the  Thirteenth  Indiana  and  the  rear  guard. 
The  cavalry  followed  2 miles  beyond  Carrsville,  when  pursuit  was  dis- 
continued. It  being  evident  that  no  further  stand  would  be  made  a 
return  to  Deserted  House  was  ordered. 

At  Carrsville  Major  Wheelan  reported  with  six  companies  of  Dodge’s 
Kifles  and  one  howitzer  and  was  assigned  to  duty.  Later  in  the  day  a 
section  of  the  Second  Wisconsin  guns  also  joined.  The  whole  com- 
mand reached  the  Deserted  House  about  G p.  m.  and  Suflblk  after  mid- 
night, having  made  a march  of  32  miles  in  twenty-four  hours  and  beaten 
the  enemy  soundly. 

Our  loss  was  as  follows : * 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

OfBccrs 

2 

9 

Trivates 

23 

93 

9 

Total  

25 

102 

9 

* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  135. 


134 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


The  rebel  loss  must  have  been  more  than  ours,  judging  from  the  in- 
dications of  the  field  and  roads  and  from  the  fact  that  1,140  rounds  of 
shot  and  shell  were  thrown  from  our  batteries.  Thirteen  prisoners  fell 
iuto  our  hands. 

The  Thirteenth  Indiana  is  spoken  of  in  very  flattering  terms ; also 
the  Sixty-ninth,  One  hundred  and  fifty -fifth,  and  One  hundred  and  thir- 
tieth New  York. 

The  demoralization  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-seventh  Penn- 
sylvania, already  spoken  of,  undoubtedly  arose  from  a coiux^lication  of 
unfavorable  circumstances  rather  than  from  anj^  determination  to  dis- 
obey orders.  It  had  never  been  under  fire,  its  position  at  the  head  of 
the  column  near  the  artillery  (exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire  for  near  two 
hours  in  the  darkness  without  being  engaged),  and  the  fact  that  the 
colonel  was  desperately  wounded  and  the  lieutenant-colonel  and  major 
unhorsed  were  considerations  well  calculated  to  create  temx)orary  con- 
fusion. From  this  it  recovered,  and  no  complaint  was  made  during  the 
subsequent  operations.  This  regiment  should  avail  itself  of  the  earliest 
opportunity  to  wipe  out  any  suspicion  that  may  have  attached  to  its 
conduct  at  the  Deserted  House. 

General  Corcoran  speaks  in  high  commendation  of  Colonel  Foster,  of 
the  Thirteenth  Indiana,  in  command  of  the  infantry;  of  Colonel  Spear, 
commanding  the  cavalry;  of  Captain  Follett,  senior  officer  of  artillery, 
and  of  Surgeon  Hand,  medical  director.  These  are  all  officers  of  rare 
merit,  who  have  won  high  reputation  by  their  bravery,  iirudence,  and 
fidelity. 

Lieutenant-Colonels  Dobbs  and  Thorp ; Captain  Davis,  Lieutenants 
Hartwell,  Devoll,  and  McCurdy  (Seventh  Massachusetts  Battery);  Lieu- 
tenants Whitney  and  Wilkeson  (Fourth  Artillery) ; Surgeons  Dwyer  and 
Nolan,  Assistant  Surgeons  Silencer  and  Fawcett,  Quartermaster  Cooke, 
Captain  Blodgett  (assistant  adjutant-general),  and  Aides-de-Camp  Tra- 
cey, Hughes,  and  Winterbotham  are  particularly  noticed  for  zeal,  gal- 
lantry, and  good  conduct. 

The  troops  that  joined  during  the  day  are  deserving  of  credit  for  the 
alacrity  with  which  they  responded  to  the  call  of  duty. 

The  wounded,  in  kind  and  skillful  hands,  are  doing  well.  Especial 
l)raise  is  due  them  for  unflinching  courage  on  the  field  and  patient  en- 
durance of  suffering. 

The  dead  fell  in  the  performance  of  high  and  stern  duties  assumed 
in  behalf  of  a country  menaced  by  the  most  cruel  and  wicked  rebellion 
recorded  in  history.  Nobly  have  they  discharged  all  obligations,  leav- 
ing bright  examples  of  valor  and  fidelity  for  their  fellow-soldiers  and 
countrymen.  Their  families  and  friends  have  the  deepest  sympathies 
of  the  American  people,  and  the  precious  and  enduring  recollections  that 
their  blood  was  poured  out  in  the  defense  of  constitutional  liberty. 

The  artillery  of  the  enemy  equaled  ours,  while  he  had  a chosen  x)osi- 
tion  and  choice  of  ground  in  his  retrograde  movement.  A flank  move 
early  in  the  day  Avould  probably  have  been  decisive,  and  the  victory 
full  and  complete.  The  action  was  prematurely  brought  on  by  the  ad- 
vance some  two  hours  before  daylight,  during  which  time  the  usual  suj)- 
ply  of  battery  ammunition  was  nearly  exhausted  and  the  temper  of  the 
troops  severely  tried.  Delays  ensued  and  the  enemy  commenced  his 
retreat. 

Under  all  the  circumstances  it  was  a handsome  affair,  and  the  enemy 
will  long  remember  his  losses,  disai^i>ointment,  and  narrow  escape  from 
cai)ture. 


CiiAr.'XXX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  DESERTED  HOUSE. 


135 


General  Corcoran  and  the  troops  are  entitled  to  my  warmest  aijpro- 
bation  for  the  brilliant  achievement  contributed  by  them  to  the  cause 
of  the  Government. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

Col.  D.  T.  Van  Bueen, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General.^  Seventh  Army  Corps. 


[Addenda.] 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  the  Deserted  House,  or  Kelly’s  Store,  Va., 

January  30, 1863. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  list  of  casualties,  returns,  etc.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

13th  Indiana  Infantry 

1 

11 

14 

5 

8 

1 

18 

1 

18 

.5 

9 

8 

7th  Massachusetts  Battery 

3 

3 

1 

6 

6th  Massachusetts  Infantry 

1 

2 

1 

69th  New  York  Infantry  [N,  G.  A.] 

1 1 2tli  New  York  Infa.Titry . 

5 

2 

3 

2 

1.30th  Np.w  York  Tnfa.Titry  ..  

1 

2 

15.'jth  N ew  York  Infantry. 

1G4th  New  York  Tn  fn,nt,ry 

1 

1 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry 

1 

165th  Pennsylvania  Infantry 



167th  Pennsylvania  Infantry 

1 

4th  XT.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  D 

4 

Total 

2 

21 

8 

100  i 

1 

12  J 

12 

IG 

n 

17 

2 

29 

5 

4 

2(» 

5 

10 

12 


143 


Ofjiccrs  killed. — Lieut.  Edward  D.  Sawtell,  Sixtli  Massachusetts;  Capt.  Rowley  R.  Taylor,  One  hun- 
dred and  thirtieth  New  York. 

Mortally  ^oounded. — Col.  Charles  A,  Knoderer,  One  hundred  and  sixty-seventli  Pennsylvania. 


Suffolk,  January  30,  18G3. 

Three  of  FolletPs  guns  have  arrived  ; two  of  them  disabled  by  ina- 
bility to  get  shells  down  5 one  of  his  limtiers  exploded.  Our  loss  about 
100.  My  extra  force  had  arrived  at  the  latest;  also  Colonel  Poster. 
The  enemy  had  fallen  back  from  3 to  4 miles  since  daylight,  contesting 
different  positions.  I have  repeatedly  guarded  against  being  led  too 
far  away  in  case  of  success.  It  has  been  a hard  night  and  day,  but  I 
feel  sure  that  we  have  a victory.  One  of  the  churches  has  been  pre- 
pared for  the  wounded. 

Prisoners  saj^  that  battery  horses  were  nearly  exhausted  and  the 
guns  were  moved  by  hand  at  intervals.  Some  guns  will  probably  bo 
secured. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


136 


NORTH!  CAROLINA  AN1>  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran,  TJ.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  GoRCoteAN’s  Irish  Legion, 

SuffolJc,  Va.,  February  1,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  orders 
received  from  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  at  9.30  p.  in.  on  Thursday  the 
29th  ultimo  I proceeded  to  take  command  of  the  troops  designated  for 
the  exiiedition  to  attack  the  rebel  force  under  General  Roger  A.  Pryor. 

Arriving  at  the  point  previously  arranged  for  the  rendezvous  of  our 
troops  at  12  o’clock  I found  most  of  the  regiments  already  on  the  ground 
or  had  passed  them  on  their  march  thereto. 

At  1 a.  m.  on  Friday,  the  30th,  everything  being  in  readiness  I com- 
menced the  march  in  the  order  according  to  the  annexed  supplement. 

I continued  the  march  until,  arriving  near  the  Hansemond  County  Poor 
House,  I ordered  a halt  for  about  ten  minutes,  after  which  we  proceeded 
on  toward  the  Deserted  House. 

About  1 mile  from  the  latter  place  our  advance  guard,  at  3.20  a.  m., 
met  the  enemy’s  pickets  posted  in  strong  force  on  the  road  and  in  the 
woods.  They  were  promptly  charged,  some  being  killed  and  others 
taken  prisoners.  The  charge  was  continued  by  two  companies  of  Colonel 
Spear’s  cavalry  up  to  the  enemy’s  front,  who  were  drawn  up  in  line 
of  battle.  I pushed  forward  Captain  Follett’s  battery  of  the  Fourth 
U.  S.  Artillery,  supported  by  the  Thirteenth  Regiment  Indiana  Yolun- 
teers,  and  two  sections  of  Captain  Davis’  (Seventh  Massachusetts)  bat- 
tery, supported  by  the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York  Volunteers. 
They  gained  an  open  space  in  front  of  the  enemy,  whose  camp-fires  were 
burning.  The  other  regiments  of  the  command,  which  were  in  line  bf 
battle  along  the  south  side  of  the  road,  were  ordered  to  lie  down  when 
the  artillery  firing  commenced. 

Captain  Follett’s  battery  first  opened  at  3.40  a.  m.  on  the  north  side 
of  the  road,  and  the  enemy  immediately  replied  witl^dwelve  pieces,  some 
of  which  were  of  a larger  caliber  than  our  own.  Captain  Davis  took 
position  on  the  south  side  of  the  road,  and  our  own  guns  and  the  en- 
emy’s kept  up  an  incessant  and  very  rapid  fire  until  6 a.  m. 

At  about  5.15  a.  m.  I gave  orders  for  the  infantry  to  advance.  This 
order,  twice  repeated,  was  not  promptly  executed,  through  cause  which 
1 reported  verbally  to  the  major-general  yesterday.  On  learning  this 
I immediately  ordered  an  advance  a third  time  and  Nvent  in  person  to 
tlie  One  hundred  and  sixty-seventh  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Militia  and 
sent  orders  to  the  regiments  in  the  rear  to  advance  in  succession  in  tbe 
order  of  battle  previously  assigned.  I found  the  One  hundred  and 
sixty-seventh  without  a single  field  officer.  The  colonel,  I afterward 
learned  with  regret,  was  seriously,  if  not  mortally  wounded,  and  the 
lieutenant-colonel  and  major  had  their  horses  killed  under  them  and 
were  temporarily  hurt.  I asked  if  there  was  any  officer  present  who 
would  take  command  of  the  regimeilt.  The  adjutant  promptly  re- 
sponded and  used  all  exertions  to  get  the  men  forward,  but  did  not 
succeed.  They  became  a confused  mass,  mixed  up  with  other  regi- 
ments, and  filled  up  the  entire  road,  leaving  it  impassable  and  creating 
a tem])orary  confusion  among  some  other  regiments  in  the  rear.  The 
lieutenant-colonel  came  up  to  me  about  this  time  and  requested  per- 
mission to  take  his  fegiment  to  the  rear  in  order  to.  restore  confidence 
and  have  them  reformed.  I became  convinced  this  must  be. done,  and  :i 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  DESERTED  HOUSE. 


137 


consequently  ordered  the  Sixty-ninth  Eej^iment  New  York  National 
Guards  (who  behaved  throughout  with  admirable  steadiness,  although 
sud'ering  severely  from  the  enemy^s  shell)  and  the  One  hundred  and 
fifty-fifth  New  York  Volunteers  to  take  position  in  line  of  battle  about 
800  paces  in  the  rear  and  stop  any  of  the  command  from  retiring  be- 
yond that  point.  One  company  of  Spear’s  cavalry  was  placed  on  the 
road  for  a similar  purpose.  I rode  down  to  see  this  order  executed,  and 
on  returning  to  the  front  in  company  with  Colonel  Spear,  at  5.40  a.  m., 
determined  to  charge  the  enemy  with  the  bayonet,  and  ordered  two 
pieces  of  artillery  to  be  placed  on  the  road  and  formed  the  Thirteenth 
Indiana  and  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York  on  the  right  and  left, 
strongly  supported  by  Spear’s  cavalry.  These  orders  were  promptly 
attended  to,  and  at  6 a.  m.  they  all  moved  forward  under  command  of 
Colonel  Spear.  I ordered  up  the  other  regiments  and  formed  them  in 
successive  lines  of  battle. 

The  enemy  rapidly  retreated  at  our  apparent  approach,  and  were 
vigorously  pursued  until  our  infantry  advance  was  stopped  by  thick 
woods  and  marsh.  On  the  concentration  of  our  forces  at  this  point  I 
ordered  the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York  Volunteers  to  be 
thrown  forward  as  skirmishers  on  each  side  of  the  road  and  a portion 
of  Spear’s  cavalry  to  recoimoiter  on  the  road,  who  soon  reported  the 
enemy’s  artillery  strongly  posted  about  2 miles  in  front.  Our  skir- 
mishers here  were  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Thorp, 
and  continued  to  advance  steadily.  The  enemy  on  perceiving  them 
came  forward  with  theirpeculiar  yell  to  dislodge  them,  but  were  quickly 
driven  back  with  much  loss.  They  tried  this  three  times  with  the 
same  result.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Thorp  acted  bravely  and  exhibited 
much  coolness  and  good  judgment.  Two  ijieces  of  Captain  Davis’  bat- 
tery, supported  by  the  Sixty- ninth  New  York  National  Guards,  mean- 
while took  position  on  the  road  and  opened  on  the  enemy. 

It  may  be  necessary  for  me  to  state  that  from  5.30  a.  m.  the  re- 
mainder of  our  artillery  were  almost  entirely  without  ammunition. 
The  men  of  the  command  had  eaten  nothing  up  to  this  time,  10.15  a.  m., 
and  had  made  a rapid  march.  I therefore  ordered  a halt  for  the  pur- 
pose of  giving  them  time  for  breakfast  and  awaiting  fresh  supplies  of 
ammunition.  I consulted  the  colonels  and  chiefs  of  commands  and 
decided  to  endeavor  to  take  the  enemy  in  flank  by  moving  along  the 
old  Franklin  road. 

At  about  11  a.  m.  Colonel  Foster  reported  to  me,  and  I immediately 
iflaced  him  in  command  of  the  entire  infantry.  Soon  after,  the  One 
hundred  and  twelfth  Kegiment  New  York  Volunteers  and  three  pieces 
of  the  Second  Wisconsin  Battery,  with  a fresh  supply  of  artillery  am- 
munition, reported.  My  thanks  are  due  to  these  commands  for  the 
prompt  manner  in  which  they  marched  to  the  scene  of  action  and  the 
desire  they  manifested  to  join  in  the  i)ursuit  of  the  enemy.  The  two 
howitzers  attached  to  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry  were  present 
and  were  brought  to  bear  on  the  enemy  while  on  their  retreat  in  the 
morning. 

At  12  m.  everything  was  in  readiness  and  I altered  the  former  de- 
termination and  decided  to  aftack  the  enemy  in  front,  and  again  moved 
forward  for  that  purpose,  leaving  the  One  hundred  and  twelfth  New 
York  Volunteers,  two  pieces  of  the  Second  Wisconsin  Battery,  and  two 
companies  of  Spear’s  cavalry  to  hold  the  Deserted  House.  The  enemy 
had  commenced  his  retreat.  We  pursued  with  all  possible  haste  toward 
Carrsville.  At  Pecosin  Creek  the  Thirteenth  Indiana  Volunteers,  as 
skirmishers,  came  up  with  their  rear  guard,  strongly  posted  on  the 


138 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


opposite  bank,  and  a sharp  skirmish  ensued.  Our  artillery  was  quickly 
placed  in  position  and  opened,  receiving  no  reply.  After  a few  min- 
utes I ordered  the  artillery  to  cease  fire  and  Colonel  Spear  to  charge 
the  enemy  across  the  bridge,  which  he  did  in  his  usual  gallant  and  fear- 
less manner.  He  continued  on  nearly  2 miles  beyond  Carrsville  and 
returned,  reporting  the  enemy  entirely  out  of  sight. 

I then  concluded  that  all  attempts  to  get  them  to  engage  were  useless, 
and  therefore  farther  pursuit  unnecessary.  Major  Wheelan,  with  six 
companies  of  Dodge’s  New  York  Mounted  Eifles,  reported  at  this  time 
and  was  immediately  assigned  to  duty.  We  returned  toward  Suffolk, 
halting  at  the  Deserted  House  at  6 p.  m.  to  give  the  men  time  for  rest 
and  food. 

Details  were  ordered  to  bury  those  of  the  enemy’s  dead  who,  in  their 
flight,  were  left  on  the  field,  and  among  whom  was  a lieutenant,  as  in- 
dicated by  his  uniform. 

We  fired,  according  to  Captain  Follett’s  official  report,  1,140  rounds 
of  shot  and  shell,  and  the  ground  occupied  by  the  enemy  was  strewn 
with  dead  soldiers,  horses,  broken  rammers,  sponges,  knapsacks,  and 
cartridge-boxes;  and  innumerable  pools  of  blood  on  the  roadside  and  in 
the  woods  gave  full  proof  of  the  immense  havoc  our  artillery  created 
during  the  night  engagement.  I ascertained,  from  information  received 
on  the  way  to  Carrsville,  that  25  wagons  were  believed  to  have  been 
impressed  for  the  purpose,  and  were  driven  off  filled  with  their  killed 
and  wounded.  I visited  a large  farm  house  occupied  by  Mrs.  Mulhol- 
land,  which  they  had  used  as  one  of  their  hospitals.  Both  floors  of  the 
building  were  covered  with  blood  and  pieces  of  bone  and  flesh.  My  in- 
formant told  me  that  40  wounded  had  been  there,  among  wliom  were  4 offi- 
cers. A prisoner  asserts  that  our  first  shell  killed  one  of  their  colonels. 

The  Thirteenth  Indiana  Volunteers,  with  its  accomplished  lieutenant- 
colonel,  I found  ever  ready  to  obey  all  orders  promptly  and  cheerfully, 
and  did  signal  service.  Of  the  Sixty-ninth  New  York  National  Guards 
and  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York  Volunteers,  as  they  be- 
long to  my  own  command,  I do  not  desire  to  speak  as  flatteringly  as 
they  deserye.  What  I have  a right  to  say  of  Colonel  Spear,  command- 
ing the  cavalr3^,  would  scarcely  add  to  his  already  high  reputation  as 
one  of  the  most  accomplished  officers  in  the  service,  a thorough  disciplin- 
arian, and  one  who  does  not  know  what  fear  is.  He  led  every  charge 
in  person,  and  I found  him,  his  lieutenant-colonel,  majors,  adjutant,  and 
other  officers  and  entire  command  ever  ready  to  perform  every  duty 
assigned  them  with  the  greatest  alacrity.  His  perfect  knowledge  of  the 
country  was  of  incalculable  service  to  me. 

Colonel  Foster  is  also  too  well  known  to  the  major-general  for  me  to 
endeavor  to  elevate  his  military  character  beyond  that  very  high  stand- 
ard he  has  already  earned  and  attained.  I must,  however,  state  that 
he  fully  maintained  this  character  and  rendered  me  most  efticient  serv- 
ice from  the  time  of  his  arrival. 

Captain  Follett,  as  chief  of  artillery,  acted  with  great  judgment,  and 
himself  and  officers,  as  also  Captain  Davis  and  officers  and  the  men  of 
both  batteries,  cannot  be  spoken  of  too  highly  for  their  coolness  and 
indomitable  courage  during  such  a severe  engagement. 

I was  most  ably  assisted  by  Captain  Blodgett,  my  assistant  adjutant- 
general  ; Lieutenant  Tracey,  my  aide-de-cami),  and  Lieutenants  llughes 
and  AVinterbotham,  detailed  on  my  staff.  They  carried  my  orders  and 
messages  everywhere  under  the  most  galling  lire,  and  all  are  alike  de- 
serving of  the  highest  praise  and  commendation.  Captain  Blodgett 
was  slightly  wounded  in  the  left  knee  by  a piece  of  shell. 

I also  desire  to  mention  the  excellent  soldierly  qualitiesof  Private  James 


CiiAP.  XXX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  DESERTED  HOUSE. 


139 


Collins,  Comixiny  E,  of  Colonel  SpeaEs  regiment,  wlio  was  detailed  to 
me  as  orderly. 

For  specific  accounts  of  meritorious  conduct  of  subordinate  officers 
who  did  not  come  under  mj^  own  observation  I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to 
accompanying  reports. 

Dr.  Hand,  the  medical  director  at  this  post,  was  present  and  directed 
the  transportation  of  our  wounded  and  relieved  and  prevented  much  suf 
leiing.  Dr.  Dwyer,  surgeon  of  the  Sixty-ninth,  took  charge  of  the  build- 
ing occupied  as  our  hospital,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  Dr.  Nolan,  sur- 
geon of  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth,  and  Assistant  Surgeons  Ewen, 
Si)encer,  Fawcett  and  others,  rendered  good  service  in  that  department. 

Quartermaster  Cooke,  of  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York 
Volunteers,  was  placed  in  command  of  the  transportation  and  gave 
most  perfect  satisfaction. 

The  number  of  prisoners  taken  by  us  has  not  been  generally  men- 
tioned in  the  official  reports  to  me,  but  I believe  them  to  be  about  30. 

Onr  total  loss  is  as  follows 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Officers 

2 

9 

’Mnii-p.nTnrnissimiP.fl  nffir.ftrs  

3 

21 

1 

14 

Privates 

18 

G5 

Total 

23 

95 

15 

Total  casualties 

133 

1 

The'whole  command  arrived  at  headquarters  inmost  excellent  spirits 
at  1 a.  m.  on  the  31st  ultimo,  making  a march  of  32  miles  in  about 
twenty-four  hours. 

I cannot  close  without  returning  my  sincere  thanks  to  Maj.  Gen.  John 
J.  Peck,  commanding  this  post,  for  the  high  honor  he  conferred  on  me 
in  intrusting  the  command  of  this  important  expedition  tome  and  leav- 
ing in  his  special  orders  and  dispatches  so  very  much  to  my  own  dis- 
cretion. I endeavored  to  execute  everything  to  the  best  of  my  ability, 
and  hope  that  all  I have  done  meets  his  approbation. 

I am,  major,  with  high  respect,  your  obedient  servant. 

MICHAEL  COECOEAN, 

Brigadier- General j Comdg.  at  Battle  of  Deserted  Hoiise^  Va. 

Maj.  B.  B.  Foster,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Supplement.] 

Order  of  march  of  force  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  Corcoran, 
United  States  Volunteers,  from  signal  station  near  Suffolk,  Va.,  from  1 
to  3.20  a.  m.  Friday,  January  30,  1863  : 

Six  companies  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  under  command  of 
Col.  Samuel  P.  Spear ; Thirteenth  Eegiment  Indiana  Volunteers,  under 
command  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  J.  Dobbs ; Battery  D,  Fourth  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, under  command  of  Captain  Follett,  acting  as  chief  of  artillery  j 
two  sections  Seventh  Massachusetts  Batterj^,  under  command  of  Caj)- 
tain  Davis;  One  hundred -and  thirtieth  Eegiment  New  York  Volun- 
teers, under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Thorp;  Ambulance  Corps  ; 
Sixth  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Colonel 
Follansbee  ; One  hundred  and  sixty-seventh  Eegiment  Pennsylvania 
Militia,  under  command  of  Colonel  Knoderer;  Jne  hundred  and  fifty- 
fifth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Colonel  Mc- 

* Bat  see  revised  statement,  p.  135. 


140 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap;  XXX. 


Evily  5 train  ; one  section  Seven^  Massachusetts  Battery,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant ; Sixty-ninth  Eegiment  New  York  National 

Guards,  under  command  of  Colonel  Murphy,  and  two  companies  Elev- 
enth Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  under  Major  Cornog. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Samuel  P.  Spear,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Vol.  Cavalry, 
Camp  Suffolk,  Va.,  February  1,  1863. 

Sir:  Inclosed  herewith  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  a list  of  the 
killed  and  wounded  in  an  engagement  in  which  my  regiment  was  en- 
gaged for  thirteen  hours,  being  three  hours  and  eleven  minutes  under 
a most  tremendous  fire  of  shot  and  shell  from  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns. 

This  is  the  fifth  heavy  engagement  that  the  regiment  has  taken  an 
active  part  in  since  October  1,  1862,  in  the  vicinity  of  Blackwater. 

The  recent  battle  took  place  on  the  morning  of  the  30th  of  January, 
1863,  at  the  Deserted  House,  9 miles  west  of  Suffolk,  Va.  The  enemy 
consisted  of  16  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  1,200  cavalry,  and  6 regi- 
ments of  infantry.  Our  force  was  12  pieces  of  artillery,  5 regments 
of  infantry,  and  my  regiment,  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry.  The 
cavalry  opened  the  engagement  by  a charge  on  the  enemy’s  pickets, 
and  was  from  that  moment  till  the  end,  as  before  stated,  constantly  in 
the  hottest  of  the  battle.  Lieut.  Col.  George  Stetzel  and  Majs.  Samuel 
Wetherill  and  George  T.  Cornog  were  present  with  the  regiment  and 
rendered  iirompt  and  valuable  services  during  the  entire  engagement. 
The  non-commissioned  officers  and  men  performed  their  duty  in  excel- 
lent style,  and  during  a crashing  fire  they  proved  an  ornament  to  the 
service  and  an  honor  to  their  State.  It  will  be  seen  by  the  inclosed  list 
that  Capt.  Albert  J.  Ackerly  had  his  horse  killed  by  a piece  of  a shell, 
and  that  Capt.  John  B.  Loomis  and  my  adjutant,  A.  A.  Menzies,  had 
their  horses  instantly  killed  by  a heavy  shot.  My  own  horse  was  seri- 
ously" and  perhaps  mortally  wounded  by  a shot  in  the  breast. 

Both  officers  and  men  are  worthy  of  the  highest  commendation  for 
their  coolness,  courage,  and  undaunted  bravery. 

I most  respectfully  request  that  permission  may  be  granted  to  have 
inscribed  upon  the  regimental  colors  the  words,  ‘^Blackwater”  and  “ De- 
serted House.” 

I am,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  P.  SPEAK, 

Colonel,  Eleventh  Pen7isylvania  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

Hon.  Eli  Secretary  of  State. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  WilUain  McEvily,  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  R^etv  York 

Tnfamtry. 

Suffolk,  Va.,  January  31,  1863. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  31,  from  general  head- 
quarters, I herewith  furnish  for  the  information  of  the  brigadier-general 
commanding  a detailed  account  of  the  expedition  in  which  the  regiment 
under  my  command  was  engaged  on  the  30th  instant : 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  DESERTED  HOUSE. 


141 


In  accordance  with  orders  received  the  regiment  fell  in' at  12  o’clock 
midnight  and  marched  for  the  signal  station  on  the  South  Quay  road, 
a short  distance  from  which,  farther  on,  it  came  up  with  the  rear  of  the 
rest  of  the  forces  composing  the  expedition,  under  command  of  Brigadier- 
General  Corcoran,  and  proceeded  with  them  to  within  about  half  a mile 
of  the  place  known  as  the  Deserted  House,  where  the  regiment  was 
drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  heavy  firing  in  the  front  having  announced 
that  we  had  got  up  with  the  enemy  and  that  an  engagement  had  com- 
menced. In  this  spot  we  remained  within  range  of  the  rebel  artillery, 
exposed  to  occasional  danger  from  the  discharge  of  shot  and  shell,  the 
men  of  my  command  behaving  with  a coolness  and  self-possession  sel- 
dom evinced  by  volunteers  under  a first  fire. 

Here  a temporary  confusion  was  created  among  the  soldiers  of  my 
command  by  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-seventh  Pennsylvania  and  the 
Sixth  Massachusetts  Eegiments  falling  back  in  disorder  upon  them,  but 
from  this  they  sooji  recovered  and  remained  steady  in  line  until  6 a.  m., 
when  an  order  was  received  to  advance,  which  was  complied  with,  and 
the  regiment  was  again  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  other  side  and 
within  half  a mile  south  of  the  Deserted  House.  At  this  time  the  com- 
panies were  mustered  to  ascertain  if  any  casualties  had  occurred,  when 
it  was  found  that  there  was  1 man  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty -fourth 
Kegiment  (two  companies  of  which  were  attached  to  my  regiment  in 
lieu  of  Companies  D and  K on  duty  at  the  time  the  regiment  was  or- 
dered out.  Company  K being  on  picket  duty  and  D detailed  to  garrison 
Port  Halleck)  killed  j 2 men  of  Company  B,  of  my  regiment,  wounded, 
and  5 reported  missing. 

I'rom  this  position  we  then  followed  the  enemy,  who  was  retreating, 
some  5 or  6 miles,  when,  in  consequence  of  renewed  firing  in  our  front, 
the  regiment  was  once  more  formed  in  line  of  battle,  soon  after  which, 
the  firing  having  ceased,  I was  ordered  to  return  with  my  command 
to  the  Deserted  House,  where  I arrived  about  6 ii.  m.  and  remained 
till  9 o’clock,  the  men  resting  and  refreshing  themselves  after  the  fatigue 
they  had  undergone.  From  here  I was  ordered  to  Suflolk,  for  which 
place  I marched  with  my  regiment  and  arrived  at  1 a.  m.  on  31st  instant. 

I must  particularly  mention  the  valuable  assistance  rendered  me 
throughout  the  whole  time  the  engagement  lasted  by  Major  Flood, 
whose  services  iirincipaily  conduced  to  the  restoration  of  order  and 
confidence  when  the  regiment  had  been  thrown  into  confusion  by  the 
One  hundred  and  sixty-seventh  Pennsylvania  and  {Sixth  Massachusetts 
Regiments. 

I would  also  make  favorable  mention  of  Captain  Byrne  and  the  sol- 
diers under  him,  whose  anxiety  to  get  into  action  was  such  that  it  was 
with  difficulty  they  were  restrained  from  charging  on  the  rebel  batteries. 
I should  do  an  injustice  to  the  gallant  men  composing  the  two  companies 
ol*  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  Regiment  attached  to  the  One 
hundred  and  fifty-fifth  if  I omitted  to  mention  the  brave  and  steady 
manner  in  which  they  behaved. 

From  the  bearing  of  all  the  officers  and  men  engaged  in  the  affair 
and  the  coolness  and  intrepidity  displayed  by  them  during  the  time  it 
lasted,  I feel  confident  that  they  possess  all  those  qualities  necessary  to 
make  good  and  efficient  soldiers,  and  of  their  willingness  to  display  "the 
same  whenever  occasion  offers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.^McEVILY, 

OoL,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  fifty -fifth  EegC  New  Yorlc  Yols, 
Capt,  J,  J,  Blodgett,  A.  A,  G, 


142  • NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CHAr.  XXX. 

No.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Roger  A.  Pryor.,  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Forces  on  the  Blackwater, 

Fehruary  4,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
light  at  Kelly^s  Store  on  the  30th  ultimo: 

With  the  design  of  subsisting  my  command  as  largely  as  possible 
within  the  enemy’s  lines,  on  the  25th  ultimo  I crossed  the  Blackwater 
on  a foraging  expedition.  The  detachment  consisted  of  the  regiments 
of  Cols.  [Bobert  C.]  Trigg,  [J.  J.J  McMahon,  and  [Thomas]  Poage ; 150 
men  of  Col.  [W.  C.]  Claiborne’s  [Seventh  Confederate]  Cavalry  ; [Capt. 
d.  C.]  Coit’s,  and  a section,  respectively,  of  [Capt.  S.  T.]  Wright’s  and 
[Capt.  Louis  H.]  Webb’s  batteries.  Subsequently  I directed  Maj. 
[S.  P.]  McConnell  to  join  me  with  a part  of  [H.  A.]  Edrnundson’s  bat- 
talion and  a section  of  S.  Taylor  Martin’s  batter^^  The  entire  force 
did  not  exceed  1,800  of  all  arms. 

The  evening  of  the  25th  I bivouacked  at  Somerton.  Informed  of  the 
I)resence  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  at  Gatesville,  some  12  miles  distant,  I 
disi)atched  Lieut.  Col.  [Y.  H.]  Taliaferro  that  night  with  100  mounted 
men  to  beat  up  their  quarters  j but  they  were  appraised  of  his  ap- 
proach, and  despite  the  celerity  of  his  march  they  continued  to  escape 
by  a circuitous  route  to  Suffolk. 

The  2Gth  I moved  from  Somerton  to  Holland’s  Store,  where  I was 
detained  three  days  by  inclement  weather. 

On  tlie  29th  I resumed  my  march,  and  that  evening  about  5 o’clock  1 
reached  Kelly’s  Store,  on  the  direct  road  from  Franklin  to  Suffolk,  dis- 
tant from  the  former  12  miles,  from  the  latter  scarcely  9.  Apprehend- 
ing a probable  attack,  1 disposed  my  force  in  such  manner  as  to  be  pre- 
])ared  for  any  contingency.  I preferred  to  approach  Kelly’s  by  the  road 
from  Kinsale  Swamp,  because  it  conducted  toward  the  enemy  by  a direct 
instead  of  an  oblique  march,  and  because,  being  covered  on  either  side  by 
an  extensive  and  impenetrable  it  protected  me  against  the  pos- 

sibility of  a flank  attack,  except  through  certain  obscure  pathways,  which 
a small  force  would  suffice  to  block  up.  At  Kelly’s  the  road  divides — 
one  fork  leading  directly  to  Suffolk,  the  other  turning  almost  perpendic- 
ularly to  the  left  and  sweeping  around  by  Ely’s  and  Providence  Church. 
A hundred  or  two  iiaces  from  the  store  both  roads  are  intersected  by  a 
swamp,  but  it  opposes  scarcely  any  obstruction  to  the  passage  of  troops. 
The  store  stands  in  an  open  field  of  considerable  extent,  inclosed  on  eitlier 
side  by  a thick  iiine  growth  reaching  to  both  roads  at  the  point  where 
they  traverse  the  swamj).  The  wood  in  rear  of  the  field,  about  1 mile 
from  the  swamp,  I occui)ied  with  the  regiments  of  McMahon  and  Poage, 
<leployed  on  both  sides  of  the  road.  One  battalion  of  Trigg’s  regiment 
was  in  the  pines  on  the  left,  a little  in  advance  of  Poage’s,  the  other  on 
the  right,  a little  in  adv^ance  of  McMahon.  The  batteries  I destined  to 
sweep  the  field  in  case  the  enemy  should  cross  the  sw'amp.  A section 
of  6-i)onnders  I advanced  to  within  300  yards  of  the  store,  one  gun  being 
on  either  side  of  the  road.  Some  400  yards  to  the  rear  and  on  either  side 
of  the  road  I placed  a rifled  piece  and  liowitzer.  This  w’as  Coit’s  battery. 
Wright’s  section,  consisting  of  a rifled  gun  and  howitzer,  was  in  position 
on  tlie  left  of  the  road  and  in  line  with  Coit’s  rearmost  pieces.  Edmiind- 
son’s  battalion,  with  a section  of  Martin’s  and  a section  of  Webb’s  ba  t- 
teries, were  held  in  reserve  some  three-quarters  of  a mile  in  rear  of  the 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  DESERTED  HOUSE. 


143 


niaiu  body,  and  were  so  posted  as  to  observe  tbe  twoby-patbs  wbicb  there 
intersect  tbe  Kelly  road,  tbe  one  communicating  with  tbe  railway  and 
tbe  other  with  tbe  Oarrsville  road  on  tbe  left.  Tbe  cavalry  were  em- 
l)loyed  in  outpost  duty,  a strong  picket  being  stationed  on  both  roads 
some  distance  beyond  tbe  swamp.  A company  of  infantry  was  also 
placed  on  each  road  immediately  at  the  swamp.  Hardly  were  these  dis- 
positions completed  when  tbe  vedettes  in  advance  of  tbe  cavalry  outposts 
encountered  and  drove  back  a small  scouting  party  from  Suffolk.  An- 
ticipating an  attack  during  tbe  night  by  a large  force  of  cavalry,  I pre- 
pared an  ambuscade  by  posting  100  sharpshooters  on  tbe  direct  road  a 
mile  beyond  tbe  swamp.  As  was  expected,  about  3 o^clock  tbe  enemy\s 
cavalry  approached  tbe  men  in  ambush  and  received  a volley  which 
emptied  many  a saddle  and  threw  tbe  column  into  confusion.  They 
rallied,  however,  and  were  saluted  with  another  destructive  fire.  The 
infantry  behind  then  engaged  my  skirmishers,  Avbo,  being  overpowered 
by  numbers,  were  obliged  to  recross  the  swamp.  Here  they  were  again 
jjlaced  in  ambush,  and  again  they  poured  a deadly  volley  into  tbe  enemy’s 
cavalry  at  a distance  ot  10  paces.  Meanwhile  the  enemy’s  whole  force 
pressed  on  across  the  swamp. 

At  this  moment  I reached  the  spot  and  immediately^  directed  Captain 
Coit  to  open  with  his  advance  section.  He  was  anticipated  by  the  enemy, 
who  had  already  gotten  a couple  of  mountain  howitzers  in  position . The 
ground  being  favorable  to  the  action  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  I appre- 
hended some  peril  to  the  pieces  in  advance,  and  accordingly  after  a few 
rounds  I retired  them  on  a line  with  the  other  sections.  All  my  artillery 
except  the  reserve  under  Captain  Martin,  was  now  engaged.  The  enemy’ 
too,  had  brought  up  his  batteries,  and  there  ensued  and  was  maintained 
for  two  hours  as  furious  a cannonade  as  I have  ever  witnessed.  It  was 
now  4 o’clock  precisely^  by  6 o’clock  the  enemy’s  advance  was  decisively 
checked  and  all  his  guns  silenced,  except  a single  piece  which  discharged 
an  occasional  shot  with  feeble  eftect.  ^ 

At  this  moment  word  was  brought  me  from  various  sources  that  the 
cars  were  running  and  were  accumulating  troops  in  rear  of  my  right  flank. 
This  information  obliged  me  to  move  my  main  force  to  the  point  occu- 
pied by  the  reserve  in  order  to  prevent  the  enemy  debouching  on  my  flank 
and  rear.  Accordingly  1 directed  the  infantry  to  retire  by  successive  bat- 
talions and  the  artillery  by  alternate  sections.  The  movement  was  exe- 
cuted with  perfect  deliberation  and  without  the  least  annoyance.  The 
reserve,  now  become  the  advance,  was  re-enforced  and  arranged  in  a skirt 
of  woods  behind  the  field,  about  400  paces  in  width,  which  the  enemy  in 
Ins  approach  would  be  obliged  totraverse.  Skirmishers  were  thrown  for- 
ward to  the  right  and  left.  The  artillery  was  disposed  on  the  edge  of  a 
held  in  such  order  as  to  rake  the  road  and  sweep  every  foot  of  the  field 
The  position  was  sufficiently  strong,  and  we  awaited  the  approach  of  the 
enemy  if  he  should  prove  in  a mood  to  renew  the  fight.  After  the  lapse 
of  nearly  an  hour  their  cavalry  appeared  in  the  woods  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  field.  A single  discharge  of  spherical  case  sent  them  scamper- 
mg  away.  Next  they  brought  up  a howitzer,  but  after  three  rounds  that 
also  was  disabled  and  withdrawn.  Their  infantry  then  issued  from  the 
woods  across  the  field  with  the  evident  design  of  charging  our  batteries 
but  being  confronted  by  our  skirmishers  and  assailed  by  storm  of  case 
and  canister  they  broke  and  ran  in  the  utmost  confusion,  nor  did  they 
.allj  again.  M3"  line  of  skirmishers  was  advanced  and  scouts  were  sent 
orward  to  ascertain  the  enemy’s  presence,  but  they  were  not  to  be 
omul.  They  were  beaten  and  had  fled  toward  Suffolk.  Despite  our 
interior  force  and  deficiency  in  cavalry  I resolved  on  pursuit,  and  had 


144 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


issued  orders  accordingly,  when  I received  the  embarrassing  informa- 
tion that  the  artillery  ammunition  was  exhausted.  In  this  circum- 
stance no  alternative  was  left  me  but  to  return  toward  our  base  of 
supply.  After  remaining  on  the  field  from  8 until  1 o’clock  (five  hours) 
without  seeing  or  hearing  of  the  enemy  we  retired  leisurely,  marching 
3 miles  in  so  many  hours,  and  exempt  from  all  interruption  until  we 
reached  Kinsale  Swamp,  when  the  enemy’s  cavalry  attempted  a dash 
on  our  rear  guard.  He  was  promptly  repulsed  and  severely  chastised. 
We  proceeded  to  Carrsville  and  bivouacked  6 miles  from  the  field  of 
battle. 

The  fortunate  issue  of  this  engagement,  maintained  against  such  su- 
])erior  force  (the  enemy’s  force  being  fully  8,000),  I attribute  to  the 
favor  of  Providence  and  the  superb  valor  of  the  troops  of  my  command. 
For  four  hours  the  infantry  lay  under  a terrific  storm  of  shell,  case,  and 
canister,  and  yet  hardly  a man  abandoned  his  place  in  the  ranks.  But 
the  chief  glory  of  the  fight  must  be  accorded  to  the  artillery.  To  the 
rapidity  and  effect  of  their  fire,  the  firmness  with  which  they  held  their 
l^osition  and  maintained  the  fight  against  more  numerous  and  heavier 
batteries  and  under  the  menace  of  a charge  by  cavalry  and  infantry, 
is  due  the  decisive  repulse  sustained  by  the  enemy. 

When  all  discharged  their  duty  so  admirably  it  is  difficult  to  distin- 
guish particular  merit  in  individuals ; but  I could  not  acquit  myself  of 
injustice  if  I omitted  to  recall  the  services  of  Captains  Ooit,  Martin,  and 
Wright.  By  their  gallantry  and  judicious  conduct  these  ofBcers  im- 
parted tbe  noblest  spirit  and  the  greatest  efficiency  to  their  respective 
commands  and  contributed  chiefly  to  the  successful  event  of  the  day. 

The  casualties  in  the  command  were  few,  but  among  them  I have  to 
lament  the  death  of  Colonel  Poage,  of  the  Fiftieth,  and  Capt.  [Thomas 
P.]  Dobyns  and  Lieut.  [John  S.]  Lacy,  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Virginia  Vol- 
unteers, all  courageous  and  capable  officers.  Persons  with  the  best 
opportunities  of  information  report  the  enemy’s  loss  to  exceed  300  in 
killed  and  wounded.  My  own  dead  and  wounded  were  brought  from 
the  field,  except  the  few  who  fell  in  the  fight  across  the  swamp  and  who 
were  lost  in  the  thickness  of  the  woods  and  the  darkness  of  the  night. 

In  conclusion  I have  to  commend  the  conduct  of  my  staff:  Of  Capt. 
[W.  H.]  Whitner,  assistant  adjutant-general,  whose  zeal,  gallantry,  and 
intelligence  are  worthy  of  all  praise;  of  my  aide,  Lieut.  [C.]  McCann, 
who  exhibited  his  usual  activity  and  reckless  audacity  of  courage,  anil 
of  Messrs.  McMullen  and  Barnes,  who  were  equally  fearless  and  ener- 
getic in  communicating  my  orders  and  directing  their  execution. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

KOGER  A.  PRYOR, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  George  G.  Garrison, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 
Goldshoroughj  N.  0.,  February  10,  1803. 

I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  report  of  General  R.  A.  Pryor,  in- 
closing with  it  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded.  It  is  with  pleasure  I call 
the  attention  of  the  War  Department  to  the  successful  defense  of  tbe 
lines  of  the  Blackwater.  Although  I have  never  been  able  to  place  an 
adequate  force  on  the  line,  yet  by  defensive  works  and  constant  vigi- 
lance it  has  been  held  since  July  last  against  a force  often  five  or  six 
times  our' numbers.  - Three  times  in  heavy  columns  they  have  tried  to 


CHAr.  XXX.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  PLYMOUTH,  N.  C. 


145 


force  a,  passage  and  have  in  each  instance  been  repulsed,  and  our  forces 
have  constantly  traversed  the  counties  on  the  left  bank  and  drawn  there- 
from most  of  their  own  supplies.  Col.  G.  Leventhorpe,  the  former  com- 
mander of  the  lines,  and  General  Pryor  both  deserve  commendation 
for  their  successful  defense  of  that  frontier  with  their  small  commands. 

S.  G.  PEENCH, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


[Addenda.] 

Beturn  of  Casualiies  in  the  Brigade  commanded  hy  Brig.  Gen.  Roger  A.  Pryor,  in  engagement 

at  Kelhfa  Store,  Va. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  on  file.] 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


Command. 


50th  Virginia  Regiment,  Col.  Thomas  Poage. . 
G3d  Virginia  Regiment,  Col.  J.  J.  McMahon  . 
54th  Virginia  Regiment,  Col.  Robert  C.  Trigg. 

Coit’s  battery,  Capt.  J.  C.  Coit 

Wright’s  battery,  Capt.  S.  T.  Wright 

Martin’s  battery,  Capt.  S.  T.  Martin 

Grand  total 


FEBRUARY  1-10,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Plymouth,  N.  C. 

Ueport  of  Col.  Francis  L.  Lee,  Forty  fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  44th  Regiment  Mass.  Vol.  Militia, 

Camp  Stevenson,  Few  Berne,  Fehritary  14,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  order  of 
January  31,  1863,  I embarked  my  command  on  steamer  Northerner 
and  arrived  at  Plymouth,  N.  C.,  at  4 p.  m.  on  February  2. 

Upon  landing  I consulted  with  Major  Bartholomew,  Twenty-seventh 
IMassachusetts  Regiment,  commander  of  the  post,  in  regard  to  closing 
the  lines ; but  learning  from  him  that  information  of  our  arrival  and 
])robable  force  had  undoubtedly  been  sent  forward  to  the  enemy  even 
before  our  arrival,  I deemed  it  unwise  to  interfere  with  existing  ar- 
rangements in  regard  to  passing  the  lines. 

Learning  that  Commodore  Flusser  was  absent,  I proceeded  in  com- 
pany with  Major  Bartholomew  to  inspect  the  location  of  his  pickets 
and  his  preparations  for  defense,  and  found  the  pickets  well  jilaced,  his 
precautions  against  surprise  sufficient,  and  every  advantage  taken  of 
the  natural  defenses  of  the  town,  the  major  having  almost  completed 
a ditch  connecting  the  two  swami)s  lying  south  of  the  town.  Inside  of 
this  ditch,  which  is  about  6 feet  in  depth  and  about  15  feet  wide,  the 
earth  is  thrown  up  sufficiently  high  to  afford  shelter  for  sharpshooters. 
Major  Bartholomew  proposes  to  erect  a small  block-house  where  the 
Long  Acre  road  crosses  this  ditch,  and  also  one  upon  the  Jamesville 
road  at  the  crossing  of  the  ditch.  My  carpenters  built  draw-bridges  for 
each  of  these  roads,  and  I would  respectfully  suggest  that  two  field 
howitzers  would  render  the  defense  of  these  roads  easy  against  any  force 
10  R R — VOL  XVIII 


146 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chai*.  XXX. 


likely  to  be  brought  against  them,  and  that  they  are  most  earnestly  de- 
sired by  Major  Bartholomew.  I would  also  recommend  a further  supply 
of  axes  and  shovels,  as  the  want  of  these  tools  prevents  Major  Barthol- 
omew from  availing  himself  fully  of  the  services  of  the  contrabands  in 
his  command. 

Upon  the  Long  Acre  road  the  picket  is  stationed  at  the  ditch,  about 
three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  custom-house,  with  an  outer  picket  of 
5 men  half  a mile  in  advance  at  the  junction  of  the  road  with  the  Lee’s 
Mill  road.  At  this  point  there  is  a blockade  of  trees  fallen  across  the 
road. 

Upon  the  Columbia  road  the  picket  is  established  just  west  of  the 
bridge,  crossing  Coneby  Creek,  about  two  miles  from  the  custom  house. 
This  bridge  is  taken  up  each  night  and  affords  an  easy  and  sure  de- 
fense, as  the  creek  is  very  deep. 

Upon  the  Jamesville  road  the  picket  is  at  the  ditch,  about  1 mile  from 
the  custom-house,  and  a cavalry  vedette  is  stationed  about  half  a mile 
in  advance. 

Upon  inquiring  as  to  the  probable  force  and  location  of  the  enemy, 

I learned  from  Major  Bartholomew  that  he,  in  company  with  Commo- 
dore Flusser,  had,  on  January  30,  made  a reconnaissance  as  far  as 
Jamesville  on  the  gunboat  Commodore  Perry,  shelling  the  woods  at 
various  points  but  finding  no  signs  of  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  It  was 
the  opinion  of  Major  Bartholomew  that  the  position  and  strength  of  the 
enemy  was  as  follows : Two  companies  of  the  Seventeenth  INorth  Caro- 
lina Eegiment  at  Eainbow  Bluff  with  two  field  pieces;  the  remainder 
of  that  regiment,  with  four  field  pieces,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  bluff*,  any- 
where between  Hamilton  and.  Williamston  ; four  companies  of  infantry 
some  7 miles  northwest  of  Washington,  and  the  remainder  of  their  regi- 
ment at  or  near  Greenville;  three  companies  of  cavalry  scouting  any- 
where between  the  Tar  and  Eoanoke  Eivers. 

A cavalry  scout  to  Ward’s  Bridge,  some  4 miles  from  town,  failed  to 
discover  any  signs  of  rebel  scouts,  though  they  learned  that  parties  of 
two  or  three  cavalrymen  had  been  seen  in  that  vicinity  Avithin  a week. 

Commodore  Flusser  arrived  on  the  evening  of  the  2d  of  February, 
and  after  consultation  I arranged  to  go  with  my  regiment  on  his  three 
gunboats  to  Williamston,  starting  the  next  morning  at  7 o’clock  and 
landing  at  Williamston  or  Jamesville  as  might  be  thought  best — the 
landing  party  to  be  supported  by  three  boat  howitzers  and  their  crews, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant  Furness,  of  the  Valley  City.  On  the  fol- 
lowing morning  a drifting  snow-storm  rendered  any  advance  by  land 
or  water  impossible ; the  impassable  state  of  the  roads  also  prevented 
an  expedition  to  Windsor  to  confiscate  bacon  packed  for  rebel  use. 

On  Fridaj^,  February  6,  finding  that  no  coal  could  be  furnished  to  our 
transport  by  the  l^avy  and  that  my  pioneers  were  unable  to  supply  the 
requisite  quantity  of  wood,  I was  obliged  to  send  out  some  3 miles  to 
buy  and  draw  some  dry  wood  belonging  to  Mr.  Harrison,  a loyal  man 
living  on  the  Long  Acre  road.  Before  starting  the  wagons  Major  Bar- 
tholomew told  me  that  he  had  good  reason  to  believe  that  many  of  the 
inhabitants  upon  that  road  had  abused  their  protection  papers  by  smug- 
gling out  salt  in  larger  quantities  than  they  needed  for  home  consump- 
tion; that  they  had  packed  large  stores  of  bacon  intended  lor  the  use 
of  the  rebel  troops;  that  he  thought  an  examination  and  confiscation  of  j 
a portion  of  their  bacon,  if  found  in  such  large  quantities,  Avould  be  de-  | 
sirable.  I therefore  took  four  of  my  companies  and  went  some  13  miles 
out,  taking  on  the  way  the  horses,  mules,  and  carts  to  transport  the 
pork  if  found.  I examined  the  farms  of  the  persons  suspected,  and 
finding  from  two  to  three  tons  of  bacon  took  from  four  of  them  3,385 


CHAr.  XXX.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  PLYMOUTH,  N.  C. 


147 


pouuds,  leaving  much,  for  want  of  transportation,  which  I think  would 
properly  have  been  brought  away.  This  bacon,  with  22  horses  and 
mules  and  16  carts,  I handed  over  to  Major  Bartholomew,  leaving  it  to 
his  judgment  to  return  any  of  the  horses  and  carts  to  persons  in  whose 
loyalty  he  had  confidence,  and  directing  him  to  see  that  quartermaster’s 
receipts  for  the  property  taken  should  be  given  to  the  parties,  in  order 
that  if  they  could  rebut  the  testimony  with  regard  to  their  sympathy 
and  aid  for  the  rebel  cause  they  might  receive  payment  from  the  Gov- 
ernment. 

On  Sunday  morning,  being  informed  by  the  captain  of  our  transport 
that  unless  we  started  then  he  would  be  obliged  to  lay  at  Plymouth  until 
coal  was  found  him,  and  my  rations  not  being  sufficient  for  over  two  days 
longer,  I left  Plymouth  that  afternoon,  and  after  anchoring  at  Roanoke, 
for  coal,  arrived  here  on  the  evening  of  Tuesday,  February  10. 

Yours,  with  respect, 

FRANCIS  L.  LEE, 

Colonelj  Comdg,  Forty-fourth  Regt.  Mass.  Vol.  Militia. 


Capt.  Andrew  Stewart, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


P.  S.— Inclosed  please  find  instructions  received  from  headquarters 
relative  to  the  movement  above  stated. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Few  Bernej  N.  (7.,  February  15,  1863. 
Approved  and  respectfully  forwarded. 

H.  W.  WESSELLS, 

Brigadier-General  Volunteers ^ Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina,  18th  A.  C., 

New  Berne^  January  31,  1863. 

Col.  Francis  L.  Lee, 

Comdg.  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia  : 


Colonel:  You  will  embark  your  command  to-morrow  morning  at 
7 o’clock  on  the  steamer  Northerner  and  proceed  directly  to  Plymouth, 

N.  C. 


The  Massasoit  will  be  at  the  wharf  at  the  foot  of  Middle  street  for 
the  imrpose  of  transferring  your  regiment  to  the  Northerner. 

Upon  your  arrival  at  that  place  you  will  assume  command  of  the 
])ost,  and  immediately  after  consultation  with  Captain  Flusser,  U.  S. 

, Navy,  and  Major  Bartholomew,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers, take  the  necessary  steps  to  drive  in  the  enemy’s  pickets. 

It  is  reported  here  that  the  enemy  is  in  force  (about  1,000)  at  James- 
ville.  Should  you  find  this  report  corroborated  by  the  information  you 
may  receive  at  Plymouth,  you  will  advance  on  that  place  and  whip  the 
enemy ; and  if  upon  consultation  with  the  above  officers  it  should  be 
deemed  advisable  you  are  authorized  to  advance  as  far  as  Williamston. 

It  is  necessary  that  the  advance  should  be  made  very  shortly  after 
,,\our  arrival,  so  that  the  enemy  may  not  receive  information  of  your 
arrival  at  the  place,  and  you  are  therefore  advised  to  elose  the  lines. 

Captain  Flusser^  U.  S.  Navy,  will  furnish  you  with  some  boat  howit- 
zers and  crews,  and  he,  as  well  as  Major  Bartholomew,  are  strongly  rec- 
ommcpdpfl  to  you  from  their  long  experience  at  the  post. 


148 


NORTtI  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Much  of  course  must  be  left  to  your  own  discretion,  and  the  greatest 
confidence  is  placed  in  your  judgment  and  abilities.  The  generahs  de- 
sire is  to  drive  the  enemy  back  and  prevent  their  annoying  our  forces 
at  Plymouth. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

SOUTHARD  HOFFMAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


FEBRUARY  2, 1863. — Destruction  of  Salt-Works  at  Wale’s  Head,  Currituck 

Beach,  H.  C. 

Eej)ort  of  Ca;pt.  Francis  E. ' Porter , Eighth  Alassachusetts  Infantry. 

. Headquarters, 
Eoanohe  Island.,  February  5,  1863. 

Captain  : Pursuant  to  information  received  from  you  in  your  com- 
munication of  December  29, 1862,  of  there  being  salt-works  in  operation 
on  Currituck  Beach,  I on  the  2d  instant  went  with  a force  of  90  men 
on  the  United  States  steamer  Halifax  and  succeeded  in  destroying  the 
same,  together  with  about  100  bushels  of  salt,  without  opposition.  These 
same  works  are  located  at  a place  called  Wale’s  Head  and  have  before 
been  destroyed  by  our  forces,  but  were  rebuilt  and  in  full  opei'atiou  and, 
I should  say,  were  manufacturing  salt  at  the  rate  of  about  50  bushels 
per  day.  My  expedition  was  a perfect  success. 

Trusting  my  actions  may  meet  your  approbation,  I am,  captain,  re- 
spectfully, your  obedient  servant, 

F.  E.  PORTER, 

• Captain,  Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  John  F.  Anderson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutajit- General,  New  Berne,  N.  C. 


FEBRUARY  5,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Olive  Branch  Church,  Va. 

Eeport  of  Maj.  Christopher  Kleinz,  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Camp  Magruder, 

Near  Williamshurg,  February  5,  1863. 

• Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  instruc- 
tions I proceeded  this  morning  in  command  of  the  second  and  third 
s(piadrons,  numbering  in  all  156  men,  to  make  a reconnaissance  of  the 
country  as  far  as  Twelve  Mile  Ordinary.  Arriving  at  Fort  Magruder  1 
was  joined  by  26  men,  under  Lieutenant  AVilliamson,  and  from  thence 
to  William  and  Mary  College;  here  1 detached  the  third  squadron,  under 
Captain  Stetson,  with  orders  to  take  the  Jamestown  road  and  scout  that 
l)ortion  of  the  country  around  by  Green  Spring  farm;  to  come  in  by 
( ’entreville,  and  send  me  word  as  to  his  arrival  down  to  the  junction  ot 
the  Ccntreville  and  Richmond  roads,  where  1,  with  the  remaining  i)art 
of  my  force,  was  waiting. 

During  the  interval  1 sent  Lieutenant  Williamson  on  with  his  com- 
mand toward  York  River,  some  5 miles,  who  on  returning  reported  no 
sign  of  an  enemy.  On  receiving  word  of  Captain  Stetson’s  arrival  at 
Centreville  1 marched  to  Six  Mile  Ordinary,  where  1 was  joined  by  Cap- 
tain Stetson,  who  reported  no  traces  of  the  enemy  in  the  direction  from 


Chap. XXX  ] SKIRMISH  AT  OLIVE  BRANCH  CHURCH,  VA. 


149 


which  he  came.  With  my  whole  force  I now  proceeded  up  the  Eich* 
mond  road  to  Mrs.  Pickett’s  gate,  where  the  advance  guard  came  on  the 
enemy’s  pickets,  which  they  gallantly  drove  in,  capturing  1 prisoner 
(and  [who]  in  their  hasty  retreat  left  part  of  their  arms,  blankets,  and  a 
Virginia  dinner  at  Olive  Branch  Church,  where  their  reserve  of  8 men 
was  posted),  and  pursued  them  2 miles  beyond  Twelve  Mile  Ordinary. 

In  accordance  with  instructions  I halted  my  main  force  at  the  Ordi- 
nary, and  finding  no  force  near,  and  from  information  received  believ- 
ing none  to  be  nearer  than  Diascund  Bridge,  I returned  with  my  com- 
mand and  prisoners  to  camp. 

I am,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  KLEINZ, 

. Major. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  Comdg.  Fifth  Pa.  Car. 


FEBRUARY  6-21,  1863. — Transfer  of  Ninth  Army  Corps  from  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac  to  Newport  News,  Va. 

Itinerary  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps.,  Maj.  Gen.  William  F.  Smith.,  U.  S. 

Army.,  commanding,  February  6-28.=*^ 

February  6. — In  accordance  with  orders  from  corps  headquarters  the 
Third  Division  struck  tents  on  the  Rappahannock  River,  near  Falmouth, 
and  proceeded  by  cars  to  Aquia  Creek  and  thence  by  transports  to  Fort 
Monroe,  where  it  arrived  on  the  10th  j thence  it  proceeded  to  Newport 
News. 

February  9. — The  Second  Division  struck  tents  near  Falmouth  j took 
cars  for  Aquia  Creek,  and  transports  from  thence  to  Newport  News, 
where  it  arrived  on  the  11th.  The  artillery  of  this  division,  having  been 
landed  at  Hampton  on  the  15th,  joined  at  Newport  News  on  the  21st. 

February  10. — The  First  Division  left  camp  on  the  Rappahannock  and 
proceeded  by  cars  and  transports  to  Newport  News. 


FEBRUARY  7,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Olive  Branch  Church,  Va. 

RICFORTS. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Geu.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army,  commandiug  Fourth  Army  Corps. 
No.  2.  —Maj.  Christopher  Kleiuz,  Fifth  Peunsylvauia  Cavalry. 

No.  15. — Brig.  Geu.  Henry  A.  Wise,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Col.  William  B.  Tahh,  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Infantry. 

' No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth 

Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Yorlitoicn,  February  8,  1803. 

Ceneral  : A squadron  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  which 
left  on  a reconnaissance  yesterday  afternoon,  encountered  a force  of 


From  Corps  Return  for  February,  1863. 


150 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


rebel  cavalry  and  infantry  at  Burnt  Ordinary,  about  25  miles  above 
here.  After  a short  conflict  our  squadron  retired,  having  lost  several 
officers  and  men.  I will  report  in  detail  as  soon  as  I learn  the  facts. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-  Ge^ieral. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


Yorktown,  February  9,  1803. 

The  report  of  particulars  has  not  come  in.  I would  rather  delay  a 
little  than  report  an  exaggerated  loss  before  the  stragglers  return. 
Eumor  now  places  it  about  23.  The  officer  in  command  exceeded  his 
instructions  by  going  to  Burnt  Ordinary  when  he  was  directed  to  go 
only  to  Six  Mile  Ordinary.  I am  going  up  to  examine  in  person  before 
I give  the  facts. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

YorMown,  February  10, 1863. 

Lieut.  George  Smith  and  5 privates  reported  missing  in  the  recon- 
naissance of  the  7th  instant  have  come  in.  Lieutenant  Williamson  was 
killed  and  Captain  Hagemeister  and  Lieutenants  Eeinmuller  and  Little 
were  taken  prisoners.  Five  rebel  deserters  have  just  come  in. 

Jjee’s  brigade  of  cavalry  is  reported,  on  pretty  good  authority,  to  be 
in  I^ing  William  County,  opposite  the  White  House. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Christopher  KleinZj  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Camp  of  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 

Near  Williamsburg^  February  8,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report : That  dur- 
ing your  absence  yesterday  from  the  regiment — the  command  having 
been  turned  over  to  me  by  you  before  leaving — three  deserters  from 
enemy  came  into  our  lines  and  delivered  themselves  to  our  pickets. 
They  stated  that  several  more  were  outside  who  desired  to  come  in,  but 
in  consequence  of  the  enemy  having  sent  out  patrols  for  the  purpose  of 
discovering  and  arresting  them  they  were  afraid  to  venture. 

Shortly  afterward  two  other  deserters  came  in  and  delivered  them- 
selves up,  and  who  corroborated  the  statement  of  the  others,  saying 
furthermore  that  16  of  their  men  likewise  disposed  were  at  Walker’s 
Mill,  3 miles  beyond  and  to  the  right  of  our  pickets,  on  the  Eichmond 
road  j also  that  they  had  heard  of  20  of  their  own  men  patroling  in 
front  of  our  lines  and  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  in  search  of  de- 
serters, and  of  whom  the  men  at  Walker’s  Mill  were  in  fear. 


Chap.  XXX.]  SKIRMISH  AT  OLIVE  BRANCH  CHURCH,  VA. 


151 


I deemed  it  necessary  to  send  out  a scout  to  ascertain  if  there  was 
any  truth  in  these  statements.  Accordingly  a squadron,  composed  of 
Companies  L and  M,  numbering  84  men,  and  commanded  by  Captain 
Faith,  was  sent  out  with  instructions  to  take  the  road  leading  to  Walker’s 
Mill  to  the  right  at  the  Eichmond  road  picket  post,  and  from  Walker’s 
Mill  to  proceed  to  Six  Mile  Ordinary,  and  then  return  to  camp  via  the 
Richmond  road;  in  the  event  of  meeting  with  the  enemy’s  patrol,  as 
previously  mentioned,  to  capture  them  if  possible. 

I have  been  informed  that  Captain  Faith  proceeded  as  far  as  Six 
Mile  Ordinary  without  discovering  any  trace  of  the  enemy.  He  then 
ordered  his  advance  guard  to  proceed  300  or  400  yards  beyond,  on  the 
Eichmond  road,  and  halt.  This  the  advance  guard  proceeded  to  do, 
when  they  discovered  a small  patrol  in  their  front.  The  lieutenant 
commanding  advance  guard  sent  back  to  Captain  Faith  for  orders. 
Captain  Faith,  in  violation  of  orders  received  from  me,  ordered  the 
lieutenant  to  charge  and  capture  them  if  possible,  and  that  he  would 
support  him. 

The  enemy  fled  on  the  approach  of  our  men,  and  after  being  pursued 
for  2 miles  they  took  a road  leading  to  the  right,  our  advance  guard  in  hot 
l)ursuit.  At  this  point  Captain  Faith  threw  out  another  advance  guard, 
upon  the  direct  road,  endeavoring  to  cut  off  the  enemy’s  retreat.  An* 
other  body  of  rebels,  being  either  infantry  or  dismounted  cavalry,  and 
secluded  by  a ravine  along  this  part  of  the  road,  allowed  our  advance  guard 
to  pass  them,  and  as  the  column  was  passing  poured  into  them  two  or 
three  volleys,  emptying  about  twenty  saddles.  At  the  same  time  a small 
body  came  out  of  the  woods  and  charged  the  rear  of  the  column,  throw- 
ing our  main  body  into  confusion,  and  owing  to  the  unexpectedness  of 
this  fierce  attack  they  could  not  be  rallied  until  they  had  retreated  to 
Six  Mile  Ordinary,  a distance  of  from  2 to  3 miles.  Here  they  rallied, 
charged,  and  dispersed  the  pursuing  enemy;  but  in  consequence  of 
their  horses  being  completely  worn-out  they  were  unable  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  change  in  our  favor. 

The  number  missing  at  present  is  5 officers  and  ’33  men ; some  of  the 
latter  are  supposed  to  be  in  the  woods,  their  horses  having  been  shot 
and  disabled.  The  enemy’s  loss,  so  far  as  I can  ascertain,  appears  to  be 
5 killed  and  15  wounded. 

Immediately  on  hearing  the  firing  I ordered  out  one  battalion  under 
Major  McCandless  to  support  Captain  Faith.  On  reaching  Williams- 
burg they  met  the  retiring  party  and  there  halted  for  further  orders. 
In  the  mean  time  you  had  arrived  in  camp  and  resumed  command. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  KLEIEZ, 

Major, 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis, 

Commanding  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 

TorJctown,  February  9, 1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  Major-Greneral  Dix,  commanding  depart- 
ment. 

Captain  Faith,  who  commanded  the  scouting  party,  is  wounded  in 
the  face  and  speaks  with  difficulty. 

The  reconnaissance  was  not  conducted  properly,  and  was  in  violation 
of  my  general  instructions.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  commanding 


152  NORtii  CAROLINA  A^^D  S.  E.  ViRGINtA.  [Chap.  ±X± 

Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  had  left  for  Yorktown  on  business  but  a 
short  time  before  the  party  was  sent  out  by  Major  Kleinz  in  consequence 
of  the  representations  of  the  deserters.  I have  heretofore  regarded  Cap- 
tain Paith  as  an  enterprising  officer,  but  he  and  Major  Kleinz  have  in 
this  instance  both  allowed  themselves  to  be  deceived. 

Captain  Faith  was  led  into  an  ambush  at  a point  near  Nine  Mile  Or- 
dinarv,  which  is  about  21  miles  from  Yorktown. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-  General. 


Ko.  3. 

I 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Senry  A.  Wise^  G.  S.  Army. 

Brigade  Headquarters, 
Chaffin’s  Farm,  Va.,  February  10,  1863 — 12  m. 

General  : The  report  of  Col.  [William  B.]  Tabb,  [Fifty-ninth  Vir- 
ginia Infantry,]  is  fully  confirmed.  On  Saturday,  the  7th  instant,  at 
about  5 p.  m.,  the  enemy  advanced  in  force  (about  85  cavalry)  up  the 
Telegraph  road  and  approached  near  the  Olive  Branch  Church,  below 
the  Burnt  Ordinary.  Colonel  Tabb  had  about  100  infantry  and  about 
150  cavalry.  When  the  enemy  came  within  short  range  he  fired  one 
volley  of  infantry  and  charged  with  his  cavalry,  killing  some  7 or  8 and 
wounding  some  2 or  3,  which  were  captured,  and  capturing  35  prisoners, 
with  their  horses,  arms,  accouterments,  &c.,  and  pursuing  the  enemy 
down  to  the  Six  Mile  Ordinary,  and  there  firing  severely  into  them  and 
putting  them  to  rout.  Probably  their  wounded  who  escaped  amounted 
to  some  10  or  20  more.  Thus  tire  colonel,  without  the  loss  or  injury  of 
a man  or  horse,  succeeded  in  killing,  wounding,  and  capturing  some  50 
or  60  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry — from  a fifth  to  a fourth  of  his  whole  num- 
ber. I send  to  you  35  prisoners,  among  whom  are  1 captain  and  2 
lieutenants.  One  lieutenant  was  killed.  These  men  are  .chiefly  Ger- 
mans, of  the  rascally  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  who  destroyed  the 
records  of  Charles  City  County  and  who  burned  the  buildings,  library, 
&c.,  of  the  venerable  William  and  Mary  College.  I trust  they  will  be 
dealt  with  accordingly. 

Accompanying  this  is  a note  from  Colonel  Tabb.  I have  approved 
of  his  request  to  retain  the  horses,  arms,  &c.,  for  his  cavalry.  They 
need  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HEKEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Elzey,  Commanding,  &c. 


Ko.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  William  B.  Tahb,  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Infantry. 

Headquarters, 

Diascund  Bridge,  Ya.,  February  7,  1863. 
General  : I left  my  encampment  here  at  10  a.  m.  to-day  and  with  a 
detachment  of  six  companies  of  cavalry  and  four  of  infantry  (an  aggre- 
gate force  of  235)  moved  down  the  Telegraph  road  in  the  direction  of 


OltAi^  XXX.] 


skirmish  At  sandy  ridge,  n.  c. 


153 


Williamsburg.  At  Olive  Branch  Church,  1 mile  below  the  Burnt  Or- 
dinary, my  advance  guard  came  upon  a detachment  of  the  enemy^s  cav- 
alry. The  position  being  favorable  I immediately  disposed  my  force  in 
ambush  and  awaited  their  approach.  When  they  had  come  within 
close  range  I ordered  a volley  of  musketry,  and  taking  advantage  of 
their  confusion  charged  them  with  my  cavalry.  They  were  easily 
routed.  The  pursuit  was  continued  as  far  as" the  Six  Mile  Ordinary. 

The  enemy  lost  7 killed,  2 wounded,  and  36  captured,  with  their 
horses,  arms,  and  equipments.  In  my  command  there  are  no  losses  or 
casualties  to  report. 

My  original  object  was  to  penetrate  the  enemy ^s  lines  and  gain  the  . 
rear  of  the  guard  force  in  Williamsburg.  My  intention  having  been 
discovered,  I decided  to  abandon  it  for  the  present  and  returned  to  my 
intrenchments. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  B.  TABB, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise,  Commanding.,  &c. 

[Indorsement.] 

February  8,  [1863] — 7.30  p.  m. 

I respectfully  forward  this  excellent  report  of  a successful  skirmish 
with  the  enemy  without  the  least  loss.  Colonel  Tabb  deserves  more 
than  a word  of  approval.*  May  I not  send  another  battalion  to  re- 
enforce him  ? 

HENRY  A.  WISE. 


FEBRUARY  12-13, 1863. — Expedition  from  Batchelder’s  Creek  and  skirmish 
(13th)  at  Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C. 

Reports  of  Col.  John  Richter  Jones,  Fifty  eighth  Pennsylvankt  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Outposts,  Camp  Fifty-eighth  Pa.  Vols., 
Batchelder^s  CreeJc,  February  14,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  result  of  an  expedition  made  yes- 
terday and  the  night  before  in  order  to  ascertain  the  force  of  the  enemy 
on  my  front  and  also  to  abate  their  audacity. 

At  8 p.  m.  Thursday  evening  I moved  my  effective  men,  leaving  this 
l)ost  in  charge  of  those  not  capable  of  severe  duty  assisted  by  a com- 
]>any  which  I ordered  up  temporarily  from  the  railroad  crossing. 

At  Tuscarora  I dispatched  Captain  Brown,  of  the  Fifty-eighth,  with 
two  comiianies,  to  move  on  the  Neuse  and  Dover  roads  and  scour  the 
country  near  the  Neuse  River,  and  also  to  co-operate  generally  with  my 
movement. 

At  ^‘Jones’  Clearing,”  1 mile  short  of  Core  Creek,  I dispatched  one 
company  to  seize  the  railroad  bridge  at  the  creek  and  to  remain  there  in 
order  to  co-operate  with  me  when  necessary;  and  at  the  same  point  1 
moved  by  a road  crossing  the  railroad  southward;  with  seven  companies. 
Under  guidance  of  unintelligent  negro,  on  routepartly  over  wood-paths 
and  through  swamps,  I reached  the  enemy^s  position  on  iSandy  Ridge 
at  daybreak.  Unfortunately,  from  the  difficulty  of  the  route,  which  was 
almost  impracticable  even  to  infantry,  it  was  later  than  I contemplated, 
and  before  the  camp  was  completely  surrounded  the  enemy  was  alarmed. 


See  report  No.  3,  p.  1.52. 


154 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AKD  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


rushed  from  their  quarters  and  opened  an  irregular  fire.  I had  ordered 
my  men  to  capture  the  enemy  with  the  bayonet,  but  my  flank  companies 
and  some  of  the  others  fired  also  and  a short  action  ensued.  When 
the  enemy  ran,  which  was  very  soon,  the  proximity  of  the  woods  and 
the  incompleteness  of  my  arrangements  saved  most  of  them,  but  we  cap- 
tured 43,  of  whom  4 were  wounded,  and  in  addition  one  of  them  also  was 
killed  and  left  on  the  ground.  Providentially  none  of  my  men  were 
hurt,  though  for  a time  the  enemy^s  fire  was  sharp. 

After  burning  the  tents,  quarters,  &c.,  and  destroying  the  stores,  &c., 
I returned  by  the  Dover  road.  Their  pickets  behind  Core  Creek  on  the 
railroad  and  other  roads  being  alarmed  made  their  escape.  Bridging 
Core  Creek  at  the  Dover  road  I reached  my  camp  in  the  afternoon. 

Meanwhile  Captain  Brown,  with  his  two  companies  and  a detachment 
of  Company  E,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Jacobs,  whom 
I had  previously  ordered  to  co-operate,  had  scoured  the  country  along 
the  Neuse,  discovering  a body  of  the  enemy,  40  or  50  strong,  whom  they 
followed  briskly  but  were  unable  to  catch. 

The  enemy  at  Sandy  Kidge  were  Companies  C,  Captain  Davis,  and  D, 
Captain  Eobinson,  Eighth  North  Carolina,  and  are  reported  as  180  or 
200  strong.  The  party  pursued  by  Captains  Brown  and  Jacobs  was 
Captain  Avirett’s  company. 

As  soon  as  an  inventory  of  the  arms  and  property  captured  can  be 
made  I will  order  a return  of  them  to  the  proper  department. 

As  a general  result,  this  expedition  has  swept  away  the  enemy^s  posts 
on  our  front  and  enables  us  to  occupy  without  opposition  the  line  of 
Core  Creek,  if  judged  expedient,  as  in  my  opinion  it  is.  In  the  march 
over  an  almost  impracticable  route,  the  distance  made  in  twenty  hours 
being  at  least  32  miles,  and  in  the  short  action  which  ensued  the  con- 
duct of  my  men  was  all  that  could  be  expected  from  soldiershii)  of  tlie 
highest  grade. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  EICHTER  JONES, 
Colonel  Fifty -eighth.  Commanding  Oiotposts. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

If  not  already  ordered,  please  send  me  some  cars  to  transi)ort  the 
prisoners  to  New  Berne. 


Hdqrs.  Outposts,  Camp  Fifty-eighth  Pa.  Yols., 
Batchelder^s  Creeh,  February  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  ordered  to  be  turned  in 
to  the  proper  department  captured  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  as  per 
the  annexed  inventory.  Also  that  I have  on  hand  fourteen  captured 
shot-guns,  in  more  or  less  serviceable  condition,  or  injured,  which  not 
falling  under  the  classification  of  ordnance  as  known  to  the  service,  I 
propose  distributing  among  the  captors  as  a reward  and  an  incitement, 
with  the  assent  of  headquarters,  of  course. 

Also  that  I have  turned  into  the  proper  department  and  taken  a re- 
ceipt therefor,  as  in  my  hands  for  the  public  service,  captured  horses, 
mules,  and  wagons,  as  per  inventory. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  EICHTEE  JONES, 
Colonel  Fifty-eighth,  Commanding  Outposts. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXX.  J 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 
[Inclosure.] 


155 


Inventory  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  from  the  Confederates  at  Sandy  Hill, 
N.  C.,  February  13,  1663,  by  Col.  J.  B.  Jones,  commanding  Fifty-eighth  Begiment  Penn- 
sylvania Volunteers. 


No. 

Description. 

Condition. 

Caliber  of 
gun. 

35 

United  States  mnskets,  Harper’s  Ferry  and  Springfield. . 
United  States  muskets,  Harper’s  Ferry  and  Springfield.. 
Belgian  rifle. 

Serviceable 

.69 

2 

Unserviceable 

.69 

1 

Serviceable 

.54 

1 

North  Carolina,  rifle * 

do 

20 

Gun-slings 

Unserviceable 

3 

Bayonets 

Sei'viceable 

3 

Bayonet-aeahharfl  a 

do 

40 

Cartridge-boxes  ..  

do 

32 

Cart.ridge-helta 

do 

1 

Cap-poucb 

do 

2 

Waist-belts 

do ...'. 

Waist-belt  plates 

The  above  is  a correct  inventory  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores 
captured  as  above  stated. 


M.  J.  HADLEY, 

Acting  Ordnance  Sergeant  Fifty-eighth  Eegt  Pa.  Vols. 


FEBRUARY  13,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Washington,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  Luke  Lyman,  Twenty-seventh.  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Capt.  George  F.  Jocknick,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Luke  Lyman,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Lnfantry. 

Headquarters, 

Washington,  N.  G.,  February  16,  1863. 
Dear  Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Friday  last,  13th,  the 
cavalry  company  stationed  at  this  post  crossed  the  bridge,  drove  in  the 
enemy’s  vedettes,  surprised  their  picket  headquarters  (where  some  40 
cavalry  were  stationed),  and  captured  7 men  and  12  horses;  one  of  the 
men  was  dangerously  wounded  and  is  now  in  our  hospital.  The  horses 
I turned  over  to  the  post  quartermaster  (a  poor  lot) ; the  saddles  were 
retained  by  the  cavalry  company.  The  prisoners  I will  send  to  Yew 
Berne  by  the  first  opportunity,  unless  ordered  to  parole,  and  send  them 
out  the  lines  from  this  point.  They  belong  to  the  Sixty-second  Georgia 
State  Troops,  but  are  Yorth  Carolinians.  If  you  wish  me  to  parole  them 
here  please  inform  me. 

Have  I the  authority — if  not,  will  you  give  it  to  me — to  appoint  a 
board  of  appraisers  % The  surgeons  would  like  to  purchase  of  the  Gov- 
ernment one  or  two  of  the  captured  horses. 

‘•All  quiet  along  the  lines.” 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LUKE  LYMAY, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoffman,  A.  A.  G. 


156 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  F.  JocTcniclc^  Third  New  YorJc  Cavalry. 

Washington,  N.  0.,  February  14, 18G3. 

Colonel  : The  monotony  of  the  daily  routine  of  military  duties  here 
for  the  last  few  weeks  has  at  last  been  interrupted  by  a liltle  affair 
which  reflects  much  credit  on  all  concerned. 

Having  ascertained  that  the  enemy  kept  a picket  station  oii  the  other 
side  of  the  river,  some  3 or  4 miles  from  this  post,  and  were  in  the  habit 
of  pushing  their  vedettes  close  up  to  our  lines,  I sent  yesterday  First 
Lieutenant  O’Brien  with  a detachment  of  20  men  of  my  company  to  in- 
tercept them  and  thus  check  their  boldness  for  the  future. 

The  command  left  here  at  1 o’clock  p.  m.  yesterday,  and  returned  in 
less  tjian  two  hours  with  7 prisoners  and  the  following  amount  of  cap- 
tured property : Twelve  horses,  12  saddles,  5 bridles,  8 Enfield  muskets, 
1 Harper’s  Ferry  musket,  and  1 saber. 

Lieutenant  O’Brien  reports  that  after  proceeding  about  a mile  the 
enemy’s  vedettes  were  discovered  some  distance  in  advance,  when  he 
immediately  charged,  determined  to  overtake  them.  The  enemy  after 
firing  their  pieces  put  spurs  to  their  horses  and  retreated  up  the  Green- 
ville road  at  their  utmost  speed.  A 3-mile  race  was  the  result,  at  the 
termination  of  which  our  lieutenant  found  himself  with  only  a small 
part  of  his  command  in  the  very  nest  of  their  main  guard — a trooj)  of 
some  30  or  40  mounted  and  dismounted  cavalry.  Our  men  in  the  rear, 
retarded  by  gullies  in  the  road,  were  pressing  up  rapidly.  But  so  com- 
plete was  the  surprise  that  the  enemy  at  once  broke  for  the  swamps, 
where  they  fired  volley  after  volley,  but  without  any  effect  whatever. 
One  of  the  prisoners  captured  is  mortally  wounded,  and  how  many  more 
were  left  on  the  field  cannot  be  ascertained. 

We  had  no  casualties  pn  our  side  except  the  wounding  of  a horse 
rode  by  First  Sergeant  Richards. 

Among  the  prisoners  is  a color-sergeant  and  an  orderly-sergeant,  both 
very  intelligent  men.  The  latter  states  that  the  troops  engaged  be- 
longed to  the  Sixty- seventh  Georgia  Regiment,  being  a detachment 
of  Captain  Thompson’s  company,*under  command  of  Lieutenant  Holt. 
Our  men,  I am  told,  all  behaved  well  and  are  much  pleased  that  we  at 
last  have  been  able  to  retaliate  in  the  open  field  for  the  many  outrages 
(iommitted  on  our  pickets  by  skulkers  in  the  swamps. 

The  horses  captured  are  of  pretty  good  breed,  but  in  a miserable, 
worn-out  condition;  their  backs  covered  with  sores  and  ulcers.  I shall 
turn  them  over  with  the  rest  of  the  property  to  the  quartermaster  at 
this  post. 

Respectfully  submitting  the  above  report,  T have  the  honor  to  be, 
your  obedient  servant, 

G.  F.  JOOKNICK, 

Captain.^  Comdg.  Company  /,  Third  Neio  Yorlc  Cavalry. 

Col.  S.  H.  Mix, 

Comdg.  Third  New  YorJc  Cavalry^  New  Feme,  N.  C. 


Company  E,  Sixty-second  Georgia. 


Chaf.  XXX.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  SWAN  QUARTER,  N.  C, 


157 


MARCH  1-6,  1863. — Expedition  from  Hew  Berne  to  Swan  Quarter,  N.  C., 
and  skifmishes  (3d  and  4th)  near  Eairfield  and  Swan  Quarter. 

Report  of  Gapt,  Colin  Bicliardson^  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry, 

Hew  Berne,  N.  0.,  March  6,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  this  place  Sunday, 
March  1,  at  5 p.  m.,  on  hoard  the  steamer  Escort  with  my  company  (F, 
Third  Hew  York  Cavalry)  and  the  first, howitzer  of  the  battery  attached 
to  the  same  regiment,  also  Company  G,  First  Horth  Carolina  Volun- 
teers, and  proceeded  to  Bose  Bay  Bridge,  not,  however,  without  a great 
deal  of  delay  for  the  want  of  a pilot,  as  there  was  no  one  on  either  of 
the  two  boats  who  was  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  place.  I then 
ordered  Captain  Brinkerhoff  to  make  a reconnaissance  with  his  boat 
Horth  State,  who  after  a delay  of  four  hours  reported  that  he  had  found 
the  bridge.  I ordered  the  scow  alongside  and  disembarked  the  infantry 
and  howitzer  and  a portion  of  the  cavalry,  placing  Lieutenant  Joy  in 
commaud  until  my  arrival. 

On  arriving  with  the  balance  and  having  resumed  the  command  I 
ordered  a small  guard  on  board  the  Horth  State,  with  orders  to  the 
captain  of  the  same  to  destroy  the  bridge;  I in  the  mean  time  pro- 
ceeded along  the  north  side  of  the  lake  for  a distance  of  about  5 miles. 
With  much  difficulty  and  delay  we  marched,  the  crossings  of  the  road 
having  been  torn  up  by  the  negroes,  under  the  orders  of  one  Henry 
Cradle  (whom  I have  brought  back  a prisoner),  and  having  a protection 
from  Goveruer  Stanly.  I encamped  for  the  night  at  the  cross-roads. 

Next  morning  at  daybreak  I resumed  my  march,  encountering  and 
driving  in  the  enemy ^s  pickets.  About  3 miles  from  Fairfield  we  drove 
more  of  the  enemy,  and  on  arriving  at  the  place  I found  it  nearly  de- 
serted. I i)assed  on  about  2 miles  farther,  when  I discovered  a boat  on 
the  lake ; hailed  it,  but  no  attention  was  paid  to  the  hail.  I ordered 
Ijieutenant  Burke  to  throw  a shell  across  the  bow  of  the  boat,  which 
brought  it  to  shore.  I found  in  the  boat  two  men  without  protections, 
whom  I ordered  out  of  the  boat,  and  ifiaced  in  it  a squad  of  infantry 
under  charge  of  a non-commissioned  officer,  to  sail  around  to  Lake  Land- 
ing, with  orders  to  save  the  bridge  if  possible,  I then  moved  on  and 
encamped  for  the  night  9 miles  from  Lake  Landing. 

The  next  morning  (Wednesday)  I resumed  the  march.  After  moving 
about  5 miles  I was  fired  upon  by  guerrillas  from  some  houses  on  the 
right  of  the  road.  Our  men  drove  them  from  the  houses  into  the  woods. 
1 then  deidoyed  the  infantry  to  the  right  and  threw  out  cavalry  skir- 
mishers in  front  and  rear  and  covered  the  infantry  with  the  howitzer, 
shelling  the  woods  and  dispersing  the  enemy  in  all  directions.  Having 
rallied  my  command,  I moved  on  toward  Lake  Landing,  leaving  Lieu- 
tenant Morse,  with  a party  of  cavalry,  to  burn  their  headquarters.  I 
proceeded  without  further  interruption  until  arriving  at  the  bridge, 
which  I Ibund  destroyed.  I ordered  the  fences  to  be  torn  down  and 
us(‘d  to  rebuild  the  bridge.  I then  moved  on  and  drove  in  mounted 
])ickets  during  the  whole  march  from  Lake  Landing  to  within  about 
miles  of  Swan  Quarter,  when  I was  attacked  from  the  swamp  on  the 
right  ot  the  road  in  front  and  rear  by  about  80  guerrillas  and  ordered 
to  surrender.  A deep  canal  about  8 feet  wide  ran  between  me  and  the 
attacking  party.  As  my  vedettes  were  passing,  the  guerrillas  fired  one 
shot.  Lieutenant  Benson  immediately  charged  with  the  first  platoon 
of  cavalry  and  received  a volley,  killing  3 of  my  men  and  wounding 


158 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CnAF.  XXX. 


tlie  lieutenant  and  several  others.  Six  horses  were  killed  and  many 
wounded.  I ordered  the  infantry  to  deploy  into  the  woods  as  skir- 
mishers, not,  however,  without  some  difficulty,  and  ordered  Lieutenant 
Burke  to  unlimber  his  piece  and  give  the  enemy  a few  rounds  of  can- 
ister, supported  by  the  second  platoon  of  cavalry.  Here  Lieutenant 
Burke  was  wounded  in  the  face,  breast,  and  hand.  The  remainder  of 
the  enemy  were  dispersed  and  fled,  having  sustained  a loss  of  many  of 
their  number,  among  whom  was  their  captain  killed  and  a lieutenant 
taken  prisoner.  After  having  my  killed  and  wounded  taken  care  of  and ' 
placed  in  wagons  and  carts  which  I had  captured,  I moved  on  to  Swan 
Quarter,  and  having  learned  that  a force  of  250  or  300  guerrillas  was 
lying  in  ambush  about  3 miles  from  Swan  Quarter,  on  the  road  to  Eose 
Bay,  and  deeming  it  inexpedient  to  encounter  it  with  my  weakened 
force,  I dispatched  Corporal  Kent,  Company  F,  Third  Kew  York  Cav- 
alry, and  3 men  to  sail  in  a small  boat  to  the  gunboat  Korth  State,  or- 
dering Captain  Brinkerhoff  to  steam  around  to  Swan  Quarter  Landing. 
The  next  morning,  he  having  arrived,  I embarked  on  board  the  steamer 
Escort,  which  had  accompanied  the  gunboat.  I arrived  here  at  4 p.  m. 
to-day. 

I beg  leave  to  make  honorable  mention  of  Luther  H.  Farnsworth,  Com- 
pany I,  Fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  who  accompanied  the  infantry. 
He  was  cool  and  courageous,  jumping  through  the  canal  and  taking  the 
extreme  right,  leading  the  platoon  of  inffintry  into  the  fight;  also  Lieu- 
tenant Morse,  of  the  Third  Kew  York  Cavalry,  who  was  of  great  service 
in  the  rear,  returning  the  fire  of  the  enemy  with  effect  and  holding  them 
in  check. 

My  loss  is  as  follows : Killed,  3 ; wounded,  2 lieutenants  (Benson  and 
Burke)  and  12  men  of  my  company  and  1 of  the  First  Korth  Carolina 
Volunteers.  One  sergeant  of  my  company  has  since  died  of  his  wounds. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  yours, 

COLIK  EICHAEDSOK, 

Capt.  Company  F,  Third  Few  Yorlc  Cav.^  Comdg.  Expedition. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


MARCH  6-8, 1863. — Demonstration  on  Kinston,  N.  C.,  including  skirmishes 
(7th)  at  Core  Creek  and  near  Dover. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Col.  Josiah  Pickett,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Capt.  Ferris  .Jacobs,  jr.,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Capt.  James  R.  Chamberlin,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Junius  Daniel,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Kiustou. 


Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Josiah  Pickett^  Twenty -fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fifth  Eegt.  Massachusetts  Vols., 
Camp  Oliver^  Few  Berne y F.  0.,  March  12,  18G3. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with  orders 
issued  by  you  on  the  5th  instant  I proceeded  with  my  command  on  the 

* See  also  Capt.  David  A.  Taylor’s  report,  p.  170. 


Chap.  XXX.]  DEMONSTRATION  ON  KINSTON,  N.  C.  159 

(>th  to  the  forks  of  the  Trenton  and  Kinston  roads,  17  miles  distant  from 
this  place. 

We  reached  our  destination  about  4 p.  m.  I immediately  secreted 
my  force  from  the  observation  of  the  enemy,  between  Jumping  Eun 
and  Kethercutt’s,  my  purpose  being  to  make  a demonstration  on  their 
outposts  during  the  night.  The  expedition,  consisting  of  three  com- 
j)auies  of  infantry,  under  command  of  Captain  Denny,  with  Captains 
Jacobs’  and  Chamberlin’s  companies  of  the  Third  Kew  York  Cavalry, 
left  our  bivouac  at  midnight,  proceeding  rapidly  up  the  Kinston  road 
a distance  of  4 miles.  The  cavalry,  leading  the  advance,  encountered 
and  were  fired  upon  by  the  rebel  pickets.  They  immediately  made  a 
most  gallant  charge  of  over  a mile,  the  infantry  following  at  double- 
quick,  reaching  Jones’  house  (their  reserve  picket  post).  Captain 
Jacobs  succeeded  in  capturing  two  of  the  enemy’s  scouts,  and  in  so 
doing  was  fired  upon  from  an  ambush,  seriously  wounding  a sergeant 
and  private  of  his  company. 

Ascertaining  that  their  camp  was  alarmed.  Captain  Denny  ordered 
the  infantry  in  the  advance  and  pushed  on*  receiving  and  returning 
their  fire  from  various  points.  When  within  a short  distance  of  their 
camp  the  infantry  were  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  each  side  of  the 
road.  The  line  moved  up  speedily,  passing  the  barricade  of  trees,  and 
when  within  a few  rods  of  the  rebels  (intrenched  by  another  barricade) 
received  a heavy  volley  of  musketry ; this  was  returned,  and  after  a 
sharp  skirmish  the  rebels  were  routed  and  pursued  for  some  distance, 
but  escaped  into  the  woods. 

Pursuit  being  useless,  and  perhaps  under  the  circumstances  impru- 
ileut,  Captain  Denny  ordered  his  men  to  return — burned  their  camp, 
destroying  twelve  tents,  several  log  barracks,  a large  number  of  new 
knapsacks,  arms,  equipments,  blankets,  several  boxes  of  new  clothing, 
and  in  fact  everything  left  by  the  rebels  in  their  hasty  departure. 

Owing  to  their  superior  speed  only  5 prisoners  were  taken,  whom  I 
forwarded  under  guard  to  headquarters.  The  force  reported  back  to 
our  bivouac  with  no  loss,  and  only  2 wounded,  at  6 a.  m.,  having  marched 
a distance  of  16  miles  and  within  12  miles  of  Kinston.  From  muster- 
rolls  found  in  the  enemy’s  camp  their  force  was  estimated  at  190  effect- 
ive men.  Ours  numbered  130  infantry  (which  was  the  only  force  en- 
gaged after  leaving  Jones’  house)  and  80  cavalry. 

I desire  to  acknowledge  the  gallantry,  bravery,  and  endurance  of 
both  officers  and  men  engaged  in  the  affair.  Considering  their  fatiguing 
march  of  the  previous  day,  to  march  8 miles  after  midnight,  whip  the 
rebels  handsomely,  and  return  by  daybreak,  very  much  credit  is  due 
tliem.  Captain  Denny  is  entitled  to  great  praise  for  the  able  manner 
in  which  he  conducted  the  expedilsion.  The  Third  Kew  York  Cavalry 
sustained  its  brilliant  reputation.  To  Captains  Jacobs  and  Chamber- 
lin I am  under  great  obligation  for  their  valuable  co-operation  and 
assistance.  They  left  us  on  the  morning  of  the  7th.  During  our  stay 
at  Kethercutt’s  scouting  parties  were  sent  out  occasionally  to  observe 
the  movements  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  Captain  O’Keil  discovered  them  in  Tren- 
ton and  exchanged  shots  across  the  river.  Captain  Harrington,  from 
a reconnaissance  on  the  Kinston  road,  returned  with  the  intelligence 
tliat  a large  body  of  rebel  cavalry  had  approached  to  within  1 mile  of 
our  pickets  during  the  night.  Receiving  orders  from  you  at  10  a.  m. 
on  the  8th  to  fall  l3ack  to  a more  defensible  i)Osition,  I retired  to  the 
forks  of  the  Trenton  and  Pollocksville  roads,  remaining  there  until  the 


160 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


lOtli  at  2 p.  m.,  when,  by  your  orders,  I returued  to  New  Berne,  leaving 
the  four  companies,  under.Oaptain  Denny,  in  their  former  position,  near 
Deep  Gully. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSIAH  PICKETT, 

Colonel  Twenty-fifth  Begt  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 
Col.  Horace  C.  Lee, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  First  Biv.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corj)s, 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty -eighth  Fennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Outposts,  Camp  Fifty-eighth  Pa.  Vols., 

March  8,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  conformably  to  instructions  I 
made  a movement  in  connection  with  the  general  reconnaissance,  but 
as  the  orders  were  not  received  in  time,  not  in  fact  until  the  7th,  I was 
unable  to  operate  in  exact  connection. 

1 left  my  camp  at  8 o’clock  the  evening  of  the  Gth  (Friday)  with  the 
ellicieut  men  of  the  Fifty-eighth  (about  500)  and  reached  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Core  Creek  about  2 a.  m.  of  the  7th,  having  also  ordered 
a small  detachment  of  Company  H,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  to  fol- 
low. Ascertaining  that  the  line  of  the  creek — relinquished  after  my 
expedition  to  Sandy  Kidge — was  again  occupied  by  the  enemy,  I en- 
deavored to  cross  at  some  unobserved  x>oint,  but  owing  to  the  darkness 
of  the  woods  and  tiie  depth  of  water  in  the  swamj^s  was  unable.  Be- 
ing obliged  to  force  a passage,  I did  so  at  the  Dover  road,  just  before 
daylight,  by  opening  a heavy  fire  on  the  crest  of  the  breastwork 
which  defended  the  crossing,  while  a jiarty  rushed  over  the  siugle 
string-piece,  a round  log,  which  remained  on  the  bridge.  The  enemy 
fired  sharply  at  first,  but  their  fire  was  soon  silenced,  when  they  cried 
out  that  they  surrendered,  but  on  the  consequent  cessation  of  our  fire 
they  took  the  opportunity  to  retire  under  cover  of  the  darkness  before 
my  men  could  reach  their  works. 

I then  rebuilt  the  bridge,  which  detained  me  until  full  daylight,  and 
leaving  a company  in  charge  of  it  I moved  forward,  but  the  various 
posts  of  the  enemy  had  been  jiut  on  the  alert  by  the  firing,  and  the 
alarm  had  been  propagated,  perhaps,  to  Kinston  by  signal-rockets  sent 
up  immediately  afterward. 

About  a mile  beyond  the  creek  my  advance  was  fired  on  from  a 
swampy  thicket  and  woods  flanking  the  road  on  both  sides,  and  as  the 
enemy  stuck  closely  to  cover  it  cost  my  skirmishers  time  and  labor  to 
dislodge  them.  In  my  subsequent  advance  at  the  forks  of  the  Dover 
and  Ib<‘.  railroad  dej)ot  roads  1 captured  a camp  recently  and  suddenly 
abandoned,  ai)parently  by  two  companies,  containing  rough  shelter, 
blankets,  knai^sacks,  spare  clothing,  &c.,  the  blankets,  &c.,  being  goo(l 
and  new ; but  I could  find  no  enemy  in  force,  and  being  informed  by  the 
negroes  that  they  knew  of  none  nearer  than  Kouse  farm,  12  miles  from 
the  creek,  and  the  driving  of  fugitives  from  thickets  and  swamps  with- 
out definite  object  being  useless  labor,  I concluded  to  return. 

From  the  marks  on  the  captured  iiroperty  the  enemy  whom  I encoun- 
tered belong  to  the  Forty-third  North  Carolina  and  the  Sixty-third  North 


Chap.  XXX.] 


161 


DEMONSTEATION  ON  KINSTON,  N.  C. 

Carolina  Cavalry,  but  what  numbers  of  either  regiment  were  in  front 
did  not  appear,  the  enemy  keeping  closely  under  cover  and  the  country 
being  thickly  wooded.  They  are  a different  class  of  troops  from  those 
1 have  hitherto  met,  contesting  successively  every  strong  position  and 
giving  way  only  to  my  superior  numbers.  Their  arms  are  also  different, 
being,  from  the  whistle  of  the  bullets,  the  Minie  or  others  of  similar  tone. 

From  the  information  of  negroes  it  would  seem  that  some  general  offi- 
cer (General  French,  some  of  them  say)  visited  their  posts  on  Wednes- 
day last,  ordered  the  line  of  Core  Creek  to  be  reoccupied,  and  brought 
re-enforcements.  Also  yesterday,  while  I was  on  my  return,  the  whistle 
of  a locomotive  was  heard  some  distance  up  the  railroad  toward  Kinston 
and  on  the  supposition  that  fresh  troops  might  be  brought  up  I took  a 
strong  position  and  awaited  a couple  of  hours,  but  no  show  of  increase 
ot  force  being  made  I resumed  my  march. 

On  the  whole,  my  movement  effected  nothing  beyond  driving  back 
some  of  the  enemy ^s  posts  and  accustoming  our  men  to  la  petite  querre 
As  to  capturing  their  men,  that  will  be  difficult  while  they  hold  the  line 
ot  Core  Creek  and  impose  on  us  the  necessity  of  forcing  a passage  everv 
time  we  cross.  o x & j 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ^ ...  J.  EICHTER  JOKES, 

Colonel  Fifty  ■eighth  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  Comdg.  Outposts. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hd.qrs.  Outposts,  Camp  Fifty-eiohth  Pa.  Vols., 

March  10,  18(33. 

Sir  : In  reference  to  the  surrender  of  the  enemy’s  picket  in  the  breast- 
work on  the  Dover  road  beyond  Core  Creek  I have  the  honor  to  report 
the  following  facts : ^ 


As  soon  as  the  sentinel  at  the  enemy’s  works  fired  I opened  a rapid 
fire  from  the  two  companies  which  had  been  previously  placed  under 
cover  along  the  near  bank  of  the  creek.  Our  fire  was  answered  imme- 
diately by  about  twenty  pieces,  and  for  a few  minutes  there  was  a brisk 
exchange  ot  shots.  Then  the  enemy’s  fire  suddenly  ceased.  Staudin«’ 
a lew  yaitls  from  the  bridge,  which  my  storming  party  was  endeavoring 
to  cross,  1 heard  my  officers  on  the  right  and  left  give  the  commamf 
‘Cease  firing;  they’ve  surrendered,”  and  our  fire  almost  immediatelv 
ceased.  On  inquiry  afterward  I was  informed  by  officers  and  non-coin- 
missioned  officers  that  they  distinctly  heard  from  the  enemy’s  side  of 
the  creek  the  words,  ‘‘  We  surrender;  don’t  fire,”  several  times  repeated 
It  was  very  dark  at  the  time  and  the  passage  of  the  bridge  on  the  siipde 
remaining  string-piece  difficult,  so  that  it  cost  my  men  some  time'^to 
Cl  OSS  and  form  beyond  the  creek,  and  when  they  entered  the  enemv’s 
works  they  were  empty.  As  the  ground  rises  rapidly  to  the  rear  of  the 
fiieastwork  it  would  have  been  hazardous  to  leave  them  if  our  fire  had 
not  ceased,  and  I attribute  the  escape  of  the  picket  to  the  cessation  of 
our  fire,  consequent  on  the  supposition  of  the  surrender. 

Very  res])ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KICHTEK  JOKES, 

Lieut.  Col.  SOUTHAEB  Hofpman,  Outposu. 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 

11  R R — VOL  XVIII 


162 


NORTH  CAKOLINA-AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


3. . 

Report  of  Copt  Ferris  Jacobs,  jr.,  Third  Few  Yorlc  Cavalry. 


Eed  House,  March  1,  1863. 

Col.  J.  lUcHTER  Jones, 

Commanding  Outposts  : 

(Jolonel:  I liave  the  honor  to  report  that  pursuant  to  your  per- 
mission I proceeded  yesterday  with  iny  own  and  Captain  Chainherlin’s 
company  up  the  Trent  road,  joined  Colonel  Pickett,  Twenty-fifth  Mas- 
chusetts,  encamped  at  a concealed  point  near  l^ethercutt’s,  and  at  12 
o’clock  at  ni^ht  marched  with  the  two  companies  cavalry,  and  three 
companies  infantry  furnished  hy  Colonel  Pickett,  to  the  Kinston  forks 
(4  miles  beyond  Nethercutt^s),  the  cavalry  keeping  pace  with  the  in- 
fantry. 

On  the  knoll  immediately  beyond  the  Kinston  forks  my  advance  ve- 
dettes were  fired  upon,  whereupon  I set  the  whole  cavalry  column  in 
motion,  charging  at  full  speed  up  the  Kinston  road  with  the  intention 
of  capturing  the  reserve  picket  station  of  about  30  men.  Not  finding 
them  at  the  place  specified  I continued  the  charge,  without  halting,  to 
the  house  of  one  Jones,  being  about  3 miles  from  the  place  where  we 
met  the  first  picket.  The  infantry  followed  at  double-quick  and  in  a 
few  minutes  joined  me. 

At  this  place  it  was  ascertained  that  we  were  within  1 mile  of  the 
enemy^s  camp,  which  was  near  the  house  of  one  Green.  After  a mo- 
ment’s consultation  the  line  of  march  was  again  taken  up,  with  cavalry 
in  advance.  At  this  moment,  and  while  I was  giving  instructions  to 
the  vedettes,  two  mounted  men  approached,  and  upon  being  appre- 
hended purported  to  have  been  sent  out  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the 
disturbance.  About  a quarter  of  a mile  farther,  on  encountered  a party 
of  six  infantry,  who  surrendered,  and  while  the  sergeant  (Hosier)  in 
charge  of  the  advance  was  receiving  their  arms,  four  of  them  fired  upon 
him,  wounding  him  severely  in  the  hip  and  1 man  in  the  arm.  Pour  ot 
six  escaped.  At  this  point  I drew  in  the  cavalry,  threw  out  lines  of 
skirmishers  upon  the  flanks,  and  advancing  quickly  upon  their  camp 
received  a severe  fire  from  their  barricaded  camp  in  the-  direction  of 
the  skirmishers. 

Tlie  skirmishers  escaped  by  fiilling  to  the  ground  and  covering  them- 
selves in  a ditch  a few  rods  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  breastwork  of  trees. 
Captain  Denny,  in  command  of  the  infantry,  then  pushed  forward  in 
fine  style  and  after  a few  minutes’  sharp  firing  entered  the  camp,  tbe 
enemy  escaping  in  a sort  of  cha])arral  so  dense  that  a footman  unop- 
posed could  barely  have  passed  through. 

The  infantry  companies  under  Captain*  Denny  behaved  exceedingly 
well.  Tlie  enemy  in  their  haste  had  left  everything,  even  their  knap- 
sacks (which  were  new,  having  been  issued  to  them  three  days  pre 
vious),  and  15  or  20  Enfield  rifles  which  they  had  just  received. 

There  Avere  two  streets  of  tents,  about  ten  in  each,  and  two  officers 
tents,  and  a commissary  tent  in  addition.  In  short,  they  abandoned 
everything.  iVfter  an  examination  of  a few  minutes  I ordered  the  camji 
and  its  contents  burned,  which  was  done,  i)roducing  quite  a smart  ex- 
])losion  of  fire-arms,  which  had  been  concealed  or  overlooked. 

Only  one  prisoner  was  captured  here.  The  camp  Avas  exceedingly 
strong  by  natural  position  and  artificial  defenses,  and  could  have  beer 
held  by  the  same  number  of  resolute  men  for  hours  against  an  army 


Chap.  XXX.]  DEMONSTRATION  ON  KINSTON,' N.  C.  165 

without  artillery'.  There  were  two  companies  of  the  Forty -fifth  Korth 
Carolina,  commanded  by  Captains  Eankin  and  Scales,  and  both  were 
said  by  the  prisoners  to  have  been  in  charge  of  a major. 

After  the  destruction  of  the  camp  I moved  back  to  the  house  pre- 
viously occupied  as  a reserve  picket  station,  but  since  the  late  desertion 
the  station  had  been  removed  to.the  woods  near  by,  where  a large  picket- 
fire  was  burning  when  we  advanced.  The  enemy  had  between  their  camp 
and  the  outpost  from  which  we  were  fired  upon  40  men  on  duty  each 
day,  all  of  whom,  with  the  exception  of  the  outpost  vedette,  were  driven 
in,  and  escaped  us  without  firing  a shot  or  in  any  way  alarming  the 
main  body.  The  reserve  picket-station  house  was  burned. 

Beached  the  camp  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts,  at  I^ethercutt’s, 
at  daybreak.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  cavalry  detachment  be- 
haved with  more  than  the  usual  spirit  and  promptitude. 

The  aftair  is  of  but  little  importance  except  for  the  information  gained 
or  confirmed.  It  is  also  worthy  of  mention,  perhaps,  that  the  movement 
penetrated  farther  into  the  enemy’s  country  in  that  direction  than  any 
other  reconnaissance  with  exception  of  General  Foster’s  advance  on 
Goldsborough. 

Trusting  that  you  will  pardon  the  particularity  and  diffusiveness  of 
this  report,  I remain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  JACOBS,  Jr., 
Captain^  Commanding  Detachment. 

[Appendix.] 

Colonel:  I should  have  mentioned  in  the  body  of  my  report  that 
the  success  of  the  movement  mainly  depended  upon  the  accuracy  of  the 
information  derived  by  Captain  Chamberlin  from  the  late  deserters  and 
other  sources,  and  that  it  was  upon  Captain  Chamberlin’s  suggestion 
that  the  attempt  was  made. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

F.  JACOBS,  Jr. 

[Indorsement.] 

I have  the  honor  to  forward  Captain  Jacobs’  report  of  his  spirited 
movement,  made  under  my  authorization  in  connection  with  the  gen- 
eral movement. 

Very  respectfullv, 

J.  BICHTEB  JOI^ES, 

Commanding  Outposts. 


' ' No.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  James  11.  Chamberlin^  Third  Neio  Yorh  Cavalry. 

riDQRS.  Company  A,  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 
Trent  Road.,  N.  C.,  March  10,  18G3. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

From  information  which  I deem  reliable  I ascertained  there  were  two 
companies  of  infantry  (picked  men),  belonging  to  the  Forty- fifth  North 
Carolina  Begiment,  encamped  on  the  Kinston  road  some  12  miles  this 
side  of  Kinston,  and  I determined  to  surprise  them. 

After  making  a map  of  the  country,  with  which  I was  somewhat 
familiar,  I opened  my  plan  to  Capt.  F.  Jacobs,  jr.,  Company  E,  Third 


164 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


New  York  Cavalry,  and  proposed  that  we  unite  our  two  companies  (A 
and  E)  and  make  an  attempt  on  the  rebel  cami),  to  which  he  acceded. 
We  accordingly  provided  our  command  with  two  days^  rations,  and  left 
camp  at  noon  on  March  7,  our  whole  command  numbering  102  men,  all 
told,  Company  A furnishing  48  and  Company  E 54  men. 

At  Major  Nethercutt’s  (secesh)  house  we  came  across  the  Twenty-fifth 
Eegiment  Massachusetts  Yolunteers,*  commanded  by  Col.  J.  Pickett, 
which  was  acting  as  a corps  of  observation  at  tliat  point.  We  biv- 
ouacked with  them  for  a few  hours.  Erom  a contraband  whom  I picked 
up  I learned  that  the  enemy  had  changed  their  camp  and  had  received 
additional  re-enforcements.  Upon  consultation  with  Captain  Jacobs  we 
determined  to  ask  of  Colonel  Pickett  two  companies  of  infantry,  and  he 
very  kindly  assigned  us  three  companies  (A,  C,  and  K),  commanded  by 
Captain  Benny,  Company  K,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Eegiment, 
numbering  about  130  men. 

With  this  additional  force  we  left  Nethercutt’s  house  at  12  o’clock 
that  night.  Upon  reaching  the  Trenton  Cross-Eoads,  a distance  of  4 
miles,  we  halted  for  the  infantry  to  close  up  and  then  made  our  prepa- 
rations for  the  attack,  for  it  was  only  some  one-fourth  of  a mile  beyond 
this  point  that  we  expected  to  meet  their  first  picket,  and  our  plan  was^ 
after  drawing  his  fire,  the  cavalry  was  to  commence  a charge  at  once 
and  endeavor  to  capture  their  reserve  picket  station  of  25  men,  said  to 
be  some  half  a mile  beyond.  We  placed  some  of  our  fleetest  horses 
with  the  advance  guard,  which  was  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Gibbs, 
of  Company  E,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  after  allowing  a few  mo- 
ments of  rest  the  column  was  again  put  in  motion.  Slowly  and  silently 
we  moved  along,  every  man  intent  on  doing  his  duty,  and  determined 
not  to  be  outdone  by  another.  Presently  we  saw  a flash,  and  then  the 
sharp,  shrill  report  of  the  rebel  picket’s  rifle,  with  his  ball  whistling 
over  the  heads,  unharmed,  of  our  entire  column.  Hardly  had  the  flash 
died  away  when  the  command  ‘‘charge”  was  given,  and  instantane- 
ously the  whole  column  started  like  one  man.  On  we  flew,  like  the 
wind,  the  ground  fairly  quaking  beneath  our  feet.  The  picket  station 
reached,  but  not  a rebel  was  found — they  had  heard  the  alarm  and  fled 
like  thieves  in  the  night.  On  we  dashed  to  Hoble’s  house,  a mile  be- 
yond, and  again  to  Jones’  house,  still  another  mile,  but  found  nothing. 
So  impetuous  had  been  our  charge  that  we  had  completely  cut  through 
and  cut  off  their  advance  guard,  which  I afterward  learned  was  com- 
posed of  40  men. 

While  waiting  here  for  the  infantry  to  come  up,  which  were  to  follow 
us  at  double-quick,  and  while  Captain  Jacobs  was  giving  some  instruc- 
tions to  the  advance  guard,  up  rode  two  rebel  cavalrymen,  evidently  mis- 
taking us  for  friends,  and  inquired,  “ What’s  the  matter  below  ? ” Before 
these  words  had  hardly  left  their  lips  several  of  Colt’s.“Love  me  quicks” 
were  presented  to  their  heads  and  they  were  “gobbled.”  One  of  them, 
in  utter  astonishment,  remarked,  “That’s  another  damned  Yankee 
trick.”  We  learned  from  our  prisoners  that  the  rebel  camp  was  about 
miles  beyond,  but  nothing  definite  as  to  its  situation.  After  the  in- 
fantry liad  arrived  we  determined  to  attack  them  with  our  combined 
force.  Accordingly,  Companies  A and  C,  of  the  infantry,  were  placed 
in  rear  of  our  advanced  guard,  followed  by  the  cavalry,  while  Captain 
Benny’s  company  (K)  was  held  in  reserve,  and  in  this  order  all  again 
pressed  forward.  We  had  gone  but  a short  distance  when  our  advance 
guard  met  six  rebel  infantrymen,  who  had  been  sent  out  to  ascertain  what 
had  become  of  their  two  mounted  men.  They  all  immediately  surren- 
dered, and  while  the  two  first  were  in  the  act  of  giving  uj)  their  arms  their 


Chap.  XXX.] 


DEMONSTRATION  ON  KINSTON,  N.  C. 


165 


comrades  jumped  into  the  woods  and  fired,  wounding  Sergeant  Mosier 
and  Private  Morenus,  of  Company  E,  Third  New  York  Cavalry.  The 
infantry  were  then  thrown  out  on  the  flanks  as  skirmishers,  while  the 
cavalry  kept  in  the  road.  In  a very  few  minutes  we  met  the  enemy’s  line 
of  skirmishers  and  a brisk  fire  commenced.  We  adopted  the  ‘^drop 
game”  on  them — that  is,  we  fell  down  immediately  after  firing,  loading 
our  pieces  on  the  ground;  and  after  drawing  their  fire,  which  invariably 
passed  over  our  heads,  we  vrould  up  and  charge  them  again.  In  this 
manner  we  kept  gradually  pressing  forward  and  soon  reached  their 
camp,  which  we  found  strongly  barricaded  on  three  sides.  The  rebels 
here  attempted  to  make  a final  stand,  but  it  was  of  short  duration,  for 
we  carried  their  works  by  storm,  they  retreating  in  hot  haste  toward 
Kinston.  In  their  camp  we  found  several  fine  tents  and  any  quantity  of 
clothing,  camp  and  garrison  stores,  arms  and  accouterments,  and  sev- 
eral packages  (sent  by  express),  containing  coffee,  tea,  sugar,  ham,  and 
other  delicacies  of  camp  life,  evidently  showing  that  some  of  our  ciaiin- 
iug-to-be  Union  friends  within  our  lines  not  only  symT)athized  with  but 
contributed  to  our  enemies.  We  hastily  gathered  everything  together 
and  burned  all,  together  with  their  camp,  to  the  ground. 

Not  deeming  it  safe  to  remain  long  in  such  close  proximity  to  Kistonn 
with  such  a small  force  we  commenced  our  homeward  march,  reaching 
camp  at  daylight,  having  marched  IG  miles  and  done  our  fighting  in 
six  hours,  our  entire  casualties  being  the  sergeant  and  private  of  Com- 
l)any  E,  as  before  mentioned. 

I must  not  omit  to  say  that  both  officers  and  men  behaved  themselves 
with  great  credit  to  their  country,  and  never  have  I seen  men  fight  with 
more  determination  or  bravery. 

We  took  5 prisoners.  Of  the  loss  of  the  enemy  I had  no  means  of 
ascertaining,  as  the  night  was  quite  dark  and  we  had  no  time  to  look 
after  bereaved  friends. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

Jx\S.  K.  OHAMBEPLIN, 

Captain,  Comdg.  Company  A,  Third  ITeio  Yorh  Cavalry, 

Lieut.  Col.  George  W.  Lewis, 

Commanding  Third  Neiv  Torh  Cavalry. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Junius  Daniel,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Kinston. 

Headquarters, 
Kinston,  N.  C.,  March  10, 18G3. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  j^ours  of 
yesterday. 

In  the  difierent  skirmishes  with  the  enemy  on  Saturday  there  were  two 
infantry  lost,  supposed  to  be  captured.  I have  since  learned  that  there 
are  tw^o  couriers  missing,  supposed  to  be  captured.  Major  Winston  lost 
a few  tent-flies  and  a few  blankets.  I have  learned  from  citizens  that 

tlie  enemy  buried men  on  their  retreat  ou  the  lower  Trent  road 

and  that  they  had  others  wounded.  On  the  Dover  road  citizens  say 
tliere  were  several  killed  and  some  w’ounded.  These  reports  come  from 
citizens  below  and  I think  are  reliable. 

I would  have  made  these  statements  sooner  but  my  pickets  are  so  far 


166 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


apart  and  on  so  many  roads  that  I could  not  have  done  so  sooner.  I 
forgot  to  mention  that  one  of  my  men  deserted  and  made  known  to  the 
enemy  my  signals,  and  it  was  in  this  way  that  they  got  upon  tJie  two 
infantrymen.  Nothing  of  the  enemy  this  morning.  Generals  Eohert- 
son  and  Pettigrew  are  here. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding.,  Goldshorough,  N.  G. 


MARCH  6-10, 1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Trenton,  Pollocksville, 
Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  Swanshorough,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Geu.  Heury  Prince,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Expedition. 

No.  2. — Capt.  David  A.  Taylor,  Third  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Chief  Signal  Officer, 
' of  operations  March  5-15. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Joseph  Fricker,  Eighth  Pennsylvania  Reserve  Infantry,  Acting  Signal 
Officer,  of  operations  March  5-15. 

No.  4. — Surg.  Pitkin  B.  Rice,  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  New  York  Infantry, 
Chief  Medical  Officer. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Francis  U.  Farquhar,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer  Eight- 
eenth Army  Corps. 

No.  C. — Col.  Silas  P.  Richmond,  Third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Col.  Augustus  B.  R.  Sprague,  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  8. — Lieut.  Col.  George  W.  Lewis,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  9. — Maj.  Jeptha  Garrard,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince.,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  Expedition. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Neio  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  11,  1803. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  recounaissance  in 
force,  which  I was  directed  to  make  by  your  letter  of  the  5th  instant, 
Avas  completed  last  evening  by  the  return  to  New  Berne  and  distribution 
to  former  quarters  and  commands  of  all  the  parts  of  my  column.  The 
instructions  I received  have  been  entirely  carried  out  and  the  objects 
of  the  expedition  fully  accomplished. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  say  that  the  most  admirable  spirit  was  mani- 
fested by  every  portion  of  the  command.  The  desire  to  carry  out  the 
views  of  the  Government,  as  made  known  through  orders  from  time  to 
time,  Avas  made  strikingly  apparent  in  all  ranks,  as  Avas  also  the  desire 
to  luiA-e  their  determination  to  do  so  tested  in  the  face  of  opposition, 
even  to  the  death.  At  the  same  time  their  feeling  toAvard  tlie  enemy 
Avas  self-possessed  and  magnanimous,  as  Avas.  illustrated  by  instances 
of  personal  conduct.  I will  gi\x  a narratiA^e  of  the  expedition  for  the 
records  of  the  department.  A copy  of  my  orders  is  subjoined  (A). 

The  column  formed  as  it  passed  o\^er  the  bridge  at  Brice’s  Creek,  at 
8.30  a.  m.  on  the  Gtli.  We  crossed  the  bridge,  Avhich  we  had  to  con- 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


167 


struct  over  Mill  Greek,  at  2.15  p.  m.,  and  bivouacked  on Creek, 

at  McDaniel’s  plantation,  at  4 p.  m.,  at  wbicb  place  the  train  did  not  get 
fully  up  till  near  12  o’clock  at  night.  Leaving  the  train  x)arked  here, 
guarded  by  the  Third  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  a sec- 
tion of  Eiggs’  battery,  the  column  marched  at  6.30  o’clock  next  morniug 
in  the  same  order.  The  cavalry  arrived  at  Trenton  at  8.45  a.  m.,  fol- 
lowed by  the  voltigeurs,  where  I joined  them  immediately,  sending  back 
to  halt  the  main  body  2 miles  in  rear. 

At  10  a.  m.  I sent  from  Trenton  to  General  Spinola  and  Colonel 
Jourdan,  commanding  brigades,  the  message  that  “ the  bridges  we  were 
ordered  to  destroy  have  not  been  rebuilt  since  their  former  destruction ; 
the  enemy’s  cavalry  have  been  scattered  by  a charge  of  ours  5 there  is 
no  body  of  the  enemy  on  this  side  the  Trent,  and  consequently  the 
column  will  face-about  and  return  to  the  wagons.”  The  column  marched 
in  returning  at  10.15  a.  m. 

At  11.45  a.  m.,  having  obtained  all  the  information  I could  at  Tren- 
ton and  created  the  indefinite  impression  that  I was  going  to  Kinston 
or  toward  Eichlands  to  look  up  their  cavalry,  I withdrew  the  cavalry 
to  feed,  without  the  limits  of  the  town,  and  then  continued  the  return 
march. 

I arrived  with  the  main  column  at  McDaniel’s  at  1.30  p.  m.,  and  hav- 
ing previously  sent  orders  to  the  train  to  hitch  u^),  marched  at  3;15 
p.  m.  by  a direct  route  to  Young’s  Cross-Eoads.  The  cavalry  i^ushed  on 
rapidly  with  its  howitzer,  followed  more  moderately  by  the  voltigeurs. 
When  nearing  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  Colonel  Lewis,  being  with  the  ad- 
vance of  the  cavalry,  discovered,  as  he  supposed,  the  enemy’s  picket 
of  two  mounted  men,  and  he  charged  to  capture  them.  They  proved  to 
he  one  Lieutenant  Sharp,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Whiting,  and  an- 
other lieutenant.  Their  start  being  a long  one,  they  got  off  by  plung- 
ing into  and  swimming  the  White  Oak  Eiver,  to  the  bank  of  which 
they  w^ere  followed,  where  they  fired  upon  their  pursuers  from  the  op- 
posite side. 

A party  of  cavalry,  being  sent  up  the  Pollocksville  road,  drove  some 
foot  pickets  ffito  the  swamp.  Darkness  came  on  before  the  infantry 
came  up.  We  had  withdrawn  all  but  a small  guard  from  the  river  to 
lay  out  the  camp,  which  was  to  be  on  ground  about  a mile  distant  from 
the  river,  and  a sentinel  at  the  river  being  approached  in  the  darkness 
from  the  direction  of  camp  by  six  men,  hailed  them,  at  which  they 
halted  and  cocked  their  guns.  He  called,  ^‘Turn  out  the  guard,”  and 
instantly  the  persons  scattered  in  the  cover.  This  party  was  Captain 
Harris  and  five  of  his  men,  as  we  afterward  learned.  As  soon  as  the 
infantry  came  up  I sent  two  companies  to  deploy,  under  the  guidance 
of  Cai)tain  Earquhar,  United  States  Engineers,  who  was  directed  by  me 
to  recon noi ter  the  river  thoroughly  in  the  neighborhood.  He  ascer- 
tained that  a log  below  the  bridge  was  the  means  that  footmen  had  of 
crossing.  The  river  was  carefully  watched  for  the  rest  of  the  night, 
that  no  more  of  the  rebels  should  get  back  to  their  quarters.  On  the 
opposite  side  of  the  river  there  w^as  a steady  light  of  a small  camp 
hearing  southwest  by  the  compass.  I could  not  tell  whether  it  was  a 
bright  camp  light  5 miles  off'  or  a lesser  one  a mile.  The  train  did  not 
come  up  till  2.30  o’clock  in  the  night,  owing  to  holes  wearing  in  the 
road  over  which  the  howitzer  and  caisson  charged  with  the  cavalry. 
One  of  my  permanent  orderlies,  who  happened  to  be  stationed  to  shoV 
tlie  way  that  the  wagons  should  turn  out,  reports  seeing,  during  the 
hour  of  intensest  darkness  (perhaps  7 o’clock),  previous  to  the  coming 
up  of  the  infantry,  bearing  southwest,  a light,  probably  a fire  balloon. 


168 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


which  rose  and  stood  awhile,  dipped  several  times,  moved  horizontally 
back  and  forth  several  times,  then  descended.  Presuming  from  ail 
these  indications  that  a picket  guard  of  the  enemy  intended  to  annoy 
the  constructors  of  the  bridge  which  I had  to  make  here,  I did  not  corri- 
mence  it  till  I had  crossed  a regiment,  which  I did  soon  after  daylight  ; 
in  the  morning.  ! 

Having  deployed  a company  of  skirmishers  on  the  immediate  bank  i 
of  this  side,  I placed  two  Napoleon  guns  in  position  to  command  the  j 
opposite  bank,  and  sent  a regiment  across  in  single  file  on  the  log.  The  [ 
regiment  which  performed  this  duty  and  formed  its  line  beyond  the  | 
swamp  was  the  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  New  York,  Lieutenant-  | 
Colonel  Hitchcock.  The  commander  was  ordered  not  to  cross  till  three  [ 
companies  were  over,  and  quite  an  emulation  was  excited  among  the  ! 
captains  as  to  who  should  go  over  first.  Colonel  Hitchcock  ordered  the  I 
left  flank  company  forward,  and  its  commander,  Capt.  George  Micha, 
Company  A,  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  Kegiment  New  York  Yol-  | 
unteers,  was  first  on  the  log  and  on  the  opposite  bank.  No  opposition 
was  made  till  the  verge  of  the  swamp  was  reached,  when  half  a dozen 
shots  of  small-arms  were  exchanged. 

At  10.30  a.  m.  the  bridge  was  ready,  and  the  column,  with  three  days’ 
rations,  moved  over  it,  leaving  behind  to  guard  the  bridge  and  train 
the  Third  Kegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  a battalion  of  the  One 
hundred  and  sixty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Militia,  two  sections  of  Parrott 
guns,  one  section  of  Napoleon  guns,  and  a company  of  cavalry.  Colonel 
Pichmond,  Third  Massachusetts,  in  command. 

It  being  open  country  for  the  4 miles  to  the  next  defile.  Colonel  Lewis 
was  permitted  to  go  on  rapidly  to  it  with  the  cavalry,  followed  within 
supi^orting  distance  by  the  voUigeurs  of  Major  Garrard.  The  cavalry  of 
the  enemy  were  seen  upon  all  flanks  and  in  rear  by  these  forces,  cut  off 
and  scattered  by  our  movements,  and  they  were  either  left  behind  us  or 
found  some  course  other  than  the  road  we  traveled  to  get  away  by. 

We  marched  a mile  or  so  beyond  where  the  road  forks  off  to  Snead’s 
Ferry,  which  the  guide-post  there  says  is  20  miles  distant,  and,  finding 
a good  position,  bivouacked  at  6.15  p.  m. 

In  the  morning  I detached  the  cavalry  to  go  back  to  the  forks,  take  the 
Snead’s  Ferry  road,  and  proceed  on  that  route  and  toward  Swansbor- 
ough,  taking  into  consideration  the  imminent  prospect  there  of  unfavor- 
able weather,  as  far  as  he  thought  he  could,  and  join  or  communicate 
with  me  in  the  evening.  At  12  m.,  presuming  that  the  cavalry  were  at 
or  near  Swansborough,  I marched  back  to  and  halted  at  the  forks  of  the 
road  to  Swansborough  till  4 p.  m.,  at  which  time  the  cavalry  joined  me. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis’  report  of  this  scout  is  appended.  It  was  now 
evident  from  our  reconnaissance  that  all  the  forces  of  the  enemy  in  this 
region  were  withdrawn  behind  the  New  Kiver;  that  the  bridge  at  Jack- 
sonville had  been  destroyed  and  not  yet  rebuilt,  and  that  there  could  be 
no  point  whatever  in  marching  my  column  any  farther  away. 

No  enemy  could  be  met  with  without  going  farther  than  the  organi- 
zation and  supply  of  the  command  contemplated.  There  was  nothing 
left  undone  which  the  expedition  set  out  to  do;  nothing  more  whatever 
which  my  imagination  could  suggest  as  within  our  reacli  to  be  done.  I 
therefore  returned  from  this  point  at  once  to  Young’s  Cross-Poads, 
reaching  there  at  6 p.  m.,  and  on  the  following  day,  the  lOtli,  pursued 
the  route  to  New  Berne.  Of  course  there  were  many  incidents  occurring 
having  an  interesting  bearing  on  the  personnel  of  our  troops.  At  a time 
when  I was  in  the  front  with  the  advance  guard  of  the  cavalry  I saw  a 
corporal  and  two  vedettes,  who  were  100  yards  out  beyond  me  on  the 


Chap. 


169 


EXt^EDITION  FEOM  NEW  BEENE,  N.  C. 

road,  bail  aud  receive  tlie  surrender  of  three  mounted  rebels,  uniforjiied 
a^nd  armed.  A bend  in  the  road  concealed  from  the  rebels  the  danaer 
they  were  api)roaching-,  and  the  corporal  and  vedettes,  thougli  ready, 
made  no  attempt  to  fire.  It  could  not  have  been  performed  quieter  on 
tlie  stage,  and  the  balanced  self-possession  which  it  indicates  I regard 
ns  ii  qnaiity  of  the  command.  Beyond  this  I am  satisfied  by  this  march 
1 liat  there  is  neither  corruption  of  politics  nor  iufamy-of-peace  notions 
to  taint  tlie  pure  patriotism  of  the  command.  It  is  glowing'  with  a de- 
sire to  enforce,  as  the  country’s  true  soldiers,  a decided  policy  of  the 
(K)yernment  for  suppressing  the  rebellion. 

Inclosed  herewith  please  find  (marked  A,  P>,  C,  I),  E,  and  ¥)*  a co])y 
ol  mynistructionsj  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  G.  W.  Lewis,  Third  New  York 
La^  ally,  ot  scout  toward  the  sea  board  j receipt  of  department  proyost- 
marshal  for  seyen  jirisoners,  including  a commissioned  officer,  sergeant 
(u)iporal  and  four  privates;  report  of  property  captured  by  the  cavalry ; 
lepoit  ot  property  captured  by  the  voltigeiirs : co])y  of  my  orders f relat- 
ing to  the  expedition.  ‘ ? ^ a 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

IIENEl^  PKINCE, 

Brigadier- General  of  Yolmiteers^  CommandHiuj. 

Lieut.  Col.  SouTHAED  Hoffman, 

Adjt.  Gen.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Neiv  Berne,  If.  C. 


[Inclosure  A.] 


Headquaeters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  (7.,  March  5,  1803. 

General:  By  direction  of  the  major-general  commanding  I have  the 
honor  to  pbmit,  for  your  guidance,  the  following  points: 

You  will  proceed  with  your  command  to  Trenton  by  the  road  on 
the  ^uth  side  of  Trent  Eiver.  On  arriying  there  you  are  to  destroy 
the  Trenton  Bridge  and  the  White  Hall  Bridge.  The  enemy  in  this 
( iiection  will  be  carefully  obseryed.  You  will  then  countermarch  your 
command  to  Pollocksyille  aud  Young’s  Cross-Eoads.  From  this  latter 
point,  atter  leaying  a strong  rear  guard  for  the  protection  of  the  wagon 
tram  aiid  such  force  of  artillery  and  infantry  as  you  may  deem  need- 
tiu  to  hold  that  point,  you  will  push  on  toward  Onslow.  Obserying 
t le  enemy  in  this  direction  you  will  take  a strong  position  with  the 
nitantry  and  batteries  of  your  command,  and  send  all  the  mounted 
your  command  to  scour  thoroughly  the  country  between  the 
vv  lute  Oak  and  New  Eiyers. , From  the  information  you  may  be  able 
to  obtain  you  will  be  able  to  determine  as  to  the  expediency  of  pushing 
tlie  reconnaissance  as  far  as  Snead’s  Ferry,  near  the  mouth  of  the  New 
itiyer. 


Ihe  object  of  this  expedition  is  to  make  a strong  reconnaissance  in 
t ie  direction  of  Wilmington,  to  ascertain  the  roads,  the  crossings  of 
me  riyers  and  creeks,  the  position  of  the  enemy,  &c.,  and  if  possible  to 

companies  of  cayalry  supposed  to  be  between 
Hie  W lute  Oak  and  New  Eiyers. 

I am,  general,  yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  seryant, 

SOUTHAED  HOFFMAN, 

-r,  . ^ ^ Assistant  Ad/mtant- General. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince, 

Comdg.  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


* Inclosures  B,  D,  and  E are  Reports  Nos.  8 and  9. 
•r^tte^  solely  to  tlio  routine  duties  of  troops 


on  the  march  aud  are  therefore 


170 


NOETH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCiiAP,  XXN. 


[Inclosure  C.] 

Provost-Marshal’s  Office, 

New  Berne,  N,  0.,  March  10, 18G3. 

Received  from  Colonel  Lewis,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  7 prisoners, 
viz:  William  B.  Pringle,  Tenth  North  Carolina  Yolnnteers;  T.  B. 
Snipes,  Lieut.  L.  B.  Williams,  Josiah  Tyson,  and  Wesley  B.  Mews, 
Sixty-third  North  Carolina  Yolnnteers  j Joseph  Grey,  deserter,  and  Z. 
M.  Caston,  citizen.* 

GEORGE  P.  WOODMAN, 

Bepartinent  Provost. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  David  A.  Taylor,  Third  New  Yorh  Light  Artillery,  Chief 
Signal  Officer,  of  operations  March  5-15. 

Hdqrs.  Signal  Detachment,  Eighteenth  A.  0., 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  16,  1863. 

Sir:  In  pursuance  to  your  orders,  on  the  5th  instant  I detailed  two 
officers  (Lieuts.  Joseph  Pricker  and  E.  R.  Blagden)  to  accompany  the 
force  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Prince  on  the  late  reconnais- 
sance to  Swansborough.  At  the  same  time  I detailed  Pirst  Lieut.  N. 
S.  Barstow  to  accompany  the  force  under  Colonel  Sprague,  at  Newport 
Barracks,  which  was  to  advance  on  Swansborough  by  southern  route, 
and  Second  Lieut.  Henry  T.  Merrill  to  accompany  the  command  of 
Colonel  Pickett,  who  covered  the  right  flank  of  General  Prince’s  move- 
ment. 

That  the  different  forces  might  haA^e  a ready  and  certain  mode  of  com- 
munication I drew  up  a rocket  code  of  signals  for  the  use  of  the  officers 
on  this  expedition.  The  command  of  General  Prince  bivouacked  near 
PollocksAulle  on  the  night  of  the  first  day’s  march ; the  command  of 
Colonel  Pickett  bivouacked  at  the  Trenton  Cross-Roads,  Avith  a heaA^y 
picket  force  of  the  enemy  in  front,  for  the  reason  that  Colonel  Pickett 
Avas  going  to  attempt  a surprise  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant  Merrill  did 
not  answer  the  rockets  sent  up  by  General  Prince,  as  the  rockets  would 
reveal  the  i)osition  of  Colonel  Pickett’s  force  whicli  it  was  necessary  to 
keep  concealed.  At  3 a.  m.  of  the  6th  instant  Colonel  Pickett  surprised 
a rebel  picket,  taking  5 prisoners  and  destroying  their  camp. 

On  tlie  7th  instant  Colonel  Pickett  fell  back  to  the  Pollocksville  Cross- 
Roads  to  aAvait  the  return  of  General  Prince.  General  Prince  marched 
directly  to  Swansborough,  Colonel  Sprague  at  the  same  time  advancing 
to  the  same  point  and  reaching  there  nearly  the  same  time,  Avhen  com- 
munication betAA'een  the  two  commands  Avas  immediately  opened  by 
Lieutenants  Ericker  and  Barstow. 

On  the  return  of  the  different  forces  there  Avas  no  occasion  for  any 
signal  commnnication  between  them..  All  ])arties  arrived  at  NeAV  Berne 
in  time  to  take  i)art  in  the  skirmish  at  Port  Anderson  on  the  14th.  On 
the  morning  of  March  14,  immediately  after  the  attack  on  Port  Ander- 
son, Lieutenant  Merrill  and  party  Avas  placed  on  board  gunboat  SlniAV- 
slieen,  Lieut.  E.  R.  Blagden  and  party  on  the  JIunchback,  and  Lieut. 
Joseph  Pricker,  on  the  evening  of  that  day,  on  board  the  gunbor.t 

^ Discliarged  soldier  from  Tliirty-fiftli  North  Carolina  Volunteers;  has  his  discharge 
with  him. 


G.  F.  W. 


Chap.  XXX.) 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


171 


Hetzel.  As  soon  as  the  attack  commenced' Lieutenant  Barstow  signaled 
to  Lieutenant  Frick er  that -the  enemy  were  in  front  of  the  fort  in  large 
force,  with  artillery,  and  asked  for  re-enforcements,  to  which  was  re- 
plied, “Hold  out  as  long  as  you  can;  re-enforcements  will  come  .as 
quickly  as  possible.”  When  the  gunboats  got  into  position  their  fire 
was  directed  by  means  of  signals  by  Lieutenant  Barstow,  stationed  at 
Fort  Anderson,  and  Lieutenant  Merrill,  on  board  the  Shawsheen.  Lieu- 
teoant  Merrill,  from  the  paddle-box  of  the  boat,  was  able  to  obtain  a 
better  view  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  than  any  one  else.  He  so 
skillfully  directed  their  fire  that  one  of  the  enemy^s  pieces  was  for  a time 
abandoned  and  their  infantry  driven  back  some  distance.  Had  the 
garrison  of  Fort  Anderson  been  strong  enough  to  have  made  it  safe  a 
well-conducted  sortie  would  have  easily  captured  one  or  more  of  the 
enemy’s  guns. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th  three  boats  went  up  the  IXeuse,  accom- 
panied by  Lieutenants  Fricker,  Merrill,  and  Knox,  who,  by  their  signals, 
kept  up  a constant  communication  between  the  different  boats  to  the 
entire  satisfaction  of  the  ofiicers  in  command,  who  expressed  themselves 
in  terms  of  admiration  at  the  ease,  rapidity,  and  certainty  with  which 
every  message  was  transmitted. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAYID  A.  TAYLOE, 
Captain  and  Acting  Signal  Officer  in  Charge. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Ko.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Joseph  Fricher,  Eighth  Fennsylvania  Reserve  Infantry., 
Acting  Signal  Officer ^ of  operations  March  5-15. 

ilDQRS.  Signal  Detachment  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  March  18,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the 
expedition  under  the  command  of  General  Prince : 

in  obedience  to  your  orders  of  March  5,  1863,  I reported  to  General 
Prince  for  signal  duty.  Left  Kew  Berne  at  8 o’clock,  March  6,  and  pro- 
ceeded 3 miles  beyond  Pollocksville  ; bivouacked  for  the  night.  Ac- 
cording to  arrangements  made  previous  to  starting  I sent  up  two  red 
rockets,  the  first  at  9 o’clock  p.  m.,  the  second  at  ten  minutes  past  9. 
The  rockets  were  to  indicate  that  “ the  advance  of  our  column  is  here, 
and  all  quiet,”  but  I received  no  reply  from  the  other  i)arties. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  we  started  and  advanced  on  Trenton. 
We  remained  in  Trenton  a few  hours,  then  started  and  bivouacked 
about  6 miles  from  Trenton  that  night.  There  was  nothing  of  any  ac- 
count took  ])lace,  with  the  excei)tion  of  taking  a few  of  the  enemy’s 
pickets  along  the  march. 

On  the  9th  I received  an  order  from  General  Prince  to  accompany 
tile  advance  cavalry  to  Swansborough,  a distance  of  16  miles,  which  I 
djd,  acconqianied  by  Flagmen  W.  J.  Lindsay  and  IT.  P.  Baker.  When 
>;  within  1 mile  of  Swansborough  the  cavalry  charged  into  the  town,  my- 
iself  and  fiagmen  in  the  advance  carrying  a red  signal  flag.  I immedi- 
J ately  went  down  to  the  water’s  edge  and  called  attention  from  the  party 


172  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

on  the  opposite  side  of  Bogue  Inlet.  It  was  replied  to  by  Lieutenant 
Barstow,  signal  officer,  who  accompanied  a party  under  command  of 
(lolonel  Sprague,  of  the  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers.  We  sent 
several  official  messages ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  who  was  in  com- 
mand of  the  cavalry  and  to  whom  I was  ordered  to  report  by  General 
Prince,  sending  messages  across  the  inlet  and  receiving  reply  in  return. 
Tliere  was  nothing  worthy  of  note  on  our  return  to  New  Berne. 

Immediately  on  returning  to  New  Berne  I went  to  my  station  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Neuse  Biver,  a short  distance  from  General  Foster’s 
headquarters.  I remained  there,  communicating  with  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Anderson  on  the  opposite  side. 

On  Saturday,  March  14,  at  5.45  a.  m.  I received  tlie  following  official 
message  from  the  fort : 

To  General  Foster  : 

Tlie  enemy  have  attacked  oiir  jiickets  with  artillery  and  infantry.  They  are  in 
large  force.  The  colonel  wants  more  men. 

BARSTOW. 

I immediately  sent  the  message  to  General  Foster.  In  a few  minutes 
the  general  came  and  told  me  to  send  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson, 
who  was  then  in  command  of  the  Ninety-second  New  York,  to  hold  out 
as  long  as  he  could  and  not  surrender  unless  he  was  compelled  to. 

I also  received  and  sent  a large  number  of  messages  from  the  forfc 
asking  for  more  troops  and  re-enforcements,  which  I replied  to,  by 
order  from  General  Foster,  that  re-enforcements  would  be  there  in  a 
short  time  and  that  the  gunboats  were  getting  in  position.  I also  re- 
ceived messages  directing  the  fire  of  the  gunboats  and  stating  the  loca- 
tion of  the  enemy.  I also  received  messages  from  the  gunboats  Hunch- 
back, Lockwood,  and  Shawsheen. 

On  the  evening  of  the  14th  I was  ordered  on  board  the  commodore’s 
boat  Hetzel ; remained  there  until  9 a.  m.,  March  15,  when  I was  or- 
dered on  gunboat  Allison  to  proceed  up  the  Neuse  Biver  on  a recon- 
naissance. 

We  went  up  the  river  to  Street’s  Ferry,  a distance  of  12  miles.  -The 
enemy  had  retreated  beyond  this  point.  We  found  four  of  the  enemy’s 
pickets  j they  skedaddled.  We  then  shelled  the  woods  for  an  hour, 
and  returned  to  New  Berne  the  same  day. 

With  great  respect,  I remain,  j'our  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  FBICKEB, 

First  Lieiit.j  Sth  Pa.  R.  Y.  (7.,  and  Actg.  Sig.  Officer  18th  A.  C. 

Capt.  H.  A.  Taylor, 

Chief  Acting  Signal  Officer , Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Surg.  Pitldn  B.  Rice.,  One  hnndy'ed  and  thirty -second  New  YorJc 
Infantry,  Chief  Medical  Officer. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Fifth  Hiv.,  Eighteenth  A.  C., 

Neio  Berne,  March  12,  18(>3. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  ex- 
pedition just  returned : 

The  division,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  comprised  of 
the  two  brigades  commanded,  respectively,  by  Brig.  Gen.  F.  B.  Spiuola 


CUAP.XXX.I  EXPEDITION  EKOM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  173 

and  Col.  James  Jourdan,  together  with  two  batteries  of  artillery,  under 
the  command  of  Major  Stone,  and  four  companies  of  cavalry,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  left  N'ew  Berne  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  Oth  instant,  and  after  marching  over  good  roads  with  no 
diflicnlt  streams  to  cross,  making  18  miles,  bivouacked  for  the  night  lu 
a large  open  held  on  high  dry  ground  contiguous  to  an  abundance  of 
wood  and  excellent  water. 

The  men  of  the  several  infantry  regiments,  viz,  the  One  hundred  and 
seventy-first.  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth,  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
eiglith,  and  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Pennsylvania  Militia,  com- 
prising Brigadier-General  Spinola’s  command,  and  the  One  hundred 
and  fifty-eighth  and  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  Kew  York  Volun- 
teers, together  with  the  Third  Massachusetts  Militia,  commanded  by 
Colonel  Jourdan,  bore  the  march  exceedingly  well ; none  sickj  a few 
complaining  of  sore  feet,  occasioned  by  ill-fitting  boots. 

The  second  day  the  regiment  left  camp  in  light  marching  order, 
traveled  G miles  and  returned  to  the  camp  of  the  previous  night,  the 
route  being  over  a dry  sandy  road  with  no  formidable  streams  to  pass. 
After  a halt  of  two  hours,  to  enable  the  men  to  rest  and  prepare  their 
rations,  the  march  was  resumed  over  a road  about  3 miles  of  which  was 
through  low  swampy  ground.  At  8 o’clock  p.  m.,  after  accomplishing 
22  miles,  encamped  on  high  dry  ground  adjacent  to  wood  and  running 
water.  On  this  day’s  march  the  men  suffered  considerably  from  blis- 
tered feet ; none,  however,  reported  sick. 

The  next  morning,  March  8,  at  daybreak  broke  camp,  and  leaving 
the  One  hundred  and  sixty-eighth  Pennsylvania  and  Third  Massachu- 
setts Militia  as  a guard  to  the  wagon  train,  crossed  White  Oak  Kiver 
and  traveled  14  miles;  bivouacked  in  a pine  grove  5 miles  from  the  junc- 
tion of  the  Swansborough  and  N'ew  Berne  Cross-Eoads,  near  to  a full 
supply  of  good  water.  Yext  day  at  1 p.  m.  resumed  the  line  of  marcli 
and  returned  to  our  former  camping  ground  at  White  Oak  Eiver. 

At  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  the  column  took  up  its  direc- 
tion homeward.  During  the  early  part  of  the  day  the  roads  were  ex- 
cellent, but  heavy  rain  setting  in  about  noon  rendered  them  heavy  and 
the  march  very  fatiguing;  nevertheless  the  various  regiments  reached 
tlieir  camps  about  8.30  p.  m.,  and  no  stragglers  reported. 

The  entire  march  was  x^erformed  in  good  order  and  unattended  with 
any  casualty  ; very  few  men  were  sufficiently  sick  to  be  conveyed  in 
ambulances;  the  princix^al  complaint  was  sore  feet,  the  result  of  chaf- 
ing, confined  almost  entirely  to  those  who  Avore  heavy  boots.  The  con- 
trast in  this  respect  between  the  boot  and  Government  shoe  Avas  very 
marked  and  exhibited  the  suxAeriority  of  the  latter  and  absolute  neces- 
sity of  eA^ery  infantry  soldier  substituting  it  for  the  boot  on  the  march. 
Prequent  bathing  with  cold  water  afforded  great  relief,  and  on  the  last 
day’s  march  of  22  miles  but  little  comx)laint  Avas  heard.  The  rations 
provided  for  the  regiments  Avere  abundant  and  of  excellent  quality. 
Fresh  beef  Avas  furnished  three  days  out  of  five. 

This  rex)ort  is  written  on  the  second  day  after  the  return  of  the  troops, 
and  the  effects  of  the  march  on  the  x)hysical  condition  and  health  of  the 
men  a])XAear  to  be  more  beneficial  than  otherwise.  The  sick  rex)oi  ts 
bom  the  various  regiments  this  morning  are  even  less  than  usual. 

Eespectful  1 y submitted . 

P.  B.  EIOE, 

Surgeon, 

Capt.  S.  W.  Waldron, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


1 74  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Cuap.  XXX.  I 

Ko.  5.  I 

Report  of  Lieut.  Francis  U.  Farquliar,  U.  S.  Corjys  of  Engineers,  Chief 
Engineer  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Eighteenth  Corps  d’Armee, 

New  Berne,  March  12,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your  orders* 
I joined  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Prince  on  the  6th instant. 

The  command  moved  along  the  Pollocksville  road  on  the  south  side 
of  the  Trent.  After  passing  Brice’s  Creek  the  general  direction  of  thet 
road  was  a very  little  north  of  west.  As  far  as  Mill  Creek  the  road  was  - 
only  tolerable,  but  after  the  rain  it  was  very  bad.  We  found  it  neces- 
sary to  build  the  bridge  across  Mill  Creek,  which  occasioned  a halt  ol , 
the  advance  guard  of  two  hours.  After  passing  the  creek  the  road  was  ^ 
firm  and  good.  From  Pollocksville  the  road  bore  nearly  west.  Our  first  -I 
day’s  march  ended  at  the  Mill  Creek,  near  McDaniefs  plantation.  Ou 
the  7th  the  march  was  resumed  toward  Trenton.  With  the  exception  ol 
the  crossing  of  the  creek  near  McDaniel’s  the  road  was  good.  The  creek 
near  Trenton  could  not  well  be  forded  by  field  artillery  when  the  c^ek 
is  high.  The  Trenton  Bridge  was  destroyed,  as  was  also  the  White  Hall 
Bridge.  From  reliable  information  we  learned  that  there  was  a bridge 
known  as  the  Quaker  Bridge,  and  another  bridge  above  White  Hall  and 
below  Tuckahoe  Creek.  There  is  also  a small  neighborhood  bridge , 
known  as  Wilcox’s  Bridge,  about  6 miles  from  Trenton.  However,  these  I 
bridges  are  not  absolutely  necessary,  as  at  the  ordinary  height  of  watei 
the  stream  is  fordable  in  many  places  above  Trenton. 

The  road  from  New  Berne  to  Trenton  afiibrds  many  good  places  foi  | 
camping,  especially  after  passing  Mill  Creek,  water  and  wood  being  abun  I 
dant.  At  Trenton  the  command  countermarched  and  returned  to  McDan 
iel’s  plantation , where  we  had  camped  the  previous  night.  From  thencf  i 
we  took  a road  bearing  south  by  east  for  5 miles  and  southeast  for  6 
which  brought  us  to  Young’s  Cross-Koads.  This  road  passed  for  tli( 
greater  part  through  an  extensive  pocoson.  The  road  was  bad  in  som( 
places.  About  Young’s  Cross-Eoads  the  ground  was  good  for  camping 
Here  our  day’s  march  ended.  The  bridge  across  White  Oak  Eiver  wa? 
destroyed,  and  would  have  been  rebuilt  during  the  night,  but  the  troop 
and  negroes  were  very  tired,  having  marched  nearly  22  miles,  and  tu( 
enemy’s  pickets  were  on  the  other  side  of  the  stream.  On  the  morning 
of  the  8th  instant  the  troops  crossed  at  6.45.  By  9.30  the  bridge  wa; 
finished.  The  general  direction  of  the  road  toward  Jacksonville  soiitl 
by  one-half  east.  The  country  is  slightly  imdulating.  On  the  west  sid 
of  the  road  for  8 or  9 miles  is  an  extensive  pocoson,  from  which  floy 
many  small  tributaries  of  the  White  Oak  Eiver.  Through  this  semi 
swamp  run  many  roads,  at  most  times  impracticable  for  wagons,  bii 
through  which  with  great  toil  infantry  might  march.  About  mile: 
from  White  Oak  Eiver  there  is  a church  known  as  “The  Tabernacle, 
near  which  the  road  forks,  the  left  fork  leading  direct  to  Swansborougli 
the  distance  to  latter  place  being  13  miles  j the  right-hand  road  leads  t 
Jacksonville,  the  distance  being  16  miles.  About  4 miles  from  this  fori 
the  road  again  forks,  the  right-hand  fork  leading  to  Jacksonville,  the  Im 
direct  to  Snead’s  Ferry,  passing  through  Piney  Green.  Near  this  latte 
fork  the  command  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

The  next  morning,  with  the  cavalry  for  an  escort,  I made  a recon 
naissance  to  Swansborough.  We  took  the  Snead’s  Ferry  road  as  la 
as  Piney  Green ; then  we  turned  to  the  left  toward  Swansborougli 
From  Piney  Green  to  Swansborough  the  distance  is  12  miles,  and  t 


Chap.  XXX-] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  BERNE^  N.  C. 


175 


Snead’s  Ferry  15  miles.  Tlie  roads  are  quite  good,  being  of  sand,  but 
the  country  is  flat,  and  in  wet  seasons  would  not  afford  good  camping 
grounds.  Swansborough  is  a small  place,  easily  defended,  and  can  be 
approached  by  vessels  drawing  8 feet  of  water.  After  spending  two  hours 
at  Swansborough,  during  which  time  communicated  with  General  Potter, 
we  countermarched  for  2|  miles,  when  we  took  the  right-hand  road  anti 
joined  the  infantry  af  Morton’s,  near  The  Tabernacle.”  We  then 
marched  on  to  Young’s  Cross-Eoads,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night. 
The  uext  morning  we  marched  for  Eew  Berne  via  Pollocksville. 
Accompanying  this  report  is  a sketch  of  the  roads  passed  over.* 
Hoping  that  the  information  gained  may  be  useful,  I have  the  honor 
to  be,  geueral,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEANCIS  H.  FAEQUHAE, 

Second  Lieut.  TJ.  S.  Engrs..  and  Chief  Engr.  ISth  Corps  diArmee. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster. 


IS^o.  6. 

Beport  of  Col.  Silas  P.  Richmond^  Third  IlassacJmsetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Eegt.  Massachusetts  You.  Militia, 
Camp  Jour  dan  j New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  12,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  myself  and  command  in  the  recent  expedition  under  the  com- 
ijiand  of  General  Prince : 

On  the  evening  of  the  5th  instant  I received  orders  to  march  at  0 
o’clock  on  the  following  morning  with  three  days’  cooked  rations. 

March  6. — Formed  regimental  line  at  6 a.  m.,  and  almost  immediately 
after  joined  a column  consisting  of  Prince’s  division  and  took  up  the  line 
of  march  toward  Pollocksville.  I marched  24  officers  and  529  men.  After 
crossing  the  Trent  Eiver  I received  an  order  detailing  myself  and  com- 
mand to  the  responsible  and  laborious  position  of  escort  to  the  subsist- 
ence train,  which  consisted  of  nearly  100  wagons  heavily  laden.  I made 
the  following  distribution  of  my  regiment:  Two  companies  in  advance, 
four  companies  in  the  center,  and  three  companies  in  the  rear  of  the  train. 
We  ]nade  good  iirogress  for  about  G miles,  after  which  we  encountered 
bad  places  in  the  road,  which  caused  much  delay  and  hard  labor,  but 
we  finally  succeeded  in  bringing  the  whole  train  to  the  place  of  bivouac 
at  about  10  p.  m.  This  was  on  the  McDaniel’s  plantation,  4 miles  beyond 
Pollocksville.  The  distance  marched  this  day  was  said  to  be  18  miles. 

March  7. — Early  this  morning  I received  orders  to  park  the  train  in 
the  best  possible  position,  and  with  my  regiment,  a section  of  Morrison’s 
battery,  and  a platoon  of  cavalry  remain  and  defend  it.  I sent  out  the 
cavalry  as  patrols  and  five  of  my  companies  as  pickets  in  different  direc- 
tions, holding  the  remainder  of  my  command  in  a position  near  the  train, 
which  I had  parked  near  the  center  of  a broad  field.  During  the  morn- 
ing the  main  column  marched  to  Trenton  and  returned  without  meeting 
any  opposing  force.  Nothing  of  importance  happened  at  the  place  of 
bivouac  during  the  absence  of  the^ commanding  general.  At  3 p.  m.  the 
whole  force  took  up  the  line  of  march  toward  Young’s  Cross-Eoads. 
My  regiment  w as  detailed  to  march  in  the  rear  of  the  train  and  a com- 
pany of  cavalry  in  my  rear.  The  roads  were  exceedingly  bad,  and  I 
had  to  detail  a large  number  of  my  men  to  go  forward  and  assist  in  get- 
ting the  wagons  over  the  bad  places.  The  train  moved  very  slowly, 

^ Omitted  as  unim|iortaiit. 


176 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


the  teams  being  frequently  stuck.  We  arrived  at  the  place  of  bivouac 
(Young’s  Cross-Eoads)  with  the  whole  train  at  3 a.  m.  on  the  morning 
of  the  8th,  having  marched  about  10  miles. 

March  8. — My  regiment  with  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-eighth  Penn- 
sylvania Volunteers,  Belger’s  battery,  and  a small  company  of  cavalry, 
the  whole  being  under  my  command,  were  detached  from  the  column 
and  ordered  to  hold  this  place  while  the  main  column  moved  on  toward 
Swansborough.  The  larger  portion  of  the  subsistence  train  was  left  with 
us.  My  whole  force  amounted  to  1,120  men.  I immediately  parked  the 
train  in  a large  field  near  White  Oak  Eiver,  threw  out  strong  infantry 
pickets  with  cavalry  patrols  beyond  on  the  different  roads,  disposed  of 
the  remainder  of  my  force  to  the  best  of  my  judgment  for  defense,  and 
awaited  the  result.  The  remainder  of  the  day  passed  very  quietly. 

March  0. — The  night  passed  without  any  occurrence  of  importance,  as 
also  did  the  day  until  0 p.  m.,  when  the  main  column  returned,  the  ad- 
vance reporting  to  have  been  to  Swansborough  without  meeting  the 
enemy  in 'force.  During  the  absence  of  the  general  my  cavalry  patroled 
the  roads  as  far  as  Pollocksville  in  the  rear  and  some  9 miles  to  the  right 
on  the  opposite  side  of  White  Oak  Eiver,  and  also  about  15  miles  on  the 
road  to  Peletier’s  Mill,  meeting  no  opposing  force  or  signs  of  the  enemy. 
The  whole  column  again  bivouacked  here  for  the  night. 

March  10. — Had  the  train  straightened  out  and  my  regiments  in  line 
before  7 a.  m.,  but  had  to  wait  some  time  for  the  First  Brigade,  they 
having  the  advance,  my  regiment  coming  next  in  column,  the  train  fol- 
lowing, and  the  remainder  of  the  Second  Brigade  in  the  rear.  The  col- 
umn moved  at  about  8 a.  m.,  taking  the  direct  road  to  Pollocks\’ille.  On 
arriving  at  the  last-named  place,  in  accordance  with  orders  I halted  my 
regiment  and  the  train  until  all  the  force  in  the  rear  had  passed  on;  we 
then  moved  on.  Colonel  Jourdan  destroyed  the  bridge  after  we  crossed. 
It  now  commenced  to  r^in  very  heavily  and  continued  to  do  so  about 
two  hours.  This  rendered  the  roads  very  bad  indeed.  My  regiment 
was  distributed  through  the  train  in  the  same  manner  as  on  the  first 
day  out.  We  moved  very  slowly  and  with  much  hard  labor  in  assisting 
the  train.  The  head  of  the  train  reached  New  Berne  about  9 o’clock, 
but  the  rear  did  not  get  in  until  after  11  p.  m.  The  distance  marched 
this  day  was  22  miles. 

Both  my  officers  and  men  were  very  much  exhausted  with  their  con- 
stant exertions  to  assist  the  train  along.  There  were  no  severe  casual- 
ties in  my  command  during  the  expedition.  1 am  pleased  to  say  that 
although  my  command  occupied  the  hardest  and  most  responsible  posi- 
tion during  the  entire  expedition,  yet  there  was  but  very  little  com- 
plaint, the  men,  with  but  few  exceptions,  doing  their  duty  nobly. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

S.  P.  EICHMOND, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Third  Massachusetts. 

Col.  J.  Jourdan,  Comdg.  2d  Brig.,  Mh  Div.,  ISth  A.  C. 


No.  7. 

Ueport  of  Col.  Augustus  B.  li.  /Sprague,  Fifty  first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

llDQRS.  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Eegiment, 

Beaufort,  N.  C.,  March  11,  18G3. 

Colonel:  In  obedience  to  instructions  from  department  headquar- 
ters I left  Newport  Barracks  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant  with 


Chap.  XXX.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


177 


Companies  B,  C,  D,  H,  and  I,  of  my  regiment,  a section  of  Lee’s  battery, 
Lieutenant  Cady,  and  Captain  Moschell’s  company  of  Third  JS'ew  York 
Cavalry. 

Passing  through  the  pocoson  around  the  head  of  Big  Broad  Creek 
we  arrived  at  Cedar  Point,  opposite  Swansborough,  some  18  miles  from 
Newport,  about  4 o’clock  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th. 

The  steamer  Wilson  did  not  make  her  api)earance  at  the  mouth  of 
the  White  Oak  Biver  as  arranged,  and  as  no  other  transportation  could 
be  procured  to  cross  the  river  (about  IJ  miles  wide  at  this  place)  the 
troops  went  into  bivouac  in  the  woods  at  Cedar  Point.  On  the  morn- 
ing of  the  8th,  the  Wilson  not  having  arrived,  I accompanied  Captain 
Moschell’s  company  of  New  York  cavalry  on  a reconnaissance  up  the 
east  side  of  White  Oak  Creek  to  a point  called  Dorton’s  Ferry  (about 
16  miles  distant  from  the  Point  by  road'),  about  6 miles  from  Smith’s 
Mill,  or  Young’s.  En  route  we. passed  over  Pettiford’s,  Hadnot’s,  and 
Hunter’s  Creeks ; examined  Horton’s  Ferry,  long  since  abandoned  as  a 
thoroughfare  and  entirely  impracticable  as  such  in  consequence  of  the 
extended  marsh  over  which  a road  must  necessarily  be  built  to  the  river 
bank.  The  marsh  which  borders  the  river  at  this  point  is  nearly  a mile 
in  width  and  the  river  in  the  vicinity  about  200  feet  broad. 

There  is  no  ferry  or  ford  between  the  Point  and  the  mouth  of  the 
White  Oak  Eiver.  We  returned  to  Cedar  Point,  arriving  at  the  cam]) 
soon  after  dark. 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th  communicated  with  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Lewis,  who  had  reached  Swansborough,  coming  down  on  the  other  side 
of  the  river  with  a detachment  of  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

At  6 o’clock  a.  m.,  10th  instant,  left  Cedar  Point  and  returned  to 
Newport  Barracks. 

Saw  nothing  of  the  enemy  during  our  advance  and  absence,  and  am 
convinced  that  they  do  not  cross  White  Oak  Kiver  in  force,  and  that 
Swansborough  has  only  been  occupied  by  some  15  or  20  of  the  enemy 
as  an  outpost. 

Brigadier-General  Potter,  chief  of  staff,  joined  me  in  the  expedition, 
and  I respectfully  refer  to  him  in  the  matter  of  details,  relative  to  ferry, 
fords,  depth  and  width  of  rivers,  &c.,  in  conformity  to  original  instruc- 
tions. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  E.  SPEAGIJE, 

Colovel  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Regiment. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  George  W.  LeiciSj  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 

Rew  Beroie,  N.  C.,  March  11,  1863. 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  the  follow- 
ing order,  viz — 

Headquarters  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Bivouac  in  Field,  March  9,  1803 — 6 a.  m. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  with  the  cavalry  and  v'oltigeurs,  will  reconnoiter  upon 
the  road  leading  from  this  point  to  Snead’s  Ferry,  and  will  pass  from  it  toward 

12  R R — VOL  XVIII 


178 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Swansborougli,  going  as  far  on  both  routes  as  he  may  consider  prudent,  taking  into 
consideration  the  threatening  state  of  the  weather,  so  as  to  join  the  main  body  by 
night  or  communicate  with  it. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Prince : 

S.  W.  WALDRON,  Jr., 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General — 


I started  with  four  companies  of  my  regiment  and  one  mounted  howit- 
zer and  150  mounted  men,  under  Major  Garrard,  in  the  direction  of 
Swansborough,  which  road  intersects  the  road  to  Jacksonville  via 
Snead’s  Ferry  at  Piney  Green,  11  miles  from  Jacksonville  and  13  from 
Swansborough.  Halting  at  Piney  Green  I sent  a detachment  up  the 
road  to  Snead’s  Ferry,  2 miles  or  more ; they  reporting  nothing  in  that 
direction,  I moved  on  to  Swansborough,  arriving  there  at  11  a.  m.,  com- 
municating with  General  Potter,  at  Hill’s  plantation,  directly  opposite 
Swansborough,  through  Lieutenant  Fricker,  the  signal  officer  accom- 
panying my  command.  General  Potter  immediately  crossed  to  Swans- 
borough in  a small  boat. 

After  remaining  at  Swansborough  nearly  three  hours  I took  up  the 
line  of  march  and  joined  the  left  of  the  column,  under  your  command, 
at  the  forks  of  the  road,  5 miles  from  Young’s  Cross-Eoads,  at  5 p.  m. 

During  the  march  we  captured  three  Confederate  soldiers,  one  a pa- 
roled prisoner  named  Gaston,  who  was  not  yet  exchanged ) one  by  the 
same  name  who  claims  to  have  been  recently  discharged,  and  Private 
William  B.  Pringle,  Tenth  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  was  visiting 
Swansborough  on  a furlough. 

On  my  advance  I captured  several  citizens,  taking  them  to  Swans- 
borough, but  returning  them  to  their  homes  on  my  return.  I ascer- 
tained by  inquiries  all  along  the  route  that  the  rebel  pickets  had  left 
the  day  before  for  Jacksonville. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  W^.  LEW^IS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Third  N^ew  York  Cavalry. 

Brigadier* General  Prince, 

Commanding  Fifth  Division^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 

New  Berne,  N.  0.,  March  12, 1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  list  of  property 
taken  by  my  command  during  the  recent  march,  viz  : 


Horses 6 

Light  wagons 3 

Cavalry  sabers  and  belts 3 

Jack 1 

Jennies 2 


Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  LEWIS, 

Commanding  Third  Neic  York  Cavalry. 

Brigadier-General  Prince, 

Commanding  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


m 


Chap.  XXX.]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  WINDSOR,  VA. 

No.  9. 

Report  of  Maj.  Jeptha  Garrard,  Third  New  Yorlc  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Yoltioeurs, 

, — , 186^. 

List  cf  property  taken  on  inarch  made  by  General  Prince’s  division 
by  Maj.  Jeptha  Garrard,  commanding  voltigeurs: 


Horses 2 

Colt 1 

Buggies 2 

Harness  for  buggy 1 


JEPTHA  GARRAED, 

3Iajor,  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry,  Comdg.  Voltigeurs. 

Captain  Waldron,  Jr., 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Prince’s  Division. 


MARCH  7-9,  1863. — Reconnaissance  from  Suffolk  and  skirmish  (9th)  near 

Windsor,  Va. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  C.  Dodge,  First  Battalion  New  York  Mounted 

Rifles. 

Headquarters  Mounted  Rifles, 

Suffolk,  Va.,  March  9,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  a late  recon- 
naissance at  Smithfield,  Blackwater,  &c.: 

In  accordance  with  instructions  from  general  headquarters  I started 
with  about  450  of  my  command  and  one  field  howitzer  on  the  evening 
of  the  7th  instant  for  the  Isle  of  Wight  Court-House,  and  thence  to 
Smithfield,  where  I remained  till  about  9 a.  m.  on  Sunday,  the  8th  in- 
stant. No  enemy  were  discovered,  although  the  day  before  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Taliaferro  was  reported  there  with  a small  party.  He  had  un- 
doubtedly returned  across  the  river  by  Broadwater  or  Proctor’s  Bridge. 
Making  the  cross-roads  my  headquarters,  strong  scouting  parties  care- 
fully reconnoitered  the  vicinity  for  a circle  of  10  miles,  but  met  no  en- 
emy. The  inhabitants  of  this  district  assured  us  that  since  Pryor’s  raid 
there  some  two  months  ago  no  large  force  has  visited  the  town.  A few 
mounted  rebels  occasionally  appear,  but  do  not  remain  any  time.  I am 
confident  all  that  district,  including  Surry  Court-House,  may  be  safely 
considered  free  from  them.  Prom  Smithfield  we  proceeded  via  Benn’s 
Church  to  Chuckatuck,  where  we  spent  the  night.  Every  effort  was 
made  to  gain  information  as  regards  the  enemy  and  their  visits  to  this 
place,  and  our  exertion  satisfied  me  that,  excepting  on  one  or  two  occa- 
sions, never  more  than  two  or  three  Confederate  soldiers  had  dared  to 
enter  the  peninsula.  These  persons  came  to  see  their  relations,  &c.,  and 
seldom  have  done  any  one  an  injury.  I believe,  however,  forage,  bacon, 
&c.,  have  been  sent  from  there  to  Zuni  and  Petersburg  in  times  past, 
but  none  whatever  can  be  found  now,  and  the  disadvantage  of  this 
therefore  exists  no  longer.  The  guerrillas  have  burned  down  the  only 
bridges  leading  direct  from  Chuckatuck  toward  Suffolk  or  Windsor. 

On  the  a.  m.  of  the  9th  instant  we  were  obliged  to  make  a detour  of 
some  miles,  improvise  a bridge,  and  proceed  toward  Barber’s  Cross- 


180 


NORTH  CAEOLiNA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Eoads  and  Windsor,  arriving  about  10  a.  m.  Parties  were  at  once  sent 
out  toward  Blackwater  Bridge  and  Zuni.  The  former  had  not  pro- 
ceeded far  when  its  advance  guard,  in  turning  a sharp  bend  in  the  road, 
suddenly  came  upon  the  advance  of  a small  force  of  the  enemy  en  route 
for  Windsor.  Shots  were  exchanged,  and  my  advance  at  once  ordered 
to  charge.  .This  they  did  well,  the  main  column  supporting  them  at  as 
close  a distance  as  possible.  At  our  first  fire,  however,  the  enemy, 
whom  we  learned  to  be  some  50  of  Claiborne’s  Confederate  cavalry 
(Seventh  Eegiment),  turned  and  fled  precipitately.  Lieut.  Thomas 
Freeborn,  with  Squadron  D,  pursued  them  at  his  utmost  speed,  driv- 
ing them  vigorously,  the  entire  column  following  at  the  gallop ) but  as 
they  had  some  half  a mile  the  start  of  us  and  fresh  horses  it  was  im- 
possible to  come  up  with  them,  although  we  followed  to  within  half  a 
mile  of  Blackwater  Bridge  at  the  most  rapid  gait  in  our  power.  They 
crossed  the  river  at  once  upon  the  pontoon  bridge  there.  Lieutenant 
Freeborn  and  Major  Wheelan  succeeded,  however,  in  capturing  four 
men  and  horses,  with  several  rifles,  shot-guns,  &c.,  which  the  enemy 
had  thrown  away  in  their  flight.  The  prisoners  are  in  the  hands  of  the 
provost-marshal,  awaiting  such  examination  and  disposition  as  you  may 
decide.  Believing  it  imprudent  to  attempt  to  force  the  bridge,  consid- 
ering the  force  we  knew  to  be  there  and  the  wearied  condition  of  our 
men  and  horses,  we  returned  with  our  captures  to  Windsor.  The  party 
going  toward  Zuni  went  to  within  sight  of  the  river  banks,  but  met  no 
force  on  this  side,  although  pickets,  as  usual,  were  discovered  on  the 
other. 

Thus  the  entire  section  of  country  which  I guard  has  been  most  care- 
fully reconnoitered,  and,  I trust,  to  the  general’s  satisfaction.  The  con- 
duct of  my  men  has  been  everything  that  could  be  desired,  and  all  of 
the  regimental  officers  and  men  are  but  the  more  eager  from  the  experi- 
ence of  to-day  to  meet  the  enemj^  in  a fair  fight,  that  they  may  then 
I)rove,  as  they  have  often  before,  the  injustice  of  late  reports  circulated 
by  malicious  parties  concerning  the  demoralization,  &c.,  of  the  Mounted 
Eifles.  Not  a man  has  been  lost,  nor,  I can  safely  say,  a pennyworth 
of  property  destroyed. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

CHAELES  0.  DODGE, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Maj.  B.  B.  Foster, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


MAECH  7-14,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Mattamuskeet  Lake, 

N.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  David  B.  Morris,  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  In- 
fantry. 

Hdqrs.  One  hundred  and, first  Eegt.  Pa.  Vols., 

Hew  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  17,  18G3. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  my  report  of  the  ex- 
pedition under  my  command  around  Lake  Mattamuskeet,  Hyde  County, 
North  Carolina. 

In  obedience  to  instructions  from  corps  headquarters  of  March  7 I 
embarked  the  troops  under  my  command,  viz,  One  hundred  and  first 


Chap.  XXX.] 


MATTAMUSKEET  LAKE,  N.  C. 


181 


and  One  hundred  and  third  Regiments  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Com- 
pany F,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  one  piece  and  caisson  Third  Rew 
York  Artillery,  on  the  afternoon  of  7th  instant,  on  board  the  North- 
erner and  Escort.  Accompanied  by  the  North  State  and  two  scows,  we 
proceeded  to  Swan  Quarter,  Hyde  County,  arriving  at  7 o’clock  a.  m., 
8th  instant,  and  the  gunboat  Allison  at  once  i)roceeded  to  Rose  Bay 
Bridge  to  prevent  its  reconstruction. 

After  eight  or  ten  hours  delaj^,  caused  by  the  captain  of  the  steamer 
Northerner  failing  to  go  nearer  than  about  18  miles  to  the  landing,  we  com- 
menced debarking  the  troops  in  the  afternoon  of  the  8th  instant.  Seven 
companies  of  infantry  and  one  platoon  of  cavalry,  with  howitzer,  under 
command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Armor,  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers,  were  debarked  and  marched  to  Swan  Quarter,  miles 
from  the  landing,  arriving  about  5 o’clock  p.  m.  The  remainder  of  the 
troops  debarked  at  11  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  and  proceeded 
to  Swan  Quarter.  Acting  on  the  advice  of  Captain  Richardson,  Third 
New  York  Cavalry,  we  then  advanced  in  two  columns,  one  in  a south- 
west direction,  under  command  of  Colonel  Morris,  the  other  in  a north- 
west direction,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Armor,  forming  a 
junction  at  Mason’s  house  at  the  earthwork,  distant  about  8 miles  from 
Swan  Quarter,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night,  after  posting  our 
picket.  During  the  night  our  picket  captured  1 man  (Thomas  Voliva), 
attempting  to  fire  upon  the  picket. 

We  resumed  the  line  of  march  at  6.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  10th  instant,  pro- 
ceeding around  the  lake  from  north  to  east,  marching  25  miles,  and 
bivouacked  for  the  night  on  Spencer’s  farm.  At  6 o’clock  a.  m.,  11th 
instant,  resumed  the  march;  arrived  at  Swan  Quarter  about  6 o’clock 
p.  m.,  having  marched  30  miles.  During  the  10th  and  11th  it  rained 
almost  incessantly,  consequently  the  roads  were  very  bad.  No  armed 
force  at  any  point  was  to  be  seen. 

A few  stragglers,  whose  names  were  on  the  guerrilla  muster-roll,  were 
captured  and  brought  to  Rew  Berne.  A few  others,  supposed  to  belong 
to  the  company,  were  also  brought  with  us — 11  in  all.  They  are  now 
in  the  hands  of  the  provost-marshal  at  New  Berne. 

About  60  citizens  were  made  prisoners,  but  released  at  Swan  Quar- 
ter upon  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance.  From  the  best  information 
that  could  be  obtained  the  band  of  guerrillas  in  this  county  were  scat- 
tered about  in  small  parties  of  from  6 to  8,  through  the  almost  impass- 
able swamps. 

Quite  a number  of  horses,  oxen,  and  carts  wwe  captured,  but  the 
greater  part  were  abandoned,  not  deeming  them  of  sufficient  value  to 
warrant  the  delay  of  transportation  and  expense  of  subsistence.  On 
the  morning  of  the  12th  instant  Captain  Richardson,  with  300  men  and 
all  available  transportation,  was  sent  out  7 miles,  to  the  farm  of  Judge 
Donald,  for  the  piupose  of  bringing  in  a quantity  of  cotton,  corn,  and 
bacon. 

The  following  is  an  approximate  list  of  all  the  property  turned  over' 
to  the  proper  authorities:  Seventeen  horses;  13 buggies;  1 yoke  oxen; 
1 schooner.  Snow  Squall,  of  Washington,  of  about  35  tons  burden  ; 8 
cart-loads  cotton  (small  portion  unginned),  not  baled  ; about  1,500 
pounds  bacon  ; about  400  bushels  corn ; about  40  slaves,  who  followed 
ns  to  the  landing.  We  embarked  on  the  13th  instant  and  arrived  at 
New  Berne  on  14th  instant.  The  only  buildings  burned  by  my  order 
were  the  outbuildings  of  a farm-house  near  Fairfield,  in  which  we 
found  a rebel  officer’s  coat,  ammunition,  &c.  I regret  to  state  that  a 
small  mill  at  Swan  Quarter  was  fired  and  burned, ‘and  also  a barn  filled 


182 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


with  corn  adjoining  Spencer’s  farm  was  burned  by  an  unknown  party; 
also  a number  of  stacks  of  fodder  on  the  farm  of  Judge  Donald  was 
burned  without  my  order. 

I would  also  call  attention  to  a lack  of  proper  discipline  among  the 
line  officers  of  the  One  hundred  and  third  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Yol- 
unteers.  They  seem  to  have  little  or  no  control  over  their  commands, 
and  lack  energy  to  enforce  proper  discipline.  To  this  there  are  some 
exceptions. 

The  One  hundred  and  First  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  also 
lacks  discipline,  which  I attribute  to  my  long  absence  from  it,  but  which 
in  the  course  of  time  I will  bring  about  again.  As  an  instance  of  in- 
subordination in  the  One  hundred  and  third  Eegiment  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers,  while  embarking  on  board  the  Northerner  from  the  steamer 
Escort  the  officers  and  men,  contrary  to  repeated  orders,  rushed  forward 
before  the  boat  could  be  made  fast  to  such  an  extent  as  to  endanger 
life  and  to  render  it  impossible  for  the  officers  of  the  boat  to  manage 
her.  Having  repeated  the  order  for  the  men  to  remain  in  their  places 
and  await  orders,  and  all  to  no  effect,  I seized  a gun  and  fired  down  the 
side  of  the  boat  for  the  purpose  of  deterring  the  men,  but  with  no  in- 
tention of  injuring  any  one.  At  the  moment  of  firing  a man  rushed 
forward  and  was  slightly  injured. 

My  thanks  are  due  the  officers  of  the  Escort,  North  State,  Lockwood, 
and  Allison  for  their  valuable  assistance. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  B.  MOEEIS, 
Colonel,  Commmiding  Expedition. 

Lietit.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


[Addenda.] 

New  Berne,  March  28,  1863. 
Major-General  Foster,  Commanding,  Ac.: 

General  : 1 deeply  regret  to  be  compelled,  in  the  last  hours  of  my 
stay  here,  to  distress  you  by  complaints  of  the  outrages  of  our  forces  in 
the"  last  expedition  to  Hyde  County.  In  numerous  iustauces,  well  au- 
thenticated, they  entered  and  robbed  the  houses  of  loyal  men,  destroyed 
furniture,  insulted  women,  and  treated  with  scorn  the  protections  which 
by  your  advice  1 had  given  them.  Can  I give  to  people  whose  loyalty 
is  not  and  has  never  been  questioned  any  assurance  that  you  can  see 
them  protected  % 

As  matters  now  stand  the  loyal  men  and  women,  aged  and  infirm,  out- 
side of  our  lines  are  the  most  unfortunate  and  oppressed  in  our  country; 
both  sides  pillage  and  rob  them.  I know  you  have  uniformly  rebuked 
• these  atrocities,  but  your  words  have  been  treated  like  my  protections. 

I invoke  for  the  people  referred  to  such  interposition  as  your  sense  of 
duty  and  humanity  will  suggest. 

With  high  respect  and  regard,  yours,  &c., 

ED.  STANLY. 


[Indorsement.] 


Eeferred  to  Colonel  Morris  for  report. 


March  29, 1863. 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

Major-  General. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


183 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 

MARCH  8-16,  1863. — Expedition  against  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  including  skir- 
mishes (13th-14th)  at  Deep  Gully,  and  attack  (14th)  on  Fort  Anderson. 

REPORTS.* 


No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of 
North  Carolina. 

2. — Capt.  David  A.  Taylor,  Third  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Chief  Signal  Officer. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Nathaniel  S.  Barstow,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  Acting 
Signal  Officer,  of  attack  on  Fort  Anderson. 

No  4. — Itinerary  of  the  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Brig.  Gen.  Innis 
N.  Palmer,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding,  March  7-15. 

No.  5. — Col.  Josiah  Pickett,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  Second  Brigade, 
of  skirmishes  at  Deep  Gully. 

No.  6. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fiftti  Division,  of  opera- 
tions March  15-16. 

No.  7. — Maj.  Gen.  Daniel  H.  Hill,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Expedition. 

No.  8. — Maj.  John  C.  Haskell,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Artillery. 

No.  9. — Brig.  Gen.  John  J.  Pettigrew,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  10. — Brig.  Gen.  Richard  B.  Garnett,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  Junius  Daniel,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  12. — Brig.  Gen.  Beverly  H.  Robertson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster^  XT.  S.  Army^  commanding  the  De- 
partment of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  0.,  March  15,  1863. 

General  : The  enemy  are  retiring  from  an  attack  on  this  town,  which 
was  intended  to  have  been  strong,  but  was  feeble,  very  feeble,  in  all 
places  except  on  a work  on  north  side  of  Neuse  River,  directly  opposite 
the  town.  At  that  point  the  enemy  opened  a brisk  artillery  fire  from 
seventeen  pieces,  which  continued  about  three  hours.  They  retired  a 
short  distance  and  remained  threatening  the  work  till  this  morning, 
when  they  retired.  The  whole  force  of  the  enemy,  from  deserters,  was 
13,000  infantry  and  cavalry  and  thirty-nine  pieces  of  artillery.  I am 
sending  parties  out  in  all  directions  to  harass  the  enemy^s  retreat.  The 
attack  was  on  the  14th,  the  anniversary  of  the  taking  of  the  town,  and 
the  supposition  is  that  they  intended  to  recapture  the  town  on  that  day. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  15,  1863. 

General:  Referring  to  my  telegram  of  this  date  I have  the  honor  to 
report  that  on  the  evening  of  the  13th  the  enemy  appeared  in  force  on 
the  Trent  road,  driving  in  our  picket  posts  on  that  road ; the  force  on 

* For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee  and  Commander  A.  Murray,  U.  S. 
Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


184 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


the  road  was  heavily  re-enforced  and  ordered  to  retire  slowly,  and  fight 
if  they  were  pressed. 

At  "daylight  of  the  14th  General  Pettigrew,  with  a force  of  7,000  men 
and  seventeen  pieces  artillery,  attacked  a small  work  on  north  side  of 
the  Neuse  Eiver,  occupied  by  the  Ninety  second  New  York  Volunteers,  ; 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson.*  They  opened  a fire  from  ail  their  pieces  ! 
on  the  work  and  held  their  infantry  in  reserve  for  assault.  Colonel  i 
Anderson  was  summoned  to  surrender  several  times,  which  he  declined  | 
doiug.  Keferring  to  me  for  orders,  I instructed  him  to  defend  and  hold 
the  work.  The  Navy  gunboats  were  in  an  unfortunate  position  to  be  of 
much  assistance  at  first,  owing  to  one  being  aground  and  the  other  two 
damaged.  They  were,  however,  towed  to  position  by  tugs,  and,  assisted 
by  a battery  of  rifled  guns  on  this  side  of  the  Neuse,  compelled  General 
Pettigrew  to  withdraw  his  artillery  and  infantry,  merely  remaining  in  a | 
threateniug  position  till  this  a.  m.,  when  he  finally  retired.  On  south 
side  of  Trent  River  the  enemy  advanced  to  within  6 miles  of  New  Berne, 
but  have  witthdrawn.  The  attack  was  to  have  been  made  with  vigor 
enough  by  General  Pettigrew  to  have  taken  CamiJ  Anderson,  which 
would  have  enabled  him  to  have  planted  rifled  batteries  at  that  point, 
whence  he  might  have  driven  the  gunboats  from  the  river  and  shelled 
the  town,  during  which  a strong  attack  was  to  have  been  made  on  Trent 
and  Neuse  roads.  Our  pickets  held  them  on  Trent  road,  although  they  | 
were  ordered  to  fall  back  to  my  defenses  where  1 proposed  making  the  j 
fight.  i 

The  whole  affair,  meant  to  be  effective  and  strong,  was  ineffective  and  | 
weak,  inflicting  no  damage  and  accomplishing  no  object.  j 

The  force  of  the  enemy  was  about  13,000  to  14,000  infantry  and  cav-  i 
airy  and  thirty- nine  pieces  of  artillery.  Our  loss  was  only  2 killed  and  I 
4 wounded.  ' 

Referring  to  my  letter  of  March  2,  I beg  to  say  that  recent  informa-  ^ 
tion  shows  General  Longstreet  with  his  corps  to  be  on  the  Black  water,  i 
and  not  southwest,  as  reported. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  3mur  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege;, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army.,  Washington,  B.  C. 


No.  2.  ^ 

Report  of  Capt.  David  A.  Taylor,  Third  Neic  York  Light  Artillery,  Chief  j 

Signal  Officer. 

Headquarters  Signal  Detachment, 

Weiv  Berne,  March  18,  1863. 

Sir  : Inclosed  1 forward  you  copies  of  the  reports  of  Lieutenants  Mer-  ' 
rill  t and  Barstow,  containing  an  account  of  their  signal  operations  at 
and  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Berne  during  the  late  movements,  and  of  ' 
the  action  which  took  place  here  on  the  14th  instant. 

I can  truly  say  that  both  Lieutenants  Merrill  and  Barstow  are  by  far 
too  modest  in  describing  their  own  share  of  the  work. 

* The  casualties  in  the  Ninety-second.  New  York  Infantry  were  3 men  wounded  and 
3 men  missing;  1 man  reported  as  killed,  March  13. 
t Not  found. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


185 


The  positioD  occupied  by  Lieuteuant  Barstow  was  oue  of  extreme 
danger;  every  tent  and  bouse  within  the  works  at  Fort  Anderson  was 
riddled  by  shot  and  shell,  and  the  parade  literally  blown  up  by  the  ene- 
my’s artillery.  Both  Lieutenant  Barstow  and  his  flagman  (Marsh)  were 
struck  by  spent  pieces  of  shell,  but  fortunately  received  no  injury  of  any 
account.  It  is  but  justice  to  Lieuteuant  Merrill  to  state  that  but  for  him 
the  gunboat  on  which  he  was  placed  would  have  done  more  damage  to 
our  troops  than  the  enemy,  as  either  through  the  stupidity,  excitement, 
or  drunkenness  of  its  commanding  officer  they  were  going  to  open  fire 
on  the  only  place  where  the  garrison  of  the  fort  were  covered  from  the 
fire  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant  Merrill  having  taken  position  on  the  pad- 
dle-box had  a fine  view  of  the  field  and  the  roads  by  which  the  enemy 
must  come  to  assault  the  place,  and  the  moment  the  head  of  their  columns 
showed  themselves  gave  directions,  distances,  and  elevations  to  the  gun- 
ners, and  that  so  accurately  that  some  of  the  rebel  guns  were  for  a time 
abandoned  and  their  infantry  driven  back.  He  and  Lieutenant  Barstow 
together  directed  the  fire  of  the  gunboat  Hunchback  and  the  batteries 
on  shore  on  the  south  side  of  the  Neuse. 

With  a corps  of  such  officers  as  Lieutenant  Merrill  I would  be  willing 
to  undertake  anything. 

It  was  impossible  for  these  officers  to  get  their  reports  ready  in  time, 
or  these  copies  would  have  accompanied  my  own  report  of  the  same 
transaction,  lately  mailed  to  you. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  A.  TAYLOR, 
Captain  and  Acting  Signal  Officer, 

Maj.  A.  J.  Myer,  Signal  Officer ^ U,  S.  Army. 


:sio,  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Nathaniel  S.  Barstoic^  Ticenty fourth  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry^ Acting  Signal  Officer^  of  attach  on  Fort  Anderson. 

Headquarters  Signal  Detachment, 

New  Berne,  March  16,  1863. 

Sir  : On  the  13th  instant,  in  pursuance  to  orders  of  Captain  Taylor, 
I reported  for  signal  duty  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson,  at  Fort  An- 
derson, on  the  north  side  of  the  IS'euse  River,  New  Berne,  N.  C. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant,  just  before  daylight,  the  fort  was 
attacked  by  General  Pettigrew  with  two  brigades  of  infantry  and  sev- 
enteen pieces  of  artillery. 

By  order  of  Colonel  Anderson  I sent  the  following  message  to  Major- 
General  Foster: 

The  enemy  are  in  front  of  us  in  large  force,  with  artillery ; we  want  men. 

Answer: 

Re-enforcements  shall  he  sent  as  soon  as  possible. 

After  sending  this  message,  by  the  severity  of  the  enemy’s  fire  I was 
compelled  to  change  my  position,  and  took  a more  sheltered  place. 

From  Colonel  Anderson  to  General  Foster: 

Send  more  men ; send  them  quickly. 

Answer: 

Hold  out  as  long  as  you  can ; lie  close;  men  are  coming. 


186 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


This  message  was  several  times  repeated,  each  time  by  order  of 
Colouel  Anderson  in  his  extreme  anxiety  for  re-enforcements.  I sent 
several  messages  to  the  gunboats,  directing  their  fire,  such  as,  Fire 
higher,”  “Fire  to  the  left,”  “Fire  to  the  right,”  &c.,  but  having  no  blank 
book  with  me  at  the  time  could  not  record  them. 

I wish  to  recommend  to  your  notice  my  flagman,  Timothy  S.  Marsh, 
Company  D,  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  who  throughout  the 
whole  affair  behaved  with  admirable  coolness  under  a fire  the  severest 
I ever  saw. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

K.  S.  BAESTOW, 
Lieutenant  and  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Capt.  D.  A.  Taylor, 

Chief  Acting  Signal  Officer. 


No.  4. 

Itinerary  of  the  First  Division.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps.,  Brig.  Oen.  Innis 
N.  Palmer.,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding,  March  7-15.* 

March  7. — In  accordance  with  orders  from  Headquarters  Eighteenth 
Army  Corps,  five  companies  of  the  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteer 
Militia,  of  the  First  Brigade,  marched  from  Newport  Barracks  to  Cedar 
Point,  opposite  Swansborough,  on  White  Oak  Eiver,  where  they  biv- 
ouacked. Here  the  infantry  remained  while  a reconnaissance,  under 
General  Potter,  chief  of  staff  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  was  made  some 
16  miles  farther  on  into  the  enemy^s  country.  On  the  return  of  tlie  re- 
connoitering  party  the  infantry  returned  to  Newport  Barracks,  arriving 
on  the  10th  instant. 

March  13. — In  anticipation  of  an  attack  upon  New  Berne  three  regi- 
ments of  the  Second  Brigade,  viz,  the  Fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteer 
Militia,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  the  Forty-sixth 
Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  were  sent  to  Deep  Gully,  on  the  Trent 
road.  On  arriving  at  the  Gully  it  was  found  that  the  enemy  had  crossed 
and  were  strongly  posted.  Bivouacking  for  the  night,  preparations 
were  made  for  a morning  attack.  At  daylight  the  movement  com- 
menced and  the  fire  of  the  skirmishers  had  just  opened,  when  orders 
were  received  to  retire  to  New  Berne,  leaving  one  regiment,  the  Twentj^- 
fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  to  hold  the  enemj^  in  check.  Tliis  was 
done. 

March  14. — The  regiment  at  Deep  Gully  was  re-enforced  this  a.  m.  by 
the  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  of  the  Second  Brigade. 
An  attack  on  New  Berne  being  apprehended,  the  Forty-third  Massa- 
chusetts Volunteer  Militia  and  other  forces,  under  command  of  Col.  T. 
J.  C.  Amory,  marched  18  miles  on  the  Kinston  road  on  a reconnaissance, 
but,  the  enemy  having  retired,  returned  on  the  IGth  to  camp. 

March  15. — The  enemy  commenced  falling  back,  closely  followed  some 
15  miles  by  the  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia ; but  the 
road  being  rendered  impassable  at  this  point  by  the  retreating  force  the 
Forty-sixth  retraced  their  steps  toward  New  Berne. 


From  Returns  of  the  Division  and  First  and  Second  Brigades  for  March,  1863. 


Chap.  XXX.]  ATTACK  OK  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  187 

N’o.  5. 

Bejport  of  Col.  Josiali  Pickett^  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry^  Second 
Brigade,  of  skirmishes  at  Beep  Gully. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fifth  Eegt.  Massachusetts  Vols., 
Camp  Oliver,  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  15,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  13th  instant,  at  5.30 
p.  m.,  I started  with  six  companies  of  my  regiment  for  the  outpost  near 
Deep  Gully,  that  place  being  attacked  by  the  enemy  and  being  held  by 
the  other  four  companies  of  my  regiment  with  a part  of  the  Third  New 
York  Cavalry.  I arrived  at  the  disputed  ground  soon  after  dark  and 
learned  that  the  enemy  were  in  strong  force  in  our  front,  with  infantry, 
cavalry,  and  artillery,  a distance  of  half  a mile.  By  order  of  Colonel 
Lee,  commanding  the  brigade,  I divided  my  regiment,  placing  a wing- 
on  either  side  of  the  Trent  road,  throwiag  out  a strong  picket  to  guard 
against  surprise,  and  remained  on  our  arms  until  morning. 

At  daybreak  I moved  forward  a com^iany  as  skirmishers  and  they 
immediately  engaged  the  enemy ^s  line.  General  Palmer  taking  com- 
mand, I was  ordered  forward  with  my  regiment,  supported  by  the 
Fifth  and  Forty-sixth  Eegiments  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  with  a 
section  of  Eiggs’  and  one  piece  of  Belger’s  batteries.  Musketry  firing 
was  kept  up  for  nearly  three  hours.  The  city  being  attacked  in  our 
rear,  the  regiments  supporting  me  were  withdrawn  for  its  defense,  and 
i was  left,  with  my  regiment  and  two  pieces  of  artillery,  to  take  care  of 
the  enemy  as  best  I could.  Having  special  orders  from  General  Pal- 
mer not  to  expose  the  pieces,  I blockaded  the  road  and  fell  back  to  a 
better  position  at  the  Jackson  House  and  awaited  their  advance.  They 
soon  began  to  shell  the  woods  around  and  kept  it  up  at  intervals  during 
the  day,  but  did  not  advance.  At  4 p.  m.  I sent  out  one  company,  under 
command  of  Captain  Harrington,  to  observe  the  movements  and  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy  if  possible.  He  went  as  far  as  Deep  Gully  and  found 
them  falling  back  and  exchanged  shots  with  them  at  that  place.  I was 
relieved  by  the  Forty-third  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia 
at  6 p.  m.  on  the  14th,  and  returned  to  camj)  at  New  Berne  with  a loss 
of  1 man  wounded  and  1 missing. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

JOSIAH  PICKETT, 

Colonel  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

George  W.  Bartlett, 

A,  A.  A.  G.  Second  Brig.,  First  Biv.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  JJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifth  Bi- 
vision, of  operations  March  15-16. 

™ Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

^ New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  16,  1863. 

(Colonel:  Pursuant  to  orders,  verbally  communicated  to  me  by  tlie 
^commanding  general,  my  division  moved  out  yesterday  on  the  road 
south  of  the  Trent  Eiver  to  feel  the  enemy,  who  had  just  then  been 
reported  from  the  front  to  have  probably  crossed  in  large  force  to  that 


188 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCHAF.  XXX. 


side.  At  half  past  1 o’clock  the  regiments  left  their  camps,  and  at 
twenty  minutes  to  6 the  command  bivouacked  miles  this  side  of  Mill 
Greek.  The  grountl  and  road  being  very  bad  and  wet  for  3 miles  for- 
ward and  the  moon  being  absent  made  it  impracticable  to  go  farther. 
We  found  a picket  of  the  enemy  2 miles  in  front,  and  our  own  picket, 
a mile  in  front,  reports  three  shots  fired  into  it  in  the  night. 

We  advanced  at  daylight  to-day.  We  approached  Mill  Greek  as  if 
to  find  it  occupied.  Meeting  no  opposition  we  took  possession  of  the 
opposite  bank  at  8 a.  rn.  1 pushed  on  at  once  with  the  infantry  to  Pol- 
locksville  and  there  learned  that  Eobertson  with  his  cavalry  left  that 
place  yesterday  at  1 o’clock  p.  m.,  going  to  Kinston. 

Having  a picket  on  the  Trent,  this  side  of  Mill  Greek,  I communicated 
by  it  with  the  gunboat  Korth  Star,  the  captain  of  which  placed  himself 
under  my  orders.  This  was  prior  to  the  advance  from  Mill  Greek.  1 
directed  the  boat  to  proceed  to  Pollocksville,  where  she  arrived  soon 
after  the  troops,  when  I ordered  her  to  return  to  New  Berne. 

Satisfied  that  the  enemy  were  beyond  reach  and  that  no  troops  were 
left  in  that  vicinity,  I marched  iny  command  back  to  their  quarters  at 
New  Berne. 

The  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Militia  was  detailed 
last  evening  for  the  advance  guard  in  the  morning,  and  Golonel  Mc- 
Kibbin  commanded  it,  although  after  being  detailed  his  horse  had  fallen 
upon  him  and  fractured  the  fibula  of  one  of  his  legs.  He  returned  in 
the  gunboat  from  Pollocksville.  He  expressed  himself  as  ably  seconded 
in  the  duties  of  the  morning  by  Lieutenant-Golonel  Troxel  and  Major 
Hale,  of  his  regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  PEINGE, 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers,  Commanding, 

Lieut.  Gol.  Southard  Hoffman, 

A,  A,  G.,  Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Neio  Berne, 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Daniel  H.  Rill,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Expedition, 

Goldsborough,  N.  G.,  March  16,  1803 — 10  p.  m. 

Have  just  this  moment  arrived  from  below.  Our  expedition  was 
partly  successful.  I went  with  Daniel’s  brigade  on  the  lower  Trent 
road  to  New  Berne,  and  sent  Eobertson  around  on  the  upper  Trent 
road  to  cut  the  railroad.  Pettigrew  was  to  bombard  the  shipping  and 
barracks  from  the  other  side.  The  result  was  highly  satisfactory  on 
our  road. 

On  Friday  we  drove  them  to  their  first  line  of  works  at  Deep  Gully, 
8 miles  from  New  Berne.  This  was  a very  strong  position  naturally, 
and  strengthened  by  earthworks.  It  was  defended  by  five  companies 
and  two  pieces  of  artillery.  General  Daniel  in  person  charged  it  and 
captured  it  with  four  companies.  We  held  it  that  night  and  I sent  an 
order  to  Eobertson  to  cut  the  railroad  the  next  day. 

At  daylight  Saturday  morning  the  Yankees  made  a feeble  attempt 
at  a recapture  of  Deep  Gull}*.  General  Pettigrew  opened  at  the  same 
time,  but  I soon  discovered  that  he  had  been  repulsed,  as  the  firing 
was  plainly  that  of  the  lieavy  guns  of  a gunboat.  After  repulsing  the 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


189 


Yaukees  at  Deep  Gully  I would  have  pursued  them  to  their  uext  strong- 
hold, at  Kocky  Euu,  3 miles  nearer  New  Berne,  but  as  Pettigrew  had 
been  silenced,  and  there  were  three  shorter  roads  to  Kinston  than  the 
one  I was  on,  I fell  back  to  a i^oint  opposite  Trenton.  Eemained  there 
Sunday  and  until  noon  to-day.  No  pursuit  by  the  Yankees.  Our  loss 
has  been  slight.  • 

General  Pettigrew  reports : 

The  absence  of  the  Whitworth  ruined  us.  The  20-poiiuder  Parrotts  are  worse  than 
useless.  One  burst,  killing  4 men  and  wounding  4 ; another  broke  its  axle.  The 
shells  of  all  of  them  burst  just  at  the  mouth  of  the  gun.  I hoj)e  never  to  see  them 
again. 


Kobertson  sent  me  out  a lieutenant,  who  partly  cut  the  railroad.  He 
sent  out  a colonel,  who  saw  some  Yankees  and  came  back.  Eobertson 
did  not  go  himself.  We  must  have  a better  man.  Garnett  did  not 
start  until  Sunday.  I have  sent  Pettigrew  to  Greenville  to  protect 
him  if  necessary.  I propose  to  go  over  there  myself  in  a few  days.  I 
fear  Garnett  has  seriously  compromised  himself  by  his  long  delay.  If 
it  be  true,  as  your  scout  reports,  that  the  Y^aukees  have  been  so  heavily 
re-enforced  at  New  Berne  they  may  attempt  to  cut  Garnett  ofi.  Had 
the  Whitworth  been  sent  the  gunboat  would  have  been  beaten  and 
New  Berne  would  have  been  at  Pettigrew’s  mercy.  Then  if  my  origi- 
nal plan  had  been  carried  out  of  moving  Eansom  on  the  Sound  road  to 
the  rear  of  New  Berne  I think  we  would  have  gained  the  town,  or  at 
least  have  caused  a very  salutary  alarm.  The  spirit  manifested  by 
Whiting  has  spoiled  everything.  My  order  of  assignment  says : ‘‘  Gen- 
eral D.  H.  Hill  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  all  the  troops  in  North 
Carolina.”  If  I am  to  be  cut  down  to  two  brigades  I will  not  submit  to 


the  swindle. 

So  far  as  I can  judge  there  will  be  no  movement  at  Charleston  until 
Hooker  gets  out  of  the  mud.  Then  there  will  be  a general  movement 
on  Fredericksburg,  Petersburg,  the  North  Carolina  Eailroad,  and  Wil- 
mington. We  ought  to.  have  been  clearing  out  North  Carolina  while 
Hooker  was  mud-bound.  This  I urged  three  months  ago,  but  I was 
unheeded.  It  is  not  yet  too  late  to  do  something  and  I am  anxious  to 
go  to  work.  I started  out  with  my  throat  in  a terrible  fix  and  thought 
it  might  cost  me  my  life.  Thank  God,  I am  no  worse. 

Foster  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  letting  one  brigade  run  him  into  his 
rat-hole. 

I have  received  nothing  but  contemptuous  treatment  from  Eichmond 
from  the  very  beginning  of  the  war,  but  I hope  they  will  not  carry  mat- 
ters so  far  as  to  perpetuate  a swindle. 

You  were  greatly  mistaken  in  sui^posing  that  I was  indifferent  about 
the  Whitworth.  I told  you  that  it  was  too  late  to  get  it,  but  that  it  was 
worth  all  the  guns  I had.  I had  tried  the  Parrotts,  and  their  shells  all 
burst  prematurely. 

If  the  Yankee  re-enforcements  are  as  large  as  your  scout  represents 
them  they  will  establish  an  inland  communication  between  New  Berne, 
Washington,  and  Plymouth,  and  thus  have  their  cordon  of  forts  com- 
plete from  Suffolk  down.  A glance  at  the  map  will  show  how  seriously 
this  would  embarrass  us.  For  mj"  part  I could  get  no  information  from 
New  Berne. 

With  great  respect. 


D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


[General  Longstreet.] 


190 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


No.  8. 


Report  of  Maj.  John  G.  Haskell^  G.  S.  Army^  commanding  Artillery. 

Headquarters  Artillery, 

• March  IG,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  most  respectfully  to  submit  the  following- 
report  of  the  artillery  under  my  command : 

1st.  Having  on  March  8,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H. 
Hill,  marched  from  Goldsborough  with  a portion  of  the  reserve  artillery, 

I bivouacked  at  Falling  Creek,  26  miles  from  Goldsborough,  8 from 
Kinston. 

2d.  On  the  night  of  the  8th  at  this  place  I received  orders  to  report  to 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew,  and  from  him  orders  to  move  on  to  Kinston 
with  the  rifle  guns  of  my  command,  which  consisted  of  four  20-pounder 
Parrott  guns  of  the  Macon  Light  Artillery,  under  command  of  Lieut. 
[C.  W.]  Slaten,  and  one  3-inch  rifle  of  the  Montgomery  Light  Artillery, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant  Davis.  Having  reported  there  with  the 
above-mentioned  guns,  I was  joined  by  the  following  batteries : Captain 
WyatFs,  with  two  12-pounder  Napoleons  (bronze),  one  heavy  12-pounder 
(bronze),  and  one  10-pounder  Parrott ; Capt.  [ J.J  Graham^s,  of  one  fl- 
inch rifle,  one  12-pounder  howitzer,  and  two  6-pounders  (bronze),  and  a 
section  of  Captain  Graham^s  battery  (attached  to  Daniel’s  brigade),  of 
two  3-inch  rifles.  With  this  artillery  I marched  in  rear  of  the  brigade 
and  trains  about  21  miles  from  Kinston  and  halted  for  the  night.  About 
a mile  from  the  camping  ground  I was  delayed  for  over  three  hours  by 
a portion  of  the  brigade  wagon  train,  and  when  they  moved  out,  one 
of  my  guns,  a 3-inch  rifle,  broke  through  a corduroy  bridge,  letting  the 
piece  down  into  the  water  j all  the  other  guns  of  the  command  escaped.  , 
Two  being  behind  this  were  delayed  until  this  gun  could  be  pried  out  ' 
and  the  bridge  repaired.  All  the  guns  then  crossed  except  the  last  two. 
The  horses  of  the  first  of  these  took  fright  and  pulled  one  side  of  the  i 
gun-carriage  over  the  edge  of  the  bridge.  The  water  underneath  being  I 
some  4 feet  deep,  with  great  difficulty  the  wheels  were  taken  off  the  car-  ‘ 
riage  and  the  gun  dismounted.  To  do  this,  however,  it  was  found  1 
necessary  to  cut  away  part  of  the  bridge,  and  before  it  could  be  repaired  ; 
and  the  guns  gotten  to  camp  it  was  near  daylight  and  the  men  and 
horses  were  much  jaded. 

At  7 a.  m.  on  the  10th  the  artillery  resumed  the  march  in  the  same 
position  as  the  day  before  and  marched  as  far  as  Palmetto  Creek,  which 
was  crossed  by  all  the  artillery  except  the  20-pounder  battery,  the  first 
gun  of  which  crushed  in  the  bridge  and  was  drawn  out  by  hand  with 
great  difficulty.  The  bridge  was  then  repaired  in  about  three  hours 
and  the  rest  of  the  train  jjassed  over  and  moved  on,  allowing  the  brigade 
commissary  wagons  to  pass  in  front.  In  this  order  the  march  was  con- 
tinued until  within  about  3 miles  of  the  camping  place  for  the  night,  when 
the  artillery  was  stopped  by  the  brigade  wagon  train,  which  had  stalled 
in  the  middle  of  a stream.  The  wagons  were  removed  by  about  10 
o’clock  that  night,  when  all  the  light  guns  and  one  20-pounder  crossed, 

I getting  over  about  11.30  o’clock.  The  rest  of  the  20-pounders  were 
behind  the  commissary  wagons,  which  did  not  cross  until  about  2 the 
next  evening,  as  the  stream  was  impassable  and  had  to  be  bridged. 
If  this  battery  had  crossed  the  night  before  I do  not  think  they  could 
have  advanced  farther,  as  the  horses  were  broken  down.  After  cross- 
ing, the  artillery  again  moved  forward  and  arrived  within  about  2 miles 


Chap.  XXX.] 


191 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 

of  Barrington’s  Ferry  and  halted  with  all  the  guns  except  the  10- 
pounder  Parrott  of  Captain  Wyatt’s  battery,  which  I had  placed  in 
position  under  Lieutenant  Eives  at  Pettiford’s  Ferry  to  enfilade  the  work 
at  Barrington’s  Ferry  and  fire  at  the  gunboats  when  expedient.  This 
gun  fired  a number  of  rounds  at  the  encampment  and  redoubt,  the  effect 
of  which  could  not  be  seen,  and  eight  at  a gunboat,  four  of  which  Lieut. 
[Charles  M.]  Eives  thinks  took  effect,  when  she  hauled  off  out  of  range. 

The  artillery,  with  the  exception  of  this  piece,  was  moved  forward  just 
about  daybreak,  and  I was  directed  by  General  Pettigrew  to  place  them 
in  position  so  as  to  play  upon  the  earthwork  at  the  ferry  and  the  gun- 
boats upon  the  river.  In  obedience  to  this^  order  I placed  the  guns  of 
Captains  Wyatt’s  and  Graham’s  batteries  in  position  about  100  yards 
from  the  work,  and  directed  them  to  open  fire  with  shell  and  case-shot, 
which  they  did,  throwing  the  shell  and  case-shot  with  great  precision  in 
the  work.  After  some  rounds  Captain  Wyatt  commenced  firing  solid  shot 
from  some  of  his  guns  to  batter  down  the  breastwork.  It  was  soon  found 
unavailing  and  stopped.  As  soon  as  the  batteries  of  Captains  Wyatt  and 
Graham  commenced  firing  I ordered  up  the  rifle  gups  and  placed  them 
in  position  on  the  right  and  left  of  these  batteries,  giving  them  orders 
to  direct  their  fire  against  the  gunboats,  except  a section  of  3-inch  rifles 
under  Lieut.  Aldon  Alexander,  which  was  placed  upon  the  extreme 
right,  with  orders  to  fire  upon  the  earthwork  at  a point  where  it  seemed 
weakest.  Though  the  guns  were  worked  well  and  fired  accurately  the 
effect  was  small.  The  rest  of  the  rifle  guns  fired  at  the  gunboat,  which 
was  distant  If  miles,  with  but  little  effect.  Although  they  struck  her 
several  times  it  was  impossible,  with  the  very  inferior  ammunition  with 
which  they  were  supplied,  to  shoot  accurately  enough  to  strike  any  vital 
part  unless  by  chance.  After  the  firing  had  continued  about  an  hour 
the  first  piece  of  the  20-pounders  burst,  mortally  wounding  1 man  and 
severely  wounding  2 others.  About  half  an  hour  after  this,  by  the  di- 
rection of  General  Pettigrew,  the  guns  were  gradually  withdrawn  and 
taken  back  about  1 mile,  with  the  exception  of  the  smooth  guns  of 
Captains  Wyatt’s  and  Graham’s  batteries,  which  were  kept  close  to  be 
moved  up  if  necessary.  About  3 i^.  m.  they  were  withdrawn  and  moved 
back  to  the  halting  place  of  the  night  before  and  halted  there  until 
about  12  o’clock  at  night  of  the  14th,  when  the  artillery  moved  again 
until  it  arrived  at  the  ground  where  I had  encamped  the  night  of  the 
12th,  and  halted  there  until  about  12  m.  on  the  15tli;  then  again  moved 
to  Swift  Creek  and  took  position  to  repel  an  attack  which  was  antici- 
pated. 

During  the  march  it  was  found  necessary  to  dismount  and  leave  one 
of  the  20-pounder  Parrotts,  as  the  axle,  which  had  an  old  crack  in  it,  was 
found  on  examination  to  have  broken  in  two  during  the  fire  of  the  14th 
and  could  not  be  replaced.  It  was  hidden,  so  that  it  might  be  sent  for 
hereafter.  I would  most  respectfully  recommend  that  the  20-pounders 
be  taken  from  the  Macon  Light  Artillery,  as  it  is  a good  company  and 
deserves  better  than  to  have  its  members  wounded  and  killed  by  defect- 
ive guns. 

I would  beg  leave,  most  respectfully,  to  call  to  the  favorable  con- 
sideration of  the  general,  Lieut.  Aldon  Alexander,  who  on  the  march 
down  gave  invaluable  aid  by  his  skill  as  an  engineer  and  untiring  energy 
in  commanding,  which  would  without  him  have  been  the  cause  of  much 
greater  delay  than  was  experienced.  All  the  men  and  officers  behaved 
coolly  and  well. 

The  following  were  the  casualties:  Macon  Light  Artillery  had  1 man 
mortally  wounded,  2 severely  j Lieutenant  Alexander’s  section  had  1 man 


192 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


wounded  by  a shell  from  the  enemy,  not  dangerously.  The  remaining 
batteries  lost  none  killed  and  none  wounded.  From  Captain  Graham’s 
battery  there  is  1 missing. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN^  C.  HASKELL, 
Major,  Cojnmanding  Artilery. 

Capt.  [K.  C.]  Hughes, 

Assista^it  Adjutant-  General. 


• Ko.  9. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  J.  Pettigrew,  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Pettigrew’s  Brigade, 

Greenville,  N.  G.,  March  17,  1863. 

General  : The  expedition  intrusted  to  me  having  failed  in  accom- 
plishing the  hoped-for  result,  I submit  the  following  statement  of  the 
causes : 

I left  Goldsborough  on  the  9th  instant  (Monday)  with  the  portion  of 
my  brigade  there  stationed  and  arrived  at  Kinston  on  Tuesday  after- 
noon. That  night  I received  your  instructions  to  take  the  two  rifled 
guns  of  General  Daniel,  the  four  20-pounder  Parrotts  of  the  reserve 
artillery,  and  the  Whitworth  gun  in  case  it  arrived,  and  to  proceed 
to  Barrington’s  Ferry ; to  get  my  guns  in  position  without  observa- 
tion if  possible ) to  open  a concentrated  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  work, 
which  it  was  thought  would  so  demoralize  the  enemy  as  to  induce  an 
almost  bloodless  surrender.  I was  then  to  open  on  the  Yankee  ship- 
ping and  barracks.  It  was  important  that  the  bombardment  should 
begin  on  Thursday.  The  distance  was  57  miles,  and  the  heavy  rain  of 
Tuesday  and  Wednesday  had  swollen  the  swamps  and  put  the  roads  in  i 
very  bad  condition.  Many  of  the  bridges  broke  down  under  the  20- 
pouuders,  all  causing  great  delay,  but  I wroteyou  that  I hoped  to  carry  | 
the  work  by  moonlight  on  Friday  morning  with  the  bayonet,  which  I 
preferred,  as  the  enemy  in  Kew  Berne  then  would  not  know  the  result  | 
and  I might  thus  be  enabled  to  intrench  the  guns  before  the  gunboats 
attacked.  The  infantry  reached  the  camp,  8 miles  from  Barrington’s, 
at  dark,  and  I intended  to  start  at  midnight  for  the  ferry,  but  a swamp 
some  3 miles  in  rear  of  the  halt  changed  under  the  train  into  a quick- 
sand. The  men  vainly  worked  all  night  in  the  freezing  water  to  repair 
it.  It  was  necessary  to  bridge  the  whole  swamp  in  a new  place,  which  . 
was  done  under  the  superintendence  of  Lieutenant  Koerner,  of  the  Topo- 
graphical Engineers,  who  ottered  his  services  and  greatly  aided  me. 
About  3 p.  m.  Friday  the  bridge  was  finished.  The  infantry  arrived  at 
the  ferry  early  in  the  night,  but  the  20-pounders  having  mired,  the  ar- 
tillery was  detained  until  late  in  the  morning. 

In  a reconnaissance  made  by  me  and  Major  Haskell  and  my  aides 
during  the  afternoon,  Pettiford’s  Ferry  had  appeared  a suitable  point 
for  attacking  the  gunboats  and  perhaps  for  enfilading  the  work.  A 
rifled  gun,  under  Lieutenant  Fives,  was  placed  there  before  daylight. 
The  Twenty-sixth  Kegiment  (Col.  [H.  K.]  Burgwyn),  assisted  by  Cap- 
tain Whitford’s  Bangers,  were  to  capture  or  drive  in  the  euemy’s  pickets. 
The  Twenty-sixth  sup])orted  by  the  Forty-fourth  Regiment,  if  necessary, 
Avere  to  carry  the  work.  I hoped  then  to  intrench  the  20-pounders  and 
drive  away  the  gunboats  and  the  enemy  from  his  iutrenchments  in  front  ' 


Chap.  XSX.] 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


193 


of  Kew  Berne.  The  first  part  of  this  programme  was  excellently  well 
carried  out;  3 of  the  enemy’s  pickets  were  captured;  the  bridges  within 
the  enemy’s  lines  were  repaired.  At  400  yards  we  came  for  the  first 
time  in  view  of  the  work.  The  result  of  what  I had  heard  of  the  char- 
acter  of  the  work  and  learned  from  my  reconnaissance  of  the  previous 
day,  and  from  what  I now  saw  before  me,  was  as  follows : 

It  was  a simple  coupe,  situated  on  a slight  elevation,  the  height  of 
the  interior  crest  being  8 or  9 feet  and  the  ditch  in  front  6 by  8 feet. 
It  was  flanked  by  a swamp  of  3 or  4 miles  on  the  right  and  a swampy 
creek  on  the  left,  so  that  it  could  only  be  approached  in  front.  The 
road  ran  down  to  its  center  and  then  along  the  ditch  of  the  left  half. 
The  garrison  was  composed  of  a two-years’  regiment,  about  250  or  300 
strong. 

It  was  now  broad  daylight.  The  presumption  was  the  garrison  would 
fire  one  round,  costing  us  50  or  100  men.  I therefore  decided  to  display 
my  force,  demoralize  them  by  a heavy  fire,  and  demand  a surrender,  thus 
saying  my  own  men  and  not  unnecessarily  killing  theirs.  The  light  bat- 
teries deployed  finely  into  battery  at400  yards  from  the  work  and  opened 
upon  it  a rapid  and  well-directed  fire.  After  a few  minutes  I demanded 
a surrender  by  Lieut.  [Louis  G.]  Young,  my  aide-de-camp.  This  was 
a mistake  on  my  part  and  I regret  it  very  much,  but  it  had  no  effect  upon 
the  principal  object  of  the  movement.  They  declined  surrendering  with- 
out consulting  General  Foster,  &c.  The  firing  was  then  recommenced. 
I now  devoted  my  attention  to  the  20-pounders.  I regret  to  sav  that 
their  performance  was  execrable — fully  as  bad  as  the  experiments  at 
Goldsborough  led  us  to  fear.  A gunboat  lay  opposite  us  at  the  wharf 
m Kew  Berne,  about  IJ  miles  distant,  getting  up  steam  and  firing  upon 
us,  in  which  she  was  aided  by  field  guns,  probably  Whitworths  from 
the  sound  of  the  missiles.  Half  of  the  shells  from  the  20-pounders 
burst  just  outside  of  the  guns.  They  turned  over  in  the  air  and  were 
perfectly  harmless  to  the  enemy.  At  length  the  axle  of  one  of  these 
guns  broke  and  it  became  unserviceable.  Then  another  burst,  wound- 
ing 3 men,  1 of  them  mortally.  These  four  20-pounders  were  our  sole 
agents  for  accomplishing  the  object  of  the  expedition.  It  was  now 
painfully  evident  that  they  were  worse  than  useless.  Of  the  six  guns 
composing  the  battery  two  had  burst  at  Fredericksburg,  one  here,  a 
fourth  was  disabled  by  the  breaking  of  an  axle-tree.  The  ammunition 
was  fully  as  bad  as  the  guns.  The  light  guns  would  have  been  effective 
against  gunboats  in  an  ordinary-sized  river,  but  the  Neuse  at  New 
Berne  is  so  wide  as  to  enable  them  to  remove  a mile  or  two  distant. 
Other  boats  with  heavy  guns  were  coming  round  from  the  Trent.  The 
principal  object  of  the  expedition  ha\dng  then  utterly  failed  it  seemed 
to  me  tolly  longer  to  expose  the  men  and  materiel  of  the  artillery.  The 
only  question  was  whether  I should  carry  the  work  before  withdrawing. 
Ibe  Twenty-sixth  had  been  in  waiting  ever  since  daylight  and  would 
lave  done  it  in  five  minutes.  The  advantage  of  so  doing  would  have 
been  the  capture  of  some  300  two-years’  men,  with  their  arms.  The 
work  we  could  not  hold.  The  disadvantage  was  the  probable  loss  of 
a certain  number  of  men  60  miles  from  our  hospitals.  I decided  against 
It.  It  cost  me  a struggle,  after  so  much  labor  and  endurance,  to  give 
up  the  eclat,  but  I felt  that  my  duty  to  the  country  required  me  to  save 
jiny  men  for  some  operation  in  which  sacrifices  would  be  followed  by 
consequences,  not  in  capturing  two-years’  men  and  holding  temporarV 
possession  of  breastworks,  however  brilliant  the  operation  might  be.  I 
therefore  withdrew  the  whole  command  except  the  Twenty-sixth  Eegi- 

13  R R_V0L  XVIII 


194 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ment,  which  remained  within  about  500  yards  of  the  place  in  order  to 
cover  the  withdrawal  of  Captain  Whitford’s  men.  I cannot  too  hip^hly 
express  my  admiration  of  the  manner  in  which  they  stood  the  furious 
shelling  of  the  enemy  without  flinching.  The  rest  of  the  command  was 
about  a mile  distant. 

In  the  afternoon,  the  enemy  having  received  re-enforcements,  I 
thought  he  might  sally  out,  so  I drew  up  in  line  parallel  to  the  fire  of  i 
the  gunboats,  the  right  resting  some  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  | 
work.  While  in  this  position  the  enemy^s  scouts  were  perceived  ad- 
vancing, doubtless  to  discover  our  position,  but  they  disappeared  as 
soon  as  our  skirmishers  showed  themselves.  The  shelling  of  the  gun- 
boats continued  all  day.  The  two  rifled  guns  at  Pettiford’s  Ferry  re- 
plied, and,  I have  every  reasou  to  think,  disabled  one. 

Later  in  the  afternoon  I withdrew  to  my  camp.  During  the  night 
the  sounds  of  drums,  bugles,  and  bands  in  New  Berne  announced  that  I 
their  forces  had  retreated  from  General  Daniel’s  front  j but  as  we  heard  ' 
nothing  from  his  guns  after  12  m.  I concluded  that  he  had  not  pursued.  I 
The  whole  force  in  New  Berne  could  thus  be  thrown  upon  my  rear  at  ; 
very  short  notice,  so  the  next  day  (Sunday)  I fell  back  8 miles,  within  i 
striking  distance  of  Swift  Creek.  1 then  received  your  order  to  proceed  j 
to  Greenville. 

It  will  thus  be  seen,  general,  that  the  not  capturing  of  the  fort  was  j 
owing  to  myself,  for  which  I have  given  my  reasons,  good  or  bad.  The  , 
failure  of  the  eftbrt  to  drive  the  gunboats  out  of  New  Berne  and  the  i 
troops  from  their  intrenchments  was  owing  solely  to  the  utter  worth- 
lessness of  the  20  t)Ouuder  Parrotts,  which  had  hung  around  our  necks  : 
like  a millstone  during  the  march  and  failed  us  in  the  vital  moment. 
My  attack  was  partly  effective  in  withdrawing  the  troops  from  General 
Daniel’s  front,  and  had  I been  supplied  with  four  Whitworth  guns  I 
firmly  believe  you  might  have  slept  in  New  Berne  that  night. 

For  details  of  the  artillery  I refer  to  the  report  of  Major  Haskell,  who 
discharged  his  whole  duty. 

I was  greatly  indebted  throughout  to  that  gallant  and  efficient  officer 
Captain  Whitford. 

I cannot  refrain  from  bearing  testimony  to  the  unsurpassed  military 
good  conduct  of  those  under  me.  In  seven  days  they  marched  127  miles, 
waded  swamps,  worked  in  them  by  night  and  day,  bivouacked  in  the 
rain,  sometimes  without  fire,  never  enjoyed  a full  night’s  rest  after  the 
first,  besides  undergoing  a furious  shelling,  and  discharging  other 
duties.  All  this  without  murmuring  or  even  getting  sick. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  I have  no  means  of  ascertaining.  Several 
boat-loads  of  apparently  dead  or  wounded  men  were  sent  over  to  New 
Berne. 

Our  casualties  were  caused  by  the  bursting  of  the  2()-pounder  and  by 
the  shells  from  the  gunboats.  The  fort  did  not  return  our  fire  at  all. 
Including  concussions  and  other  trivial  injuries  they  amount  to  23,  dis- 
tributed as  follows : 


Killed 2 

SeriouHly  wounded  (2  mortally,  since  died) 7 

Sliglitly  wounded 14 

Total 23 


Among  the  wounded  is  the  adj utaiit- general  of  the  brigade,  Capt.  [N. 
C.]  Hughes,  whose  face  was  injured  by  sand  thrown  into  it  bj"  the  strik- 
ing of  a shell  upon  the  ground  nearly  in  front  of  him. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


195 


We  left  the  fragments  of  the  20-pouucler  that  burst  on  the  held  in 
front  of  the  work  at  Barrington’s  Ferry.  They  could  not  have  her  taken 
off  without  a wagon. 

Ver}^  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  PETTIGEEW, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army,  Confederate  States. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

[In  closure.] 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  March  10,  18G3. 
[Brig.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew:] 

I wish  you  to  take  all  the  rifled  guns  in  your  own  brigade,  Daniel’s, 
and  the  reserve  artillery,  and  the  Whitworth  gun  from  Wilmington  (if 
arrived)  and  move  with  your  brigade  to  the  neighborhood  of  Barring- 
ton’s Ferry.  Get  all  your  guns  in  position,  if  possible,  without  observa- 
tion and  open  a concentrated  hre  upon  the  enemy’s  work  at  the  ferry. 
It  is  thought  that  this  can  be  reduced ; if  so,  push  up  your  guns  to  h 
after  its  fall  and  open  upon  the  Yankee  shipping  and  barracks.  It  is 
important  that  this  bombardment  shall  begin  on  Thursday,  and  your 
brigade  must  move  part  of  the  way  to-morrow.  It  is  proper  for  you  to 
know  that  there  is  to  be  a combined  movement  from  the  James  to  the 
Cape  Fear,  and  you  are  to  begin  it.  Upon  your  success  depends  very 
much  the  success  of  the  scheme.  The  condition  of  Oontentnea  Creek 
or  the  roads  below  may  prevent  your  march,  or  there  may  be  other  ob- 
jections which  I do  not  understand.  If  so,  wait  until  you  see  mej 
hope  to  be  down  to-morrow.  I most  earnestly  hope,  however,  there 
will  be  no  obstacle  in  the  way.  I have  written  to  General  Garnett,  at 
! Greenville,  that  you  would  begin  on  Thursday.  Everything  is  in- 
I trusted  to  your  skill,  prudence,  and  good  management. 

I With  great  respect, 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major-  General. 


Eo.  10. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  B.  Garnett,  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Garnett’s  Brigade, 

Tarborongh,  N.  G.,  March  11,  1863. 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report,  which  I 
deem  important  you  should  be  in  possession  of: 

, My  last  regiment  has  just  arrived.  My  troops  have  been  very  much 
delayed  on  the  route,  owing  to  want  of  concert  among  the  railroad 
agents.  I did  not  receive  your  letter  of  instructions  until  about  1 o’clock 
to-day,  which  was  the  first  reliable  information  I had  of  my  destination. 
Being  entirely  ignorant  of  the  country  in  which  I was  ordered  to  oper- 
ate, I consulted  with  the  post  quartermaster.  Captain  Brown,  who  in- 
formed me  that  he  had  done  business  in  Hyde  County  for  many  years. 
He  was  of  the  opinion  that  it  had  been  very  much  stripped  by  the 
Yankees,  and  introduced  to  me  a Mr.  Blount,  of  the  Forty-first  North 
Carolina  Regiment,  whom  he  represented  as  a very  trustworthy  man 
»iid  a native  of  Beaufort,  the  adjoining  county  to  Hyde.  Mr.  Blount 


196 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


gives  me  the  following  information,  which  he  obtained  in  Hyde  County 
while  endeavoring  to  get  out  a horse  belonging  to  him? 

The  Yankee  troops  have  destroyed  the  following  bridges : Pungo 
Bridge,  100  yards  long ; Wilkerson  Creek  Bridge,  40  yards  long ; Broad 
Creek  Bridge,  60  yards  long,  and  Bose  Bay  Bridge,  20  yards  long.  (All 
of  these  except  the  first  are  in  Hyde  County,  and  must  be  rebuilt  before 
wagons  can  pass  over  the  only  accessible  road  through  the  county. 
This  last  fact  is  confirmed  by  Captain  Brown.)  Mr.  Blount  was  told  by 
Dr.  Milton  Selby  and  Mr.  Davis  (gentlemen  of  high  standing  in  Hyde) 
that  the  Federal  troops  had  lately  made  several  raids  into  the  county 
(one  about  a week  since),  destroying  and  carrying  off  large  quantities 
of  bacon  (about  15,000  pounds  from  a Mr.  Bell),  besides  wantonly  killing 
beef-cattle  and  other  stock.  The  number  of  the  enemy  in  their  last 
expedition  was  about  1,500,  Mr.  Blount  reports  ten  gunboats  on  the 
Sound,  two  of  which  he  saw  in  Pungo  Eiver. 

I have  but  few  mechanics  in  my  command  and  no  building-tools  ex- 
cept axes.  It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  build  a bridge  over  the 
Pungo  Biver  if  attacked  by  the  gunboats,  which  would  probably  be  the 
case,  as  the  water  is  some  20  feet  deep  and  the  work  would  necessarily 
occupy  several  days.  With  regard  to  the  other  bridges  I can  form  no 
idea,  being  ignorant  of  the  facility  for  getting  timber,  &c.,  in  their  neigh- 
borhood. You  can  judge,  seeing  the  distance  I would  have  to  march  and 
the  detention  I would  meet  with  from  the  causes  above  stated,  whether 
the  concert  you  mentioned,  with  other  troops  could  be  carried  out. 

I shall  leave  for  Greenville  to-morrow  morning,  which  place  i cannot 
reach  until  the  next  day.  As  the  information  may  modify  your  views, 
I am  desirous  of  hearing  from  you  as  soon  as  possible.  You  will  there- 
fore oblige  me  very  much  by.  replying  by  the  bearer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  B.'GABBETT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding. 


No.  11. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Junius  Daniel,  G.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters,  ; 

Kinston,  K.  C.,  March  11,  1863.  y 
General  : Your  letters  of  instructions  have  been  received  and  de-  j 
livered.  General  Bobertson  left  yesterday;  General  Pettigrew  tliisj 
morning ; Major  Haskell  is  about  leaving.  I am  \ ery  anxious  that  you 
should  come  down  to-day.  You  are  aware  that  there  are  four  roads  { 
from  this  place  to  New  Berne  besides  the  railroad.  I do  not  think  I can  r 
advance  in  any  force  or  with  wagons  over  any  other  than  the  lowers 
Trent.  The  bridges  are  destroyed  on  Neuse  and  Dover  roads  and  it  i 
will  require  a day  or  two  to  build  them.  You  are  also  aware  that  un-  i 
less  General  Bobertson  operates  between  the  Trent  and  White  Oak  that  i 
the  upper  Trent  road  will  be  left  open  to  the  enemy.  I think  1 under- 
stood from  General  Bobertson  that  his  orders  were  to  operate  on; 
south  side  of  Trent,  allowing  him  to  go  beyond  the  White  Oak  I pre- 
sume. 


CriAP.  XXX.] 


ATTACK  ON  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


197 


The  only  news  from  the  enemy  is  that  of  the  8th.  The  enemy’s  cav- 
alry went  to  Swansborongh  from  Smith’s  Mill,  where  they  met  some 
of  their  men  in  boats.  The  cavalry  returned  to  Smith’s  Mill  on  the  9th. 
Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldsborough,  N.  C. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Brig.  Ge7i.  Beverly  H.  Robertsoii,  C.  8.  Army,  coynmanding 

Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Briuade, 

Ma^'cli  21,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major- 
general  commanding,  that  on  Monday,  the  9th  instant,  in  obedience  to 
his  written  instructions,  and  immediately  after  their  receipt,  I moved 
with  six  squadrons  of  my  command — three  from  the  Fifty-ninth  and  the 
remainder  from  the  Sixty -third  Eegiment  North  Carolina  Troops,  in  all 
about  500  men — to  the  south  side  of  Trent  River;  thence  toward  Jack- 
sonville, the  enemy  having  been  reported  advancing  in  that  direction. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  Huggins’  farm  I was  informed  by  Capt.  [T.  W.J 
Harris,  [Company  E,  Sixty-third  North  Carolina  Troops,  or  Fifth  Cav- 
alry], on  picket  duty  in  that  vicinity,  that  the  Yankees  had  recrossed  the 
White  Oak  River  and  probably  returned  to  New  Berne.  Learning  next 
morning  (Thursday)  that  they  were  reported  in  force  at  Trenton,  I at 
ouce  started  for  that  point  via  Comfort,  in  the  vicinity  of  which  I en- 
camped the  same  night. 

Early  on  the  following  day,  in  order  to  protect  Daniel’s  right  and  re- 
connoiter  the  country,  I proceeded  to  Pollocksville,  where  it  was  stated 
the  enemy  had  their  pickets  stationed  and  were  strongly  fortified.  Upon 
my  arrival  there  I ascertained  the  Yankees  had  crossed  Mill  Creek 
several  days  previous  and  destroyed  the  bridge  over  that  stream,  which, 
on  account  of  the  recent  rains,  I found  impassable  for  cavalry,  at  least 
in  that  vicinity.  I therefore  returned  to  McDaniel’s  Mill  and  encamped, 
leaving  Mclntire’s  squadron  on  picket  at  Pollocksville  and  Mill  Creek, 
with  orders  to  hold  those  places  at  all  hazards.  With  a view  to  carry- 
ing out  the  instructions  of  the  major-general  commanding,  I detached 
a party  under  command  of  Lieut.  W.  J.  Wiley,  Company  F,  Sixty- third 
Regiment,  with  directions  to  move  rapidly  and  cut  the  railroad  between 
Sheppardsville  and  New  Berne.  I provided  the  party  with  a few  axes 
and  sent  with  it  the  only  good  guide  I had — Private  Dennis,  Forty-first 
Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops.  With  the  bulk  of  my  force  I deter- 
mined either  to  head  Mill  Creek  and  ojjerate  in  the  enemy’s  rear  nearer 
New  Berne  or  move  upon  Sheppardsville.  Upon  reaching  Richard  Old- 
field’s I was  informed  by  a most  respectable,  intelligent,  and  loyal  citi- 
zen (well  known  to  many  of  my  officers),  and  perfectly  familiar  with 
that  section  of  country,  that  but  few  cavalry  could  be  advantageously 
used  there.  I therefore  decided  to  detach  a good  squadron,  with  instruc- 
tions to  strike  a blow  at  or  near  Evans’  farm,  about  7 miles  from  New 


198 


NOR  CH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX, 


Berne.  With  Lis  usual  alacrity  Col.  [P.  G.J  Evans,  [Sixty-tLird  KortL 
Carolina  Troops,  or  Fifth  Cavalry],  who  is  perfectly  acquainted  with 
that  neighborhood,  volunteered  to  command  it  and  selected  Capt.  [E.  E.] 
Shaw’s  squadron.  With  the  remainder  of  my  command  I moved  on  to- 
ward Sheppardsville,  reaching  Peletier’s  Mill,  20  odd  miles  distant,  before 
sunset.  After  gaining  from  reliable  sources  all  the  information  I could 
relative  to  the  enemy’s  strength,  position,  &c.,  1 made  arrangements  to 
attack  Sheppardsville  early  next  day  (Sunday),  or  at  least  to  occupy 
the  enemy’s  attention  at  that  point  while  Colonel  Ferebee,  who  promptly 
offered  his  services  for  the  purpose,  would  destroy  the  railroad  above 
Newport  Creek,  taking  the  left-hand  road  beyond  Kennedy’s  Mill. 
During  the  night  official  dispatches  were  received,  both  from  the  major- 
general  commanding  and  from  Colonel  Evans,  whose  contents  induced 
me  to  abandon  my  plan.  By  reference  to  the  map  you  will  perceive 
that  I had  reached  a point  25  or  30  miles  in  front  of  Smith’s  Mill,  on  White 
Oak,  following  the  only  road  by  which  it  was  possible  for  me  to  return. 

Colonel  Evans  having  been  comiielled  to  fall  back  over  Mill  Creek  my 
position  was  by  no  means  desirable,  since  in  the  event  of  the  enemy’s 
advance  to  the  fork  of  the  road  at  Smith’s  Mill  I should  have  been  forced 
to  cut  my  way  through  or  swim  the  White  Oak  at  Swansborough.  Some 
time  before  daj"  Lieutenant  Wiley’s  party  returned  and  reported  they  i 
had  torn  up  the  railroad  track  at  a point  3 miles  above  Sheppardsville.  i 
From  the  proximity  of  the  enemy’s  forces  they  were  compelled  to  wait  i 
until  after  night  to  commence  operations.  I was  highly  gratified  with  | 
the  promptness  and  efficiency  displayed  by  Lieutenant  Wiley  and  party.  | 

Colonel  Evans  had  not  advanced  more  than  6 or  7 miles  beyond  Mill 
Creek  before  he  encountered  a large  force  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  with  * 
which  he  skirmished  awhile,  resulting  in  the  loss  of  one  horse  killed  on  i 
our  side  and  disabling  one  of  the  enemy’s.  The  colonel  then  ordered  a . 
charge,  but  the  road  was  in  such  condition  that  the  horses  mired  down  . 
and  two  men  were  dismounted.  The  shouting,  however,  had  the  effect  of 
routing  the  Yankees,  but  the  colonel  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  pursue, 
as  his  rear  was  much  exposed.  A prisoner  whom  we  captured  reported 
a large  force  in  that  vicinity,  as  did  also  a loyal  citizen. 

Colonel  Evans  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  coolness  and  gal- 
lantry of  Captain  Shaw  and  Lieut.  John  C.  Hines,  of  Company  C.  He 
also  mentions  the  good  conduct  of  Sergt.  Lewis  H.  Darden,  whose  horse 
was  killed  under  him;  Privates  Thomas  O.  Bunting,  Eichard  H.  Lee, 
Charles  Butler,  Thomas  M.  Ferrill,  Walter  J.  Moore,  George  M.  Tatum, 
George  Vauu,  Cornelius  Timothy,  Isaac  W.  Grist,  and  Corpl.  W.  F. 
Culbreth,  all  of  whom  volunteered  to  go  to  the  front  and  watch  the 
enemy. 

I am  pleased  to  state  that  my  whole  command  during  the  march  con- 
tinued in  excellent  spirits  despite  the  weather,  and  seemed  anxious  to 
engage  the  foe.  My  movements  were  seriously  interrupted  and  impeded 
by  the  scarcity  of  forage,  of  which  there  is  not  sufficient  to  supply  the 
wants  of  the  few  citizens  remaining  in  those  counties. 

I am  greatly  in  need  of  a good  battery,  and  respectfully  ask  that  one 
be  ordered  to  me  without  delay. 

Verv  respectfullv,  vour  obedient  servant, 

B.  H.  EOBEETSON, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  Archer  Anderson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen  , Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  X.  C.,  Goldshorongh. 


CuAF.  XXX.]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  FRANKLIN,  VA.  199 

MARCH  10-13,  1863. — Demonstration  on  Plymouth,  H.  C. 

Report  of  Maj.  Walter  G.  Bartliolomeic ^ Tic enly- seventh  Massachusetts 
Infantry^  commanding  Rost. 

Plymouth,  N.  0.,  March  13,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  10th  instant,  at 
about  3 o’clock  p.  m.,  the  enemy  made  their  appearance,  about  50  strong, 
within  rifle-shot  of  our  outpost.  I immediately  ordered  the  garrison  to 
take  position  in  line  of  the  inside  pickets  and  sent  a company  out  as  skir- 
mishers, who  proceeded  about  2 miles  and  found  they  were  in  force  one- 
half  mile  farther  on.  I reported  to  Captain  Flusser,  of  the  gunboat 
Perry,  but  the  enemy  not  making  any  further  demonstrations  at  that  time 
did  not  open  upon  them.  After  standing  an  hour  in  a drenching  rain 
another  alarm  was  given.  As  the  enemy  advanced  and  fired  upon  our 
pickets  the  gunboats  commenced  to  shell  them,  and  they  retired.  They 
made  their  appearance  again  about  10  in  the  evening  so  close  to  our 
lines  that  we  could  hear  them  speak  distinctly.  At  a signal  from  the 
boats  the  pickets  were  drawn  in,  and  they  were  again  shelled,  as  I learn, 
with  good  effect,  as  several  were  reported  killed  and  wounded.  We 
were  underarms  the  remainder  of  the  night  but  were  not  molested.  In 
the  morning  I sent  a party  to  reconnoiter,  who  went  as  far  as  Oorpeur’s 
blacksmith’s  shop,  which  had  been  used  as  a picket  post,  and  burned  it 
in  sight  of  the  enemy,  and  ascertained  their  strength  to  be  about  800 
men  of  the  Seventeenth  Korth  Carolina  Kegiment. 

This  morning  (the  13th),  about  2 o’clock,  three  rockets  were  sent  up 
by  the  enemy  and  were  answered  by  two  blue  ones  several  miles  up.  the 
river.  Thus  we  are  still  in  doubt  as  to  what  they  intend  to  do,  but  ex- 
pect to  meet  them  with  determination  whatever  way  they  come.  Both 
officers  and  men  behaved  with  their  usual  gallantry,  and  expressed  much 
disappointment  that  the  affair  should  end  so  quietly. 

I am,  general,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

W.  G.  BARTHOLOMEW, 

fl/u/or.  Commanding  Post. 


MARCH  17,  1863.— Skirmish  near  Franklin,  Va. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Geu.  John  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Col.  Samnel  P.  Spear,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Pech,  U.  >?.  Army. 

Suffolk,  Va.,  March  17, 1863. 

Bear  Sir  : Colonel  Spear  was  delayed  from  four  to  five  hours,  and 
reached  the  vicinity  of  Franklin  about  9 o’clock.  He  charged  with 
cavalry,  capturing  one  lieutenant,  but  his  men  failed  to  get  over  the 
earthworks,  ditches,  &c.  He  made  a second  charge  with  like  results. 
He  shelled  them  with  effect.  He  went  down  toward  South  Quay  and  is 
now  returning.  Major  Stratton  led  a cLarge  and  wns  twice  wounded, 


200 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


but  only  slightly.  Lieut.  [G.  B.]  Knight  and  one  man  missing.  Lieut. 
[S.  L.]  Monday  is  badly  wounded.  It  was  a bold  dash  for  cavalry,  and 
impressed  the  rebels  with  the  idea  that  our  men  were  in  earnest. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

General  Dix. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  tSamuel  P.  Spear Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Yol.  Cavalry, 
Camp  Suffolk,  Ya.,  March  18,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  a reconnais- 
sance made  by  me  in  the  direction  of  Franklin,  &c. : 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th  I received  orders  from  the  commanding 
general,  through  his  assistant  adju cant-general,  to  make  a thorough  in- 
vestigation of  the  ground  occupied  by  a supposed  force  on  the  Black- 
water,  and  opposite  to,  on  this  side  of  the  river  from  Franklin.  I ac- 
cordingly left  Suffolk  in  command  of  350  cavalry  and  four  pieces  of 
Davis’  battery,  and,  proceeding  very  cautiously,  arrived  at  and  found 
the  enemy’s  outer  pickets  at  Hebron  Church,  half  a mile  from  Carrsville 
and  4J  miles  this  side  of  Franklin.  They  at  once  fled  to  the  woods, 
and  undoubtedly,  by  a pathway,  gave  information  of  my  approach.  1 
advanced,  and  at  a point  1 mile  this  side  of  Franklin  found  a small 
picket  5 captured  a first  lieutenant  in  charge  and  sent  him  at  once  to 
your  headquarters.  Here  I ordered  a charge  of  three  companies,  under 
Maj.  F.  A.  Stratton,  and  he  gallantly  made  the  same,  in  which,  imme- 
diately under  the  breastworks  of  the  enemy,  he  lost  his  horse  and  full 
equipments.  Some  of  his  men  were  wounded  and  Lieut.  Samuel  L. 
Monday  was  badly  wounded  in  the  abdomen.  The  party  under  command 
of  Major  Stratton,  after  examining  the  enemy’s  defenses,  &c.,  and  in 
accordance  to  orders,  returned  and  joined  my  main  body.  Captain  Davis 
was  then  directed  and  threw  about  eighteen  shells  directly  into  the  en- 
emy’s lines,  which  must  have  done  great  destruction. 

1 then  ordered  cease  firing  and  made  a second  charge  of  three  com- 
panies, under  Maj.  George  T.  Cornog,  which  was  done  in  such  a man- 
ner as  to  merit  my  thanks.  The  enemy’s  intrenchments,  masked  bat- 
tery, and  rifle-pits  were  so  constructed  as  to  be  impassable  for  cavalry, 
and  while  no  results  could  be  gained  by  me,  enabled  him  to  a very 
great  advantage. 

The  fortifications,  rifle-pits,  &c.,  are  about  200  yards  from  Blackwater 
Eiver  and  running  nearly  parallel  with  it,  and  it  is  estimated,  by  a 
minute  examination,  that  one  regiment  of  infantry,  about  250  cavalry, 
two  10-pounder  rifltd  guns,  and  one  section  of  rocket  battery  is  the 
strength  of  the  enemy  on  this  side  of  the  river  at  that  point. 

Inclosed  please  find  a list  of  wounded  and  missing,*  and  see  note  of 
some  since  returned.  Lieutenant  Knight  must,  I think,  have  been 
thrown  from  his  horse,  and  is  probably  now  a prisoner  unhurt. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  commend  highly  the  conduct  of  Majs.  Frank- 
lin A.  Stratton  and  George  T.  Cornog  for  their  prompt,  energetic, 
and  spirited  manner  in  conducting  their  respective  charges,  and  unless 

^Not  found.  Regimental  returns  report  1 ofiScer  and  2 men  wounded,  and  1 officer 
and  11  men  missing. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIKMISH  AT  WINFIELD,  N.  C. 


201 


these  movements  had  been  made  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  have 
given  a correct  or  even  a slight  account  of  the  enemy’s  defenses, 
strength,  &c. 

Lieut.  Samuel  L.  Monday  was  seriously  wounded*  while  in  the  per- 
formance of  his  duty,  and  I regret  exceedingly  this  serious  injury  to  an 
excellent  and  promising  officer. 

Capt.  Phiueas  A.  Davis  is  deserving  of  great  credit  for  his  portion  of 
duty  in  the  reconnaissance,  and  officers  and  men  all  behaved  well. 

Haviug  performed  the  duty  assigned  me,  I returned  to  camp  at  7 last 
evening. 

While  I regret  exceedingly  the  loss  in  missing  I am  positive  that  I 
could  not  have  carried  out  my  instructions  with  less  casualties. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  P.  SPEAE, 

Colo7iel  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 

Maj.  B.  B.  Foster, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


MARCH  23,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Winfield,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  Virginia. 
No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  North 
Carolina. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  TJ.  8.  Ar^ny,  conwianding  the  Depart- 

• ment  of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  March  29, 1863. 
On  the  23d  the  enemy,  with  three  companies  Forty-second  North  Car- 
olina and  a guerrilla  force,  under  command  of  Colonel  Brown,  Forty- 
second  North  Carolina,  attacked  the  post  at  Winfield,  on  the  Chowan, 
below  Gatesville.  Lieutenant  McLane,  with  part  of  a company  of  the 
First  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  took  refuge  in  a block-house,  and  after 
an  hour  and  a half’s  fighting  repulsed  the  enemy.  The  next  day  Gen- 
eral Foster  came  up  from  Plymouth  with  three  companies,  which  were 
landed  and  sent  in  pursuit.  Four  companies  of  the  Eleventh  Pennsyl- 
vania Cavalry  were  sent  from  Sufiblk  the  same  day  by  General  Peck. 
Some  of  Colonel  Brown’s  command  succeeded  in  crossing  the  Chowan. 
The  residue  were  overtaken  by  General  Foster’s  companies,  and  after  a 
skirmish  were  dispersed  and  scattered  in  the  swamps.  Our  troops  were 
trying  to  hunt  them  up  at  last  accounts.  This  morning  the  enemy 
attacked  Williamsburg  with  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  were  repulsed 
by  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Lewis.  They  had 
retreated  an  hour  ago.  All  was  quiet  at  Williamsburg,  and  Colonel 
Lewis  had  re-established  his  pickets. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 

* Died  of  his  wcuuds  March  18,  1863. 


202 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Ko.  2. 


Eeport  of  Maj,  Gen.  Jolm  G.  Foster.,  TJ.  8.  Army.,  commandmg  the  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina. 


^Chowan  Eiyer,  Steamer  John  Faron, 

Alarcli  25,  1863. 

General  : The  rebels  attacked  the  post  at  Winfield  on  the  morning 
of  the  23d  at  daybreak.  Lieutenant  McLane,  with  the  portion  of  his 
company  (of  the  First  North  Carolina  Yolunteers)  that  had  not  left  him, 
took  refuge  in  the  block-house,  and  after  one  and  a half  hours’  fighting 
repulsed  the  enemy,  whose  force  consisted  of  three  companies  of  the 
Forty-second  North  Carolina  and  a guerrilla  force,  all  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Brown,  of  the  Forty-second  North  Carolina.  I was  at 
Plymouth  at  the  time  and  ran  up  with  three  companies,  landed  them, 
and  started  them  in  pursuit,  at  the  same  time  patroling  the  river  with 
my  boat  to  prevent  their  recrossing  and  also  sending  for  some  cavalry 
to  General  Peck,  at  Suffolk,  to  scour  the  country  and  pick  up  stragglers. 
Some  of  Colonel  Brown’s  command  succeeded  in  recrossing,  but  the  re- 
mainder were  overtaken  by  our  companies  at  Eocky  Hock  Creek  yes- 
terday morning  and  attacked,  and  after  a short  skirmish  scattered  into 
the  swamps. 

Four  companies  of  your  fine  regiment,  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania 
Cavalry,  arrived  at  night,  too  late  to  do  much  scouting,  but  will  to-day 
try  to  force  out  these  fugitive  rebels.  You  can,  if  you  choose,  send  a 
brief  epitome  of  this  small  affair  to  General  Halleck. 

If  you  still  entertain  the  idea  of  holding  the  country  north  of  the 
Albemarle,  now  garrisoned  by  very  small  parties,  I shall  be  happy  to 
vacate  whenever  you  find  it  convenient  to  replace  my  small  garrisons 
or  to  establish  others  more  convenient  for  you.  I think  the  post  at 
Winfield  should  be  maintained  to  intercept  smuggling  across  the 
Chowan  Eiver. 

With  great  respect,  verv  truly,  yours, 

J.  C.  FOSTEE, 

Major- General,  Volunteers. 


General  John  A.  Dix, 

Comdg.  8eventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peeh,  U.  8.  Army. 

Suffolk,  Ya.,  March  23,  1863. 

The  post  at  Winfield,  N.  C.,  was  attacked  this  morning  by  a consid- 
erable force  of  guerrillas  in  the  absence  of  the  gunboat.  One  of  the 
l^ickets  came  in.  I at  once  ordered  Major  Stratton  to  go  down  with  a 
party  of  cavalry'  and  render  anj^  assistance  in  his  power. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

General  Dix. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  March  24,  1863. 

A communication  from  General  Foster’s  headquarters  reached  me 
this  morning.  The  gunboats  bad  arrived  at  AVintield  from  Plymouth 


Chaf.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  WILLIAMSBURG,  VA. 


203 


and  relieved  the  garrison  after  all  their  barracks  were  burned.  They 
crossed  8 miles  below.  Yesterday  I sent  a strong  party,  under  Major 
Stratton,  and  hope  we  may  be  able  to  cut  off  and  capture  some  of  them. 
Shall  follow  them  up. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

General  Hix. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  25,  1863. 

Major  Stratton  reached  Winfield  at  8 a.  m.,  in  excellent  time.  The 
gunboat  had  been  back  with  four  comi)anies  of  infantry  and  left  again 
prior  to  his  arrival.  The  infantry  were  in  pursuit.  The  rebels  moved 
oft  toward  Edenton.  Some  heavy  guns  were  heard  in  that  direction. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


MARCH  29,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 

REF>ORTS,  ETC.* 

Ko.  1. — Brig.  Geu.  Richard  Busteed,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Yorktown,  and 
orders. 

Xo.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  William  Lewis,  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Geu.  Henry  A.  Wise,  C.  S.  Army. 

Xo.  4. — Col.  William  B.  Tahb,  C.  S.  Army. 

Xo.  .5. — Capt.  G.  A.  Wallace,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Heport  of  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Busteed^  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  at  York- 

toivn,  and  orders. 

Yorktowx,  March  30,  1863. 

I sent  you  this  morning  the  report  of  Colonel  Lewis,  who  is  now  here. 
Our  casualties  were  5 wounded,  6 missing,  and  2 murdered.  The  boots 
were  stolen  from  off  our  dead. 

The  enemy’s  loss  in  killed  and  wounded,  according  to  the  most  reli- 
able accounts,  is  at  least  18.  He  came  with  a train  of  wagons  and  four 
field  pieces,  and  was  guided  into  the  town  by  citizens  of  Williamsburg 
at  three  different  points. 

I will  send  you  to-morrow  three  of  the  enemy’s  force,  who  deserted  to 
us.  I have  the  pleasure  to  report  everything  quiet  now. 

KICHARD  BUSTEED, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

General  Dix. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Yorktown,  Ya.,  March  29,  1863. 

Colonel  Lewis: 

I received  on  Thursday  from  General  Dix  a telegram  that  Williams- 
burg must  not  be  destroyed  unless  actually  taken  possession  of  by  the 


See  also  Dix  to  Keyes,  May  26,  1863,  in  “ Corresi^ondence,  eXc,."  i^st. 


204 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XKX. 


enemy,  and  then  not  unless  absolutely  necessary  for  our  own  safety. 
Yon  must  be  guided  by  these  rules  in  all  that  you  do. 

EIOHAED  BUSTEED, 

Brigadier- General j Commanding  the  Forces  at  YorJctown. 

Orders.]  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Torktown,  Va.,  March  29,  18G3. 

Commanding  Officer, 

Williamsburg^  Va. : 

The  attack  of  the  enemy  on  our  lines  at  Williamsburg  this  (Sabbath) 
morning  was  accompanied  by  circumstances  of  so  aggravated  a char- 
acter as  to  call  for  prompt  and  severe  punishment  to  those  most  impli- 
cated. Conclusive  evidence  has  been  furnished  to  the  commanding 
general  that  the  attack  was  aided,  if  not  planned,  by  citizens  of  Will- 
iamsburg and  carried  to  a successful  end  hy  them  and  their  abettors 
outside  the  lines;  that  the  enemy  were  led  into  the  city  by  one  or  more 
citizens,  and  that  when  once  in  they  were  enabled  by  the  aid  of  the 
citizens  and  their  own  overwhelming  force  to  occupy  the  most  advan- 
tageous points  for  attack  and  defense ; that  upon  their  occupation  of 
the  city  they  were  assisted  by  the  citizens  in  their  attack  upon  our 
forces,  who  were  fired  upon  from  the  houses  lining  the  streets,  the 
dead  liodies  of  the  murdered  being  despoiled  and  stripped,  their  boots 
pulled  off  their  feet ; that  the  stores  of  their  sympathizers  within  the 
city  were  thrown  open  to  their  advantage  and  their  horses  loaded  with 
packs  prepared  for  their  arrival.  To  provide  against  a repetition  of 
the  outrage,  the  commanding  general  directs  : 

1st.  That  all  the  privileges  to  all  store-keepers  in  the  city  of  Williams- 
burg to  purchase  and  sell  goods  are  revoked. 

2d.  That  all  citizens  in  the  city  of  Williamsburgand  vicinity  who  are 
willing  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  will  present  themselves  to  the  provost-marshal  of  Williamsburg 
for  the  purpose  of  taking  such  oath  on  or  before  the  1st  day  of  April, 
1863. 

3d.  That  all  citizens  in  the  city  of  Williamsburg  and  vicinity  who  are 
not  willing  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  excepting  the  servants  and  employes  of  the  Eastern 
Lunatic  Asylum  of  the  State  of  Virginia,  will  prepare  themselves  and 
their  families  to  be  placed  beyond  the  lines  now  occupied  by  the  armed 
forces  of  the  said  Government  by  the  2d  day  of  April,  1863. 

4th.  The  greatest  publicity  possible  will  be  given  to  this  order  and 
the  cause  leading  to  its  issue,  and  the  end  to  be  accomplished  by  its 
enforcement  will  be  communicated  to  all  concerned. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Busteed,  commanding  post: 

C.  G.  SUYDAM, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Yorkiown,  Va.,  March  30,  1863. 

Col.  William  Lewis, 

Commanding  Fifth  Fennsylvania  Cavalry  : 

General  Dix  directs  that  the  order  1 issued  to  you  to-day  shall  not 
be  enforced.  You  will  therefore  consider  it  as  revoked.  Yotify  the 
provost-marshal  at  Williamsburg. 

EICHAED  BUSTEED, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


CUAP.  XXX.] 


205 


SKIEMISH  AT  WILLIAMSBURG,  VA. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  March  31,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Commanding,  Yorhtown,  Va.  : 


GENERA.L : In  view  of  tbe  raid  on  Williamsburg  on  Sunday  last,  and 
rumors  of  complicity  on  the  part  of  the  inhabitants  with  the  assailants, 
you  will  give  orders  as  follows  : 

1st.  Ko  persons  will  be  allowed  to  go  to  Williamsburg  from  any  point 
south  of  Fort  Magruder  without  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance. 

2d.  Ko  citizen  of  Williamsburg  will  be  permitted  to  go  to  Yorktown 
or  to  any  place  south  of  Fort  Magruder  without  taking  the  oath  of  alle- 
giance. 

3d.  Ko  person  will  be  allowed  to  trade  in  Williamsburg  without  first 
taking  the  oath  of  allegiance. 

4th.  Ko  further  supplies  will  be  allowed  to  be  taken  to  Williamsburg 
for  the  use  of  the  inhabitants,  except  the  produce  of  the  neighboring 
farms,  until  farther  orders. 

An  investigation  will  be  made  into  the  circumstances  alleged  to  have 
occurred  at  the  time  of  the  attack,  and  if  the  parties  accused  of  aiding 
and  abetting  it  are  detected  and  reasonable  presumi^tion  of  their  guilt 
is  shown  they  will  be  brought  before  a military  tribunal  and  punished 
according  to  the  laws  of  war. 

The  objections  to  the  order  issued  by  General  Busteed  are : 

1st.  If  the  enemy  should  come  in  overwhelming  force  and  dispossess 
us  of  Williamsburg  the  order  would  be  an  idle  threat. 

2d.  It  assumes  without  investigation  that  the  reports  of  complicity 
with  the  enemy  are  true  and  that  all  the  inhabitants  are  implicated, 
whereas  we  must  ascertain  who  is  guilty  and  leave  the  innocent  undis- 
turbed. 

3d.  It  has  not  been  the  policy  of  the  Government  in  towns  which  are 
occupied  as  outposts,  and  which  may  only  be  temporarily  held  as  such, 
to  apply  the  tests  imposed  by  General  Busteed’s  order  j but  on  the  con- 
trary to  leave  the  people  unmolested  if  they  continue  in  the  quiet  pur- 
suit of  their  customary  occupations  and  give  no  aid  or  comfort  to  the 
enemy. 

4th.  An  order  of  such  extensive  scope  as  that  of  General  Busteed,  who 
was  only  temporarily  in  command  in  your  absence,  should  not  have 
been  issued  without  authoricy  of  the  commanding  general  of  the  de- 
partment. 

Should  it  be  found  that  any  house  in  Williamsburg  was  occupied  by 
the  enemy  with  the  consent  of  the  owner  for  the  purpose  of  firing  upon 
our  troops  it  will  be  razed  to  the  ground. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  Lewis,  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 

Near  Williamsburg,  Ya.,  March  29,  1863.  ^ 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  about  5 a.  m.  this  day  a 
body  of  infantry,  100  strong,  drove  in  our  pickets  near  Lipscomb’s  farm 
and  advanced  into  Williamsburg  while  a large  force  of  cavalry,  esti- 


206 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCHAP.  XXX, 


mated  at  1,000  iu  number,  advanced  on  the  Eiclimond  road,  having  with 
them  four  pieces  of  artillery  and  a number  of  wagons.  Tiie  cavalry  en- 
gaging the  attention  of  Lieutenant  Wenzel,  of  Company  C,  wdio  with  26 
of  his  men  were  stationed  on  the  Richmond  road,  the  infantry  succeeded 
in  getting  in  his  rear.  Lieutenant  Wenzel,  finding  himself  cut  off,  drew 
saber  and  charged  through  their  infantry  to  join  Captain  Stetson,  in 
command  of  reserve  pickets,  but  in  so  doing  had  2 men  killed  and 
himself  and  3 others  wounded;  9 men  additional  were  dismounted  and 
are  missing.  Lieutenant  Wenzel  behaved  with  great  gallantry.  He 
gives  a very  clear  account  of  the  whole  affair,  and  is  positive  as  to  the 
strengtli  of  enemy,  as  he  allowed  them  to  approach  within  500  yards 
before  retreating.  Their  battery  was  planted  at  the  college  ready  for 
action.  On  ascertaining  their  strength  Captain  Stetson,  with  picket 
reserve,  fell  back  and  joined  the  regiment  iu  line  of  battle  near  Fort 
Magruder  under  my  command.  Before  receiving  contrary  orders  from 
your  headquarters  I ordered  Captain  Bayley,  in  command  of  Fort  Ma- 
gruder, to  shell  the  enemy  out  of  the  town,  which  was  accomplished  after 
firing  about  12  rounds  from  a 6-pounder.  Our  picket  line  was  then  re- 
established, the  enemy  still  holding  a position  in  the  woods  about  one- 
half  mile  beyond  Williamsburg.  One  24-pounder  was  then  run  from 
Fort  Magruder  and  preparations  made  for  an  advance,  with  the  idea  of 
clearing  our  picket  line,  whereupon  the  enemy  retired.  In  this  affair 
we  lost  7 horses  besides  the  men  previously  named.  The  enemy  lost  in 
killed  and  wounded  12  men,  whom  they  carried  away  in  their  wagons, 
and  4 deserters. 

After  quiet  was  restored  I returned  to  camp  with  my  command,  and 
arrived  here  at  11  a.  m. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  LEWIS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  C.  Suydam, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Fourth  Army  Corps,  Yorktoicn,  Ya. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Yorktown,  Va.,  March  29,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded. 

The  within  report  is  furnished  to  the  major-general  commanding  the 
department  for  his  information.  I am,  however,  not  satisfied  with  its 
completeness,  and  have  directed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis  to  report  to 
me  in  the  morning  that  I may  obtain  a more  full  and  detailed  account  of 
the  occurrences  of  this  morning. 

RICHARD  BUSTEED, 

Brigadier-  General. 


]S-o.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  ^Yise,  C.  S.  Army. 

March  31,  1863. 

Colonel  Tabb,  on  March  29  instant,  made  a descent  upon  the  Federals 
at  Williamsburg.  The  result  of  the  expedition  was  the  capture  of  the 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  WILLIAMSBURG,  VA. 


207 


town  and  the  killing  and  capturing  of  about  15  of  the  enemy  without 
loss  on  the  part  of  Colonel  Tabb.  Some  time  since,  as  has  been  reported 
already,  Colonel  Tabb  captured  some  36  Federal  cavalry.  The  cavalry 
on  the" Peninsula  are  doing  good  duty  and  are  actively  employed.  They 
are  doing  all  that  can  be  done  with  them. 

Very  respectfully, 

HENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 


No.  4. 

Report,  of  Col.  William  B.  Tahh,  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

JJiascund  Bridge^  Fu.,  March  30,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  to  report  the  failure  of  my  attempt  to  capture  Fort 
Magruder.  My  plan  of  operations  was  as  follows : 

The  whole  command  moved  together  to  Petitt’s  farm,  between  3 and 
4 miles  from  Williamsburg,  on  the  Telegraph  road.  Here  100  infantry,- 
under  Capt.  G.  A.  Wallace,  were  detached.  Captain  Wallace  was  di- 
rected to  gain  the  rear  of  Fort  Magruder  by  a detour  to  the  left  through 
Petitt’s  and  Lipscomb’s  farms,  passing  between  the  pickets  at  Capitol 
Landing  Bridge  and  Williamsburg,  and  to  surprise  the  fort  before  day- 
break. The  main  body  moved  to  within  IJ  miles  of  Williamsburg. 
The  report  of  Captain  Wallace’s  guns  was  to  be  the  signal  for  a general 
advance.  Signals  were  concerted  by  which  I could  be  apprised  of  the 
success  or  failure  of  the  assault.  Had  the  fort  been  carried  Captain 
Wallace  would  have  been  re-enforced  there  and  a detachment  sent  to 
King’s  Mill ; if  he  failed  the  main  body  was  to  form  in  line  of  battle  at 
the  east  end  of  the  town,  and  Captain  Wallace,  falling  back  over  ground 
protected  from  the  guns  at  the  fort  and  inaccessible  to  cavalry,  would 
come  up  by  the  Capitol  Landing  road,  enter  Williamsburg  in  my  rear, 
and  so  rejoin  the  main  body.  Partly  through  the  blunders  of  guides, 
in  whose  efficiency  I have  every  reason  to  rely,  and  partly  through 
straggling  among  the  men  by  which  the  command  was  divided  and 
time  lost  in  getting  it  together.  Captain  Wallace’s  detachment  was  two 
hours  going  not  quite  4 miles.  They  reached  Capitol  Lauding  road 
after  daybreak  and  came  in  full  view  of  the  enemy’s  pickets.  All 
thought  of  capturing  the  post  by  surprise  had  now  to  be  abandoned, 
and  an  open  assault  would  have  involved  a sacrifice  altogether  dispro- 
])ortionate  to  the  advantage  to  be  gained.  Captain  Wallace  prudently 
forbore  to  make  the  attack,  and,  signaling  me  to  that  effect,  moved  up 
toward  Williamsburg  on  the  Capitol  Landing  road.  The  main  body 
moving  rapidly  forward  drove  the  picket  and  provost  guard  back  on 
Captain  W^ allace,  who,  without  loss,  killed  and  wounded  4 and  made  11 
prisoners.  I will  forward  Captain  Wallace’s  report. 

The  failure  to  capture  Fort  Magruder  involves  the  failure  of  the  expe- 
dition to  King’s  Mill.  The  most  direct  road  looking  from  Williamsburg 
to  King’s  Mill  passes  over  two  mill-dams,  both  of  which  have  been  cut, 
making  the  road  impassable  for  cavalry.  The  only  other  road  passes 
within  close  range  of  Fort  Magruder.  The  citizens  of  Williamsburg 
inform  me,  however,  that  notbing  could  be  gained  by  going  there ; the 
negroes  have  all  been  removed. 


208 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Large  smokes  were  observed  at  Fort  Magruderand  Whittaker’s  Mill. 
Mr  Douglas,  the  superintendent  of  the  lunatic  asylum,  who  was  watch- 
ing from  the  tower,  reported  that  the  enemy  were  burning  their  stores. 

I am  still  confident  that  the  enterprise  is  easily  practicable,  but  in  this 
connection  I will  write  again. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  B.  TABB, 
Colonel^  Commanding. 

Capt.  J.  H.  Pearce, 

Assistant  Adjutant'  General. 


iTo.  5. 

Beport  of  Capt.  G.  A.  Wallace.,  C.  S.  Army. 

Diascund  Bridge,  Ya.,  March  30,  1863. 

Sir  : I beg  to  hand  you  here  my  report  of  the  expedition  intrusted 
to  me : 

The  object  being  the  capture  of  Fort  Magruder  by  surprise,  I left  you 
at  a point  on  the  Telegraph  road  about  3 miles  from  Williamsburg  at  2 
a.  m.  yesterday.  I took  with  me  two  guides.  Companies  F and  A,  Fifty- 
ninth  Virginia  Eegiment,  and  Capt.  [J.  C.]  Hill’s  company,  of  Forty- 
sixth  Virginia  Eegiment,  numbering  102  muskets.  It  was  thought  by 
your  guides  that  we  could  reach  the  point  from  which  I was  to  make 
the  assault  on  the  fort  before  daylight,  but  the  guides  whom  you  gave 
me,  though  they  knew  the  direction,  seemed  to  know  nothing  of  any 
path.  We  were  led  over  a very  rough  country — through  ploughed 
fields,  over  fences,  deep  and  wide  ditches,  through  a swamp  that  took 
the  men  over  knee-deep,  and  through  some  timber  with  very  thick  un- 
dergrowth. Owing  to  all  this  our  progress  was  very  slow ; as  it  was, 
the  darkness  caused  Company  A,  Fifty-ninth  Eegiment,  and  Captain 
Hill’s  company  to  be  separated  from  my  command,  and  at  daylight  I 
reached  the  open  country  about  1 mile  from  the  fort  with  Company  F, 
Fifty-ninth  Eegiment,  only.  I sent  back  one  of  the  guides  to  find  the 
two  lost  companies  and  when  he  returned  with  them  it  was  so  light 
that  we  could  be  seen,  and  were  undoubtedly  seen  from  Williamsburg. 
I determined  therefore  to  push  on.  On  reaching  a point  near  the  Cap- 
itol Landing  road  we  discovered  three  of  the  enemy,  mounted,  coming 
from  Williamsburg.  They  having  discovered  who  we  were  turned  their 
horses,  and  I ordered  a volley  to  be  fired  on  them.  I then  determined, 
being  discovered,  to  make  my  way  through  Williamsburg  to  form  a 
junction  with  you  on  the  Telegraph  road,  if  not  at  Williamsburg  itself. 
A few  minutes  after  the  first  I fired  the  second  volley,  as  the  signal 
agreed  on,  and  was  proceeding  over  the  old  field  toward  the  town  wlien 
we  were  threatened  by  a body  of  cavalry  on  our  left.  I immediately 
formed  line  of  battle  and  advanced  at  double-quick  and  in  good  order. 
They  seeming  to  advance,  I halted  and  fired  several  rounds.  Having 
dispersed  them  I marched  by  the  fiank  to  the  town.  Another  large 
body  of  cavalry  in  the  mean  time  was  discovered  in  a field  on  our  left, 
who  followed  us  to  the  town.  When  I struck  the  main  street,  up  which 
I filed  my  force,  this  last  body  followed.  In  the  mean  time  we  captured 
4 prisoners,  horses,  arms,  &c.,  and  fired  on  several  who  would  not  sur- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  DEEP  GULLY,  N.  C. 


209 


nf  n®/)’  ^ discovered  about  30  or  40  cavalry  forming  ahead  of  us 

at  Collep  Place  Having  thus  the  euemy  to  contend  with  at  each  end 

the  hodv'.ffpni/°Tp?  "S'*'*  ®'‘‘®  sti’eet.  when 

the  bodj  at  Collegt?  Place  advanced  in  a charge.  AVe  held  our  Are  until 

they  were  close  to  us.  Our  fire  broke  and  confused  them.  AA^e  killed  3 
men  at  this  fire  and  \vounded  several  and  took  7 prisoners  who  were 
■intrTe tilling  and  capturing  the  like  number  of  horses, 

• t t^olWe  another  stand  immediately 

.It  College  Place  upon  discovering  that  the  euemy  in  my  rear  moved 

force  tLn  ip^red 

1 Jed."  ^ 

The  enemas  loss  in  killed  iind  wounded  will  be  ut  least  13  and  i)ris- 
ouers  11.  We  did  not  lose  a man.  Our  men  acted  ver^^  bravely. 

1 am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  " ■ 

G.  A.  AVALLAGE, 

Col.  AV.  B.  Tabb  Captain,  Commanding. 

Commanding  Forces  near  Diascund,  Va. 


MARCH  30,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Deep  Gully,  N.  C.  . 

Extract  from  Record  of  Events”  of  Second  Brigade,  Fifth  Division 
Eighteenth  Army  Corps.*  ' ’ 


I'ive  companies  of  this  brigade  picketed  that  portion  of  our  lines 
running  from  red  house  to  Trent  Giver,  in  the  vicinity  of  Beep  GuIlT 
.It  which  pkacc,  on  March  30,  a slight  skirmish  with  the  enemy’s^ pickets 
occurred  on  which  occasion  Private  Fosdick,  Company  C,  One  hun- 

bj  the'enemf  Volunteers,  w.as  wounded  and  captured 


k 


* From  Return  for  month  of  Ajiril,  1863. 


14  R R — VOL  XVIII 


210 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.’  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CHAr.  XXX. 


MARCH  30-APRIL  20,  1863.— Siege  of  Washington,  N.  C.,  and  pursuit  of 

the  Confederate  forces. 


Oin  THE  EHINCIEYL  EYE^^TS. 

Mar.  30,  1863.— Skirmisli  at  Rodmau’s  Point,  Pamlico  River. 

Washington  invested  by  the  Confederate  forces  under  Maj.  Gen. 
Daniel  H.  Hill. 

April  1,  1863. — Engagement  at  Rodman’s  Point.* 

2,  1863. — Engagement  at  Hill’s  Point,  Pamlico  River.* 

4-  5.  1863.— Engagement  at  Rodman’s  Point.* 

9,  1863.— Action  at  Blount’s  Creek. 

13-21,  1863.— Expeditions  from  New  Berne  to  Swift  Creek  Village. 

15,  1863.— Siege  raised. 

16,  1863.— Affairs  at  Hill’s  and  Rodman’s  Points. 

16- 21,  1863.— Expedition  from  New  Berne  toward  Kinston. 

17- 18,  1863.— Skirmishes  at  Core  Creek. 

17-19,  1863. — Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  W ashington. 

19,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Big  Swift  Creek. 

20,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Sandy  Ridge. 


EEEOETS,  ETC.t 


1. _Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  North 

Carolina. 

2. — Capt.  David  A.  Taylor,  Third  Now  York  Light  Artillery,  Chief  Signal  Officer.  ■ 
No!  3!— Brig.  Gen.  Edward  E.  Potter,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Washington,  of  ■ 

operations  April  16-17 . 

No.  4.— Itinerary  of  the  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Brig.  Gen.  Inuis  N. 

Palmer,  U.  S,  Army,  commanding,  April  7-25. 

No.  5.— Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division,  of 
Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Washington,  April  17-19. 

No.  6.— Brig.  Gen.  Charles  A.  Heckman,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade,  of 
Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Washington,  April  17-19. 

No.  7.— Itinerary  of  the  Fourth  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells,  U.  S.  Army,  1 
commanding,  March  15-April  13. 

No.  8.— Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifth  Division,  of  opera- 
tions on  the  Pamlico,  April  4-6,  and  Expedition  from  New  Berne  toward  , 
Kinston,  April  16-21,  with  resulting  correspondence. 

No.  9.— Col.  Silas  P.  Richmond,  Third  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  operations  April  7- 
10  and  April  16-21. 

No.  10.— Capt.  John  M.  Willson,  Third  Now  York  Cavalry,  of  skirmish  at  Sandy  1 
Ridge,  April  20. 

No.  11.— Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  of  skirmish  at 
Sandy  Ridge,  April  20. 

No.  12.— Brig.  Gen.  Francis  B.  Spinola,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Provisional  Division  j 
and  First  Brigade,  Fifth  Division,  of  operations  on  the  Pamlico,  April  1-4;  : 
action  at  Blount’s  Creek,  April  9,  and  Expeditious  from  New  Berne  to  Swift  | 
Creek  Village,  April  13-21. 

No.  13. — Itinerary  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Fifth  Division,  Col.  James  Jourdan,  Om 
hundiid  and  fiftieth  New  York  Infantry,  commanding,  April  7-22. 

No.  14.— Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Ransom,  jr.,  C.  S.  Army,  of  skirmish  at  Sandy  Ridge 
April  20.  I 


* Between  Union  gunboats  and  Confederate  batteries. 

1 For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  Lee,  Commanders  Davenport  and  Renshav 
Lieutonaut-C^ommaudeV  IMcCann,  Acting  Volunteer  Lieutenants  MacDearmid  an< 
Graves,  and  Acting  jMasters  Saltonstall  and  Boomer,  IT.  ^-^avy,  see  Annual  Repor 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863.  See  also  D.  H.  Hill  to  BeaureganI 
April  20,  1863,  in  “Correspondence,  etc.,”  post. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 

1. 


211 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster^  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina, 

Fort  Washington, 
Washington,,  N.  (7.,  April  5,  1863. 

General:  1 liave  the  lioiior  to  report  that  hearing’  of  an  approach- 
ing attack  on  this  place  by  D.  H.  HilPs  corps  Jarmee,  I started  from 
New  Berne  at  2 o’clock  on  Sunday,  March  29,  ordering  re-enforceinents 
to  follow  at  once. 

In  consequence  of  the  transport  getting  aground  at  the  month  of  the 
river  the  troops  did  not  arrive  before  the  enemy  succeeded  in  investing 
the  place  by  placing  batteries  ou'the  river  banks  and  on  the  roads  lead- 
ing from  the  town. 

I found  here  a garrison  of  only  sixteen  companies  of  infantry,  one 
company  of  artillery,  and  25  cavalry— 1,200  men  in  all.  The  enemy 
opened  fire  on  our  advance  posts  on  Alonday  night  and  on  Wednesday 
morning  at  daybreak  opened  from  batteries  of  rifled  guns  on  the  oppo- 
site side  of  the  river. 

One  gunboat,  the  Commodore  Hull,  received  ninety-eight  shots  from 
a battery  of  Whitworth  guns.  I put  up  batteries  on  this  side  of  the  river 
to  reply  to  and  draw  the  fire  of  three  guns  from  the  gunboat;  at  the 
same  time  I sent  word  to  General  Palmer  to  send  troops  to  take  the 
batteries  on  the  river  by  landing  and  attacking  the  batteries,  while  the 
gunboats  (also  to  be  sent)  attacked  them  in  front. 

Owing  to  the  lack  of  transports — the  most  of  our  vessels  being  absent 
at  Hilton  Head— the  force  brought  and  which  arrived  under  General 
Prince  on  Tuesday  and  Friday,  below  the  HilPs  Point  Battery,  was  not 
sufficient  to  cope  with  the  enemy’s  force  supporting  the  battery.  I there- 
fore directed  him  to  send  a regiment  or  two  through  the  Iflockade  in 
boats  and  then  return  to  New  Berne  and  march  across  to  this  place,  at- 
tacking the  enemy  in  the  rear  and  raising  the  siege.  I am,  however, 
anxious  lest  the  disposable  force  now  left  in  New  Berne  may  not  be  suftl- 
cient  to  eflect  this  object,  and  therefore  ask,  respectfully  but  earnestly, 
that  re-enforcements  be  sent  immediately  to  New  Berne  in  force  not  less 
than  5,000  men.  It  will  also  aid  me  very  much  to  have  General  Hix  and 
a force  from  Sufiblk  to  join  two  regiments  at  Plymouth  and  make  a 
demonstration  from  that  place.  This  should  not,  however,  interfere  with 
the  rapid  sending  of  troops  to  New  Berne,  as  their  want  is  very  urgent. 

I am  quite  confident  that  I can  hold  out  here  till  the  place  is  relieved. 
I shall  not  leave  initil  that  time,  as'  I consider  my  presence  absolutely 
necessary.  The  firing  on  both  sides  has  been  continued  at  intervals 
since  Wednesday,  but  without  material  injury  or  eflect. 

I would  most  respectfully  but  earnestly  renew  my  application  to  have 
the  detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  now  at  Hilton  Head  re- 
turned^ to  this  department  to  replace  the  troops  that  now  may  be  sent 
fiom  General  Hix’s  department  to  meet  the  present  emergency.  I 
can  eflect  more  with  those  men  than  with  superior  numbers  of  other 
troops,  and  their  discipline  and  efficiency  are  fast  being  impaired  by 
the  inactivity  and  unfortunate  circumstances  surrounding  them  at  Port 
Koyal. 

1 ain  confident  that  heavy  operations  will  be  necessary  in  this  State, 
and  that  the  most  desperate  eflbrts  are  and  will  continue  to  be  made 
to  urive  us  from  the  towns  now  occupied.  I trust  therefore  that  you 


212 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


will  regard  luy  application  for  the  immediate  return  of  this  detachment 
as  tending  to  meet  a necessity  of  the  war. 

Eeferring  to  the  pressing  necessity  for  immediate  re- enforcements  to’ 
relieve  me  at  this  place,  I wmuld  respectfully  suggest  that  the  5,000  men 
he  sent  temi)orarily  from  General  Dix’s  command  and  with  the  utmost 
expedition. 

I understand,  from  an  officer  who  came  through  the  blockade,  that 
General  Palmer  has  already  made’ the  above  request  in  substance  of 
General  Dix. 

I have  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' ‘ * J.  G.  FOSTEK, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok, 

Commander -in- Chief  JJ.  S.  Army^  Washington^  I).  C. 


New  Berne,  N.  C.,  via  Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

Airril  23,  1863 — 3 p.  m. 

I left  New  Berne  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  with  a force  to  raise  the 
siege  at  Y'^ashington.  Our  advance  of  cavalry,  with  Brigadier-General 
Naglee,  came  upon  the  enemy’s  rear-guard  of  cavalry  near  Washington, 
and,  after  driving  it  several  miles,  routed  it,  capturing  their  battle-flag 
and  taking  a surgeon  and  5 men  prisoners,  killing  and  wounding  sev- 
eral. The  cavalry  were  still  following  their  retreat  yesterday.  I found 
that  the  main  body  withdrew  from  before  Washington  with  the  artillery 
on  the  night  of  the  15th.  General  Potter  immediately  leveled  their 
batteries  in  front  of  the  town,  and  after  occupying  Hill’s  and  Kodman’s 
Points  made  a dash  after  the  retiring  force,  capturing  2 officers  and  a 
drum-major.  Everything  is  now  secure. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina,  18th  Army  Corps, 

Neio  Berne,  N.  0.,  April  30,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  in  relation 
to  the  siege  of  Washington,  N.  C. : 

Learning  an  attack  Avas  to  be  made  upon  Washington  I left  here, 
Avith  several  members  of  my  staff,  for  that  place,  arriving  there  at  -7.30 
a.  m.  on  March  30.  'JDlie  garrison  of  the  place  Avas  eight  comimnies  of 
the  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  Yolunteer  Militia,  eight  companies  of 
the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  YolunteerSy  two  companies  of  tbe 
First  North  Carolina  (Union)  Yolunteers,  one  company  of  the  Third 
New  York  Ca\mlry,  and  one  company  of  the  Third  New  Y^ork  Artillery. 
After  making  an  examination  of  the  Avorks  and  giving  necessar3^  orders 
as  to  strengthening  thqm  I at  once  sent  out  a reconnaissance  of  one 
company  of  the  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  Yolunteer  Militia,  one 
piece  of  artillery,  and  a feAN^  caAmlrymen  to  ascertain  if  the  enemy  held 
the  cross-roads  3 miles  from  Washington.  When  about  1^  miles  from 


Chap.  XXX.]  SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C.  213 

the  town  the  party  was  fired  upon  by  the  enemy  in  some  force.  They 
returned  and  reported. 

I also  sent  one  company  of  the  First  North  Carolina  (Union)  Volun- 
teers, Captain  Lyon,  and  one  12-pounder  Wiard  to  occupy  Hodman’s 
Point,  on  the  south  side  of  Pamlico  Eiver  and  1-J  miles  below  the  town. 
This  company  landed  at  the  Point,  and,  having  thrown  out  pickets, 
erected  an  earthwork  in  which  they  placed  the  field  piece.  That  night 
their  pickets  were  driven  in  and  the  company  driven  to  their  boats.  At 
daylight  the  next  a.  m.  the  enemy  advanced  to  the  beach  and  forced 
the  boats  off,  wounding  Captain  Lyon  and  9 men.  At  sundown  our 
])ickets  on  the  Jamesville  road  were  driven  in  by  the  enemy’s  cavalry. 

Tuesday,  Mareh  31,  a cutter  ot  the  United  States  gunboat  Commo- 
dore Hull  was  sent  down  the  river  after  a scow  upon  which  were  some 
men  of  the  First  North  Carolina  who  had  been  driven  from  Hodman’s 
Point  the  previous  night.  When  opposite  Hill’s  Point  it  was  opened 
upou  by  a battery  of  four  rifled  guns.  It  was  also  fired  upon  by  a bat- 
tery at  Swan’s  Point.  At  12  o’clock  midnight  a schooner,  in  charge  of 
Mr.  Gilbert,  was  dispatched  to  New  Berne  with  orders  for  re-enforce- 
ments. The  enemy  sent  in  a flag  of  truce  to  open  communication  with 
the  commanding  officer.  I refused  to  receive  any  flag  of  truce. 

April  1.— At  daylight  this  morning  the  gunboat  Commodore  Hull 
was  opened  upon  by  a battery  at  Hodman’s  Point  (opposite  which  she 
was  lying  in  order  to  prevent  the  erection  of  a battery)  and  from  one  a 
little  above  which  had  been  thrown  up  during  the  night.  The  Hull  got 
aground  opposite  the  battery,  but  maintained  a gallant  fight  duriug 
the  day,  though  with  no  result.  At  night  she  floated  off  and  returned 
to  town. 

April  2. — The  gunboats  below  the  barricade  were  seen  eugagiiig  the 
Hill’s  Point  Battery.  The  movements  of  the  enemy  indicating  the  erec- 
tion of  his  siege  batteries,  1 caused  traverses  to  be  erected  along  the  line 
of  our  intrenchments,  merlons  to  be  placed  on  the  fort,  the  door  of  the 
magazine  to  be  casemated,  the  ditches  to  be  enlarged  and  flooded  by 
means  of  dams,  and  the  whole  garrison  generally  was  steadily  kept  at 
work  strengthening  the  defenses  j 10,000  rations  were  put  in  the  fort, 
with  tlie  mteution  of  holding  it  to  the  last  extremity  even  were  other 
portions  of  the  line  forced  by  the  enemy’s  column.  A redoubt  was  built 
oil  the  right  flank  of  our  works,  near  Block-house  No.  4,  bearing  on  Hod- 
man’s Point,  upon  which  were  mounted  three  guns.  Another  redoubt 
was  erected,  covering  the  marsh  on  the  right  of  the  fortifications.  At 
night  a schooner  loaded  with  ammunition  and  commissary  stores  ran 
the  batteries,  as  small  boats  had  jireviously  done. 

A2)ril  3. — At  daylight  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  the  gunboats  from 
a battery  s^breast  the  town  and  near  the  New  Berne  road,  which  thev  had 
erected  during  the  night.  This  battery  was  silenced  by  the  gunboats. 
A redoubt  was  erected  at  the  end  of  the  bridge  crossing  the  Tar  Hiver 
and  m tlm  town,  for  the  purpose  of  sweeping  the  bridge  and  also  the 
streets  of  the  town  in  case  the  enemy  should  succeed  in  forcing  an  en- 
rance,  and  in  it  was  placed  one  6-pounder  gun.  The  work  was  erected 
•uid  to  be  manned  by  Captain  Jocknick  with  his  company  of  cavalrv 
dismount^l.  I ordered  a party  of  this  company  of  cavalrv,  under  Lieu- 
tenant O’Brien,  to  cross  the  river  in  boats  and  endeavor  to  capture  the 
«un  on  the  marsh  opposite  the  steamer  Louisiana,  which  had  been  si- 
enced  by  the  gunboats.  It  was  found  impracticable  to  reach  its  posi- 
aon,  owing  to  the  intervening  swamps. 

April  4.— This  morning  the  gunboat  Ceres,  Lieutenant  MacDearmid 


214 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


ran  tlie  blockade  with  a good  supply  of  ammiiuition.  At  noon  General 
Potter  embarked  on  the  gunboat  Ceres,  with  two  companies  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  and  one  company  of  the  Third  New  York 
Cavalry  (dismounted)  for  the  purpose  of  driving’  the  enemy  from  Eod- 
man’s  Point  and  occupjdng  the  position  ourselves.  The  Ceres  got 
aground  nearly  opposite  the  battery,  and  it  being  impossible  to  accom- 
plish the  desired  object  the  men  were  landed  in  small  boats  on  the  Wash- 
ington side  of  the  river,  below  Block-house  No.  4,  and  thence  returned 
to  the  town. 

April  5. — The  Ceres,  after  being  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  battery  for 
twelve  hours,  to  which  she  gallantly  replied  until  her  ammunition  was 
exhausted,  fioated  off  at  night  and  came  up  to  the  town. 

April  G. — An  abatis  was  placed  in  front  of  our  battery  on  the  Ply- 
mouth road  and  on  the  borders  of  the  creek  bounding  our  right  fiank. 

April  7. — A battery  of  two  guns  opened  from  the  woods  beyond  the 
creek  u])on  Port  Hamilton.  A battery  (Fort  Ceres)  was  built  on  the  left 
of  Block-house  No.  1 and  one  30-pounder  Parrott  mounted  upon  it  and 
manned  by  officers  and  men  from  the  Ceres  for  the  i)urpose  of  com- 
manding the  approach  to  the  town  by  way  of  the  river  from  above,  it 
having  been  heard  that  the  enemy  intended  coming  down  in  scows 
protected  by  cotton  bales. 

April  8. — The  enemy  fired  all  day  at  the  gunboats  and  Port  Hamil- 
ton, to  which  the  fort  did  not  reply  for  want  of  ammunition.  One  gun 
was  placed  in  battery  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  opposite  the  gun- 
boats, but  was  silenced  by  them.  At  dark  1 commenced  works  on  Castle 
Island,  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  river  opposite  the  town. 

April  9. — This  morning  I discovered  the  enemj^  liad  built  lour  bat- 
teries, Nos.  1,  2,  3,  and  4,  in  front  and  to  the  right  of  the  fort,  and  Avere 
mounting  guns.  We  o])ened  fire  on  them  to  disturb  the  working  par- 
ties. I was  obliged  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  continue  the  Avork  on 
Castle  Island  by  daylight,  OAving  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  batteries 
across  the  river.  Two  small  schooners,  Avith  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mc- 
Chesney,  First  North  Carolina  (Union)  Volunteers,  and  Master  Mc- 
Keever  on  board,  arrived  from  beloAV,  bringing  ammunition. 

April  10. — At  8.30  a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  the  fort  from 
Batteries  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  and  4,  one  gun  in  each.  The  fire  was  returned  by 
three  32-pounders  from  the  fort  and  by  a 32-iAOunder  in  the  battery  on 
the  Jamesville  road.  After  firing  for  somewhat  over  an  hour  the  enemy 
AvithdreAV  their  guns  from  sight  and  ceased  firing. 

April  11. — The  enemy  opened  fire  upon  the  fort  and  the  lines  at  7.30 
a.  m.  from  all  their  batteries.  The  fort  and  the  gun  on  the  Jamesville 
road  replied. 

April  12. — At  0 a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  Batteries  Nos.  1,  2, 
3,  4,  and  from  a new  one  (No.  5)  at  the  right  of  their  former  batteries. 
We  replied,  and  the  enemy  withdrew  their  guns  from  sight  after  an 
hour’s  firing.  The  gunboats  Hull  and  Eagle,  discovering  the  enemy 
repairing  the  battery  opposite  them  Avith  cotton  bales,  opened  upon  it, 
set  the  cotton  on  fire,  and  drove  the  gunners  from  their  i)osts. 

April  13. — The  enemy  endeavored  to  replace  a gun  in  the  work  on 
the  cotton  battery,  but  were  forced  by  the  gunboats  to  abandon  the 
uiidertakiiig.  Learning  the  enemy  had  small  armed  boats  and  scows 
in  the  river  for  the  pur])ose  of  capturing  our  disi)atch  boats  and  in- 
terrupting communication  between  the  town  ami  the  gunboats  below. 
Captain  MacDearmid,  of  the  Ceres,  and  Captain  Gouraud,  aide-de-cam]), 
started  upon  a schooner  AA’ith  a boat  hoAvitzer  to  clear  the  river.  The 


CHAP.  XXX.l  SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C.  215 

schooner  was  fired  into  by  the  enemy’s  boats ; she  replied,  and  drove 
the  boats  ashore.  The  batteries  at  Eodman’s  and  Hill’s  Points  opened 
upon  her  also,  striking  her,  but  without  damage. 

That  night  the  steam-transport  Escort,  with  hay  bales  placed  on  her 
guards  and  decks  as  a protection,  ran  the  batteries.  There  also  arrived 
two  small  schooners  with  ammunition  and  commissary  stores.  The 
Escort  had  on  board  the  Fifth  Ehode  Island  Volunteers,  Col.  H.  T. 
Sisson,  and  a plentiful  supply  of  ammunition  and  commissary  stores. 
She  had  GO  shots  fired  at  her  from  the  batteries  but  was  not  struck. 

A])ril  14. — The  Fifth  Ehode  Island  Volunteers  were  properly  placed 
on  the  line  of  works.  At  12  m.  the  enemy  opened  fire  with  all  their 
batteries  and  were  replied  to  by  all  of  ours.  After  an  hour’s  firing 
they  withdrew  their  guns  from  sight.  Eegarding  everything  as  safe  in 
the  town,  and  the  re-enforcements  and  men,  with  the  supplies  of  am- 
munition and  provisions,  as  ample  until  I could  raise  the  siege,  I deter- 
mined to  run  the  blockade  and  place  myself  at  the  head  of  the  reliev- 
ing force  in  order  to  insure  more  efficiency  in  its  conduct.  I therefore 
embarked  on  board  the  Escort  for  the  purpose  of  running  the  batteries 
at  night,  but  the  pilot  could  not  distinguish  the  necessary  marks  to  pro- 
ceed by  and  therefore  waited  for  daylight.  I left  Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  Pot- 
ter, chief  of  staff,  in  command  of  the  place  in  my  absence. 

A])ril  15. — At  daylight  the  Escort  started  and  ran  the  batteries.  She 
was  fired  at  one  hundred  times  by  the  Eodman’s  and  Hill’s  Point  bat- 
teries and  struck  forty  times,  but  with  no  material  iujury.  The  pilot, 
Padrick,  a brave  and  skillful  man,  was  killed  by  a rifle-shot.  At  G a.  m. 
all  the  enemy’s  batteries  (Eos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  G,  the  last  opening  for 
the  first  time)  opened  and  continued  a heavy  firing  for  an  hour. 

April  IG. — At  daylight  5 deserters  from  the  enemy  (conscripts  of  the 
Eighth  Virginia)  arrived  in  Washington  and  reported  that  the  enemy 
had  retired  from  our  front  and  were  retreating  on  Greenville.  General 
Potter  immediately  sent  out  the  entire  force  of  cavalry  (one  company) 
to  harass  their  rear  and  at  the  same  time  a force  of  contrabands  was 
employed  to  level  the  enemy’s  batteries  in  front.  Fort  Hamilton  fired 
a number  of  shots  into  the  Eodman’s  Point  Battery.  There  being  no 
reply  it  was  surmised  that  the  battery  had  been  abandoned.  The  gun- 
boats Eagle,  Ceres,  and  Hull  thereupon  steamed  down  and  opened  upon 
the  battery,  which  eliciting  no  response,  the  Ceres,  without  orders,  sent 
a boat  on  shore  to  take  T)ossession.  As  the  boat  neared  the  laud  three 
volleys  of  musketry  were  fired  into  her  by  the  enemy  concealed  in  the 
iutrenchments.  The  engineer  of  the  Ceres  was  killed  and  2 men  were 
wounded.  The  gunboats  then  renewed  the  attack,  rapidly  shelling  the 
battery.  The  gunboats  below  were  now  seen  shelling  the  Hill’s  Point 
Battery,  which  they  soon  passed,  and  reported  it  to  be  evacuated. 

At  this  time  the  enemy  having  also  retired  from  the  Eodman’s  Point 
Battery,  it  was  taken  possession  of  by  a party  from  the  gunboat  Eagle. 
Five  companies  of  the  Fifth  Ehode  Island  Volunteers,  under  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Tew,  with  one  12-pounder  and  one  G-pounder,  were  sent 
down  ill  the  Ceres  to  occupy  the  battery.  They  immediately  com- 
menced the  construction  of  iutrenchments  to  hold  the  position.  There 
was  found  in  one  of  the  batteries  at  Eodman’s  Point  the  carriage  of  a 
32-pounder  barbette  gun  in  perfect  order  j also  fragments  of  several 
exploded  guns.  Toward  evening  three  companies  of  the  Forty-fourth 
IVIassachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  with  one  12-pounder  Wiard  and  one 
G-pounder,  were  sent  to  occupy  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery  in  connection 
with  three  companies  of  the  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Mill- 


216 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


tia  from  below.  They  intrenched  themselves  there.  The  pickets  of 
the  enemy  occasionally  appeared  through  the  night,  but  in  the  morning 
they  had  entirely  disappeared  from  the  vicinity. 

In  the  meantime  I returned  to  New  Berne  and  proceeded  to  organize 
operations  so  as  to  effectually  raise  tlie  siege.  To  distract  the  enemy 
I directed  General  Prince  to  march  up  the  railroad  as  far  as  he  could 
toward  Kinston  and  make  a vigorous  attack,  continuing  it  for  several 
days.  At  the  same  time  I crossed  the  Neuse  with  all  my  available 
force  and  marched  directly  toward  Blount’s  Creek,  the  point  where 
General  Spinola  was  repulsed  in  the  first  attempt  to  relieve  the  siege, 
sending  at  the  same  time  General  Spinola,  Avith  his  brigade,  to  make 
an  attack  on  the  enemy  at  Swift  Creek,  which  is  on  the  direct  road  be- 
tween New  Berne  and  Washington.  The  movement  toward  Kinston 
with  this  latter  movement,  together  with  the  enemy’s  information  of 
the  accession  of  strength  of  Heckman’s  brigade  and  the  fact  that  after 
fourteen  days  of  close  siege  of  Washington  General  Hill  had  failed  to 
obtain  a single  advantage  or  to  advance  one  step  nearer  his  object,  in 
all  probability  caused  him  to  retreat. 

On  arriving  at  Blount’s  Creek  I found  it  abandoned.  General  Naglee, 
with  detachments  of  two  companies  of  cavalry,  pushed  on  in  advance 
toward  Washington.  He  succeeded  in  capturing  5 of  the  enemy’s  rear 
guard  by  a brilliant  dash  on  them  made  by  himself,  Captain  Johnston, 
assistant  adj ut ant- general ; Captain  Cochen,  and  Captain  Gouraud, 
aide-de-camp. 

The  next  morning,  April  19,  he  pushed  on,  Avith  the  cavaliy,  and 
fought  the  enemy’s  rear  guard,  driving  them  from  breastAvork  to  breast- 
Avork  and  finally  forcing  them  to  retire,  taking  some  prisoners,  killing 
and  wounding  some,  and  capturing  the  battle-ffag  of  the  Seventh  Con- 
federate Cavalry  (Georgia). 

The  column  pushed  on,  arrhdng  at  Washington  Sunday  eA^ening, 
April  19.  After  making  necessary  dispositions  at  Washington  I re- 
turned to  New  Berne  to  make  general  dispositions  for  the  defense  of 
the  department,  whicli  I Avill  report.  General  Hill  has  returned  up 
the  country  Avith  his  forces  and  all  our  posts  are  now  relieA^ed  from 
pressure. 

I take  advantage  of  this  opi:)ortunity  to  say  that  the  garrison  of  Wash- 
ington— the  Twenty-se\"enth  Massachusetts  Yolunteers,  Forty-fourth 
Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  two  companies  of  the  North  Caro- 
lina (Union)  Yolunteers,  one  company  of  the  Third  New  York  CaAmlry, 
and  one  company  of  the  Third  New  York  Artillery — behaA^ed  nobly ; 
and  regarding  the  intrenchments  Avhich  by  their  cheerful  and  zealous 
labor  I had  been  enabled  to  throAv  up,  together  Avith  the  courage  shown 
in  all  cases,  I belieA^e  they  could  have  successfully  resisted  an  assault 
of  all  the  forces  under  General  Hill  at  the  Point.  1 must  also  acknoAvl- 
edge  the  timely  assistance  of  the  Fifth  Bhode  Island  Yolunteers, 
brought  up  on  the  Escort  by  Colonel  Sisson. 

I liaA^e  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  ^Y.  Halleck, 

Oeneral-in- Chief,  U.  S.  Army,  fVashington,  D.  C. 


Chap.XXX.1  siege  of  WASHINGTON,  N.  C.  217 


Bet  urn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  during  the  siege  of  Washington,  N.  C.,  March  30- 

April  16,  1863. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  etc.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Aggregate. 

, 1 

Officers. 

Enlisted  meti. 

i 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

27th  Massachusetts  Infantry 

10 

2 

G 

1 

10 

2 

4 

8 

1 

43d  Massachusetts  Infantry 

44th  Massachusetts  Infantry 

1 

1 

1st  North  Carolina  Infantry,  Company  B 

1 

3d  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Battery  Gr 

Total 

1 

2 

22 

25 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  David  A.  Taylor ^ Third  New  Yorh  TAght  Artillery,  Chief 

Signal  Officer. 

Headquahters  Signal  Detachment, 

Neiv  Berne,  N.  G.,  April  21,  1803. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  you  a report  of  the  late  operations 
of  this  detachment  connected  with  the  siege  of  Washington,  N.  C.: 

On  the  9th  instant,  at  iny  solicitation,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoffman, 
assistant  adjutant- general  of  this  department,  ordered  me  to  open  com- 
munication between  Washington  and  the  gunboats  in  the  Pamlico  Kiver, 
below  Washington.  On  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant,  in  company 
with  Lieut.  J.  B.  Knox,  acting  signal  officer,  I started  from  New  Berne, 
and  that  evening  met  the  gunboats  12  miles  below  Washington.  I di- 
rected Lieutenant  Knox  and  men  to  report  to  Captain  McCann,  com- 
manding 'gunboat  fleet  in  Pamlico  Kiver,  and  always  to  be  on  the  boat 
at  the  blockade  near  HilFs  Point. 

That  night,  in  company  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  McChesney,  First 
North  Carolina  Infantry,  and  Lieutenant  Josselyn,  of  the  Navv,  and  ac- 
j companied  by  my  flagmen,  Jacob  A.  Keed,  Company  I,  Third  New  York 

I Artillery,  and  Horace  P.  Baker,  Company  E,  Third  New  York  Artillery, 

I I went  uj)  to  Washington  in  a row-boat  and  reported  toMaj.  Gen.  J.  G. 

I Foster. 

j In  making  arrangements  for  the  oiiening  of  communication,  Captain 
McCann  agreed  to  always  have  a boat  on  the  river  within  sight  of 
1 Washington,  and  Lieutenant  Knox  had  to  entirely  depend  upon  the 
I boats  to  place  him  in  a position  from  which  he  could  communicate  with 
; me.  Notwithstanding  his  agreement.  Captain  McCann  did  not  have  a 
*boat  at  the  point  designated  until  the  second  day,  and  then  only  for  a 
couple  of  hours,  during  which  time  Lieutenant  Knox  was  unable  to  find 
my  flag,  and  it  was  not  until  the  third  day  that  he  saw  it;  after  which 
communication  was  kei)t  uj)  at  all  times  when  the  gunboats  wer(‘  at  the 

K proper  stations. 

Whenever  my  flag  was  raised  at  Washington  a cross-fire  from  tin*, 
southwest  and  the  north  was  opened  ut)oii  it  by  the  enemy. 

On  the  16th,  while  signaling  to  Lieutenant  Knox  from  No.  1 block- 


218 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XXX. 


house  at  Washington,  Private  Keed,  standing  on  the  parapet  of  the 
battery,  flagged  three  messages  of  some  length  under  a very  severe  fire 
of  shell  and  shra])nel  from  the  enemy^s  batteries  at  Itodmarf  s Point  and 
Blount’s  house.  Many  of  the  shell  and  shrapnel  burst  very  close,  drop- 
])ing  i)ieces  immediately^  around  him,  but  Keed  never  once  left  his  posi- 
tion until  I had  done  signaling.  Keed  has  several  times  before  this 
behaved  in  an  equally  admirable  manner,  and  I take  pleasure  in  again 
recommending  liim  to  your  favorable  notice,  and  hope  he  may  receive  a 
suitable  promotion.  He  is  sober,  intelligent,  discreet,  and  brave,  and 
has  been  kept  in  the  ranks  solely  for  the  reason  that  he  has  been  d(v 
tached  from  liis  company  and  serving  in  a separate  command. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  A.  TAYLOK, 
Captain  and  Acting  ^Signal  Officer. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Eiglitecnth  Army  Corps. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Edtoard  E.  Potter.,  JJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  at 
Washington,  of  operations  April  lG-17. 

Washington,  K.  G.,  April  IG,  18G3. 

General  : The  enemy  evacuated  the  batteries  in  our  front  last  night 
and  retreated  toward  Greenville  by  the  Jamesville  road.  Five  deserters 
came  in  this  morning  at  5 o’clock,  who  brought  the  information.  Tliey 
stated  the  force  under  General  Garnett  on  this  side  of  the  river  to  be 
about  4,000  men  and  that  they  received  orders  last  night  to  withdraw 
in  order  to  re-enforce  the  army  in  Virginia. 

I sent  Captain  Jocknick  out  on  a reconnaissance  to  learn  the  where- 
abouts of  the  enemy.  He  followed  them  4 or  5 miles,  but  they  had 
crossed  Tranter’s  Creek  at  Gainer’s  Bridge.  Suspecting  that  there  was 
a general  movement  I requested  Captain  Kenshaw  this  morning  to  send 
a gunboat  to  Kodman’s  to  discover  whether  any  of  the  guns  had  been 
left  there.  The  Ceres  and  the  Eagle  went  down  and  shelled  the  Point 
but  received  no  reply.  A sergeant  of  the  Forty-third  Massachusetts 
volunteered  to  go  down  and  ascertain  the  condition  of  affairs.  He  went 
with  10  or  15  men  of  that  regiment  on  a schooner.  When  they  had  reached 
the  Point  a small  boat  put  off  from  her  to  laud  as  did  also  one  from  the 
Ceres.  This  was  contrary  to  my  wish  and  instructions.  When  they  had 
got  quite  close  to  the  shore  the  rebels  opened  a sharp  fire  of  musketry, 
killing  the  third  engineer  of  the  Ceres  and  wounding  2 men  of  the  Forty- 
third.  The  boats  were  all  got  off.  Being  convinced  that  the  force  at 
the  Point  was  very  small  I determined  to  send  five  companies  of  Fifth 
Khode  Island  to  occupy  it  this  afternoon. 

In  the  mean  time  the  gunboats  had  come  up  from  below  and  threw  a 
large  quantity  of  9-inch  shells  into  Kodman’s.  I sent  the  five  companies 
on  the  Ceres  and  in  a fiat  protected  by  haj^  bales.  On  the  fiat  was  a G- 
])ounder.  Master  McKeever  went  down  on  a schooner  armed  with  a boat 
liowitzer.  He  was  the  first  to  land.  The  whole  force  landed  without 
opposition.  Hill’s  Point  is  also  evacuated.  1 shall  send  three  coin- 
])anies  to  occupy  it  along  with  the  two  companies  of  the  Forty-third 
Massachusetts  now  below. 

I have  had  all  the  batteries  on  the  ridge  in  our  front  leveled  to-day. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE -OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


219 


I have  just  received  intelligence  that  the  rebel  cavalry  have  appeared 
on  the  James ville  road. 

Please  send  me  word  what  other  disposition  you  wish  made  of  the  force 
under  my  command,  and  what  will  be  your  plans  under  the  altered  cir- 
cumstances. 

Very  respectfully, 

EDWARD  E.  POTTER, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Bigliteentli  Army  Corps. 


Off  Hill’s  Point,  April  18,  18G3— 2 p.  m. 

General:  We  occupied  Rodman’s  Point  last  evening  with  live  com- 
panies of  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island,  a 6-pounder  smooth-bore,  and  a navy 
howitzer.  There  was  some  skirmishing  between  the  rebel  pickets  and 
our  own  j one  of  them  (the  rebels)  was  killed  and  3 prisoners  taken — a 
captain,  drum-major,  and  a iirivate.  Later  I sent  three  companies  of  the 
Forty -fourth  with  a field  piece  to  Hill’s  Point.  Here  they  were  to  be 
joined  by  the  detachment  of  the  Forty-third  lying  in  the  river.  I have 
visited  both  places  to-day.  They  have  commenced  throwing  up  works 
at  both  places  and  will  soon  be  in  an  excellent  condition  for  defense. 
A gunboat  lies  off  each  Point.  At  Rodman’s  the  rebels  left  behind  tliem 
a 32-pounder  carriage.  Their  cavalry  came  down  on  the  Jamesville  road 
yesterday  evening  only  with  a view  of  picking  up  stragglers,  as  I was 
told  by  5 deserters  who  came  in  this  morning.  The  enemy  are  in  full  re- 
treat, and  their  show  of  resistance  yesterday  was  to  enable  them  to  get 
off’ their  guns  which  were  probably"  troublesome  in  the  muddy  roads.  Our 
])ickets  liave  been  out  to-day  nearly  to  the  cross-roads,  as  I am  told  by 
the  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island,  and  have  seen  nothing 
of  them.  If  we  had  had  sufficient  force  to  pursue  them  I think  some 
of  their  guns  might  have  been  taken.  I shall  continue  tlie  Avork  on  the 
castle,  and  also  those  laid  out  between  Block-houses  Nos.  3 and  4.  A 
large  supi^ly  of  ammunition  came  up  this  morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  E.  POTTER, 
Brigadier-General.,  Comma7iding. 

Major-General  Foster, 

Commanding  Eighteenth  Army  Coips. 

A dispatch  from  General  Naglee  addressed  to  you  arrived  j^esterday, 
which  I opened. 


No.  4. 

Itinerary  of  the  First  I)ivisio7ij  Eighteenth  Army  Corps.,  Brig.  Gen.  Innis 
N.  Bahner^  IT.  Amny,  coinma^iding^  April  7-25.* 

Ayril  7. — The  Forty-third  and  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Regiments, 
of  the  First  Brigade,  and  Fifth  Massachusetts,  of  tfie  Second  Brigade, 
together  with  other  troops  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  crossed  the 
Neuse  River,  and  under  General  Spinola  marched  to  the  relief  of  the 
besieged  garrison  at  Washington,  N.  C. 


From  Division  Return  for  April,  18G3. 


220 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


April  9. — Arrived  at  Blount’s  Creek,  found  the  enemy  strongly  iu- 
trenelied ; engaged  them,  but  finally  withdrew,  and  returned  to  New 
Berne.,  Immediately  after  the  return  of  the  column  the  Forty-third 
Massachusetts,  of  the  First  Brigade,  went  on  board  of  transports  and 
proceeded  toward  Washiug'ton,  N.  C.  After  lying  otf  the  rebel  bat- 
teries in  the  Pamlico  Kiver  for  seven  days  returned  to  New  Berne. 

Ai^ril  17. — The  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Yolunteers,  of  tbe  First 
Brigade,  and  the  Fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia  and  two  com- 
{)anies  of  the  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  forming  a part  of  the  force  under  the  immediate  command  of 
Ceneral  Foster,  crossed  the  Neuse  Kiver  and  marched  on  Washington, 
N.  C.,  arriving  there  on  the  20th  instant,  without  meeting  the  enemy  ; 
distance  35  miles.  • 

April  22. — Keturned  to  New  Berne  by  transports. 

April  25. — The  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia  (First  Bri- 
gade) relieved  from  duty  as  provost  guard  of  the  city  of  New  Berne, 
complimented  by  Major-General  Foster  for  the  efficient  and  soldierly 
manner  in  which  the  duty  had  been  performed. 


No.  5. 


Report  of  Bri(j.  Gen.  Heyiry  ilf.  JSfaglee^  U.  S.  Army.,  commanding  Second 

Division^  of  Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Washington.,  April  17-19. 

Headquarters  Naglee’s  Division, 

Neic  Berne.,  N.  (7.,  Ap^ril  21,  1803. 

Colonel:  I would  respectfullyreport  that  the  advance,  consisting 
of  Heckman’s  brigade,  a detachment  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 
and  one  light  howitzer,  crossed  Blount’s  Creek  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
18th  of  April,  after  a march  of  22  miles. 

Here  I learned  that  the  forces  of  the  enemy  under  General  Hill  had 
retired  in  the  direction  of  Greenville;  that  a rear  guard  still  held  the 
crossing  of  this  road  with  that  leading  from  New  Berne  direct  to  Wash- 
ington, and  that  the  road  was  picketed  and  held  by  the  Second  Geor- 
gia Cavalry.  We  proceeded  without  opposition  until  we  were  about 
crossing  the  Chocowinity  Creek,  where,  by  a bold  cavalry  dash,  we  cap- 
tured 5 of  the  enem}^,  and  it  being  night  withdrew  to  the  right  bank 
and  held  the  bridges  at  the  mills,  that  at  the  main  road  having  been 
destroyed.  Our  pickets  at  both  bridges  were  fired  upon  repeatedly 
during  the  night ; returning  the  fire,  killed  several  of  the  enemy  at  the 
main-road  crossing. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th  we  were  under  arms  by  4 a.  m.,  and  at 
G found  the  enemy  occupying  the  field  works  commanding  the  bridges 
and  mill-dam.  A force  was  sent  across  the  dam  while  a mounted  one 
was  pushed  across  the  bridges,  and  both  attacked  in  a spirited  manner 
and  drove  the  enemj’  from  the  breastworks. 

A^ain  they  formed  and  occupied  another  line  of  works  about  1 mile 
from  the  last,  and  again  were  dispossessed  of  them. 

At  the  Ibng  line  of  works  crossing  the  New  Berne  and  Washington 
roads,  3 miles  from  the  latter  place,  they  again  showed  a determination 
to  resist  our  i)rogress.  AVe  ap])roache(i  cautiously  and  detenu inately, 
and  without  hesitation  attacked  them.  The  horse  of  an  officer  was  shot 
and  threw  his  rider,  and  a charge  was  ordered,  which  resulted  in  the 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


221 


capture  of  the  ca-ptain  of  the  Secoud  Georgia  Cavalry  and  the  speedy 
retreat  of  his  men  and  soon  after  of  all  the  force.  It  now  became  a 
spirited  race  until  near  the  crossing,  where  the  enemy  turned  into  the 
road  toward  Greenville,  and  where  the  howitzer  was  ordered  into  bat- 
tery and  opened  with  such  effect  that  all  organization  was  abandoned 
and  the  Second  Georgia  Cavalry  threw  down  its  colors  and  scattered 
in  confusion.  General  Foster  having  ordered  that  I should  not  pursue 
bejmnd  this  point  I ordered  the  cavalry  to  bivouac,  that  Heckman’s 
brigade  should  do  the  same  as  soon  as  he  should  come  up,  and  that  all 
should  await  further  orders. 

I am  happy  to  notice  the  services  and  gallant  conduct  of  my  assist- 
ant adjutant- general,  Capt.  George  H.  Johnston,  and  that  oi'  Capts. 
George  E.  Gouraud  and  Cochen,  who  assisted  in  a charge  which  cap- 
tured more  of  the  enemy  than  the  number  of  those  that  engaged  them 
on  our  side. 

The  efficient  conduct  of  Lieutenant  Beecher,  of  the  Third  Hew  York 
Cavalrj^,  attracted  my  attention. 

We  killed  several  of  the  enemy  and  made  a number  of  prisoners. 
Very  respectfullv,  &c., 

HENEY  M.  HAGLEE, 

Brigadier- Ge^ieral. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Bighteenth  Army  Corps, 


Ho.  G.  » 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  A.  Hechman.,  U.  tS.  Army^  commanding  First 

Brigade.,  of  Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Washington^  April  17-10. 

Headquarters  Heckman’s  Brigade, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  21,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  two  regiments  of  my  brigade  during  the  recent  expedition  to  Wash- 
ington, H.  C.: 

Friday  (17th  instant)  having  received  orders  to  cross  the  Heuse 
River  with  my  command  and  take  the  advance,  1 proceeded  on  the  road 
toward  Washington  as  far  as  Penify’s  plantation,  distance  from  Hew 
Berne  7 miles,  the  road  for  a great  part  of  the  way  being  of  the  most 
horrid  character. 

The  column  not  having  closed  up,  I placed  Belger’s  battery,  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant  Simpson,  in  position,  and  my  two  regiments  of 
infantry  and  a squadron  of  cavalry,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Beecher, 
in  line  to  support  them.  1 then  ordered  the  troops  to  bivouac  for  the 
night. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  formed  line  and  commenced 
the  march  without  interruption  until  we  arrived  at  Swift  Creek  road  at 
10  a.  m.  Learning  that  the  road  to  Swift  Creek  was  blockaded  for  a 
number  of  miles  I continued  on  the  direct  road  to  Blount’s  Creek  Mill. 
At  12  m.,  the  main  column  being  some  distance  in  the  rear,  I halted  to 
rest  and  allow  the  column  to  close  up.  After  a halt  of  about  two  hours 
I was  joined  by  General  Haglee  and  staff,  when  we  immediately  pushed 
forward  and  reached  Blount’s  Creek  about  3.30  p.  m.  Found  the  bridge 
over  the  creek  destroyed,  but  with  very  little  labor  the  pioneers  con- 
structed a passage  through  the  mill.  Received  orders  from  General 


222  . NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S»  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

Kaglee  to  halt  the  column  when  it  arrived,  bivouac,  and  move  forward 
early  in  the  morning,  the  general  proceeding  in  the  direction  of  Wash- 
ingtoD,  accompanied  by  his  staff.  As  soon  as  the  cavalry  arrived  and 
had  fed  their  horses  I ordered  them  to  follow,  which  they  did,  coming 
up  with  the  general  about  8 miles  from  our  encampment. 

At  5.30  a.  m.,  column  again  in  motion,  received  orders  that  upon  ar- 
riving at  the  road  leading  to  Hill’s  Point  to  take  one  regiment  of  in- 
fantry and  ascertain  if  the  fort  was  occupied,  and,  if  so,  by  whom.  Ac- 
companied by  my  staff  and  followed  by  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers 
I rode  into  the  fort  and  found  it  occupied  by  detachments  of  the  Forty- 
third  and  Forty -fourth  Eegimeuts  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

At  12  m.  received  orders  to  continue  the  march  toward  Washington, 
leaving  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  at  Hill’s 
Point.  Placed  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  in  advance,  and  arrived 
at  Washington  at  3 p.  m.  The  Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers  arrived  by 
boat  from  Hill’s  Point  at  5 p.  m.  Left  on  steamer  Escort  for  New  Berne, 
N.  C.,  on  the  20th  and  reached  here  at  G a.  m.  21st. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  A.  HECKMAN, 

Brigadier -General^  Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistayit  Adjutant-General^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  7. 

Itinerary  of  the  Fourth  Division^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps^  Brig.  Gen. 

Henry  W.  Wessells,  IT.  S.  Army^  commanding.,  March  W-April  13.* 

March  15. — The  Forty- fourth  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Mili- 
tia received  marching  orders  and  proceeded  to  Washington,  N.  C.,  by 
transport,  where  they  remained  until  April  22,  when  they  returned  to 
New  Berne. 

Ma7'ch  30. — Companies  A and  Gr  went  on  a scout,  and,  falling  into  an 
ambuscade,  returned  to  Washington,  with  a loss  of  3 men  wounded  and 
prisoners  and  Captain  Eichardson  wounded.  The  rebels  the  next  day 
blockaded  the  Pamlico  Eiver  and  laid  siege  to  the  town,  keeping  ui)  a 
continuous  firing  until  the  16th,  when  they  withdrew  their  forces  and 
abandoned  the  siege. 

April  13. — Colonel  Sisson,  with  the  Fifth  Ehode  Island  Eegiment, 
succeeded  in  running  the  enemy’s  batteries,  re-enforcing  the  garrison  at 
Washington  without  loss. 


No.  8. 

Bcports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  U.  8.  Army,  eommanding  Fifth  Divis- 
ion, of  operations  on  the  Pamlico,  April  4-G,  and  Expedition  from  New 
Berne  toward  Kinston,  April  lG-21,  tvitli  resulting  correspondence. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  13, 1863. 

Colonel  : My  last  formal  dispatch  was  dated  April  3,  at  which  time 
I was  present  at  department  headquarters  here.  I left  next  morning 


From  Division  Return  for  April,  1863. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


223 


(4tli  inst.)  for  the  Pamlico  Eiver  aud  arrived  at  Blount’s  Bay  at  8 p.  m. 
In  addition  to  the  gunboats  which  I left  there — the  Lockwood,  Allison, 
and  sloop  Granite — I found  the  Southfield,  Whitehead,  and  Seymour. 
The  Ceres,  which  arrived  on  Thursday  evening,  had  during  that  night 
buoyed  out  the  i^assage  through  the  barricade,  and,  while  engaging  the 
battery  about  3 o’clock  the  same  night,  passed  through.  The  enemy 
probably  withheld  their  fire  supposing  that  the  Ceres  would  be  impaled, 
and  must  have  been  surprised  to  see  her  steam  off  up  the  river.  (3n  the 
following  night  they  removed  the  buoys  placed  by  Captain  MacDearmid. 
The  evening  of  the  4th  Dr.  Eice  left  in  a row-boat  with  dispatches  for 
General  Foster.  By  him  I informed  the  general  of  my  views  of  the 
state  of  things  at  the  barricade,  and  the  impossibility  of  taking  the 
battery  by  landing. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  I had  Colonel  Dyer’s  regiment  (One  hun- 
dred and  seventy-fifth  Pennsylvania)  on  board  the  schooner  Annie  L. 
Edwards  (with  part  of  Eansom’s  battery),  to  be  towed  to  Washington 
by  the  gunboat  Lockwood,  Captain  Graves,  who  volunteered  for  the 
])urpose.  They  were  under  way,  approaching  the  barricade  in  gallant 
Style,  when  Dr.  Eice’s  boat  and  another  belonging  to  the  Southfield 
arrived  from  Washington,  and  the  officers  of  the  Navy  on  board  of  them 
said  that  there  was  not  water  enough  above  for  the  Lockwood,  so  I 
stop])ed  them  and  turned  them  back. 

The  Northerner  arrived  with  the  following  troops  on  board:  The  One 
hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Morris,  350  strong;  the  Fifth 
Massachusetts,  Colonel  Peirson,  500  strong ; making  the  whole  number 
here,  artillery  and  infantry,  2,500  men.  In  the  afternoon  the  Hunch- 
back, Captain  McCann,  arrived,  having  been  detained  by  boisterous 
weather.  The  Hunchback,  Southfield,  aud  Whitehead  made  a com- 
bined attack  on  the  battery  at  6 p.  m.  The  battery  replied  with  but 
three  shots,  which  passed  near  the  Hunchback. 

As  soon  as  dark  came  on  (in  order  that  the  enemy  might  not  observe) 
I began  preparing  the  Emilie  steamer,  by  disposing  bales  and  boxes  of 
clothing  and  three  bales  of  cotton  to  protect  the  boiler,  for  the  reception 
of  a regiment,  intending  to  place  her  in  charge  of  Cai)tain  Wells,  of  the 
Seymour,  who  said  he  would  make  the  effort  to  run  her  ui)  to  Washing- 
ton. Later,  toward  10  i).  m.,  a dispatch  arrived  from  General  Foster. 
Tlie  dispatch  in  the  morning  directed  as  follows : 

If  you  find  it  to  be  too  risky  to  land  and  take  the  batteries,  content  yourself  witli 
sending  me  through  two  regiments,  with  a plentiful  supply  of  ammunition  for  the 
guns  (:3‘2-])Ounders,  6-pounder  Wiards,  6-pounder  smooth-bores,  and  3-inch  guns)  ] then, 
leaving  the  gunboats  to  take  care  of  Hill’s  Point  battery,  return  at  once  to  New 
Berne  and,  taking  every  man  that  can  possibly  be  spared  (five  regiments  are  enough 
for  the  safety  of  New  Berne),  march  across  the  country  from  Fort  Anderson  to  Wash- 
ington. I am  quite  sure  that  you  will  only  meet  ten  regiments  on  the  way,  and 
them  you  can  overcome.  The  road  from  Fort  Anderson  to  Swift’s  Creek  is  bad  but 
the  rest  is  good.  You  can  also  go  by  the  way  of  Street’s  Ferry,  but  it  involves  the 
bridging  of  Batchelder’s  Creek  and  the  crossing  of  th©  Neuso  Eiver  and  Swift’s  Creek. 
It  is  better  to  corduroy  5 miles  of  the  road  from  Fort  Anderson. 

And  the  dispatch  of  this  evening  says : 

If  you  cannot  send  the  two  regiments  through  without  delaying  the  main  demon- 
stration and  attack  from  New  Berne  send  only  one,  or  leave  it  to  be  sent,  and  push 
the  other  matter.  It  is  my  belief  that  the  battery  at  Hill’s  Point  will  bo  abandoned 
when  our  force  approaches  the  cross-roads  3^  miles  from  here  on  the  road  to  New 
Berne. 

The  project  of  sending  a steamer  crowded  with  men  was  proposed  for 
<liscussion  between  the  higher  navy  officers  and  some  of  my  stafit*,  and 
as  my  ideas  of  its  impropriety  were  not  shaken  I countermanded  the 
orders  given  to  the  Emilie  and  ordered  the  One  hundred  and  fifty- 


224 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  XXX. 


eighth  Pennsylvania,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Troxel,  to  embark  at  once  in 
the  schooners  Annie  L.  Edwards  and  Flambeau,  these  vessels  to  be 
towed  to  Washington  by  the  Allison  and  Phoenix,  commanded,  re- 
spectively, or  guided,  by  McKeever  and  De  Oamarra,  of  the  Louisiana 
and  Hunchback,  both  of  whom  volunteered  for  the  purpose. 

The  following  is  a copy  of  the  orders  to  the  troops : 

Special  Opdeks,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  1.  ^ BlounVs  Bay,  April  5,  1863 — 12  p.  ni. 

The  One  luinclred  and  fifty-eighth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  will  embark 
to-night  in  the  two  transports,  in  which  it  is  to  run  the  batteries  of  the  enemy,  to 
join  the  commander  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  in  the  defense  of  Fort  Washing- 
ton. The  steamers  Allison  and  Phoenix  will  tow  the  transports  through. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince: 

ALBERT  ORDWAY, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

The  plau  was  as  follows : When  the  vessels  were  ready  they  were  to 
run  up  to  the  Hunchback  and  there  receive  the  orders  to  start  from 
Captain  McCann,  who  was  to  have  the  passage  through  the  barricade 
marked  and  was  to  engage  the  battery  with  all  the  gunboats. 

Myself  and  staff  were  up  all  night  attending  to  this,  and  at  4 o’clock, 
having  called  General  Spinola  for  the  purpose,  we  stood  on  the  upiier 
deck  of  the  Escort  to  see  them  pass. 

At  this  hour  they  had  reached  the  Hunchback,  near  the  barricade, 
and  Avere  stopped  by  Captain  McCann,  because,  as  he  afterward  reported 
to  me,  he  thought  it  Avould  be  daylight  when  they  would  be  passing  the 
upper  (Eodman’s  Point)  battery. 

At  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  I left  for  Hew  Berne,  having 
given  orders  to  each  transport  that  was  to  accompany  me  and  each  one 
that  Avas  to  remain.  At  evening  I arrived  at  Hew  Berne. 

On  the  7th  I appointed  Major  Frankie  chief  of  staff*  for  an  expeditiou 
Avhich  I expected  to  conduct,  and  I passed  the  day  with  my  staff’  exam- 
ining persons  Avho  knew  the  country  between  the  Heuse  and  Washing- 
ton and  endeavoring  to  form  a plan  of  operations  conformable  thereto 
and  to  General  Foster’s  wishes. 

During  the  day  I was  quite  ill  and  constantly  retching,  to  the  inter- 
ruption of  the  investigation.  This  was  increased  about  0 p.  m.  on 
learning  that  the  Allison  and  Phoenix  had  arrived  here  and  brought 
the  schooners  with  the  regiment  I hoped  had  reached  General  Foster. 

I received  from  department  headquarters  a list  of  the  troojis  that 
would  be  over  the  Heuse  in  the  course  of  the  night  and  available  for  a 
march,  and  I organized  them  into  brigades  and  constructed  an  order  ol 
march. 

Early  on  the  8th  I awoke  Avith  a blinding  headache  and  sickness,  and 
sent  an  officer  of  my  staff’  with  the  organization  and  order  of  march  at 
once  to  General  Palmer,  Avith  the  message  that  I was  too  ill  to  attend 
to  any  duty. 

Indisposition  has  prevented  my  making  this  report  before. 

I have  the  honor  to  be  colonel,  A^ery  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

HEHRY  PEIHCE, 
BrU/adier- General  of  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

A.  A.  G.y  lldqrs.  Eighteenth  A.  (7.,  Neic  Berne,  N.  C. 

H.  B. — I have  inadvertently  omitted  to  say  that  in  the  night  of  the  5th 
instant  I sent  through  the  barricade  in  an  open  boat  all  the  G-poundei 
and  3-inch  guns’  ammunition  which  arriA^ed  in  the  Hortherner. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


225 


April  10,  1803—7.30  p.  m. 

I am  4 miles  from  Core  Creek,  having  stopped  at  dark,  working  till 
that  time  bringing  along  rails  and  laying  them  down.  I shall  drive  in 
the  pickets  on  this  road  to-night  with  a company,  reconnoitering  to  the 
bridge. 

Colonel  Jones,  with  his  own  and  the  Eighth  Massachusetts,  will  go 
to  the  crossings  on  the  Dover  road  and  b’eat  up  the  enemy’s  (piarters 
on  the  other  side  of  the  creek,  if  possible,  in  course  of  the  night. 

Ill  the  morning  early  I shall  go-ahead.  It  is  thought  the  enemy’s 
pickets  are  watching  us. 

Yours, 


Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


HENKY  riHKCE, 


Hdqrs.  Fifth  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Apn7  22,  1803. 

Colonel  : Pursuant  to  instructions,  dated  Headquarters  Eighteenth 
Army  Corps,  l^ew  Berne,  April  IG,  18G3,  I advanced  on  that  day  in  tlie 
direction  ot  Kinston  with  Col.  J.  Jourdan’s  command,  consistiiu»-of  live 
companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Eegiment  New  York 
Volunteers,  nine  companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  Uqo- 
mient  Kew  York  Volunteers,  nine  companies  of  the  Tliird  Eeodment 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  four  companies  of  the  Eighth  Eegiment 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  with  four  pieces  of  Eiggs’  battery  and  with 
Col.  J.  Eichter  Jones’  command,  consisting  of  the  Fifty-eighth  Eegiment 
^enir^dvama  Volunteers  and  21  enlisted  men  of  Company  H,  Third 

i re-enforced  Colonel  Jones  with  a battalion  of  the 
Lighth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  directed  him  to  follow  the  Dover 
road  and  take  possession  of  its  crossing  of  Core  Creek.  The  main  col 
uinii  followed  the  railroad,  which  required  some  repairing  as  we  went 
along,  and  encamped  about  4 miles  from  Core  Creek.  Campino*  places 
being  very  sparse,  the  route  does  not  admit  of  much  choice  in'^this  re 
spect.  I sent  forward  immediately  Captain  O’Connor,  of  Comnanv  G 
One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Eegiment  Kew  York  Volunteers  with  his 
company,  to  reconnoiter  to  the  railroad  crossing  of  Core  Creek.  He 
lound  a picket  there  of  about  25  men;  exchanged  a volley  with  them 
and  drove  them  to  the  other  side.  Colonel  Jones  marched  his  command 
m the  night  to  Core  Creek  and  endeavored  to  cross  at  a blind  ford  but 
laded  on  account  ot  the  depth  of  water  from  recent  rains.  He  then 
bnmuacked  near  Dover  Crossing. 

The  next  morning  Colonel  Jourdan  advanced  over  Core  Creek  at  the 
nnlroad  crossing,  with  all  the  force  not  already  stated  to  be  with  Colonel 
Jones,  exceptmg  the  Third  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  the 
oattery  held  in  reserve  and  some  companies  on  picket.  He  extended 

to  the  Dover  road.  Colonel  Jones,  findiir>‘ 
iietliercutt’s  men  opposed  to  his  crossing,  forced  the  passage,  and  in  a 
read?  ® til  which  he  followed  them  3 miles,  drove  them  beyond 

■ skirmish  we  lost  1 man  killed  and  4 wounded,  all  of  the  Fiftv 

eighth  Kegiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Three  of  the  enemy  left 

15  R R— VOL  XVIII 


22G 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XSX. 


on  the  ground  were  buried  by  tlie  victors.  A large  party  worked  all 
this  day  upon  the  railroad  bridge  and  laying  down  sleepers  and  rails 
beyond  to  a considerable  distance. 

Ill  the  course  of  the  day  I received  the  further  instructions  to  assume 
an  otlensive  and  strongly  defensiv^e  position  on  the  line  of  Core  Creek 
and  hold  the  same  until  furtlier  orders.”  At  nfght  the  troojis  were 
withdrawn  to  the  right  bank,  on  the  railroad  and  on  the  Dover  road, 
with  pickets  out  on  the  left  bank. 

On  the  18th  Colonel  Jonrdan  with  the  same  forces  crossed  the  rail- 
road bridge  and  advanced  something  over  a mile  to  the  Core  Creek 
Switch,  whence  a road  leads  to  the  Dover  road,  intersecting  it  at  three- 
quarters  of  a mile  from  the  Dover  Crossing  and  about  IJ  miles  from  the 
switch.  He  extended  his  command  to  the  Dover  road  and  held  the 
point  of  junction  with  it  in  force.  At  the  same  time  Colonel  Jones 
jiassed  down  Core  Creek  on  the  west  side  to  take  in  rear  any  party  at 
the  l^euse  road  crossing  of  Core  Creek.  This  operation  occupied  the 
whole  day,  the  troops  not  getting  back  into  their  camps  till  some  time 
after  dark.  Four  rebel  cavalry  only  were  found  at  the  Neuse  Cross- 
ing, who  were  captured,  with  their  arms  and  horses.  The  ])arty  then 
crossed  the  creek,  having  to  construct  means  of  crossing  for  their 
ambulance,  and  returned,  by  the  road  on  the  east  side,  to  the  Dover 
Crossing.  The  next  day,  Sunday,  the  troops  were  not  disturbed  in 
their  bivouac. 

On  Monday  morning,  having  fully  concerted  the  operation  with 
Colonel  Jones  and  Colonel  Jourdan,  I directed  these  zealous  and  em^r- 
getic  officers  to  advance,  maintaining  a constant  communication  with 
each  other  until  the  long  sand  ridge  should  be  fully  explored.  The 
troops  of  the  two  camps  moved  at  the  same  time.  The  left  Aving  ex- 
tended to  the  Dover  road  and  scoured  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  rail- 
road through  most  difficult  ground ; the  right  advanced  by  the  open 
country  bordering  the  Dover  road  and  dashed  first  into  the  Sandy  Itidge 
region,  when  they  Avere  opposed  by  skirmishers.  The  noise  of  this  con- 
flict Avas  the  first  communication  the  left  was  able  to  obtain  AA'ith  the 
right,  although  nearly  abreast  with  it.  The  enemy’s  i)ickets  on  the 
railroad  retired  along  the  track,  tiling,  thus  giving  distant  notice  of  our 
])rogress  there.  Arriving  at  the  Biddle  road,  an  avenue  1 mile  long 
from  the  long  sand  ridge  to  the  railroad,  Avhile  the  skirmish  was  going 
on.  Colonel  Jourdan  moved  rapidly  to  the  right  u])on  it,-  Avith  a bat- 
talion, and  in  support.  The  affair  concluded  on  the  Dover  road  about 
a mile  in  advance  of  the  avenue.  At  that  ])lace  the  Sandy  Bidge  de- 
clines into  a swam}),  and  the. last  end  of  it  Avas  roughly  intrenched. 
The  rapid  moA^ement  and  severe  fire  of  the  excellent  skirmishers  of  the 
Fifty-eighth  Ihmnsylvania  and  gallant  charge  of  17  caAxilry  of  company 
11,  Tliii  d New  York  Cavalry,  under  Sergeant  Dow,  lea])ing  the  intrench- 
ments,  drove  the  main  body  of  the  rebels  irdothe  swamp,  and  detained 
a commissioned  officer  and  27  enlisted  men  of  the  Forty-ninth  North 
Carolina  Begiment  in  our  hands  as  prisoners. 

Our  loss  in  this  skirmish  Avas  7 enlisted  men  of  the  Fifty-eighth 
Bennsylvania  Volunteers  and  1 of  Company  U,  Third  Begiment  New 
York  Cavalrv,  Avounded.  Three  horses  of  the  same  cavalry  party  were 
killed. 

On  Tuesday,  pursuant  to  orders  from  Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army 
Corps,  my  column  returned  to  the  NeAv  Berne  lines  and  resumed  their 
former  irositions. 

I have  to  acknowledge  myself  under  obligations  to  Colonel  Jones, 
of  the  Fifty-eighth  Begiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  and  Colonel 


CIIAI-.  XXX.  I 


SIEGE 


OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


227 


JoiuTlau,  comuiaiiding  tho  Secoud  Brigade  of  luy  division,  for  their 
r.iitariiig  energy  and  intelligence;  also  to  Major  Fitis  Simmons  and  Lieu- 
tenant Lreig,  Third  Regiment  New  York  Cavalry,  who  joined  my  staff 
for  the  expedition,  the  former  as  chief  of  staff  and  the  latter  as  aide  de- 
camp. 

No  opportunity  offered  for  the  use  of  artillery;  but  in  it,  and,  I may 
add,  throughout  the  entire  command,  the  very  best  kind  of  spirit  was 
made  evident  to  me. 

Inclosed  please  find  a report  of  Colonel  Jones. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  PEIEOE, 

Brigadier -General  of  Volunteers,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  SouTHAED  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  New  Berne,  N.  C. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

. ^ T r.  T.  N.  C.,  April  24,  ish. 

y.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  ’ 

Comdg.  lUh  Army  Corps,  Dept.  ofN.  C.,  Nfew  Berne,  A.  C. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  vour 
communication  of  yesterday,  in  which  you  inquire  whether,  durina-  vour 
recent  absence  at  Washington,  A C.,  the  question  as  to  your  power  to 
give  commands  from  that  place  was  raised  by  any  one,  and,  if  so,  bv 
whom  and  under  what  circumstances.  ^ " 

It  IS  natural  for  one  to  infer  from  this  interrogatory  that  you  have 
heard  that  the  question  was  raised,  and  I think  it  but  justice  to  mv- 
self  and  others  to  state  that  in  no  official  manner  wjis  this  done  But 
as  you  inquire  if  thi;s  matter  was  spoken  of  in  ‘Lsuch  consultations  and 
conversations  between  commanding  officers  as  would  naturallv  under 
such  circumstances  take  place  and  influence  actions,’^  1 think  it  proper 
to  add  that  the  only  remark  that  came  under  my  own  observation,  and 
that  could  be  considered  by  any  one  as  at  all  calculated  to  raise  the 
question  of  your  power,  was  a remark  uttered  in  private  conversation 
General  1 rince  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant  (I  think),  and  this 
occurred  m this  way : Several  officers,  including  myself,  were  standing 
on  the  pavement  near  your  quarters.  General  Prince  said  : 

mamr  Hp  iTnfniT’  Foster  is  shut  iij)  in  Washington  with  a small  com- 

rWirb  ^^°able  or  unwilling  to  leave  there.  Is  he  then  in  commaml  of  the 

flepartinent,  or  who  is  then  in  command? 

n ‘‘bove  IS  the  substance  of  the  rcmaik,  as  I understood  it.  1 paid 

reidv  ‘"r*'  ^ occupied  in  gettiug 

eadi  to  leave  for  the  blockade.  I left  the  place  where  the  coSversiP 
tiou  was  going  on  while  General  Prince  was  conversing,  and  I do  not 

WeLelKYns”' pf-  "’ere  there  but  I think  General 

1.  • This  was  not  calculated  to  “influence  (my)  actions.” 
•V,  1^1?  ^ certainly  never  advised  with  me,  officially  or  privately 
the  rei  larl-”w!;«‘’-  f general  while  in  Washington,  and 

ill-e  nt  Lit  Idle  one,  which  1 thought  it  better  not  to 

ake  at  that  time,  and  I regret  the  necessity  for  ever  speaking  of  it 
1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

I.  E.  PALMEE, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  First  Division. 


228 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap..  XXX. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Pamlico, 

Washington^  N.  G.,  April  26,  1863. 

Maj.  Geu.  J.  G.  Poster, 

Comdg.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps ^ Dept,  of  N.  C. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  tlie  21st  instant*  was  received  by  me  on  the 
22d.  You  say : 

Tlie  siogo  of  Washington  being  raised,  my  duty  to  our  country,  to  yourself,  and  to 
myself  requires  some  explanation  of  past  events. 

1 will  endeavor  to  answer  seriatim  the  queries  which  follow  this  pas- 
sage satisfactorily  to  our  country,  to  yourself,  and  to  myself. 

Tbe  passage  which  I will  first  consider  is  as  follows : 

Learning  that  an  attack  was  to  ho  made  on  Washington,  I left  on  March  29  for  that 
place  and  arrived  there  on  the  30th.  April  1,  I wrote  to  General  Palmer  suggesting 
three  ways  of  raising  the  siege  and  expressing  my  preference  for  the  first,  which  was 
to  land  a strong  force  at  a xioint  below  Hilfs  Point  Battery,  take  that  battery  in 
reverse,  march  up  in  rear  of  Rodman’s  Point,  and  join  mo  at  Washington  Bridge. 
What  effort,  if  any,  was  made  to  carry  out  my  orders  as  above  quoted  ? Was  any  re- 
connaissance made  by  your  order  for  the  purpose  of  learning  the  strength  and  position 
of  the  enemy,  on  the  result  of  which  you  reported  to  mo  that  it  was  impracticable  to 
land  and  take  the  batteries? 

On  the  1st  day  of  April  the  following  letter  from  General  Palmer,  com- 
manding the  department  in  your  absence,  was  received  by  me : 

Headquarters  Eighteenth  Arma'  Corps, 

New  Berne,  April  1.  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Princp:,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

General  ; Information  is  just  received  from  General  Foster  from  Washington,  N.  C., 
tliat  that  place  is  about  to  be  attacked^ by  the  enemj'  in  force.  The  rc-onforco- 
ments  under  General  Si)inola  have  not  been  able  to  get  to  Washington,  as  the  rebels  : 
have  established  a battery  at  Hill’s  Point,  near  the  blockade  below  that  city.  Gen-  | 
oral  Foster  has  directed  that  you  proceed  immediately  to  that  vicinity  to  take  such  i 
measures  for  the  reducing  of  this  battery  as  your  good  judgment  may  dictate,  and  you  i 
will  get  the  re-enforcements  to  their  destination  if  possible. 

The  gunboats  from  hero  are  ordered  to  proceed  immediately  to  that  point  and  they  j 
will  be  under  way  in  an  hour  or  two.  The  steamer  North  Shore  will  be  placed  at  ' 
your  disposition.  She  takes  a 8uj>i)ly  of  ammunition  for  32-pounder  and  Wiard  guns  i 
with  her.  The  gunboats  from  Plymouth  have  also  been  sent  for,  and  they  will  bo  down  ' 
as  soon  as  possible. 

I send  you  the  letter  of  General  Foster  for  jmur  information. 

General,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  N.  PALMER, 

Brig  a d ier-  (}  cn  eral,  Co  mma  n di  n g. 

With  the  above  came  a letter  from  General  Potter,  of  which  the  fol-  i 
lowing  is  a copy : 

Washington,  N.  C.,  March  31,  1863— 12  m. 
Brigadier-General  Palmer,  Commanding  : ‘ 

General:  The  rebels  are  about  to  attack  us  in  strong  force.  They  sent  in  a Hag  of 
truce  this  morning  for  the  ])urpose  of  having  the  women  and  children  removed.  The 
Hag  wns  not  received.  The  regiments  and  battery  that  were  to  follow  us  have  not 
arrived;  cause  supposed  to  bo  the  fire  from  a battery  which  the  rebels  have  planted 
at  Hill’s  Point  where  they  formerly  had  one.  Wo  can  hold  out  for  two  or  three  days. 
General  Foster  wishes  you  to  send  up  at  once  all  the  gunboats  that  can  be  spared,  and, 
if  possible,  400  rounds  of  32-pounder  shot  and  shell,  and  200  rounds  of  12-])ounder 
Wiards.  Ho  also  wishes  cirher  yourself  or  General  Prince  to  come  uj)  and  to  act 
according  to  your  own  discretion  in  attacking  the  battery  at  Hill’s  Point. 

If  the  gunboats  cannot  succeed  in  silencing  the  battery  in  question  it  will  rest 
with  you  or  General  ITinco  to  decide  as  to  the  advisability  of  landing  your  infantry 
and  Hanking  the  battery. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  E.  POTTER, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

^ The  only  copy  of  this  letter  found  is  in  letteri)ress-book,  and  is  illegible.  ; 


Chap.  XXX.] 


229 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


I remember  reading  also  a letter  from  you  stating  that  there  were 
three  means  of  relieving  Washington. 

I left  JSTew  Berne,  on  the  NIorth  Shore,  at  2.45  in  the  afternoon  of 
that  day  and  arrived  at  the  fleet,  off  Bath  in  Pamlico  Eiver,  at  2.45  the 
following  morning.  (The  2d,  not  the  4th.)  General  Spinola  was  in 
command  there.  I sought  him  immediately  and  talked  with  him  of  the 
situation  of  matters.  He  instantly  showed  me  an  order  he  had  issued 
for  landing  some  troops  at  daybreak  for  the  purpose  of  storming  the 
HilFs  Point  Battery.  No  reconnaissance  had  been  made,  and  I did 
not  see  that  his  plan  contemplated  one,  and  asked  him  if  he  proposed  to 
uiake  it  without  any.  He  replied  that  he  had  no  intention  to  attempt 
his  plan  without  one  and  should  make  a reconnaissance  first  in  the, 
morning.  I then  approved  this  course  and  directed  the  reconnaissance 
ro  be  made.  This  was  done  according  to  my  detailed  instructions.  The 
officer  in  command  of  the  party  that  made  it  reported  verbally  to  my 
satisfaction . There  were  present  about  1 ,600  men , artillery  and  infantry, 
and  the  two  little  armed  steamers,  Lockwood  and  Allison,  and  a sailing 
sloop  with  a heavy  gun  on  board,  which  vessels  vainly  endeavored  to 
interest  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery. 

I informed  myself,  by  the  examination  of  many  different  persons  and 
by  personal  observation,  of  the  precise  nature  of  tlie  situation  of  Hill’s 
Point  Battery  and  of  all  the  ways  by  which  it  could  be  approached 
and  all  the  places  where  landing  was  not  naturally  obstructed  and 
where  it  was  obstructed  by  nature.  And,  as  enjoined  so  forcibly  in  my 
instructions,  I permitted  myself  to  be  governed  solely  by  my  judgment 
in  deciding  that  a landing  could  not  be  eflected  with  any  means  at  my 
command.  Nothing  has  occurred  to  shake  this  opinion  or  modify  it. 
Time  and  light  all  confirm  it.  When  I had  formed  it  fully  I did  all  I 
could  to  make  it  immediately  known  to  you  and  to  General  Palmer. 
At  evening  on  the  3d  of  April  I left  the  river  for  New  Berne,  to  go  and 
return  as  quickly  as  possible,  for  the  purpose  of  conferring  with  General 
Palmer.  I carried  the  following  dispatch  with  me  to  General  Palmer, 
having  written  it  to  send  : 


Pamlico  River,  N.  C.,  Hjh  R 2,  1863. 

Col.  Southard  IIoffmax, 

Asst.  Adjl.  Gen.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  New  Berne,  N.  C.  : 

Colonel:  The  battery  on  Hilfs  Point  is  very  strong.  The  gunboats  we  liave  (the 
Allison  and  Lockwood)  make  no  impression  on  it.  Its  geometrical  position,  consid- 
ered Avith  the  relative  situation  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  make  it  unassailable  excejit 
by  gunboats. 

Whether  .5,000  troops  landed  on  this  river  or  marched  from  New  Berne  would  be 
immaterial;  no  less  would  be  able  to  reach  the  battery  and  get  away  again  if  uusne- 
cessfnl. 


Landing  therefore  Avith  me  is  out  of  the  question  as  things  stand.  Blount’s  Creek 
is  impassible,  and  at  the  bridge  is  a camp  of  1,000  men.  There  is  no  Avay  of  my  com- 
mand getting  out  of  the  triangle  formed  around  the  battery  by  the  water  and  the 
road.  I shall  lie  here  and  threaten,  and  if  a strong  force  of  gunboats  comes  the  bat- 
tery can  be  fully  tested.  » 

],arge  Aa'.ssels  (gunboats)  cannot  find  their  way  through  the  blockade,  the  buoys 
being  up  and  the  ])iles  being  cut  otf  2 feet  under  water,  and  while  they  are  beleaguered 
the  we]l-s<!rved  eight  guns  (some  WhitAvorths)  could  destroy  them.  I shall  attempt  to 
send  soiiK^  ammunition  to  Washington  to-night  in  a small  boat,  hugging  the  northern 
shore;  but  it  Avill  be  atrifle,  I know.  The  officers  of  the  gunboats  Avill  consider  avcU 
Avhile  near  the  battery  the  feasibility  of  one  running  through,  but  I feel  confident 
the,y  will  decide  adA^ersely  to  the  attempt.  If  General  Dix  sends  .5,000  men  we  may 
relieve  Washington.  If  the  large  gunboats  come  they  may  succeed. 

In  order  to  remain  lierc,  coal  is  necessary.  I 'send  a tug  to  bring  us  a schooner 
containing  it.  As  every  steamer  Avill  be  out  of -coal  in  thirty-two  hours,  Avhatever 


else  fails  let  the  tugs  bring  some  coal- vessel. 


Yours,  respectfully. 


HENRY  PRINCE, 
Brign  d i er-  Genera  I,  Vohm  i eers. 


230 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


And  on  tlie  same  day  I endeavored  to  express  myself  better  and 
more  clearly  in  a communication  to  your  headquarters,  a copy  of  which 
I sent  through  the  barricade  to  you,  which  is  as  follows: 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoffman  : 


New  Berne,  April  3,  1863. 


Colonel:  Tlie  above  sketch  (for  correction  of  which  1 refer  to  the  may  of  North 
Carolina  by  Topo<^raphical  Bureau)  is  to  indicate  the  relative  situation  of  points  re- 
hurcd  to  in  the  following  statement : General  Foster,  with  two  regiments,  a company 
of  cavalry,  and  a company  of  artillery  (1,200  men),  and  three  gunboats  is  at  Washing- 
ton. He  is  invested  on  the  north  side  of  the  river  by  the  brigades  of  Pettigrew  and 
Garnett,  as  he  states  in  his  letter  to  General  Prince  of  April  2,  1863.  On  the  south 
side  is  D.  H.  Hill  with  two  brigades,  according  to  General  Foster’s  information,  same 
letter ; .bnt  other  information,  to  which  he  probably  has  not  access,  indicates  a stronger 
force. 


The  enemy  have  at  Rodman’s  Point  a battery  with  which  they  are  destroying  the 
gnnboats.  At  Hill’s  Point  the  enemy  have  a fine  battery  of  six  or  eight  guns.  A 
barricade  formerly  constructed  by  the  enemy  extends  from  Hill’s  Point  to  Swan  Point ; 
the  barricade  consists  of  a double  row  of  piles  cut  olf  2 feet  under  water.  Instead  of 
destroying  the  barricade  our  vessels  made  a passage  through  it  60  feet  wide,  and 
marked  the  passage  with  buoys.  The  enemy  having  removed  the  buoys,  it  is  not 
possilile  in  the  expanse  of  the  river  to  know  where  the  passage  is  running.  The  bat- 
tery therefore  perfects  the  blockade  and  also  the  investment  of  the  small  force  of 
o Ill’s  at  Washington. 

Having  been  up  myself  to  the  front  of  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery  and  felt  it  with  some 
small  gnnboats,  and  having  reconnoitered  the  shore  there  and  obtained  carefully 
sifted  information,  I can  add  something  to  the  above  statement. 

Blount’s  Creek  has  a long  bridge  where  the  road  crosses,  and  is  impnssable  below. 
The  bridge  is  iiartly  removable,^and  at  it  is  a force  1,000  strong  of  the  enemy  ever 
since  these  operations  commenced.  Above  the  bridge  the  swamp  is  impassable.  In 
reconnoitering  the  shores  of  Blount’s  Bay  I found  the  enemy’s  pickets  of  infantry  on 
its  west  shore,  all  along,  and  infantry  and  cavalry"  on  its  east  shore.  This  shows  the 
enemy  to  be  on  the  alert  there  ; and  having  seen  lying  there  transports  filled  with 
troops  two  nights  and  a day  before  I arrived  there  they  are  in  anticiiiation  of  a 
landing.  The  enemy  therefore  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  are  in  force  to  defend 
the  Hill’s  Point  Battery. 

It  is  believed  by  me  from  my  reconnaissance  that  the  nature  of  the  position  west 
of  Blount’s  Creek  does  not  admit  of  the  gunboats  rendering  any  assistance  to  troops 
that  have  landed  save  while  they  are  on  the  immediate  shore ; the  entire  bank  is  high, 
rugged,  and  Avooded.  Any  force  landed  there  places  itself  at  once  in  a state  of  siege 
from  Avhich  there  is  no  retiring  excepting  under  most  adverse  circumstances.  A 
n\arch  upon  the  shore  itself  would  expose  the  troops  to  a fire  from  the  blutf  which  they 
could  not  faii'ly  return. 

As  I am  about  to  return  to  the  position  I shall  use  all  the  means  I can  to  obtnin 
further  knovdedge  of  the  enemy,  and  if  an  opportunity  to  land  occurs  I shall  do  it. 
Up  to  this  time  since  the  first  arrival  of  the  troops  near  BlouuFs  Bay  the  high  wind 
and  low  water  would  have  prevented  any  descent  before  a.s  well  as  after  my  arrival. 
If  anything  can  be  done  by  the  combined  forces  of  army  and  navy  assembled  at  the 
barricade  you  may  be  assured  that  no  pains  will  be  spared  to  do  it. 

It  is  understood  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  that  the  en- 
emy’s regiments  in  this  region  are  full,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  two  brigades  of 
D.  H.  Hill’s  command  number  ten  regiments. 

Very  respectfulljq  your  obedient  servant. 


HENRY  PRINCE, 

Jlri gad  ier- G en  era  I,  Vohi  n teers. 


I retiinied  to  Blount’s  Bay  the  next  day.  In  the  trip  I had  seen  the 
Southlield  and  two  other  gunboats  from  Blymoutli  on  their  way  to 
Blount’s  Bay,  where  they  arrived  before  me,  and  1 left  the  Hunchback, 
IVom  New  Berne,  detained  by  tlie  weather  in  the  mouth  of  the  Neuse. 
Tlie  jiassage  ot  tlie  Sound  was  rendered  very  difficult,  and  was  con- 
stantly being  intcuTupted  during  the  most  of  the  time  I was  up  in  the 
Hamlico  Biver  by  the  high  wind.  The  first  re-enforcements  arrived  on 
the  5th.  There  were  then  in  all  2,500  men  there ; clearly  not  enough 
to  attempt  the  operation  of  forcing  the  crossing  of  Blount’s  Creek,  which 
cannot  be  more  correctly  described  now  that  our  troops  have  it  in  pos- 
session than  it  was  by  me  then. 


CHAr.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  G. 


231 


The  instriictioiKS  contemplate  a fair  trial  of  the  large  class  of  gun- 
boats. The  Hunchback  did  not  succeed  in  reaching  BlounHs  Bay  until 
the  afternoon  of  the  5th.  On  that  day  I received  your  instructions  to 
leave  the  river  to  the  care  of  the  gunboats,  and  left  early  the  next  morn- 
ing. I do  not  think  a full  test  of  what  the  gunboats  could  do  with  the 
battery  had  then  been  made,  but  supposed  it  would  be.  There  were  no 
means  of  landing  troops  at  BlounFs  Bay  under  fire,  and  it  was  of  no 
use  to  collect  them  unless  the  troops  could  get  there.  It  seems  not  to 
have  been  possible  up  to  the  time  I quit  there  to  get  a sufficient  force 
from  New  Berne  to  fight  the  brigade  of  4,500  men,  which  was  the  least 
force  that  could  be  reasonably  deemed  to  be  supporting  the  Hill’s  Point 
Battery. 

To  recapitulate:  I arrived  at  the  forces  on  the  Pamlico  Eiver  at  3 
o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  of  April.  An  order  had  been  issued 
for  troops  to  land  at  daylight  and  storm  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery.  I 
countermanded  this  order — my  greatest  service  yet  rendered  to  the 
country  in  any  one  act.  I ordered  an  armed  reconnaissance,  in  which 
1 explained  every  detail  of  the  mode  in  which  it  should  be  conducted 
in  the  events  that  I imagined  might  occur.  It  was  completed  to  my 
satisfaction.  I reconnoitered  the  region  carefully  myself.  I ascer- 
tained the  nature  of  it  with  the  most  irrefragable  accuracy,  as  Avell  as 
the  position  of  the  enemy,  whose  force  I correctly  estimated.  I sifted 
justly  the  mass  of  information  I obtained  on  all  these  subjects,  and  thus 
saw  the  situation  clearly  and  positively.  The  stormy  night  of  the  3d  of 
April  and  the  day  of  the  4th  I traversed  the  waters  of  Pamlico  Sound  to 
New  Berne  and  back.  On  the  5th  of  April  I received  your  orders  to 
quit  the  river  with  the  2,500  men  that  were  there  in  my  command,  ex- 
cepting one  regiment  to  be  sent  by  the  naval  force  to  you,  and  1 ac- 
cordingly left  early  on  the  morning  of  the  Gth  of  April  for  New  Berne. 

And  now  as  to  the  question  of  landing.  The  notes  written  by  you 
from  Washington,  such  as  I saw,  cannot  be  regarded  technically  as 
orders.  Their  style  suggested  the  idea  to  me  that  you  did  not  so  re- 
gard them  yourself,  as  they ‘are  not  sufficiently  coherent  with  each  other 
or  sufficiently  definite  in  themselves,  it  seems  to  me,  to  be  considered 
sucli.  In  the  paragraph  of  your  letter  which  I am  now  considering  you 
said : ‘‘  1 wrote  to  General  Palmer  suggesting  three  ways,”  &c.,  and  “ex- 
pressing my  preference  for  the  first,”  &c.  You  then  said : “ What  effort, 
if  any,  was  made  to  carry  out  my  orders  as  above  quoted  I think 
from  this  that  you  do  not  always  regard  them  as  orders.  They  are  in 
fact,  as  you  style  them  yourself,  your  suggestions  and  preferences  from 
your  i)oint  of  view  at  the  moment  of  writing.  Undoubtedly  you  would 
not  consider  them  orders  in  the  case  of  failure  of  anything  done  in  pur- 
suance of  them. 

In  one  addressed  to  General  Palmer  you  say  that  the  first  plan  was 
described  to  be  “ to  land  a strong  force  below  (no  place  being  par- 
ticularized) Hill’s  Point  Battery,  take  that  battery  in  reverse,  march  up 
in  rear  of  Bodman’s  Point,  and  join  me  at  the  bridge.” 

In  one  addressed  to  me,  dated  April  2,  you  say  : 

Tlio  battcric's  innst  be  takeu  in  succession,  to  do  wbicli  it  is  nec(\ssary  to  land  nn- 
de,r  cov(',r  ot  tlie  lyrunljoats  and  to  assail  tlie  battery  in  its  ilank  or  rear  at  the  same 
time  tliat  tbe  gunboats  assail  it  in  front.  Tlie  battery  will  ])robab!y  be  supported 
by  a brigade,  wbicli  you  must  whip.  If  you  have  not  troops  enongli  send  at  once  to 
Palmer  with  orders  from  me  to  load  any  steame-r  or  sail-vessel  with  troops  enough  to 
<lo  the  business  surelj" — 

At  this  stage  I visited  General  Palmer,  who  said  that  he  was  using 
all  the  transportation — 

If  the  gunboats  arrive  liefore  more  troops  arrive  you  can  make  the  attempt  to  land 
under  their  cover. 


232 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


But  the  class  of  gunboats  that  were  expected  to  affect  the  battery 
did  not  arrive  till  the  5th  April. 

In  another  addressed  to  me  you  said  that  after  the  HilPs  Point  Bat- 
tery was  taken  the  troops  ought  to  re-embark  in  order  to  proceed  to  the 
Bodinan’s  Point  Battery  on  transports. 

The  letter  of  General  Potter,  chief  of  your  staff',  says  : ■ 

He  (General  Foster)  also  wislies  eitPer  yourself  or  General  Prince  to  come  up  and 
to  act  according  to  your  own  discretion  in  attacking  the  battery  at  Hill’s  Point.  If 
the  gnnhoats  cannot  succeed  in  silencing  the  battery  in  question  it  will  rest  with 
you  or  General  Prince  to  decide  as  to  the  advisability  of  landing  your  infantry  and 
Hanking  the  battery. 

Tints  I have  shown  most  clearly  that  it  rested  solely  on  my  judgment 
and  responsibility  to  decide  whether  the  landing  of  troops  near  the  HilPs 
Point  Battery  should  be  made,  and  I shall  proceed  to  show  that  I 
<lecided  correctly. 

H.  H.  Hill  was  known  to  be  on  the  south  side  of  the  Pamlico  Eiver 
with  at  least  two  brigades  of  rebels.  I derived  this  knowledge  not  only 
from  you  but  from  other  sources  of  information.  From  your  headquar- 
ters I learned  that  the  rebel  regiments  about  here  were  all  full,  each 
brigade  consisting  of  five  regiments,  numbering,  say,  4,500  men. 

But  as  the  HilPs  Point  Battery  was  the  key  of  the  whole  investment 
it  would  be  taking  a short-sighted  view  of  the  generalship  of  the  rebels 
to  suppose  that  they  could  not  concentrate  all  their  force  that  was  south 
of  the  river  in  its  defense;  and  when  we  were  nearest  to  being  able  to 
land,  when  we  had  in  all  2,500  men  at  BlounPs  Bay,  I knew,  by  ocular 
observation,  that  they  were  concentrated  for  the  defense  of  that  bat- 
tery against  a landing.  The  indications  were  conclusive.  This  is  now 
rendered  a demonstrated  certainty  by  our  troops  having  marched  over 
the  ground  and  witnessed  their  freshly- vacated  camps  there  since  the 
raising  of  the  siege  of  Washington. 

To  land  west  of  BlounPs  Creek  w^ould  have  been  to  place  one’s  self 
where  the  formation  of  the  shore  line  refused  to  permit  the  gunboats  to 
render  any  assistance  to  the  infantry  landed.  Bo  point  juts  out  upon 
which  the  gunboats  might  fire  without  firing  over  (that  is,  into)  our 
troops.  Bo  place  whatever  can  be  named  west  of  Blount’s  Creek  below 
the  battery  where  the  gunboats  could  assist  the  retreat.  The  troops 
therefore  would  have  to  depend  upon  themselves  and  the  intrenchments 
they  might  make  after  landing.  From  the  mouth  of  Blount’s  Creek  to 
HilPs  Point  Battery  is  2 J miles  of  shore  line,  forming  a uniform  and  gentle 
curve  of  which  Hill’s  Point  is  the  culmination  merely.  The  general  : 
level  of  the  land  along  there  is  40  feet  above  the  river,  the  bank  of  which 
is  bluff*.  A landing  west  of  Blount’s  Creek  would  be  on  this  curve  of 
2J  miles  in  length.  Inside  of  it  lies  encamped  the  supporting  brigade 
of  rebels — their  pickets  everywhere  on  the  curve  ; their  main  body  not 
over  2 miles  distant  from  any  part  of  it. 

I Avill  suppose  that  the  other  brigade  south  of  the  river  is  distributed 
at  Blount’s  Creek  Bridge,  Swift  Creek  Yillage,  Bodman’s  Point,  the 
cross-roads,  and  a point  between  the  cross-road  and  Swift  Creek. 

I will  suppose  that  we  could  land  500  men  in  row-boats,  stern-wheelers, 
&c.,  at  a time.  Let  us  see  how  the  landing  would  proceed  : 

The  transport  full  of  troops  draws  as  near  to  the  shore  as  she  can. 
She  is  then  half  a mile  off*  (or  she  remains  beyond  the  range  of  mus-. 
ketry,  which  would  make  the  time  longer).  Each  trip  to  land  500  takes 
twenty  minutes,  and,  if  no  contingency  prolongs  it,  the  transfer  of  the 
whole  to  land  takes  one  hour  and  two- thirds.  Meantime  the  rebels  , 
have  been  called  to  arms  by  the  fire  of  their  pickets,  and  being  not  over  . 

i 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


233 


2 miles  distant  tliey  are  at  tlie  landing  place  in  an  hour  after  the  land- 
ing begins  and  besiege  it  before  the  landing  is  comi)lete.  The  two 
principles,  without  the  observance  of  which  the  operations  should  not  be 
attempted,  are,  first,  a secure  retreat,  and,  second,  some  prospect  of 
taking  the  battery.  Any  one  can  decide  the  question. 

J should  have  been  willing  with  5,000  troops,  having  assured  myself 
of  your  clearly  expressed  approbation  of  doing  so,  as  my  letters  already 
quoted  show,  to  Iiave  attempted  what  1 have  described,  because  1 think 
our  sokliers,  with  a superior  morale  arising  from  the  holiness  of  their 
cause,  are  superior  in  battle  to  the  rebel  rank  and  file,  more  steady  and 
persevering,  more  coolly  determined  on  retaining  a reserve  of  energy 
and  a few  unwasted  cartridges  for  final  exhibition,  and  to  sweep  the 
field . 

To  land  east  of  Blount’s  Creek  would  have  been  safe  and  under  the 
cover  of  the  gunboats ; but  then  there  would  have  been  between  the 
column  and  the  battery  the  obstacle  of  an  unfordable  creek,  watch lully 
guarded,  with  a single  bridge  partly  removable  and  occupied  in  force. 
It  is  evident  that  2,500  men  w'ould  not  have  forded  the  crossing  of 
Blount’s  Creek  if  they  had  landed  on  the  east  side  of  it  and  remained 
in  a condition  to  go  farther.  In  fact  the  entire  available  force  of  this 
department,  all  the  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  that  could  be  marched 
from  N^ew  Berne,  in  precise  total  6,400  men,  went  there  on  the  0th  of 
April,  and  after  experimenting  on  it  marched  back  to  Kew  Berne  again 
with  their  killed  and  wounded,  because  they  could  not  force  it  without 
a too  great  cost  of  men.  As  landing  or  marching  there  would  have 
brought  the  forces  to  the  same  identical  place,  it  is  therefore  demon- 
strated that  my  judgment  was  correct  in  pronouncing  it  to  be  out  of 
the  question  to  get  on  the  flank  or  rear  of  Hill’s  Point  Battery  by  land- 
ing east  of  Blount’s  Creek,  for  there  is  no  way  of  turning  Blount’s  Creek, 
ns  a swamp  at  the  head  of  it,  beginning  at  the  bridge,  covers  an  area 
10  miles  long  and  6 miles  wide,  and  the  only  pocoson  road  through  it 
is  im])assable. 

Ijandiug  east  or  west  was,  as  I wrote  to  you,  out  of  the  question,  then, 
with  my  forces.  I sincerely  hoi^e  I hav^e  rendered  it  as  plain  to  the  coun- 
try and  to  yourself  as  it  has  long  been  to  me. 

The  next  paragrai)h  of  your  letter  is  as  follows: 

Nothing  being  done  on  the  Pamlico  River  in  accordance  with  my  plan  No,  1, 1 wrote 
(HI  tlui  .5th  of  Ai)ril  ordering  yon  to  take  command  of  all  the  available  forces  and 
march  across  the  conntry  to  Washington.  Why  did  yon  not  go  in  command? 

This  question  is  answered,  I think,  fully  in  my  re])orts  to  your  head- 
(pinrters  of  April  13,  1863,  rendered  for  the  purpose  of  answering  it.  If 
you  will  suggest  any  deficiency  in  the  explanation  as  there  given  I will 
supply  it  with  jileasure.  I believe,  in  lireparing  myself  for  the  march,  I 
foresaw  every  difficulty  likely  to  occur  in  the  march  and  all  the  places 
where  it  Avas  possible  there  would  be  any  opposition,  and  made  uj)  my 
mind  liow  I could  persistently  endeavor  to  meet  the  one  and  overcome 
the  other. 

Was  any  counsel  of  war  held  as  to  the  expcMliency  of  marching  across  the  conntry? 

None  that  I have  heard  of.  But  this  extraordinary  question  is  enti- 
tled to  more  consideration  than  is  supplied  by  a full  answer.  I did  not 
ask  the  opinion  of  any  officer  or  officers  whatever  in  respect  to  march- 
ing to  Washington.  At  one  time  General  Palmer,  Colonel  Hoflinan 
(th(‘,  assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  department)  at  anotlier,  and  Gen- 
eral Si)inola  at  another  time  were  in  my  quarters,  a few  moments  each, 
at  the  time  when  myself  and  my  confidential  personal  staff  were  gath- 


234 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ering  and  collating  information  fiom  persons  of  all  colors  respecting 
the  country  between  New  Berne  and  Washington  and  were  discussing 
in  the  most  i)erfect  i^rivacy  whatever  subjects  in  connection  therewith 
it  pleased  us  to  mention,  it  having  been  stated  by  me  to  them  that 
nothing  which  was  uttered  that  day  by  them  or  by  me  should  be  con- 
sidered an  opinion,  but  as  a mere  suggestion  to  thought  and  memory. 
No  reserve  was  observed  when  the  persons  named  were  in,  and  no  other 
])erson  was  treated  with  any  ])art  of  such  confidence.  I am  forced  to 
suppose  that  this  working  with  my  staff  is  the  Ibiindation  of  the  ques- 
tion, if  it  has  any,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  because  I cannot  imagine 
any  other. 

Did  you,  publicly  or  ])rivately,  in  cousultatiou  with  the  commanding  officer,  give 
your  opinion,  similar  to  that  expressed  to  me  in  a letter,  that  the  garrison  at  Wash- 
iugton  were  in  an  eel-pot  and  the  mouth  closed,  and  so  convey  the  impression  that  it 
was  inexpedient  to  incur  much  risk  in  endeavoring  to  raise  tlie  siege,  accepting  the 
surrender  as  a foregone  conclusion,  and  that  the  troops  tliat  should  march  to  my  res- 
cue would  in  all  probability  be  cut  off  ? 

I have  never  lield  such  opinions,  and  have  never  expressed  any  such 
to  you  or  to  any  one.  1 never  had  impressions  resembling  such  as  you 
mention  above  and  never  conveyed  any  such  to  any  one,  publicly  or 
privately.  If  I had  done  so  publicly,  as  I have  no  right  to  do,  the  in- 
formation would  be  at  your  service ; if  privately,  as  I have  the  most  per- 
fect right  to  do  to  a commanding  officer,  it  would  be  sacred  with  him. 

There  were  two  commanding  officers  whom  I consulted  with.  General 
Palmer,  commanding  the  department  in  your  absence  at  Washington, 
with  whom  I was  bound  to  consult  as  the  commanding  officer;  the 
other  was  General  Spinola,  whom  I relieved  iu  command  on  the  Pamlico 
Kiver,  which  fact  placed  me  on  similar  terms  with  him  to  a certain  de- 
gree. 1 was  habitually  frank  with  them,  and  if  my  frankness  is  partly 
exposed  I submit  to  you  that  it  is  not  my  fault.  They  are  proper  per- 
sons tor  my  freest  intercourse  on  xinblic  matters.  The  ideas  I may  have 
expressed  on  those  matters  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  department 
in  the  form  of  advice,  crude  surmises,  or  partly  coiiceived  thoughts  for 
the  purpose  of  eliciting  an  exchange  of  impressions,  or  for  persuasion,  or 
conversation  merely  in  that  intercourse,  the  freedom  of  which  is  equally 
sanctioned  by  discretion  and  honor  and  the  good  of  the  service,  are  not 
subject  to  interrogatories,  in  which  they  are  liable  to  misconstruction,  tor 
the  public  eye.  J t is  my  freedom  to  express  myself  according  to  the  incli- 
nation of  the  moment  or  the  final  decision  of  my  judgment  to  the  officer 
in  command,  with  whom  I am  in  customary  association,  on  the  current 
affairs  which  engage  us,  untrammeled  by  the  supposition  that  either 
he  or  his  confidential  staff'  officer  will  expose  my  remarks  anywhere.  I 
shall  only  hold  myself  responsible  to  the  public  for  what  I so  say  when 
it  is  properly  imparted  to  the  public,  and  then  I will  substantiate  the 
correctness  of  the  motives  actuating  my  words  in  the  broadest,  highest, 
and  i)urest  meaning  of  a motive;  for  I will  never  speak  by  any  other, 
however  agreeable  it  might  be  for  me  to  do  so.  I shall  not,  therefore, 
here  review  my  and  tlieir  ideas  exchanged  in  private  conversations. 
Doing  so  imperfectly  would  be  as  unjust  to  them  as  it  would  be  to  me. 
I may  say  in  general,  however,  that4n  discussing  a proposed  military 
operation  I habitually  make  every  supposition  of  success  or  failure, 
and  more  especially  of  failure,  that  my  ingenuity  can  devise,  as  the 
only  means  of  pre])aring  myself  or  assisting  any  one  else  to  prepare 
properly  and  fully  to  conduct  it. 

The  eel  pot  simile  I used  only  in  the  sense  in  which  I used  it  to  you, 
viz,  as  suggesting  the  manner  in  which  I presumed  the  rebels  regarded 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


235 


Washington.  I never  so  regarded  it  myself,  but  on  the  contrary  always 
expressed  as  my  firm  opinion,  in  the  most  public  manner  and  with  the 
intention  to  diffuse  it,  that  you  could  come  out  whenever  you  pleased 
and  also  bring  your  command,  with  perhaps  some  loss,  and  that  I fully 
shared  your  confidence  of  success.  I used  this  simile  discreetly  with 
some  of  those  persons  interested  in  running  the  barricade  for  you,  in 
connection  with  such  remarks  as  that  the  enemy  let  the  Ceres  go  by 
without  firing  at  her  and  probably  would  let  anything  else  go  in,  to  en- 
courage these  persons  in  making  the  passage  of  the  blockade. 

Was  the  question  raised  regarding  my  authority  to  give  orders?  If  so,  when,  by 
whom,  and  under  what  circumstances  ? 

The  question  was  not  raised  that  I know  of  regarding  your  authority 
to  command  the  troops  in  North  Carolina.  If  I had  any  talk  on  the 
topic  it  was  in  private  with  General  Palmer  or  General  Spinola,  and 
was  either  for  my  own  or  their  amusement  and  not  for  any  other  pur- 
pose. If  in  your  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  inquiry  you  are  of  the 
opinion  that  the  circumstances  in  which  you  were  at  Washington  of 
themselves  raised  the  question,  you  must  admit  that  I would  have  been 
absent-minded  not  to  think  of  it. 

Trusting  that  I have  fulfilled  the  promise  with  which  I began,  I am, 
general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  PRINCE, 
Brigadier- General^  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  May  8,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince, 

Gomdg.  District  of  the  Pamlico,  Washington,  N.  C. : 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  April  26  in  reply  to  mine  of  the  21st. 

It  is  of  course  desirable  in  all  military  operations  that  tlife  pros  and 
cons  should  be  fully  weighed  and  the  operation  contemplated  be  made 
as  certain  as  possible  j that  as  a rule.  But  exigencies  do  occur  when  it  is 
a duty  to  act  even  though  the  risk  of  failure  is  greater  than  the  chance 
of  success;  this  as  an  exception;  and  under  this  latter  hypothesis  I con- 
sider the  attemijt  to  relieve  Washington  to  have  been.  I can  therefore 
only  regret  that  the  attempt  to  storm  Hill’s  Point  was  not  made,  the 
more  so,  as  a reconnaissance  made  by  Captain  Douglas,  of  the  Fifth 
Rhode  Island  Volunteers,  showed  that  Hill’s  Point  might  have  been 
carried.  Information  shows  that  only  one  brigade  was  within  near 
reaching  distance  of  that  Point. 

I fear  that  your  judgment  against  the  feasibility  of  attacking  the  place 
was  too  generally  disseminated,  and  that  the  effect  on  subordinate  offi- 
cers and  men  was  to  discourage  and  seriouslj^  impair  the  morale  so  essen- 
tial to  success. 

This  is  written,  general,  to  acknowledge  your  report,  and  to  express 
my  regrets  that  your  views  were  not  mine;  or,  rather,  that  you  did  not 
recognize  the  emergency  as  one  justifying  and  calling  for  some  risks 
and  greater  efforts  than  were  made. 

I remain,  general,  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-  Genera  I,  Commanding. 


236 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCnAr.XXX. 


Headquadteds  District  of  the  Pamlico, 

ashing  ton  ^ N.  (7.,  May  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Geu.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. : 

Gj:neral  : Perfectly  coinciding  with  3’ou  in  tlie  generalities  of  your 
letter  of  May  8,  1863,  respecting  the  subject  of  landing  at  Hill’s  Point, 
the  reasons  1 have  assigned  in  ,iny  letter  to  you  of  the  26th  of  Aiiril, 
1863,  forbid  my  drawing  the  same  special  inference  from  tliem,  and  the 
hypothesis  which  you  there  state  that  you  consider  applicable  to  the 
case  needs  no  other  commentary  than  is  furnished  by  the  result  of  the 
siege. 

There  is  no  manner  in  which  my  judgment  could  have  affected  the 
morale  of  the  troops.  I am  confident  that  it  was  never  otherwise  than 
well  affected  by  me.  After  the  fleet  returned  from  the  Pamlico,  Avhen 
the  troops  were  crossing  the  Neuse  for  the  purpose  of  marching  to 
Washington,  in  whicli  expedition  they  expected  me  to  lead  them,  no 
regiment  ])assed  my  house  that  did  not  rend  the  air  with  unanimous 
cheers.  No  cause  whatever  has  existence  for  the  fear  you  express,  and 
1 do  most  solemnly  avow  before  my  Maker  that  no  valid  reason  can  be 
assigned  for  it. 

As  I believe  that  an  examination  of  the  reconnaissance  referred  to  by 
you  as  made  by  Captain  Douglas,  Fiftli  Ehode  Island  Volunteers,  will 
dei)rive  the^ remark  you  predicate  upoTi  it  of  all  force,  I beg  that  jmu 
will  cause  me  to  be  furnished  with  an  account  of  it. 

Eespectingthe  one  brigade  ” immediately  in  support  of  the  battery  it 
is  but  just  to  say  that  it  was  Pettigrew’s,  containing  six  full  regiments, 
nominally  5,400  men, and  that  it  was  re-enforced  by  Claiborne’s  cavalry 
and  by  artillery.  But  D.  H.  Hill  had  two  brigades  on  the  south  side 
of  the  river  besides  three  unattached  North  Carolina  regiments.  Hill’s 
I'oint  Battery  was  the  key  of  the  investment.  All  military  men  will 
agree  that  he  could  therefore  concentrate  his  main  body  in  its  defense. 
No  doubt  can  exist  of  it.  But  this  is  of  no  moment  in  the  argument, 
l^ettigrew’s  brigade  is  sufficient  for  my  purposes. 

I have  in  vain  endeavored  to  reach  with  my  perceptive  faculties  the 
object  of  this  correspondence.  Has  the  interest  of  the  country  suftered  ? 
Or,  on  the  other  hand,  has  everything  terminated  according  to  the  ut- 
most blessing  of  the  Almighty  ? The  siege  of  Washington  is  raised  m 
the  best  possible  manner.  The  enemy  acquired  no  advantage  whatever 
over  us  in  the  course  of  it.  Everything  has  resulted  in  the  utter  defeat 
and  overthrow  of  his  plans.  Nothing  could  be  better.  Your  name  is 
the  theme  of  every  newspaper  corres])ondent.  And  yet  this  correspond- 
en(*-e  is  entered  upon  with  me,  in  which  there  seems  to  be  an  elaborate 
eflbrt  to  give  currency  to  facts  which  have  no  existence  by  asserting 
them  interrogatively,  and  in  which,  notwithstanding  the  favorable  re- 
sult of  the  siege,  you  now  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  can  therefore  only 
regret  that  the  attempt  to  storm  Hill’s  Point  was  not  made,”  i)lainly 
regretting  that  an  unnecessary  and  imminent  risk  of  another  Ball's 
Bluff  was  not  run  by  landing  2,500  men  in  the  face  of  Pettigrew’s  bri- 
gade, although  sucli  landing  would  have  been  in  oj)position  to  your 
own  instructions  given  in  writing  to  me.  In  this  regret,  which  is  ut- 
tered with  such  poetical  sincerity,  neither  our  country  nor  myself  can 
possibly  ])articii^ate. 

General,  it  is  clear  to  the  most  common  apprehension  that  the  “ liy- 
imthesis,”  the  ^Gear,”  and  the  ‘'regret”  expressed  in  this  letter  have  no 


CflAF^  XXX.l 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


237 


existence  in  your  mind;  and  I am  sure  tliat  the  reconnaissance  which 
shows  that  Hill’s  Point  Battery  could  have  been  taken  by  my  2,500  men 
will  prove  equally  fictitious. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENBY  PEINCE, 

Brigadier -General  Volunteers^  Commanding  District. 


No.  0. 

> Reports  of  Col.  Silas  P.  Richmond^  Third  Massachusetts  Infantry,  of  op- 
erations April  7-10  and  10-21. 

Camp  Jourdan, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  11,  1803. 

Sir  : The  following  is  a correct  report  of  the  part  taken  by  myself 
and  command  in  the  recent  reconnaissance  in  force  under  Brigadier- 
General  Spinola. 

April  7,  0.30^.  m. — Beceived  orders  to  march  immediately  with  tliree 
days’  cooked  rations,  and  seven  in  bulk  to  follow.  My  command  left 
caiui^  at  7 ]).  m.,  marched  to  Poster’s  Wharf,  and  there  embarked  on  the 
steamer  Allison,  which  took  us  across  the  Neuse  Biver.  We  landed 
near  Fort  Anderson  and  bivouacked  for  the  night.  I had  with  me  24 
officers  and  517  men. 

April  8. — Waited  during  the  morning  for  the  remainder  of  the  troops 
to  cross  over.  The  troops  were  temporarily  brigaded  anew,  my  regiment 
being  put  in  the  First  Brigade,  under  command  of  Acting  Brigadier 
Amory.  The  whole  column  was  under  General  Spinola,  and  consisted 
of  three  brigades  of  five  regiments  each  with  a small  force  of  cavalry 
and  artillery.  The  column  moved  at  1.30  p.  m.,  my  regiment  having 
the  left  of  the  First  Brigade.  We  marched  in  a northerly  direction. 
The  roads  for  the  most  part  were  very  good  and  the  column  moved  fast. 
We  made  no  halts  for  rest.  We  passed  New  Hope  School-House  about 
sunset,  taking  the  road  to  the  left.  We  marched  until  9 p.  m.,  then 
bivouacked  by  the  road  side.  Distance  marched,  15  miles. 

April  9. — Our  brigade  moved  at  6.30  a.  m.,  in  the  same  order  as  yes- 
terday. Marched  back  on  the  same  road  about  4 miles ; then  took  a 
cross-road,  which  led  into  the  main  road  to  Core  Point,  and  continued 
on  in  the  latter;  halted  a short  time  for  dinner  and  then  marched  on 
until  3 p.  m.,  when  we  got  in  close  proximity  to  Swift  Creek,  and  the 
enemy’s  x>ickets  were  met^ — 2 of  them  caiitured  and  the  rest  driven  in. 
The  enemy  almost  immediately  opened  on  us  with  batteries  on  the 
other  side  of  the  creek.  Our  batteries  moved  to  the  front  and  engaged 
the  enemy  for  about  two  hours,  without  any  apparent  effect.  The  en- 
emy’s shell,  though  few  in  number,  were  excellently  aimed,  every  one 
causing  some  loss  on  our  side.  Ammunition  being  nearly  all  expended 
the  order  was  given  to  retire,  which  we  did  in  good  order,  marching 
back  to  the  cross-roads  near  New  Hope  School-House  and  then  biv- 
ouacked for  the  night,  it  being  then  about  9 p.  m.,  and  having  marched 
during  the  day  about  30  miles. 

April  10. — The  column  was  i)ut  in  motion  at  about  7 a.  m.,  Colonel 
Amory’s  brigade  having  the  lead  and  marching  left  in  front,  which 
brought  my  regiment  in  advance.  Beached  the  ferry  near  Fort  Ander- 
son at  10.30  a.  m.,  and  after  a little  delay  we  were  transported  across  the 


238 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


river,  reaching  New  Berne  at  12  in.,  having  marched  in  all  about  55 
miles  in  less  than  forty -eight  hours  from  the  time  of  leaving  Fort  An- 
derson. I brought  my  men  all  safely  into  camp  although  they  were 
more  completely  tired  out  than  at  any  previous  time  during  the  cam- 
paign. 

Bespectfully  submitted. 

S.  P.  EIOHMOND, 
Colonel^  Commayiding  Regiment. 

S.  A.  Ilsley, 

A.  A.  A.  G.j  Second  Brigade^  Biglitee^itli  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Eegt.  Massachusetts  Vol.  Militia, 

Camp  Jour  dan,  Neip  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  23, 1863. 

Colonel  : On  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant  I received  orders  to 
liave  my  command  formed  ready  to  march,  with  three  days’  cooked  ra- 
tions, seven  in  bulk,  and  100  rounds  of  ammunition  per  man.  The  nec- 
essary preparations  were  immediately  made  and  line  formed. 

A large  number  of  both  officers  and  men  were  on  the  sick  list,  con- 
sequently the  column  marched  was  less  in  number  than  at  any  previ- 
ous time.  I was  too  unwell  to  leave  camp,  and  the  regiment  went 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barton. 

The  following  is  a copy  of  report  to  me : 

Camp  Jourdan, 

Netv  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  22,  1863. 

Col.  S.  P.  RiCHiMONo: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the 
Third  Regiment  in  the  late  expedition  under  General  Prince  toward  Kinston,  N.  C. : 

Pormed  regiment  line  at  10.30  on  the  morning  of  April  16  and  marched  with  448  men 
and  23  officers  to  the  depot  at  New  Berne  ; embarked  on  the  cars  at  2.45  j).  m. ; pro- 
ceeded to  a point  4 miles  beyond  Batchelder’s  Creek  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  I7th  formed  line  at  7.30  and  embarked  on  the  cars  and  pro- 
ceeded np  the  railroad  and  halted  at  the  Jones  plantation,  a point  near  Core  Creek; 
disembarked  and  formed  line  of  battle.  Three  companies  were  ordered  to  report  to 
Colonel  Jonrdan.  Sent  forward  Companies  C,  B,  and  H.  Regiment  rested  on  their 
arms  during  the  day  and  bivouacked  here  for  the  night. 

is//#. — All  quiet  through  the  night.  Three  companies  were  ordered  to  rei)ort  to 
Colonel  Jonrdan.  Sent  forward  Companies  D,  F,  and  A.  Orders  received  to  hold 
the  regiment  in  readiness  to  act  as  a reserve.  Sent  out  Comi)any  E on  picket.  Reg- 
iment halted  here  for  the  night. 

19//l — All  quiet  through  the  night.  Company  G ordered  on  the  cars  to  guard  the 
train  and  ammunition.  Regiment  remained  inactive  through  the  day  and  bivou- 
acked here  for  the  night. 

20^//.— All  quiet  through  the  night.  Three  companies  were  ordered  to  report  to 
Colonel  Jonrdan.  Sent  forward  Companies  K,  E,  and  G.  About  9 o’clock  firing  was 
heard  at  the  front.  Received  orders  to  go  on  board  the  cars  as  a support  to  the  bat- 
tery. Moved  forward  to  Core  Creek  and  halted.  At  2 o’clock  returned  to  our  former 
liosition  and  bivouacked  here  for  the  night. 

21st. — All  quiet  through  the  night.  Regiment  remained  inactive  until  3 o’clock 
when  orders  were  received  to  prepare  to  march.  Embarked  on  the  cars  at  6 o’clock 
and  returned  to  New  Berne,  reaching  camp  at  7 p.  m.  Whole  distance  traveled,  34 
miles.  No  casualties. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JAMES  BARTON, 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Third  Bcgiment  Mass.  Vol.  Militia. 

During  the  absence  of  the  main  portion  of  the  regiment  those  re* 
nmining  in  camp  improved  in  health  considerably,  but  I am  sorry  to 
say  that  our  sick  list  is  still  very  large.  Company  I returned  from  de- 
ta(;hed  service  on  the  20th  instant,  and  last  evening  we  had  a dress- 
parade  in  which  all  the  companies  belonging  to  the  regiment  partici- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


239 


pated.  It  was  a very  pleasing  reunion  to  us,  it  being  the  lirst  time  at 
which  all  the  companies  have  had  an  opportunity  to  form  on  the  same 
line  since  the  first  day  of  our  arrival  in  this  department. 

I remain,  colonel,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  P.  PIOHMOND, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment. 

Col.  J.  JOURDAN, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig.^  Fifth  Div.^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  M.  Willson^  Third  New  York  Cavalry of  sldrmish 
at  Sandy  Ridge.,  April  20. 

Picket  {Station,  Neuse  Eoad, 

April  22,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  to  you  that  in  the  skirmish  with  the  enemy  ' 
April  20,  1 man  was  wounded  and  3 horses  killed  and  1 revolver  lost. 
Seventeen  of  my  command  were  engaged,  under  the  command  of  Sergt. 
Henry  Dow.  I was  sick  and  could  not  take  command. 

I am,  respectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  M.  WILLSON, 

Captain,  Third  Neiv  York  Cavalry,  Co^nmanding  Station. 
Col.  S.  H.  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 


No.  II. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty -eighth  Fennsylvania  Infantry,  of 
skirmish  at  Sandy  Ridge,  April  20. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-eighth  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Vols., 

Camp  at  Core  Creek,  April  20,  1803. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I advanced  on  the  Dover  road 
this  morning  according  to  arrangements.  No  enemy  were  found  this 
side  of  Sandy  Eidge,  but  at  the  junction,  or  just  beyond  the  causeway 
running  from  the  railroad,  fire  was  opened  on  my  skirmishers.  I had 
t hree  companies  deployed,  which  drove  the  enemy  gradually  back,  they 
making  a stand  at  every  strong  position.  Near  the  upper  end  of  the 
ridge,  where  it  is  not  more  than  100  yards  wide,  they  had  a breastwork 
of  logs  and  earth  reaching  across  to  the  swami)s  on  both  Hanks,  which 
tlicy  endeavored  to  hold  and  defended  with  great  resolution.  Finding 
the  front  likely  to  cost  me  many  men,  I deployed  two  more  companies 
on  the  right  and  left  flanks,  with  directions  to  force  their  way  through 
tlie  swamps.  Those  swamps  were  barely  passable  by  woodmen,  but  my 
men  succeeded  in  advancing  on  the  flank  of  the  breastwork,  when  they 
raised  a shout,  at  which  the  enemy  abandoned  it,  and  fled  into  the 
swamj)  to  the  rear  of  the  ridge. 

1 cannot  s})eak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  my  officers  and  men,  of 
their  coolness  and  steadiness  under  fire,  and  of  their  perseverance  in 
pushing  the  enemy.  The  enemy  opposed  to  us  were  one  comi^any  of 


240 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[C1IA1>.  XXX. 


iTethercutt’s  battalion  and  three'  companies  of  the  Forty-ninth  North  ; 
Carolina,  Lieiitenant-Oolonel  Flemming,  and  they  numbered,  one  of  the  I 
prisoners  says,  22,).  We  found  one  of  the  enemy  dead  on  the  lield  (whom  j 
we  buried  decently),  2 wounded  and  took  27  prisoners. 

Our  loss  is  8 wounded,  one  of  whom  belongs  to  Company  H,  Third  j 
New  York  Cavalry,  which  company  behaved  gallantly  and  lost  3 horses. 
Tlie  breastwork  where  the  enemy  made  their  final  stand  is  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  ridge,  about  G miles  by  the  Dover  road  from  Core  Creek;  | 
beyond,  that  road  runs  principally  through  swamps  to  its  junction  with  i 
the  railroad. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  EICHTEE  JONES, 
Colonel  Fifty  eighth  Regiment. 

Captain  Waldron, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  12. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Francis  B.  Spinola,  U.  S.  Army.,  commanding  Pro- 
visional Division  and  First  Brigade,  Fifth  Divisio7i,  of  operations  on 
the  Faynlieo,  April  1-4;  action  at  Blounfs  Creelc,  April  9,  a7id  of  Ex- 
peditions fro^n  Neiv  Bertie  to  Sicift  C^'eelc  Village,  April  13-21. 

Headquarters  Spinola’s  Brigade, 

^Yashington,  N.  G.,  May  12,  1803. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  verbal  orders,  received  at  4 o’clock  on  the 
moruiug  of  March  31,  for  me  to  have  two  regiments  of  my  brigade  ready 
to  embark  from. the  wharf  at  Fort  Spinola  at  daybreak  and  for  myseif 
and  staff  to  accompany  them  to  Washington,  N.  C.,  where  I would  re- 
port to  General  Foster,  I have  the  honor  to  report,  viz : 

I immediately  i)roceeded  to  execute  the  order.  The  One  hundred  and 
seventy-first  and  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Eegiments  Pennsyl- 
vania Militia,  the  first  commanded  by  Colonel  Bierer  and  the  second 
commanded  by  Colonel  Dyer,  were  at  the  wharf  at  the  appointed  time. 
At  G a.  m.  the  steamer  Emilie,  with  a schooner  in  tow,  started  with  the 
One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Eegiment  and  the  right  wing  of  the 
One  hundred  and  seventy-first  Eegiment,  and  at  10  o’clock  the  same 
morning  the  steamer  John  Farron  started,  with  schooner  in  tow,  the 
left  wing  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-first  Eegiment  being  on  the 
Farron  and  three  pieces  of  Eajisoin’s  battery,  with  caissons,  limbers, 
and  200  rounds  of  ammunition  for  each  gun,  together  with  Captain 
Eansom  and  his  company,  being  on  the  schooner ; myself  and  staff  on 
the  Faron. 

L iiroeeeded  down  the  Neuse  Elver  and  at  2 p.  m.  came  up  with  the 
steamer  Sylvan  Shore,  lying  at  anchor  inside  of  the  light-house  at  the 
mouth  of  Neuse  Ei\'er.  1 gave  the  captain  orders  to  ])roceed  at  once 
to  the  st(.‘anier  Thomas  Colyev,  then  aground  on  a shoal  about  8 mihis 
from  the  light  house,  and  take  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Eegi* 
ment  Pennsylvania  Militia  from  on  board  of  her  and  proceed  with  it  to 
AVashington,  N.  C.,  with  all  dispatch. 

The  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Eegiment  had  started  for  Washing- 
ton on  March  29  under  orders  from  Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army 
Corps.  I subsequently  ascertained  that  the  steamer  Sylvan  Shore  could 
not  accommodate  all  of  the  regiment,  and  at  3 o’clock  of  the  same  day 


CHAl>.  XXX.  J 


SIP:GE  of  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


241 


I overtook  the  steiiiii-tug  xllert  and  sent  her,  together  with  the  stern 
whfel  steiHucr  Wilsou,  after  the  remainder  of  the  One  hundred ^ind 
dt.y.e.ghth  Eegiment.  After  the  regiments  had  all  been  takeVfrom 
the  Oolyer  I put  part  of  them  on  the  John  Farron  and  a portion  of  them 
on  the  schooner  with  the  artillery,  and  directed  the  tng  to  take  tlw 
sclmoneyn  tow  and  reach  Washington  with  her  Ss  sooi!  as  possible 
At  4.30 passed  Brant  Island  Shoals  Bight-House,  and  at  7 oVlor*!' 
])iissed  the  light  house  at  the  entrance  to  Pamlico  Eiver.  At  7.20  o’clocV 
met  the  steamer  North  Shore.  The  officer  aboard  inKhrmed  me  that  ho 
w as  IJOiind  to  New  Berne  with  dispatches  from  General  Foster  to  Gen- 

erected  batteries  om  Midi’s  and 
HiUs  Pointe,  on  the  Pamlico  Eiver,  and  that  it  was  General  Foster’s 
oiiTers  not  to  proceed  any  farther  up  the  river  until  gnnboats  should 
arrive  to  convoy  the  transports  by  the  batteries.  I proceeded  to  within 
about  o or  C miles  of  Mull’s  Point,  and  at  9.30  o’clock  came  to^anclior 

Ili^rihroSoutthe'ni^t 

■1  inirn  S«n'5oat  Lockw'ood  passed  bv 

a little  before  daylight,  and  proceeded  to  within  1 mile  of  Hill’s  Poiid 
aud  came  to  anchor. 

At  0 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  April  1 1 got  the  steamer  Farron  and 
other  transports  under  way  and  proceeded  up  the  river,  and  at  9 o’clock 
agaiii  anchored  within  2J  miles  of  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery  * 

^ '''®i^''^‘.**'®  Sunboat  Lockwood  and  learned  from  Mr 

l . her,  that  there  were  five  guns  mounted  on  the 
lattery  on  Hill  s Point ; that  he  had  been  directly  under  the  battery 

ilel  te  ,1®®“  ‘I’i"-  suns.  Mr.  Hicks  expressed  his  willh,.; 

l?e  his^ power  to  assist  the  transports  in  running-  I'rv 

the  batteries,  whereupon  I requested  him  to  proceed- within  rano-elinil 
open  fire  upon  it,  which  he  did,  taking  his  vessel  directly  undei^it  anil 
continuing  to  fire  for  an  hour  and  a\alf  without  any  rei^ffro^Jbe 

Captain  Gouraud,  of  General  Poster’s  staff’,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Cole,  oi  my  staff,  volunteered  to  riiii  by  the  blockade  in  a simli 
boat  and  proceed  to  Washington  with  dispatches  for  General  Poster 
hey  got  safely  by  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery,  and  after  proceedino-  a few 

m.  es  up  the  river  met  Master’s  Mate  McKeever,  of  the  gurboaAonii 

®'}  his  way  down  with  dispatches  from  General  Fosten 
ptaiii  Gouraud  and  Lieutenant  Cole  returned  again  to  the  steamer 
Master’s  .^te -McKeever  said  that  no  boat  drawing  6 feet  ^f"  ’ 
^ WashiDgton,  as  tlie  tide  was  lower  tliaii  it  had  been  for  a 
i opFw  statement  was  also  confirmed  by  the  pilot  of  the  gunboat 
so  low  oil  Ti?®  f knowledge  that  it  had  never  befL  S 

\?r  n’l  ’’®9mred  more  than  C feet  of  water-  while 

- Ir.  Hicks,  commanding  the  gunboat,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that’  he  be- 
ie\ed  it  impossible  for  any  of  the  transports  to  pass  the  batteries  -w 

Siisis  rc.r.'i*"*'*'  •"  s 

■eoiiired 'f  of  the  transports  not  being  of  the  character 

--Wheel 

10  R R— VOL  xvm  ^ 


242 


NORTH  CxYROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[ClTAP.  XXX. 


and  got  safely  tlirougli,  and  returned  at  7.15  o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
April  2 with  dispatches  from  General  Foster. 

After  arriving  in  front  of  the  rebel  batteries  and  remaining  there  all 
day,  and  finding  it  quite  impossible  to  run  the  transports  by  the  batteries 
at  that  time  or  until  additional  gunboats  should  arrive  so  as  to  hold 
the  enemy’s  guns  in  check  while  the  vessels  were  passing,  and  after 
havingcarefully  examined  in  person  the  shore  from  the  mouth  of  Blount’s 
Greek  to  within  a short  distance  of  Hill’s  Point,  having  likewise  made 
the  necessary  soundings  along  the  shore  to  ascertain  the  depth  of  water 
between  the  above-named  points  with  a view  to  select  the  most  suit- 
able place  to  laud,  1 decided  to  have  the  troops  put  ashore  and  storm 
the  works  on  Hill’s  Point,  and  to  that  end  issued  the  following  orders 
on  the  afternoon  of  April  1,  1863  : 

Special  Oedeks,  } Headquaiiteks  Aboard  John  Earon, 

No.  1.  j Famlico  River,  N.  C.,  April  1,  1863. 

1.  Colonel  Dyer,  conmiandiuf;  the  One  Imudred  and  seventy-fifth  Iteginient  Penn- 
sylvania Militia,  will  disembark  his  regiment  on  the  steamer  Wilson  and  land  them 
5iear  the  mouth  of  BlounPs  Creek  and  storm  the  battery  on  Hill’s  Point  at  daylight 
to-morrovv^  morning. 

IL  Colonel  Bierer,  commanding  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-first  Regiment  Penn- 
sylvania Militia,  will  hold  that  portion  of  his  command  that  is  now  aboard  the  steamer 
Kmilie  in  readiness  to  disembark  at  daylight  to-morrow  morning  to  support  Colonel 
Dyer,  who  is  to  storm  the  battery  on  Hill’s  Point. 

ill.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Trosel,  commanding  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth 
Regiment  Pennsylvania  Militia,  will  hold  that  portion  of  his  command*  that  is  now 
aboard  the  steamer  Emilie,  and  a snfiicient  number  in  addition  from  aboard  the 
schooner  to  make  his  command  300  men  in  all,  in  readiness  to  disembark  at  daylight 
to-morrow  to  act  in  conjunction  with  Colonel  Bierer’s  command  as  support  to  Cohniel 
Dyer,  who  is  to  storm  the  battery  on  Hill’s  Point. 

IV.  Lieut.  Thomas  Low,  in  command  of  three  guns  of  the  battery,  now  aboard  the 
schooner  Annie  li.  Edwards,  will  be  ready  to  go  into  action  with  his  guns  at  daylight 
to-morrow  morning.  He  will  act  in  concert  with  the  captain  of  the  gunboat  Lock- 
wood.  The  schooner  will  be  towed  into  action  by  a iiropeller. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-Ctoneral  Spiuola: 

L.  HANLEY, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

I iilso  made  a tborough  and  careful  examination  on  the  evening  of 
April  i of  the  approaches  by  water  to  Bath,  on  the  north  side  of  the 
river,  with  a view  of  lauding  there  and  marching  to  Washington  in 
case  1 failed  in  taking  t/he  battery  on  Hill’s  Point. 

At  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  April  2 the  steamer  Korth  Shore  ar- 
lived  with  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince  and  staff  aboard.  The  foregoing 
orders  were  not  executed,  as  General  Prince  took  command  of  the 
forces,  and  all  movements  from  that  time  until  he  left  again  for  ISTew 
Berne  were  under  his  direction  and  will,  I presume,  be  embodied  in  his 
re])ort. 

At  G p.  m.  on  the  2d  instant  the  steam-tug  Alida  left  for  IS'ew  Berne, 
and  at  8 o’clock  the  same  evening  General  Prince  and  staff'  started  for 
New  Berne  on  the  steamer  North  Shore,  which  again  left  me  in  com- 
mand. 

April  3 I loaded  eight  small  boats  with  ammunition,  and  although 
it  was  blowing  almost  a gale  of  wind,  which  rendered  the  undertaking 
of  running  the  blockade  extremely  hazardous  in  addition  to  passing  the 
enemy’s  batteries,  yet  I experienced  no  difficulty  in  finding  a sulficient 
number  of  volunteers  from  aboard  the  gunboats  to  man  all  the  small 
boats,  and  at  9 p.  m.  this  little  fleet  started,  under  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Williams,  of  my  staff*,  and  reached  the  garrison  in  safety.  Ui)on 
consultation  with  Captain  MacDearmid,  of  the  gunboat  Ceres,  he  volun- 
teered to  buoy  out  the  channel  and  run  his  boat  past  the  batteries. 


Chap.  XXX.  | 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


243 


Accordingly  at  10  o’clock  on  tlie  night  of  April  3 he  started  to  place 
the  buoys,  and  at  12  o’clock  reported  that  he  had  succeeded  and  was  then 
ready  to  run  his  boat  through  if  I desired  it.  I accordingly  had  the 
Ceres  brought  alongside  of  the  Farron  and  i>ut  on  board  of  her  all  the 
ammunition  her  magazine  could  hold. 

At  2.45  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  April  4 Captain  MacDearmid  started 
with  his  gunboat  and  passed  all  the  batteries  in  safety,  the  Hill’s  and 
Swan’s  Point  P>atteries  tiring  at  him  as  long  as  he  w^as  within  range  of 
their  guns. 

At  4 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  Axmil  4 I received  a disx)atcli  from 
General  Foster  for  General  Prince.  It  was  of  an  important  character, 
and  I concluded  to  forward  it  at  once  to  General  Prince  at  New  Berne. 
Aj,ccordingly  I had  the  GOO  troops  on  the  Farron  transferred  to  the  two 
schooners  that  had  Eansom’s  battery  aboard,  and  started  the  steamer  at 
jTo’clock  in  the  morning  for  New  Berne  with  a letter  to  General  Palmer, 
asking  that  all  the  small  boats,  together  with  the  surf-boats  and  launches 
f iV)  could  be  i>rocured  at  New^  Berne,  might  be  sent  down  by  the  steamer 
^ lujy^turn,  as  I had  become  satisfied  that  the  garrison  could  be  re- 
i^^yforQ^  by  i^assiug  the  blockade  with  these  boats  in  the  night,  in  case 
afifjatfier  xilans  failed.  The  steamer  returned  but  the  boats  did  not 
come. 

At  2 o’clock  three  additional  gunboats  arrived,  the  Southfield,  White- 
head,  and  Seymour.  Their  several  commanders  expressed  a desire  to 
render  all  the  assistance  in  their  power  toward  relieving  the  garrison, 
and  wished  to  know  my  desires  in  the  matter;  w^hereupon  I requested 
that  they  would  at  once  engage  the  battery  on  Hill’s  Point,  which  they 
did  at  a distance  of  about  1,000  yards,  and  nothing  could  have  been 
more  accurate  than  the  firing  of  the  Southfield  and  one  or  two  others  of 
the  boats,  from  the  effect  of  which  I became  entirely  satisfied  that  the 
battery  could  be  passed  in  safety. 

After  ascertaining  that  the  buoys  put  down  by  Captain  MacDearmid 
bad  not  been  disturbed,  and  as  soon  as  dark  set  in,  1 had  the  whole  of 
Ramson’s  battery,  including  officers  and  men,  transferred  to  the  schooner 
Nellie  D.,  and  the  six  guns  placed  in  jmsition  on  the  schooner’s  deck.  1 
likewise  transferred  the  whole  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth 
Regiment  Pennsylvania  Militia,  under  command  of  Colonel  Dyer,  num- 
bering GOO  men,  on  the  same  schooner,  and- had  made  arrangements  for 
the  gunboat  Lockwood  to  take  aboard  the  ammunition  that  had  reache(i 
me  for  the  gunboats  and  batteries  at  Washington,  and  also  to  take  tlie 
schooner  in  tow  and  run  the  blockade  with  her  before  daylight  on  the 
following  morning.  The  above  arrangements  were  made  by  the  regi- 
mental and  battery  commanders  in  i)ursuance  of  the  following  orders: 

Special  Ordkps,  ? Headquarters  Aboard  the  Tiioimas  Colter, 

No.  2.  \ ramlico  liiver,  near  Hill’s  Foint,  N.  C.,  April  4,  ISOo. 

I.  Col.  Samuel  A.  Hyer,  commanding  One  Imndred  and  soventy-fiftli  Regiment 
I’ennsylvania  Militia,  will  immediately  transfer  liis  command  from  the  sclioomu' 

to  the  schooner  Nellie  D.  that  lias  Ransom’s  battery  aboard,  for  the  jmrpose 

of  running  the  blockade  by  the  rebel  batteries  on  Hill’s  and  Swan’s  Points  and  Rod- 
man’s Quarters  and  re-enforcing  General  Foster  at  Washington. 

JI.  The  utmost  caution  must  bo  exercised  in  keeping  the  men  between  decks  while 
passing  the  batteries. 

III.  Captain  Ransom,  commanding  battery,  will  transfer  the  guns  of  Ids  battery, 

together  with  caissons,  ammunition,  and  men,  froipthe  schooner to  the  schooner 

Nellie  D.,  and  have  all  his  guns  placed  in  position  and  ready  for  action  on  the  deck  of 
the  schooner  Nellie  D.,  so  as  to  assist  in  fighting  his  way  past  the  batteries. 

IV.  The  captain  of  the  schooner  Nellie  I),  will  receive  aboard  his  vessel  Colonel 
Dyer’s  regiment  of  infantry  and  the  balance  of  Ransom’s  battery. 

V.  Captain  Graves,  of  the  gunboat  Lockwood,  is  requested  to  receive  aboard  his 


244 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


boat  the  ammuuition  sent  from  New  Berne  for  General  Foster,  and  lny  bis  vessel 
alongside  the  schooner  Nellie  D.  for  tlie  ])nrpose  of  towing  her  x)ast  the  batteries  and 
through  the  blockade  to  Washington  between  now  and  daylight. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Sj)ino]a,  commanding; 

L.  HxVNLEY, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Everything  was  in  readiness  to  make  the  move  under  the  above 
orders  when  General  Prince  and  staff  arrived  in  the  steamer  Escort  at 
about  11  p.  m.,  April  4,  and  assumed  command,  after  which  the  execu- 
tion of  the  foregoing  orders  devolved  upon  him.  The  arrangements  for 
running  the  blockade  with  the  gunboat  and  schooner  were  not  carried 
out,  although  the  schooner  had  weighed  anchor  and  the  gunboat  had 
made  fast  to  lier  and  both  were  under  way  when  General  Prince  coun- 
termanded the  orders  alid  the  schooner  again  came  to  anchor.  I had 
made  all  the  above  arrangements  under  the  belief  that  the  favorably 
moment  to  re-enforce  thegari  ison  had  arrived,  as  there  were  2 or  3 feer 
more  water  in  the  river  than  there  liad  been  at  any  time  since  my  arri- 
val. I ascertained  this  fact  by  soundings  made  under  my  own  per-  ^ 
sonal  supervision.  The  reason  for  countermanding  the  orders  under 
which  the  arrangements  had  been  made  for  the  schooner  INellie  D.  and 
gunboat  Lockwood  to  run  the  blockade  1 have  no  doubt  will  be  fully- 
explained  in  General  Prince’s  report. 

All  the  officers  and  men  of  my  brigade  were  both  willing  and  anxious 
to  incur  any  risk  or  to  encounter  any  danger  necessary  to  relieve  the 
beleaguered  city,  and  no  troops  in  the  army  could  have  manifested  a 
greater  w illingness  to  make  any  necessary  sacritice  to  re-enforce  the 
garrison  and  to  relieve  it  from  the  perils  that  surrounded  it. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  gallant 
conduct  of  the  Navy  while  acting  in  conjunction  with  my  command, 
partieularly  Captain  MacDearmid,  of  the  gunboat  Ceres.  The  conduct 
of  the  several  commanders  of  the  gunboats  engaged  was  all  that  could 
have  been  expected  of  them.  They  manifested  great  bravery,  coupled 
with  a willingness  to  do  all  in  their  power  to  relieve  the  garrison. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  SPINOLA, 

Briga  dier- Gen  eral. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General j Eighteenth  Anmj  Corps. 


IIdqrs.  on  Eield  at  Little  Swift  Creek, 

April  8,  1SG3 — Wednesday  night,  11  o’clock. 

General:  in  pursuance  to  your  instructions  of  to-day  the  column 
under  my  command  started  at  3 o’clock  p.  m.  and  arrived  at  this  place 
at  8 o’clock  p.  711.,  The  advance  guard  met  the  enemy’s  jiiekets  about  7 
miles  from  Fort  Anderson.  They  letreated  without  returning  lire,  and 
about  half  an  hour  later  we  heard  their  alarm  guns.  From  information 
entirely  reliable  1 learn  that  the  enemy,  (),()()()  infantry  and  1,000  cav- 
alry, are  in  a strong  fortified  position  at  Walter  Buff’s  farm,  on  the  road 
leading  to  Blount’s  Creek,  1 also  learn  from  the  same  source  that  the 
enemy  occujiy  both  sides  of  S\yift  Creek  Bridge.  There  are  other  forces 
on  the  road  leading  to  Kinstoi*i,  but  1 could  not  learn  their  iiosition  or 
strength.  It  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  enemy  is  in  strong  position  and 
force  at  the  cross-roads  near  Washington.  Should  1 iiroceed  to  Wash- 
ington on  the  Switt  Creek  load  I feel  assured  that  1 will  be  attacked 


Chap.  XXX.  1 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


245 


in  the  rear  by  the  forces  above  named  on  Eutf^s  farm,  and  would  also 
be  harassed  on  my  left  flank  by  the  forces  stationed  on  the  Kinston 
roads.  In  case  I fail  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  cross-roads  near  Wash- 
ington and  am  compelled  to  retreat  it  can  only  be  done  with  a large 
sacrifice,  if  at  all.  From  all  the  information  I have  received  it  estab- 
lishes the  strength  of  the  enemy  not  less  than  20,000,  under  Hill,  Petti- 
grew, and  Garnett.  The  majority  of  the  information  fixes  the  enemy’s 
strength  at  22,000,  and  it  is  therefore  snpposable  that  we  will  have  to  en- 
counter at  least  10,000  under  Hill  at  the  cross-roads  near  Washington, 
that  being  the  main  position  of  the  enemy.  It  appears  to  me  now  that 
the  only  possible  successful  way  to  relieve  the  garrison  is  to  take  the 
battery  at  Hill’s  Point,  and  in  that  way  raise  the  blockade. 

We  are  constructing  the  bridge  over  Little  Swift  Creek  to-night. 

I shall  have  a consultation  to-night  with  the  brigade  commanders,  ar- 
tillery, and  cavalry.  It  is  my  intention  to  start  from  here  in  the  morning 
for  Blount’s  Creek,  and  engage  the  enemy  there,  and  drive  them,  if 
jmssible,  beyond  the  battery  on  Hill’s  Point  with  a view  of  taking  it. 
Should  I not  be  successful  I shall  retreat  to  Fort  Anderson,  as  1 am 
satisfied  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  march  on  Washington  by  the  Swift 
Creek  route  without  endangering  my  entire  command.  In  the  event  of 
having  to  retreat  it  will  be  necessary  that  transportation  be  ready  to 
convey  the  command  across  the  Keuse  Eiver.  Send  forward  immediately 
the  forage  wagons  and  wagons  with  officers’  baggage ; the  other  wagons 
leave  till  you  hear  further  from  me. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  B.  SPINOLA, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Brig.  Gen.  I.  K.  Palmer. 

Headquarters  General  Spinola’s  Command, 

Near  New  Hope  School-House, 
Thursday  Evening^  April  9,  1863 — 11.30  o’clock. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  communicate  that  I started  at  7 
o’clock  this  morning  from  Little  Swift  Creek  with  my  command  and 
inarched  to  Eutf’s  Mill,  at  the  head  of  Blount’s  Creek,  a distance  of  15 
miles.  Two  miles  from  this  place  we  met  and  exchanged  fire  with  the 
enemy’s  picket,  ’'vhich  was  continued  till  we  reached  the  cross-roads,  1 
mile  from  Euff’s  Mill.  I followed  the  enemy  with  the  intention  of 
crossing  Blount’s  Creek,  in  order  to  make  my  way  to  Washington,  as  I 
have  already  indicated  in  my  last  letter  to  you.  I found,  however,  the 
enemy’s  position  almost  impregnable,  owing  to  the  thickness  of  swamp 
woods  on  the  north  side  of  Blount’s  Creek,  and  also  to  the  strong  earth- 
works on  the  south  side  of  the  creek,  behind  which  the  enemy  were 
2,600  strong.  I will  also  mention  that  these  earthworks  are  thrown  up 
close  to  the  bridge,  which  was  destroyed  by  the  enemy  previous  to  my 
arrival  there.  The  earthworks  were  partly  dug  in  the  ground  and  partly 
thrown  np,  so  that  they  could  only  be  reached  by  dei)ressing  our  pieces. 
In  the  enemy’s  works  were  six  pieces  mounted,  which  I judge  to  be  12- 
ponnder  howitzers,  [which]  w^ere  served  with  great  skill.  Behind  these 
fortilications,  at  a distance  of  about  a half  mile,  were  also  3,000  of  the 
('iicmy,  the  wliole  5,000  being  under  the  command  of  General  Pettigrew. 

1 -dso  learn  from  reliable  sources  that  the  roads  from  Blount’s  Creek  to 
Washington  and  Hill’s  Point  are  entirely  occupied  by  the  enemy,  and 
1 learn  by  positive  evidence  that  there  are  two  brigades  encamped  at 
i^ml  near  the  cross-roads  in  front  of  Washington,  under  the  immediate 


246 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


command  of  General  Hill.  The  engagement  was  commenced  by  a com- 
pany of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry  with  a mountain  howitzer.  The 
howitzer,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Burke,  and  the  company  of 
cavalry,  under  the  command  of  Captain , were  under  the  direc- 

tion of  Major  Garrard,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  temporarily  detailed 
on  my  staff.  The  cavalry  detachment  constituted  part  of  Colonel 
Amory’s  brigade,  who  engaged  the  enemy  at  the  bridge  for  nearly 
two  hours.  Owing  to  the  condition  of  the  ground  it  was  imi:>ossible  to 
develop  a large  force  against  the  enemy,  and  therefore  only  two  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  the  Seventeenth  and  Forty-third  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  two  sections  of  Captain  BelgeFs  battery,  and  one  section 

of  3l?-pounder  howitzers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant , together 

with  the  cavalry  above  named,  were  actually  engaged.  Though  we  suc- 
ceeded in  silencing  the  enemy’s  battery,  yet  Ave  Avere  unable  to  drive 
them  from  their  position,  as  our  infantry  and  artillery  hre  were  without 
much  effect  upon  them,  owing  to  the  nature  of  their  earthworks  and  the 
position  of  our  guns.  It  was  equally  impossible  to  enfilade  their  works 
or  to  cross  or  ford  the  creek  at  any  other  point,  and,  as  stated  above, 
the  bridge  being  destroyed  we  were  unable  to  charge  the  enemy  or 
build  the  bridge  under  their  heavy  musketry  fire.  Seeing  that  it  was 
impossible  to  cross  the  creek,  I was  obliged  to  return,  and  did  so  at  5 
o’clock  this  afternoon,  in  regular  order,  without  being  molested  in  any 
way  by  the  enemy. 

I take  i>leasure  in  stating  that  Colonel  Amory’s  conduct  during  the 
march  and  engagement  was  of  the  most  creditable  character,  as  was  also 
Major  Frankie’s,  Major  Garrard’s,  and  Major  Stone’s,  temporarily  de- 
tailed on  my  staff.  The  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  under 
command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fellows,  is  especially  deserAung  of 
notice;  Avhile  all  the  officers  and  men  of  the  command  manifested  an 
anxious  determination  to  reach  Washington  at  all  hazards  and  relieve 
the  garrison  there,  but  failed  to  do  it  for  the  reason  that  they  could  not 
perform  impossibilities. 

I deplore  the  necessity  of  stating  the  casualties  of  officers  and  men 
during  the  engagement,  which  was  very  slight  considering  the  nature 
of  our  engagement.  Captain  Belger  was  wounded  in  the  hip,  the  ball 
])assing  through  his  thigh  and  killing  his  horse ; Lieutenant  Boberts, 
8eventeenth  Massachusetts,  left  arm  broken  by  a Minie  ball ; 2 men  of 
Battery  F,  First  Ehode  Island  Artillery,  1 slightly,  the  other  severely;  5 
men  of  Seventeenth  Alassachusetts,  1 se.A^erely. 

I shall  leave  this  pla^e  for  New  Berne  to-morroAv  morning,  feeling 
conscious  that  I have  done  all  that  Avas  in  my  power  to  comply  with  tlie 
requests  of  General  Foster  as  well  as  to  carry  out  your  instructions. 

I am,  general,  Amry  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  B.  SPINOLA, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Brig.  Cen.  I.  N.  Palmer. 

Camp  at  New  Hope  School-House, 

Tuesday^  Ajrril  14,  I8G3.— 5 p.  in. 

General:  Pursuant  to  instructions  receiA^ed  last  night  I left  Fort 
Anderson  with  my  command  at  10.30  a.  m.  and  arrived  at  this  place  at 
4 p.  m.  At  the  forks  of  the  road,  about  8 miles  from  Fort  Anderson, 
I sent  the  Avhole  detachment  of  caA^alry  (but  10)  and  the  cavalry  hoAvitzer 
on  the  road  leading  to  the  right,  Avhich  terminates  at  the  road  leading 
to  Blount’s  Creek  and  about  1 mile  from  the  school-house.  I exjiected 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


247 


the  enemy’s  i)ickets  to  be  posted  at  this  place  in  strength,  and  therefore 
instructed  the  commandant  of  the  cavalry  to  march  quickly  over  the 
road  in  order,  if  possible,  to  cut  them  off  from  their  main  force;  in  the 
mean  time  our  main  column  marched  on  the  direct  road  liere.  I am 
happy  to  inform  you  that  Captain  Chamberlin,  commanding  the  cav- 
alry, has  faithfully  performed  the  duty  assigned  him  by  succeeding  in 
'cutting  off’  and  capturing  two  cavalry  pickets  stationed  here.  From  our 
prisoners  we  have  received  information  that  the  enemy  occupied  Blount’s 
(hx^ek  with  6,000  infantry  and  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  from  that  to 
tbc  cross-roads  leading  to  Washington  they  have  15,000  infantry  and 
three  regiments  of  cavalry  stationed.  They  are  fortified  in  every  avail- 
able x)ositiou  with  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  x:>ieces  of  artillery. 

I also  learn  that  the  stringers  of  the  bridge  across  Blount’s  Creek  are 
cut,  which,  if  so,  will  prevent  our  crossing  there. 

The  prisoners  belong  to  Colonel  Claiborne’s  regiment.  Seventh  Con- 
federate Cavalry,  newly  arrived  from  the  Blackwater.  They  state  that 
there  are  50,000  rebel  soldiers  stationed  around  Washington.  I have 
sent  the  cavalry  in  two  parts  to  scour  the  roads  leading  to  Blount’s 
Creek  and  Swift  Creek.  The  latter  road  I have  our  x^ioneers  emx)loyed 
in  clearing  what  we  blockaded  in  our  last  march  here,  as  I intend  leav- 
ing here  at  daylight  in  the  morning  and  march  toward  Swift  Creek, 
leaving  a x)ortion  of  my  command  to  occupy  our  present  x^osition  until 
we  return. 

I am,  general,  very  resx)ectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

F.  B.  SPINOLA, 
Brigadier- Geyieral, 


B r i gadier-  Gen  eral  We s sell s , 

Commanding  Eighteenth  Army  Corijs. 


Headquarters  Spinola’s  Brigade, 

Washington,  W.  6\,  May  15,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  orders  received  from  Headquarters  Eight- 
eenth Army  Corps,  directing  that  my  brigade  should  be  at  Foster’s 
Wharf  at  2 a.  m.  on  April  8 for  the  x)urpose  of  crossing  the  F^eiise  River, 
I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

The  brigade  reached  the  place  designated  a quarter  of  an  hour  before 
the  time  specified,  and  in  two  hours  were  all  over  the  river.  They 
bivouacked  near  the  old  rebel  fort  on  the  road  leading  to  the  New 
Hope  School-House. 

At  between  1 and  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  Ax>ril  8 I called  upon 
Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Primje  at  his  headquarters  to  ascertain  if  there  were 
any  sx>ecific  instructions  to  be  issued  in  regard  to  the  expedition  and  to 
learn  what  time  he  had  fixed  on  for  the  column  to  commence  moving. 
1 believe  that  General  Prince  was  to  command  the  expedition,  as  he 
had  been  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  ])roceed  with  it  to  the  relief 
of  the  garrison  at  Washington,  N.  C.,  Avhich  was  then  invested  by  the 
enemy. 

I found  General  Prince  in  a state  of  mind  denoting  that  he  was  very 
much  exercised  in  regard  to  the  xtroxiriety  of  making  the  (;ontem[)lated 
inarch,  and  he  freely  cx])ressed  his  o])inion  to  me  that  the  cx])cdition 
cnuld  not  succeed,  that  it  must  be  a very  great  failure,  for  he  did  not  be- 
lieve that  any  of  those  who  accompanied  it  would  return,  as  we  would 
all  be  captured,  and  that  it  was  like  making  the  rebels  a x>resent  of  all 
the  artillery. 


248 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiTAP.  XXX. 


General  Prince  at  this  interview  also  invited  me  to  volunteer  to  take 
the  command  of  the  expedition,  which  I declined  in  the  most  positive 
and  unmistakable  language.  I was  entirely  willing  to  take  my  chance 
with  others  of  either  falling  ux)on  the  field  or  being  taken  prisoner,  but 
my  own  good  sense  promptly  told  me  that  the  size  of  the-  expedition 
and  the  im})ortance  of  its  trust  forbade  one  of  my  limited  military  ex- 
])erience  from  assuming  its  command,  except  under  imsitive  orders 
from  my  superior  ofhcers,  and  then,  in  ‘obedience  to  a willing  heart,  I 
(jould  only  promise  to  do  the  best  I could  to  accomjdish  the  object  of 
the  exi)cdition. 

At  about  10  a.  m.  on  April  8 a messenger  called  at  my  room  and 
told  me  that  General  Palmer  desired  to  see  meat  once.  I ipimediately 
}>roceedf  d to  his  headquarters,  when  he  informed  me  that  the  command 
of  the  expedition  would  fall  upon  me.  This  was  the  first  intimation  I 
laid  received  that  this  imt)ortant  trust  would  be  placed  under  my 
charge.  1 exx>ressed  my  astonishment  at  it,  and  told  General  Palmer 
that  I could  not  assume  the  command  unless  I received  a written  order 
to  that  effect,  which  he  assured  me  I should  have  before  starting. 

1 have  deemed  it  due  to  truth  and  the  interest  of  the  service  that 
these  facts  should  be  stated  in  this  report,  as  they  form  a link  in  the 
history  of  the  efibrts  made  to  relieve  the  invested  garrison. 

1 then  crossed  the  river,  and  shortly  after  reaching  the  other  side  was 
handed  tiie  following  order  : 

Fort  Anderson,  Neuse  River, 

April  8,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  F.  I>.  Spinola, 

U.  8.  Volunteer’s,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

General:  The  forces  for  the  relief  of  Washington,  are  hereby  placed  under  yonr 
command,  and  a list  of  them  is  furnished  to  you.  General  Foster,  commanding  this 
department,  has  given  positive  instructions  that  all  the  available  force  at  New  Berne 
shall  march  to  Washington  to  his  relief.  You  will  perceive  that  this  order  has  been 
im])licitly  obeyed  as  far  as  jilacing  the  troops  at  your  disposition  is  concerned. 

You  have  informed  mo  that  you  have  read  the  orders  sent  to  General  Prince  by 
General  Foster.  As  these  are  the  only  instructions  I have  seen  I can  only  direct  you 
to  bear  in  mind  the  letter  of  General  Foster  and  exercise  your  best  judgment  in  carry- 
ing out  fiis  views.  The  sole  object  of  the  expedition  is  to  get  the  troops  into  Wash- 
ington, now  invested  by  the  enemy,  and  I feel  confident  that  everything  that  can  be 
done  will  ])«  elfected. 

Please  to  keep  mo  informed  of  the  stnte  of  affairs  as  you  proceed.  Look  well  to  the 
roads  leading  into  your  route  from  the  direction  of  Kinston.  Should  you  be  obliged 
to  build  a bridge  at  Swift  Creek  it  should  be  xirotected,  for  the  supplies  for  your  com- 
mand may  not  be  able  to  start  until  to-morrow. 

I will  not  antici})ate  a failure  to  get  through,  but  should  you  be  obliged  to  return 
(for  I shall  send  for  you  if  this  place  is  attacked  by  any  force  that  I think  will  be  able 
to  overcome  the  force  left  here)  let  the  return  movement  be  conducted  with  order  and 
great  care. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  N.  PALMER, 

Br  igadi cr-  G cn  era  I,  Co  mma  n d in  g . 

on  tlie  receipt  of  wliicfi  I. directed  tlie  column  to  be  ready  to  move  at  8 
o’clock'  that  afternoon.  I organized  the  several  regiments  comprising 
the  command  into  three  brigades,  of  five  regiments  each,  and  assigned 
to  each  brigade  its  proper  iiortion  of  artillery,  and  also  gave  tlte  cavalry 
the  necessary  instructions  to  govern  them  on  the  march. 

Tlie  First  Brigade  tvas  put  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Amory,  of 
the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  aiid  coinjirised  the  follow- 
ing infantry  and  artillery:  Tlie  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteei's, 
two  .‘ki-pounder  liowitzers.  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  One 
Imndred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Ninety-sixth  New  York 
Volunteers,  Third  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  Belger’s  battery. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


249 


The  Secoucl  Brigade  was  commanded  by  Colonel  Lee,  and  consisted 
of  the  following-named  infantry  and  artillery : The  Eigbty-fifth  New 
York  Volunteers,  One  hundred  and  third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
Biggs’  battery,  Fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Eighth  Massachusetts 
Volunteers,  and  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  New  York  Volunteers. 

The  Third  Brigade  was  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Bierer,  and 
included  the  following  regiments  of  infantry  and  pieces  of  artillery : 
Two  pieces  of  artillery.  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Pennsylvania 
Militia,  One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  New  York  Volunteers,  One  hun- 
dred and  seventy-first  Pennsylvania  Militia,  One  hundred  and  fifty- 
eighth  Pennsylvania  Militia,  and  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Volunteers. 

The  following  official  statement,  purporting  to  show  the  true* strength 
of  the  command,  was  also  furnished  me  by  General  Palmer  on  the  day 
the  expedition  was  to  leave,  and  it  is  the  one  referred  to  in  General 
Palmer’s  order : 


Official  statement  of  troops  that  can  de  f urnished  Brig.  Gen.  H. 

commanding  Expedition,  April  8,  1863. 

Eigkty-fifth  New  York  lufantry 

One  hundred  and  third  Pennsylvania  Infantry 

Fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry 

Eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry 

One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  New  York  Infantry 

One  hundred  and  thirty-second  Now  York  Infantry 

Third  Massachusetts  Infantry 

Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry.  

Forty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry... 

One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Infantry 

Ninety-sixth  New  York  Infantry 

Ono  hundred  and  seventy-first  Pennsylvania  Infantry 

One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry 

One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Pennsylvania  Infantry 

Fifth  Phode  Island  Infantry..., 


Prince,  U.  S.  Volunteers, 


•Men. 

445 

471 

593 

271 

245 

555 

674 

591 

701 

395 

278 

600 

600 

600 

388 


Total  infantry 7 497 

Artillery,  16  guns. 

Cavalry,  two  squadrons,  400  men. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  I.  N.  Palmer,  commanding: 

J.  A.  JUDSON, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-fieneral. 


It  is  evident  that  this  statement  was  prepared  with  the  understand- 
iug  that  General  Prince  was  to  command.  It  re})resents  the  strength 
ol  tlie  expedition  to  be  7,807,  exclusive  of  the  artillery,  which  was  316, 
as  shown  by  a field  report  made  at  the  time  of  starting,  which  would 
make  the  whole  force  8,123;  while  the  field  report  received  from  each 
origadej  together  witli  the  artillery  and  cavalry,  half  an  hour  before 
starting,  sliowed  the  whole  force  to  be  but  0,465,  instead  of  8,123,  a 
(lillerence  of  1,658  less  than  that  shown  by  the  official  statement. 

[ The  column  moved  promptly  at  3 o’clock,  and  reached  Little  Swift 
Lreek  at  8 o’clock  the  same  evening,  having  marched  between  14  and 
L)  miles.  The  advance  guard  met  the  enemy’s  picket  about  7 miles 
Irom  Fort  Anderson.  They  retreated  without  returning  fire.  Half  an 
Lour  later  three  heavy  guns  were  heard  in  the  direction  of  Swift  Creek 
■ V illnge,  which  I took  for  alarm  guns  of  fhe  enemy.  From  information 
a character  that  seemed  entirely  reliable  I learned  that  six  regiments 
infantry  (about  6,000  men), 'under  command  of  General  Pettigrew, 
JiHl  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  under  command  of  Colonel  Claiborne, 
lumbering  about  1,000  men,  were  encamped  at  Walter  Ruffs  farm,  on 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


250 


the  road  leading  to  Washington  and  Hill’s  Point,  where  it  crosses 
Blount’s  Creek.  From  various  sources  I learned  that  the  enemy  were 
also  in  large  force  at  Swift  Creek  Village  and  occupied  both  sides  of 
the  bridge,  as  well  as  the  roads  leading  to  Kinston  and  Greenville; 
but  I could  not  learn  their  exact  strength,  except  that  they  occupied 
live  or  six  different  camps.  The  fact  that  the  enemy  were  m force  at 
the  cross-roads  in  front  of  AVashington  was  also  contirmed  by  both  i 
contrabands  and  prisoners  in  a manner  that  left  no  doubt  in  my  mind; 
that  the  strength  of  the  enemy  on  the  south  side  of  Pamlico  Biyer  and;! 
viciuitv,  and  all  of  which  were  within  supporting  distance  of  each  other, ,1 
could  not  have  been  less  than  12,000  or  15,000  men,  although  it  wash 
fixed  by  all  the  information  received  at  a much  greater  number.  W itlil 
these  facts  before  me,  and  after  a consultation  with  the  brigade  com  i 
manders  together  with  the  chief  officer  of  artillery,  who  were  unaniinousy 
in  their  expressions  of  opinion  that  the  column  had  better  return  to 
Berne,  as  in  their  judgment  an  absolute  failure  would  be  the  result  o I 
the  expedition  if  we  proceeded  by  this  route,  I therefore  concluded  noil 
to  go  by  the  way  of  Swift  Creek  Village.  , . , ^ i n 

The  infantry  of  the  enemy  at  this  place  was  strongly  intrenched  ancl|i 
had  thrown  up  earthworks  for  their  artillery  which  commanded  all  tni  i 


IJ  i Llll-A/VVLl  ll  \JX.  xi-kj  t/  , 

direct  approaches  to  the  village,  although  from  the  evidence  receive!  , 
their  strength  in  the  village  proper  was  not  as  great  as  mine,  and  it  J| 

« ~ , .1  T • Xl.  TvloniA  i‘nA\7  P.nn  U i 


had  attacked  them  there  and  driven  them  out  of  the  place  they  conk  i 
have  retreated  toward  the  cross-roads  in  front  of  Washington  and  joinei. 
the  forces  located  at  that  point.  Still,  to  have  pursued  this  course  ano 
pushed  on  toward  AVashington  by  this  route  would  have  exposed  my  le 
Hank  to  the  assault  of  the  enemy,  who  were  encamped  in  consideiaOk 
force  on  the  roads  leading  toward  Kinston  and  Greenville,  while  1 etti 
grew  would  certainly  have  crossed  Blount’s  Creek  and  attacked  my  rear 
for  I had  no  way  of  protecting  it  except  by  dividing  my  foice  and  i 
was  not  large  enough  to  admit  of  that  being  done,  particularly  so  as 
would  have  been  compelled  to  have  met  at  the  cross-roads  and  in  m; 
front  a force  very  much  larger  than  my  own  and  well  intrenched. 

Thus  hemmed  in  on  three  sides  by  an  active  foe,  with  an  impenetraui'' 
swamp  on  my  right,  it  would  have  left  me  but  a small  chance  ot  succes 
and  no  opportunity  whatever  of  falling  back  in  the  event  of  a-  repiily 
at  the  cross-roads,  the  consequence  of  which  would  have  been  y >ther  tli 
annihilation  of  my  command  or  its  capture,  to  avoid  vTiich  1 decidec  U 
try  and  reach  AVashington  by  the  way  of  Bloimt’s  Creek  road,  am  i 
possible  drive  the  enemy  back,  so  as  to  reach  Hill  s 1 oint  and  ciipt 
that  battery  and  thus  raise  the  blockade.  In  making  this  inarch  1 coiil 
completely  cover  my  rear  and  flanks  by  removing  the  bridges  acu  - 
Little  Swift  Creek  and  blockading  the  roads  over  \\diich  I was  to  pa. 
before  reaching  the  main  road  leading  to  Blount’s 
I did,  although  I could  not  have  protected  my  rear  and  flanks  by  t 
same  means  if  I had  taken  the  Swift  Creek  road,  as  it  would  ha^  e c i 
off  my  only  means  of  retreat  in  the  event  of  a repulse,  as  well  as  to  Iud 
completely  destroyed  all  communication  with  Kew  Berne,  which  i ‘ 
directed  to  protect  and  keep  open  for  the  accommodation  ot  the  v ago 
and  ammunition  train,  which  could  not  start  until  one  day  a te 

main  body  of  the  troops.  . „ . • r. 

I further  deem  it  of  interest  that  the  following  communication,  r 
ceived  from  General  Palmer  while  on  the  march,  should  be  introduci 
in  this  report,  as  it  is  confirmatory  of  my  own  information  in  regal 
the  strength  and  position  of  the  enemy : 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON.  N.  C.  251 


New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  9, 1863—8  a.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  F.  B.  Spinola, 

United  States  Volunteers : 

General:  Yours,  written  at  11  p.  m.  yesterday,  I have  received.  An  hour  before  I 
received  your  letter  I beard  from  Captain  McCann,  commanding  tbc  gunboats  on  tbe 
river  near  tbe  blockade,  tbe  same  information  concerning  tbe  force  and  position  of  tbe 
enemy.  Your  suggestions  as  to  tbe  mode  of  relief  for  Washington,  taking  all  things 
into  consideration,  appear  to  be  good.  I cannot  trammel  you  with  orders.  Your  own 
good  judgment  must  dictate  your  course.  Your  suggestion  concerning  the  transporta- 
tion and  tbe  wagons  to  be  forwarded  shall  be  adopted. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

I.  N.  PALMER, 
Jlrigadier- Genera  I,  Comm  an  ding. 

On  the  morning  of  April  9 I moved  back  from  Little  Swift  Creek  to- 
ward the  New  Hope  School-House,  which  I reached  at  9 o’clock,  halted 
the  column,  fed  the  artillery  horses  (the  forage  having  just  reached  me 
at  this  point),  and  at  10  o’clock  started  for  Blount’s  Creek,  a distance  of 
11  miles,  which  place  I reached  at  about  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon. 
After  marching  2 miles  we  met  and  exchanged  lire  with  the  enemy’s 
pickets,  which  was  continued  until  we  reached  the  cross-roads  ,1  mile 
from  Buff’s  Mill,  which  is  located  near  the  head  of  the  creek.  * I here 
halted  the  column  for  about  fifteen  minutes  while  I made  a reconnais- 
sance of  the  approaches  to  the  bridge  which  led  over  the  creek.  I here 
found  tlie  enemy  in  force  and  strongly  intrenclied.  1 moved  forward 
Colonel  Amory’s  brigade,  with  two  32-i)ounder  howitzers  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Folk,  and  the  12-pounder  Napoleon  battery  under 
command  of  Captain  Belger.  The  approaches  to  the  creek  by  tlie  main 
road  were  through  a dense  wood  with  marsh  on  the  left,  the  ground  to 
tbe  right  being  a little  higher  but  heavily  timbered,  while  the  edge  of 
the  stream  could  not  be  reached  owing  to  its  swampy  nature,  together 
with  the  growth  of  heavy  timber  and  underbrush  which  rendered  it  im- 
passable, so  that  it  was  impossible  to  reach  the  creek  below  the  bridge 
except  toward  its  mouth,  a distance  of  5 or  6 miles,  and  there  it  could 
not  be  crossed  without  the  aid  of  pontoon  bridges  or  fiats  decked  over, 
neither  of  which  I had  been  provided  with. 

As  we  approached,  the  enemy  opened  fire  on  the  column  from  the  op- 
posite bank  of  the  creek  and  the  engagement  was  immediately  com- 
menced by  Company  — , Third  New  York  Cavalry,  Captain  Pond,  wliich 
was  dismounted  and  deployed  as  skirmishers,  with  a mountain  howitzer 
under  command  of  Lieutenant  Burke,  the  howitzer  and  cavalry  being 
under  the  direction  of  Major  Garrard,  Third  New  York  Cavalry.  The 
advance  line  of  skirmishers  was  also  engaged  at  the  same  time  with  the 
cavalry  and  howitzer  companies. 

The  enemy  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  creek,  which  is  not  fordable 
and  crossed  only  by  a bridge  which  they  had  rendered  impassable  by 
tearing  oft*  the  planking,  Avere  concealed  on  the  higher  ground  occui)ied 
by  them.  I accordingly  had  the  skirmishers,  the  howitzer,  and  cavaby 
companies  Avithdrawn,  and  opened  fire  with  canister  from  the  two  32- 
pounder  howitzers,  to  which  1 soon  added  four  pieces  of  Belger’s  bat- 
tery, the  enemy  replying  in  the  same  manner  with  grape,  canister,  and 
I shell.  The  engagement  continued  for  an  hour  and  three-quarters  in 
this  Avay. 

Having  silenced  the  enemy’s  guns  and  dismounted  one  of  them,  and 
linding  it  utterly  impossible  under  the  circumstances  to  cross  the  creek, 
1 ordered  the  infantry  to  fall  back  and  the  artillery  gradually  with- 
draAvn,  Avith  a squadron  of  caA^alry  in  their  rear. 

No  property  of  any  description  was  left  behind.  The  return  march 


252 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


was  made  without  the  least  confusion  or  interruption  of  any  kind  and 
without  any  molestation  from  the  enemy.  The  column  proceeded  as 
far  as  the  New  Hope  School-House  and  bivouacked  for  the  night,  and 
returned  to  New  Berne  the  next  day. 

The  casualties  of  officers  and  men  were  ll-wounded,  none  killed,  which 
was  very  slight  considering  the  nature  of  the  engagement.  Captain 
Belger  was  wounded  in  the  leg,  the  ball  i^assing  through  his  thigh  and 
killing  his  horse  under  him  ; in  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Yolun- 
teers.  Lieutenant  Boberts  and  7 men ; in  the  artillery,  2 men  besides 
Captain  Belger. 

It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  the  loss  of  the  enemy.  Several  prisoners 
were  taken.  As  our  fire  was  well  sustained,  it  doubtless  did  good  exe- 
cution. 

The  Seveuteenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  the  Forty-third  Mas- 
sachusetts Militia  were  the  only  part  of  my  infantry  engaged,  and  the 
conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  was  all  that  could  be  desired,  as  was 
also  that  of  the  artillery  and  cavalry  engaged. 

1 take  great  pleasure  in  stating  that  the  conduct  of  Colonel  Amory, 
coiunmnding  brigade;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  of  the  cavalry;  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Fellows,  commanding  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  to- 
gether with  Captain  Belger,  of  the  artillery,  during  the  march  and  en- 
gagement, was  not  only  cool  and  brave  but  of  the  most  creditable 
character,  particularly  while  under  fire;  as  was  also  that  of  Major  Gar- 
rard, of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry;  Major  Frankie,  of  the  Seveu- 
teenth Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  Major  Stone,  of  the  Third  New 
York  Artillery,  the  last-named  officers  having  been  temporarily  detailed 
on  my  staff. 

I am,  colonel,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  B.  SPINOLA, 

. Brigadier- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistaiit  Adjutant  Ge7ieral,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Spinola’s  Brigade, 

Washington,  V.  0.,  May  18,  18G3. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

At  5 p.  m.  on  April  13  I received  the  following  order : 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  13,  1803. 

Brigadier-General  Spinola, 

Commanding  Brigade : 

General:  You  -will  cross  the  Neuse  with  your  brigade  with  as  much  expedition  as 
])racticable,  and  make  from  Fort  Anderson  a.  careful  reconnaissance  in  the  direction 
of  Washington,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  condition  of  the  country  and  to 
divert  the  attention  of  the  enemy  from*  their  attemi>t  on  our  position  at  Wasliington. 
A squadron  of  cavalry  and  a section  each  from  Belger’s,  Riggs’,  and  Ransom’s  batteries 
are  ordered  to  accompany  you. 

I^Iajor  Garrard,  an  officer  of  intelligence  and  familiar  with  the  country,  will  report 
to  you  in  person  for  such  duty  as  you  may  require. 

Tlie  road  to  the  New  Hope  School-House  and  that  toward  Swift  Creek  Village 
should  be  carefully  (examined,  and  in  all  movements  care  should  be  taken  to  secure 
your  Hanks  and  rear  by  occupying  strong  and  unassailable  i)ositions.  Much  is  left  to 
your  discretion,  it  Ixung  rrnderstood  that  General  Foster’s  desire  is  for  ns  to  occupy  or 
divert  the  attention  of  the  enemy  from  his  front. 

The  (|nartermaster’s  department  is  ordered  to  furnish  the  necessary  transportation. 
Three  days’  rations  will  bo  taken  in  the  haversacks,  and  additional  supplies  sent  to 
you  at  Fort  Anderson  on  your  requisition. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


253 


, It  is  desirable  that  you  move  with  all  your  effective  force  and  issue  strict  orders 
i against  straggling,  marauding,  destruction  of  property,  and  the  wanton  practice  of 
I firing  tne  woods  along  the  line  of  march, 
i Communicate  frequently  with  these  headquarters. 

■ Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

; H.  W.  WESSELLS, 

I Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers,  Commanding. 

I immediately  ordered  the  necessary  rations  prepared  for  the  march 
I and  at  8 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  April  13  reached  Foster’s  Wharf  an(i 
i the  brigade  crossed  over  the  Jfeuse  Biver.  At  11  o’clock  we  reached 
I the  old  rebel  fort  1 mile  beyond  Fort  Anderson  and  bivouacked  for  the 
I night. 

I At  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  April  14  the  brigade  took  up  its  line 
; of  march  toward  the  New  Hope  School-House,  which  place  we  reached 
: early  m the  forenoon.  Having  marched  10  miles  I halted  the  column 
i to  allow  the  men  to  rest  and  jirepare  their  dinner,  after  which  I care- 
; fully  examined  by  strong  detachments  all  the  roads  leading  to  this  place 
j for  a distance  of  7 or  8 miles,  except  the  one  leading  to  Swift  Creek 
1 After  the  return  of  the  various  detachments,  it  being  late  in  the  day 
; and  the  men  considerably  fatigued,  I ordered  the  brigade  to  bii-ouac  for 
tbe  night. 

There  was  no  enemy  in  any  force  on  any  of  the  roads  examined  ex- 
;cept  pickets,  5 of  whom  I captured,  3 of  them  belonging  to  Claiborne’s 
jcavalry  and  2 of  them  to  Whitford’s  battalion.  It  was  my  intention  to 
|have  moved  on  toward  Swift  Greek  Village  and  attack  the  enemy  at 
that  place,  but  before  reaching  Little  Swift  Creek  I received  thefoliow- 
jiiig  explanatory  instructions  from  the  general  commanding: 

j Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

r.  • r 1 Cl  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  14,  isbS 

;Lngadier-Geueral  Spinola  : ’ y i 

: Sir  : l am  directed  by  tbe  general  commanding  to  inform  vou  that  it  will  be  im- 
ipossible  to  send  you  nmre  cavalry.  Tbe  general  is  afraid  that  vou  may  have  misun- 
.lerstood  bis  orders  His  desire  is  that  you  should  simply  make  a tboroimb  recon- 
i attack,  and  that  you  should  be  particular  to  keep  your  reai^stroimly 

^ant  additional  supplies  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  send  a 
Isiicird  with  the  tram.  Each  road  in  your  rear  should  bo  left  strongly  guavded.  Tbe 
,^eneial  desires  you  to  communicate  with  him  in  writing  as  often  as  possible 
1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  F.  ANDERSON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjuiant- General. 

, on  the  morning  of  April  15  the  brigade  moved  toward 

5witt  Creek  by  the  old  road  across  Little  Swift  Creek.  I found  the 
I’oad  blockaded  and  the  bridge  over  the  creek  destroyed.  I commenced 
t recon stvaction  of  the  bridge,  but  before  I had  completed  it  I received 
111  ODler  trom  General  Wessells  to  return  to  New  Berne,  which  I did  that 

; 1 gained  on  this  reconnaissance  no  additional  information  in  regard 
jO  the  position  and  force  of  the  enemy,  all  the  proofs  establishing  their 
Itrengtli,  as  heretofore  reported,  from  18,000  to  25,000,  and  chiefly  en- 
ani])ed  at  and  near  Swift  Creek  Village,  the  cross-roads  in  front  of 
Vashington,  at  BlounCs  Creek,  and  on  the  north  side  of  Washington 
lie  brigade  on  reaching  Fort  Anderson  bivouacked  for  the  night  ami 
emained  there  until  April  18.  ^ 

en-anr  lespectfully,  your  obedient 

F.  B.  SPINOLA, 

^ Brigadier -General. 

Col.  Southard  Hoffman,  A.  A.  (?.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


254 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Itinerani  of  the  First  Brigade,  Fifth  Division,  Fighteenth  Army  Corps, 
Mareh  31-April  21,  1863.* 

Mareh  31.— The  One  hundred  and  seventy-first,  One  hundred  and  fifty- 
eijxhth,  and  One  hundred  and  seventy-fifth  Keginients  Pennsylvania 
MUitia  of  this  brigade,  left  New  Berne  on  steamboats  and  transports,  to 
re-enforce  General  Foster  at  Washington,  N.  0.  Found  the  river  block- 
aded by  rebel  batteries  on  both  sides,  which  were  attacked  by  our  gun- 
boats, but  failed  to  raise  the  blockade,  and  we  had  to  return  to  New 
Berne,  where  we  arrived  April  6. 

April  8. The  same  three  regiments  left  New  Berne  on  another  expe- 

dition by  land  to  Washington,  and  went  as  far  as  Blount’s  Creek,  where 
we  had  an  artillery  engagement.  The  bridge  over  the  creek  being  torn 
up  and  the  creek  ‘not  fordable,  we  returned  to  New  Berne,  where  we 
arrived  on  the  night  of  the  10th  instant. 

April  13.— The  whole  brigade  crossed  the  Neuse  River  and  went  on  a 
reconnaissance. 

April  14.— Marched  toward  Swift  Creek  and  Washington,  Is.  C.  At 
New  Hope  School-House  we  captured  2 rebel  cavalry  pickets.  W e then 
marched  toward  Little  Swift  Creek,  but  by  orders  of  General  W^essells 
we  returned  to  Fort  Anderson  on  the  night  of  the  15th  and  bivouacked 
there  until  the  18th,  when  the  brigade  again  left  for  Swift  Creek  Village, 
clearing  the  blockade  on  the  roads  and  building  three  bridges  on  our. 

march.  , . i ^ i i 

April  19.— In  the  afternoon  we  met  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  drove 

them  across  Big  Swift  Creek  that  night. 

April  20.— We  crossed  into  the  village.  Finding  no  rebels  there  we 
returned  to  New  Berne,  where  we  arrived  on  the  night  of  April  21. 


No.  13. 

Itinerary  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Fifth  Division,  Col.  James  Jour  dan,  One 

hundred  and  fiftieth  Feiv  Yorlc  Infantry,  commanding,  April  7-22.* 

The  principal  incidents  of  the  history  of  this  brigade  during  the  month 
ending  April  30  are  as  follows: 

April  7.— The  regiments  of  this  brigade,  under  the  immediate  com- 
mand of  Col.  F.  J.  Cofiiu,  of  the  Eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia 
(I  being  absent  from  the  department  by  authority  of  the  major-general 
commanding),  formed  a part  of  the  force  which  marched  under  command 
of  Brig.  Gen.  F.  B.  Spinola  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  the  garrison  at 
Washington,  N.  C. ; said  force  failing  to  accomplish  the  object  for  which 
it  marched,  returned  to  New  Berne  April  10.  Nothing  worthy  of  special 
mention  occurred  on  the  occasion  referred  to. 

April  17.— This  brigade  again  moved  in  the  direction  of  Kinston,  un- 
der my  immediate  command,  together  with  other  forces  under  the  gen- 
eral direction  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  commanding  Fifth  Division, 
Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  and  after  passing  Core  Creek  scoured  the 
country  to  within  about  10  miles  of  Kinston,  skirmishing  continually, 
and  by  proper  co  operation  with  other  forces,  succeeded  in  compelling 
the  ’enemy  to  retire  precipitately  from  an  intrenched  camp  on  a place 
known  as  Sandy  Ridge,  leaving  in  our  hands  between  30  and  40  pris- 
oners, and  after  accomplishing  the  object  for  which  it  marched,  returned 
to  New  Berne  on  April  22.  


From  Brigade  Return  for  April,  1863. 


Chap.  XXX.]  SIEGE  OF  WASHINGTON,  N.  C.  255 

No.  14. 

iReport  of  Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Ransom,  jr.,  G.  S.  Army,  of  sUrmish  at 
I Sandy  Ridge,  April  20. 

Headquarters, 
Kinston,  N.  C.,  April  21,  1863. 

General  : Your  note  of  to  day  is  received.  I have  started  five  difier- 
uit  parties  to  vicinity  of  Morefiead  City  and  New  Berne.  Whitford 
'eports  tbe  Yankees  retiring  from  Swift  Creek  j says  Foster  declares  he 
.Till  give  you  a hard  fight,  which  will  do  to  write  in  the  history  of  the 
,Tar.  In  an  hour  after  your  telegram  came  I started  a regiment  and 
bur  pieces  of  artillery  to  Coward’s  Bridge.  I have  now  here  sixteen 
lield  pieces.  I kept  [A.  D.J  Moore,  [Company  E,  Tenth  North  Carolina 
i/olunteers,  or  First  Artillery],  as  I deemed  his  battery  of  importance, 
ifesterday  there  was  another  skirmish  on  Sandy  Kidge;  three  compa- 
fies  of  the  Forty-ninth  and  about  70  of  [Maj.  J.  H.]  Nethercutt’s  men. 
Eighth  North  Carolina  Battalion].  The  enemy  was  first  driven  back, 
juit  got  a strong  re- enforcement  and  in  turn  we  had  to  retire.  We  had 
! killed,  0 wounded,  and  12  or  14  missing.  Three  horses  were  killed  by 
inr  men  belonging  to  the  field  officers.  We  went  forward  to  in  sight  of 
Oore  Creek  after  the  fight.  To  hold  Core  Creek  would  require  at  least 
|WO  regiments.  I cannot  afibrd  to  fritter  away  strength.  We  shall 
■0011  kuow  if  the  enemy  is  going  to  come  this  way.  I should  have  to 
Ight  him  on  Southwest  [Creek]  or  not  at  all  until  he  gets  to  the  river. 
jVe  are  working  on  Southwest.  If  I have  time  will  destroy  the  works 
ver  the  bridge.  For  three  days  I have  been  getting  sick,  and  am  now 
ardly  able  to  write  this.  If  morning  finds  me  no  better  this  place  will 
:eed  your  presence  or  some  one  else.  I have  no  horses.  Where  are  the 
iV  heeler  horses  I heard  that  the  men  were  permitted  to  sell  them  or 
jaud  them  home.  If  an  attack  be  made  here  we  cannot  well  have  too 
lauy  guns.  I am  almost  ill. 

Yours,  respectfully  and  trulv, 

11.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  Genera  1. 

General  1).  H.  Hill. 

P.  S.— I have  just  heard  (9  p.  m.)  that  the  enemy  is  rebuilding  the 
lilroadj  finished  to  Core  Creek,  and  were  working  this  side  with  very 
irge  force. 


ICiiAV.  XXX. 


256  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

APRIL  1,  1863. — Expedition  from  Yorktown  to  Smith’s  and  Byrd’s  Planta- 
tions, Ware  River,  Va. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gon.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Second  Lieut.  William  S.  Andrews,  Nintli  New  York  Infantry,  Acting  Signal 
Officer. 


No.  1. 


Iicport  of  Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  B.  Keyes.,  TJ.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Yorldoivn,  Va.,  April  7,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  following  extract  from  the 
report  of  Lieut.  Com.  J.  H.  Gillis,  commanding  United  States  steamer 
Commodore  Morris,  to  Admiral  Lee,  of  an  expedition  into  Gloucester 
County  by  the  land  and  naval  forces  on  this  station.  Commander 
Gillis  had  on  the  31st  ultimo  made  an  examination  of  the  country  bor- 
dering on  Ware  River  and  found  stored  there  large  quantities  of  grain 
for  the  Southern  Army.  I extract  from  his  report  as  follows : 


I therefore  embarked  my  meu,  aud  with  Mr.  Smith  as  prisoner  returned  to  York- 
town; immediately  communicated  with  General  Keyes,  infonned  him  of  the  circum- 
stances aud,  his  views  coinciding  with  mine  as  to  the  necessity  of  either  bringing  off 
or  dcstroyiuo-  the  grain,  I determined  to  return  to  Ware  River  on  the  following  morn- 
ing, the  ist  instant,  and  on  informing  General  Keyes  that  a rebel  cavalry  force  was 
stationed  at  Gloucester  Court-House,  aud  that  our  operations,  it  we  went  Aythout  a 
considerable  force,  would  not  be  likely  to  remain  undisturbed,  he  immediately  placed 
at  my  disposal  as  many  men,  cavalry  or  infantry,  whichever  I thought  would  be  best, 
as  I thought  would  be  necessary.  I took  100  infantry,  and  with  these  aud  the  Delaware, 
which  I fortunately  met  on  my  way  down  York  River  and  directed  to  accompany  me, 


I yesterday  morning  returned  to  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Smith  and  commenced  remov- 
ino-  a quantity  of  wheat,  of  wffiich  there  was  about  1,000  bushels,  but  had  not  gotten 
tbaif  2.a0  biishels  before  the  alarm  was  given  that  the  cavalry  were  approach- 


off  more  than  250  bushels  before  the  _ . . 

in*^  The  men  were  immediately  formed  aud  we  prepjwed  to  give  them  a wmrm  recep- 
ii(7n  as  they  charged  down  upon  us,  and  a few  well-directed  shots  caused  a waveriug 
in  their  ranks,  and  a cheer  and  a charge  on  the  part  of  both  sailors  aud  soldiers  turned 
an  attack  into  a retreat,  and  they  ffed  until  out  of  range  of  our  muskets,  when  they 
halted  and  appeared  to  bo  holding  a consultation,  but  just  at  this  time  a shot  avuis 
lired  from  the  100-ponndcr  ritle  on  board  this  ship,  which  struck  right  in  their  midst, 
and  they  avain  took  to  flight  aud  disappeared  arouu(l  a bend  of  the  road.  On  going 
down  the  road  some  distance  I discovered  indications  of  the  effect  of  our  firing,  there 
being  quite  a quantity  of  blood  in  the  road,  showing  that  some  of  the  party  had  paid 
pretty  dearly  for  their  temerity. 

I would  state  that  Avhen  we  were  seen  approaching,  the  overseer  s sou  was  sent  off, 
and  I had  not  the  least  doubt,  Avhen  I learned  that  such  was  the  case,  that  ho  had  been 
sent  to  bring  a force  sufficient  to  cut  us  off;  not  expecting  to  meet  any  more  than  had 
landed  the  day  before,  and  they  were  doubtless  A^ery  much  surprised  on  seeing  so  largo 
a force.  They  aucccedcd  in  capturing  2 of  our  pickets  in  their  charge,  but  had  not 
time  to  take  them  off,  when  they  in  their  turn  wore  charged  upon,  aud  the  conseiiuence 
Avas  that  Ave  did  not  lose  a man.  Knowing  that  it  Avouid  take  mo  a long  time  to  re- 
move the  grain,  and  that  the  enemy  A\muld  have  ample  time  to  bring  down  a strong 
force  upon  us,  I determined  to  destroy  it,  and  therefore  set  fire  to  all  but  one  of  the 
buildings,  in  which  there  Avereat  least  1,500  bushels  of  corn ; that  I left  for  the  use  ot 

the  faniily  and  the  hands  on  the  plantation.  ^ i * 

After  seeing  the  tires  Avell  under  way  I embarked  my  force  without  further  molesta- 
tion aud  started  to  return.  Arriving  opposite  to  the  house  of  a man  by  tha  name  or 
Byrd,  Avho  is  an  officer  in  the  rebel  army,  and  avIio  had  left  his  property  in  charge  of 
an  old  neqro  servant,  1 landed  a party,  Avho  found  that  there  was  a large  quantity  of 
corn  stoiml  in  his  barns,  ami  these  were  aho  set  fire  to;  and,  although  the  party  were 
on  shore  but  a few  moments,  thoy  came  vmy  near  being  captured,  the  caA'alry  making 
a daslidowu  upon  them  under  cover  of  the  smoke  of  the  buining  buildings;  but  1 dis- 
covenal  them  in  time  t.)  throAv  a shell  from  one  of  the  howitzers,  which  exploded  lU' 


Chap.  XXX.] 


257 


EXPEDITION  FROM  YOEKTOWN,  VA. 

tlieir  Luidst  and  they  fled  without  accomplishing  their  object.  I destroyed  at  this 
latter  jilace,  as  near  as  could  be  estimated,  1,000  bushels  of  wheat  and  ;5,0()0  bushels 
of  corn,  making  altogether  some  22,000  to  23,000  bushels  of  grain  that  the  rebels  have 
thus  been  deprived  of. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

. Major-General,  Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lobenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General,  U.  S.  Army. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Second  Lieut.  William  S.  Andrews,  Ninth  New  Yorlc  Infantry, 

Acting  Signal  Officer. 

On  Boabd  U.  S.  Steamer  Commodore  Morris, 

Off  YorJctoum,  Va.,  April  3,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  Signal  Officer  of  the 
Army,  having  directed  the  fire  of  this  vessel  (from  the  shore)  by  sig- 
nals on  a small  body  of  the  enemy  at  head  of  Ware  Kiver,  near  Glou- 
cester Court-House,  Va.,  on  the  1st  instant. 

On  the  31st  of  March,  Captain  Gillis,  of  the  Commodore  Morris,  dis- 
covered a large  quantity  of  grain  stored  in  barns  at  the  head  of  Ware 
Kiver.  It  was  determined  either  to  remove  it  or  destroy  it,  and  on  the 
next  day,  the  1st,  we  returned  to  Ware  Eiver  with  two  companies  of 
infantry  on  board  the  Morris,  and  the  gunboat  Delaware  in  company. 

Gajitaiu  Gillis  expected  interruption  from  the  rebel  cavalry  that  infests 
Gloucester  and  Matthews  Counties  to  the  number  of  about  200.  1 

accompanied  him  ashore  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  with  the 
IMorris  in  case  of  necessity,  relying  on  one  of  my  flagmen.  Private  George 
II.  Walker,  whom  I left  on  board,  to  read  the  signals. 

The  party  landed ; soldiers  and  sailors  numbered  about  200.  The 
men  all  landed  between  11  and  12  a.  m.  and  set  to  work  carrying  the 
grain  to  the  boats  and  loaded  a schooner  brought  for  that  purpose.  The 
infantry  posted  pickets  and  made  the  usual  preparations  for  defense  in 
case  of  attack.  A number  of  messages  were  sent  to  gunboat  between 
that  time  and  1 p.  m.  At  about  that  time  a cavalry  force  of  the  enemy 
were  seen  approaching  our  pickets.  I immediately  signaled  the  Mor- 
ns that  the  enemy  approached,  and  by  Captain  Gillis^  order  directed 
them  how  to  fire.  The  first  shot  fired  from  the  boat  fell  in  the  midst  of 
the  rebels,  emptying  one  saddle.  They  retired  precipitately  several 
hundred  yards,  leaving  two  of  our  pickets,  whom  they  had  already  cap- 
iure<l,  and  whom  in  their  flight  they  attempted  to  kill.  The  gunboats 
continued  to  fire ; constantly  directed  by  signals  as  the  enemy  changed 
imsitions,  the  Delaware  firing  in  the  sanie  direction  as  the  Morris.  Our 
men  now  advanced  up  the  road  at  a double-quick,  firing  one  or  two 
volleys.  The  enemy  retired  into  the  edge  of  a piece  of  woods,  about 
1,000  yards  distant  from  our  position,  which  the  gunboats  continued  to 
f'hell,  still  directed  by  signals.  In  consequence  of  the  interruption  by 
the  enemy  the  plan  of  removing  the  grain  was  abandoned  and  the  barns 

17  R R— VOL  xviii 


258 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


were  fired.  When  they  were  burned  we  returned  to  the  vessels,  all  the 
force  being  embarked  by  3.30  p.  m. 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  report  of  Lieutenant-Commander 
Gillis,  commanding  United  States  steamer  Morris,  to  Acting  Bear- Ad- 
miral Lee,  commanding  Korth  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  which  I 
am  permitted  to  make : 

I would  state  that  I received  most  important  aid  from  Lieutenant  Andrews,  of  the 
Signal  Corps,  as  by  his  assistance  I was  enabled  to  direct  the  aiming  of  the  guns  on 
board  this  vessel.  All  my  messages  were  transmitted  with  the  greatest  celerity,  al- 
most as  rapidly  as  they  could  have  been  given  had  they  been  delivered  orally,  and 
with  entire  accuracy  , and  this,  too,  during  the  excitement  of  a sudden  attack. 

I desire  to  call  especial  attention  to  the  coolness  and  efficiency  of 
Private  George  H.  Walker,  signal  liagman.  For  some  months  I have 
known  of  WalkeFs  capacity  to  read.  He  obtained  the  code  over  a year 
ago  through  the  negligence  and  carelessness  of  an  officer  instructed  at 
Annapolis.  For  a long  time  I promised  the  severest  punishment  to  my 
men  if  caught  attempting  to  read  or  to  obtain  any  portion  of  the  code, 
but  finding  that  officers  senior  to  myself  not  only  tolerated  but  encour- 
aged their  men  to  do  so,  I spoke  to  them  of  it,  and  was  informed  that 
the  matter  was  well  known  to  Major  Myer.  Since  being  at  Yorktown, 
therefore,  I have  allowed  Walker  to  read,  and  have  been  astonished  at 
his  intelligence,  superior  to  that  of  some  officers  I have  worked  with. 
Lieutenant  Benson  and  myself  abbreviated  all  ordinary  messages  to  at 
least  one-fourth  their  length  if  sent  in  fall;  but  Walker  seldom  has 
trouble  to  read  them.  In  directing  the  fire  of  the  Morris  on  the  1st  in- 
stant I at  first  partially  spelled  out  the  messages,  using  only  the  more 
suggestive  abbreviations,  such  as  eny,  enemy ; apeh,  approach,  &c. 
But  desiring  to  work  more  quickly  I used  the  abbreviations  til,  ef,  of, 
fo,  ect,  and  was  somewhat  astonished  at  Walker’s  receiving  them  all 
instantly  and  correctly  without  once  calling  for  a ‘‘repeat.”  He  has 
never  heretofore  received  the  official  abbreviations  from  me,  but  I Ijave 
now  given  them  to  him,  as  I deem  myself  justified  in  doing,  as  I am 
liable  at  any  time  to  have  occasion  to  use  them  with  him. 

I desire  to  recommend  Private  Walker  for  promotion.  1 intended  to 
have  recommended  bim  for  appointment  as  sergeant  under  the  new 
organization  of  the  Signal  Corps,  and  now  I consider  that  he  has  doubly 
earned  his  chevrons.  Walker  has  been  with  me  since  June  25,  1802, 
and  I have  had  ample  opportunity  of  knowing  his  capacity. 

The  accompanying  plan  * will  explain  the  relative  positions  of  the 
forces  engaged  in  the  affair  of  the  1st  instant.  The  outline  of  the  sketch 
was  enlarged  from  a chart. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  S.  ANDBEWS, 

Second  Lieut.  Nmth  A.  Y.  Vols.  and  Acting  Signal  Officer. 

Capt.  Leonard  F.  Hepburn, 

Acting  Signal  Officer,  Washington,  1).  C. 

P.  S. — Since  this  report  was^written  information  has  been  received 
at  Major-General  Keyes’  headquarters  that  during  the  firing  from  the 
gunboats,  directed  by  signals,  on  the  1st,  tlie  enemy  lost  4 killed  and  3 
wounded. 

Our  forces  sustained  no  loss  whatever. 


Not  fouad. 


Chap.XXX.1  skirmish  at  nixonton,  n.  c.  259 

APRIL  6,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Nixonton,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  Enos  C.  Sanders,  First  North  Carolina  ( Union)  Infantry. 

Washington,  N.  0.,  May  1,  1863. 

I started  on  the  steamer  Massasoit  for  IS^ew  Berne  and  arrived  at 
midnight.  Took  the  same  boat  on  the  2d  instant  for  Plymouth.  1 
made  application  for  transportation  at  New  Berne,  and  the  quartermas- 
ter, Lieutenant-Colonel  Biggs,  ordered  the  Massasoit  to  go  the  whole 
trip  with  me  j but  as  his  orders  did  not  reach  the  captain  of  the  steamer 
1 went  to  Plymouth,  where  I arrived  on  Sunday,  the  3d  instant.  Saw 
Commander  Charles  Plusser  that  evening  j he  was  to  send  a gunboat 
as  convoy  to  the  steamer  Massasoit,  which  I had  already  procured  the 
use  of,  to  go  as  far  as  Eoanoke  with  me. 

After  getting  the  men  that  I was  after  (but  afterwards  the  general 
decided  to  send  a gunboat  and  a company  of  infantry),  on  the  morning 
of  the  4th  I started  at  5 a.  m.  on  the  United  States  gunboat  Southfield, 
Captain  Behm  commanding,  with  a company  of  the  Eighty-fifth  New 
York  Infantry,  Lieutenant  Whitney  commanding.  Arrived  at  Halley’s 
Landing  at  9 a.  m.;  the  wharf  had  been  burned  by  the  Confederates. 
1 landed  with  the  company,  and,  on  making  inquiries,  found  that  the 
men  of  Company  E were  encamped  in  the  woods  10  miles  from  that 
place,  and  as  it  was  uncertain  about  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  that 
vicinity  I did  not  think  it  prudent  to  go  into  the  country.  We  then 
started  for  the  Pasquotank  Eiver,  where  we  arrived  at  5 p.  in.  We 
lauded  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  and  marched  to  Shiloh,  a distance  of 
10  miles,  where  we  went  aboard  of  the  gunboat  at  10  p.  m.  I sent  word 
to  the  men  to  be  ready  the  next  day  to  'go  with  me. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  we  went  to  Elizabeth  City  j landed  and  got 
the  family  of  William  Wright j went  to  Shiloh;  the  schooner  Patty 
Martin  had  arrived;  went  to  Jones’  Mill;  landed;  marched  to  Old 
Trap ; found  some  of  the  men  collected  there,  but  the  others,  not  know- 
ing of  our  presence,  could  not  be  found.  We  stayed  till  morning,  and 
then  went  on  board  with  7 of  my  men,  as  follows : Peter,  Stephen,  Cor- 
nelius, and  Nicholas  Burgess,  Ithean  and  Wilson  Duncan,  and  Demp- 
sey Wright.  We  crossed  over  to  the  Pasquotank  side ; landed  and  got 
the  family  of  Joseph  Morgan.  There  were  four  men  in  that  county  be- 
longing to  my  company;  one,  John  Cartwright,  came  with  us;  one  could 
not  be  found,  and  the  other  two  were,  one  sick  and  one  wounded.  We 
went  aboard  at  dark. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  the  Southfield  started  for  Eoanoke  at  2 
a.  m.  I started  for  Nixonton,  on  Little  Eiver,  at  daylight  with  the 
schooner  Patty  Martin  and  my  men,  numbering  17.  We  arrived  at  the 
landing  of  Thomas  Moss’ place  at  5 p.ma.;  came  to  anchor ; sent  a boat 
ashore  with  6 men,  with  orders  not  to  land  till  they  found  all  right;  a 
large  flat  at  the  landing  looked  suspicious.  As  the  boat  approached 
the  land  they  saw  a handkerchief  waived  in  the  window  of  Mrs.  Moss’ 
liouse.  They  put  about  and  pulled  for  the  schooner,  when  they  were 
fired  upon  by  the  guerrillas.  They  returned  the  fire  from  the  boat,  and 
we  commenced  a brisk  fire  from  the  schooner,  which  was  kept  up  till 
the  boat  came  alongside,  when  we  got  under  way  and  headed  down  th(‘. 
river. 

We  had  used  nearly  all  the  ammunition  we  had.  There  was  no  one 
hurt  on  our  side,  although  the  boat  was  within  40  yards  of  the  shore 
when  fired  upon.  The  vessel  was  struck  several  times.  We  got  to  the 
mouth  of  the  river  at  sunset,  where  we  found  the  United  States  steamer 


260 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Whitehead,  Captain  French  commanding.  We  went  back  to  Nixonton 
in  the  morning;  got  the  family  of  Mr.  Moss,  and  started  for  Eoanoke 
Island.  I landed  at  Oroatan  for  the  family  of  J.  W.  Harrison,  but  the 
weather  was  so  heavy  he  could  not  get  on  board.  Stopped  at  Eoanoke 
till  10  p.  m.;  got  under  way  and  sailed  for  Wasbingtou,  where  we 
arrived  at  6.30  a.  m.,  on  Sunday,  May  10. 

1 labored  under  the  difiBculties  of  having  a gunboat  of  too  much 
draught  of  water,  whose  commander  was  very  anxious  to  get  to  Eoa- 
noke, and  therefore  would  not  give  me  time  to  do  my  business  as  I could 
if  I had  had  the  command  of  the  expedition  myself. 

1 left  11  men  in  Camden,  3 in  Pasquotank,  and  2 in  Elizabeth  City. 
It  was  imi)ossible  to  get  word  to  them  in  so  short  a time,  as  they  have 
to  keep  hid  in  the  woods  most  of  the  time. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

E.  C.  SANDEES, 

Captain^  Company  jO,  First  North  Carolina  ( Union)  Vols. 


APRIL  7,  1863.— Expedition  from  Gloucester  Point  to  Gloucester  Court- 

House,  Va. 

Report  of  Col.  A.  H.  GrimshaWj  Fourth  Delaicare  Infantry. 

Camp  Gilpin, 

Gloucester  Point,  April  0,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  your 
order  of  — instant  I left  this  post  at  7 a.  m.  on  Tuesday,  the  7th  in- 
stant, with  a detail  from  the  Fourth  Delaware  Volunteers  and  three 
companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-ninth  Pennsylvania  Drafted 
Militia,  the  squadron  of  the  Second  Massachusetts  Cavalry  attached  to 
this  command,  and  a detachment  of  cavalry  under  Major  Hall,  of  the 
Sixth  Kew  York.  The  party  proceeded  up  the  main  road  to  Gloucester 
Court-House.  At  Abingdon  Meeting-House  I left  one  company  of  Oue 
hundred  and  sixty -ninth  Pennsylvania  Drafted  Militia  to  prevent  any 
communication  with  the  enemy^s  pickets. 

Beyond  Hickory  Fork  Major  Hall  was  ordered  to  proceed  to  the 
right,  and  after  destroying  any  grain  he  might  find,  to  join  the  column 
a t or  near  Gloucester  Court-House.  With  regard  to  the  particulars  of 
the  destruction  of  grain  I refer  to  Major  Hall’s  report,  which  I have 
directed  him  to  send  directly  to  your  headquarters. 

No  mail  was  found  at  Gloucester  Court-House  ready  to  be  sent  south. 
A few  letters,  which  I have  handed  to  General  Keyes,  were  found. 
These  confirm  the  account  of  the  late  fight  with  and  defeat  of  Lee’s 
cavalry. 

In  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  general  commanding  tno 
Fourth  Army  Corps  I made  preparations  to  return  to  Gloucester  Point 
on  the  7th,  since  the  re-enforcements  from  the  gunboat  had  not  landed, 
and  the  signal — one  rocket — was  not  receiv^ed  by  the  boat.  The  «lis- 
tance  to  the  station  of  the  boat  being  evidently  greater  than  we  had 
siipi)osed.  Major  Hall  proceeded  by  the  Bell  Eoy  road,  making  a detour 
toward  the  York  Eiver,  so  as  to  destroy  a quantity  of  grain  in  a barn 
beyond  Gloucester  Court-House,  of  which  we  obtained  information  at 
Gloucester  Court-House.  The  major  rejoined  the  column  at  Hickory 
Fork.  The  force  marched  during  thirteen  hours  32  miles.  The  men 


Gloucester  eoinT,  Va. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


261 


and  horses  returned  in  good  spirit  and  condition.  The  roads  were 
muddy  and  obstructed  by  numerous  collections  of  water. 

I indose  a report  of  Lieutenant  Toner,  quartermaster  of  Fourth  Del- 
aware Volunteers,  of  the  amount  of  material  seized  and  placed  in  his 
charge ; also  a note  from  Major  Growninshield.* 

Allow  me  to  speak  of  the  good  conduct  of  the  men  and  the  prompt- 
ness of  the  officers  accompanying  the  expedition.  Major  Hall  was  act- 
ive and  efficient  and  rendered  me  especial  service  by  his  advice  and 
experience.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tevis,  Fourth  Delaware,  and  Major 
Orownin shield,  with  Captain  Paul,  all  contributed,  each  in  his  position, 
to  the  success  of  the  movements. 

I did  not  destroy  the  grain  at  Tabb’s  farm,  because  it  is  within  such 
a short  distance  that  a very  small  force  can  transport  it  to  this  post. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H.  GRIMSHAW, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 

Major-General  Keyes,  YorJctown,  Va. 


APRIL  9-14,  1863. — Operations  against  Gloucester  Point,  Va. 

Report  of  Col,  D.  J.  Godtcin,  C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

King  and  Queen  Court-House,  Ya.,  April  15, 1863. 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  order  of  the  7th  instant  I proceeded 
on  Thursday,  the  9 th,  with  all  the  force  under  my  command  then  armed 
and  equipped,  to  the  enemy^s  fortifications  at  Gloucester  Point.  I ar- 
rived in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Point  Thursday  evening.  By  daybreak 
on  Friday  morning  I appeared  in  front  of  his  works  and  remained  there 
during  the  day,  making  demonstrations  at  several  different  points.  I 
appeared  alternately  as  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  so  maneuvered  my 
troops  as  to  represent  a heavy  force.  I drove  in  his  pickets  early  on 
Friday  morning,  killing  1,  wounding  another,  and  captured  2 unhurt. 
I had  2 men  wounded,  1 badly,  the  other  only  slightly.  I kept  up 
these  demonstrations  Saturday,  Sunday,  Monday,  and  Tuesday  until 
12  m.,  at  which  time  I returned  to  my  camp,  leaving  behind,  however, 
two  full  companies  to  watch  the  enemy^s  movements.  The  enemy’s 
force  at  the  Point  consisted  of  two  infantry  regiments,  one  battalion  of 
cavalry,  and  two  field  batteries.  I am  satisfied  that  my  demonstrations 
liad  the  effect  of  diverting  his  force  from  the  Peninsula.  I found  it  ut- 
terly impossible  to  attack  him  behind  his  works  with  success,  and  there- 
fore decided  not  to  do  so.  His  fortifications  at  the  Point  are  strong  and 
thorough. 

My  officers  behaved  with  great  gallantry  and  my  men  with  marked 
iirmness. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  J.  GODWIK, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding  Department  of  Richmond,  Ya. 

P.  S. — Capt.  Robert  Tomlin,  a volunteer  aide,  who  behaved  with  dis- 
tinguished gallantry,  I regret  to  say,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  leg. 


Not  found. 


262 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


APRIL  11,  1863.--Skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va. 

REJFOE.TS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Kufus  King,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Yorktown,  with  result- 
ing correspondence. 


No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes^  TJ.  S.  Army. 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  11, 1863. 

Our  communication  with  Fort  Magruder  is  re- established.  The  en- 
emy have  retired  beyond.  They  destroyed  some  camp  and  garrison 
equipage  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry  and  a small  amount  of 
liospital  stores.  No  other  loss  reported.  Wise  and  his  whole  force  are 
near  Williamsburg.  I have  ordered  Colonel  West  to  hold  the  strong 
line  of  defense  below  the  city  at  all  hazards.  It  would  be  very  inj urious 
to  give  it  up. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Norfolk,  Ya.,  April  11, 1863 — 8 p.  m 
The  enemy  was  fairly  repulsed  at  Williamsburg  to-day.  Our  pickers 
are  in  the  edge  of  the  city,  and  the  line  of  Fort  Magruder,  strengthened 
by  another  regiment,  is  now  guarded  from  York  Eiver  to  James  Eiver. 
We  lost  no  men.  Found  two  dead  rebels,  but  they  had  time,  when  our 
shots  fell,  to  carry  off  dead  and  wounded.  While  the  affair  at  Williams- 
burg was  closing  the  rebels  attacked  Peekes  pickets  at  Suffolk,  and  a 
deserter  just  in  from  there  reports  that  50,000  men  are  close  upon  our 
lines.  I have  ordered  all  our  troops  to  hold  their  ground  without  re- 
gard to  the  number  of  the  enemy. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Rufus  King,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  YorJdoicn, 
ivith  resulting  correspondence. 

Yorktown,  April  11,  1863 — 7.45  a.  m. 
The  enemy  appeared  in  front  of  Williamsburg  this  morning  about  6 
o’clock.  Our  pickets  fell  back  in  good  order  to  Fort  Magruder.  Colonel 
West  has  opened  fire  on  the  town  and  is  now  firing.  Force  of  the  enemy 
not  yet  known. 

EUFUS  KING, 

Bri gadier-  Gen  eral. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Fort  Monroe. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


263 


SKIRMISH  AT  WILLIAMSBURG,  VA. 

Yorktown,  A]^ril  11, 1863—8.20  a.  m. 

The  enemy  in  large  force,  cavalry,  artillery,  and  infantry,  have  passed 
through  Williamsburg  and  are  moving  on  Fort  Magruder.  Another 
force  of  infantry,  reported  500  strong,  have  got  on  this  side  of  the  fort. 
They  have  captured  and  destroyed  the  camp  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania, 
burned  the  hospital,  and  paroled  the  patients.  I have  ordered  the  Sixth 
ISTew  York  to  fall  back  toward  Yorktown.  All  communication  with 
Colonel  West  is  cijt  off.  The  troops  here  are  under  arms.  If  it  be  pos- 
sible I shall  send  re-enforcements  to  Colonel  West;  not,  however,  so  as 
to  endanger  this  post.  Can  a boat  be  sent  up  at  once? 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier- General. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Suffolk. 


Yorktown,  April  11, 1863 — 12.30  p.  m. 

I have  just  received  a letter  from  Colonel  West.  He  is  all  right  and 
safe  in  Fort  Magruder.  He  reports  Wise  in  front  with  his  entire  com- 
mand. The  road  is  open  between  this  point  and  Fort  Magruder.  I have 
sent  cavalry  up  to  patrol  the  road  and  keep  me  advised  of  all  move- 
ments. Except  the  camp  and  property  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  and 
some  hospital  stores  we  have  lost  nothing. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Fort  Monroe. 


Yorktown,  April  11,  1863—2.30  p.  m. 

We  have  reopened  communications  with  Fort  Magruder.  Colonel 
West  has  just  telegraphed  that  everything  is  safe  there ; that  the  enemy 
are  retreating,'  but  still  occupy  Williamsburg,  and  that  we  have  lost  noth- 
ing but  what  was  captured  in  the  cavalry  camp.  He  asks  for  a fresh 
regiment  of  infantry.  . I shall  send  him  Colonel  Johnson^s  regiment, 
and  will  bring  over  the  Fourth  Delaware  to  replace  them,  if  need  be. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Fort  Monroe. 


Headquarters  Department  o:^:  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  April  11,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  King, 

Commanding,  Yorktown : 

If  the  enemy  are  in  rear  of  Williamsburg  he  can  only  be  there  in 
very  small  force,  so  I wish  you  to  send  up  Colonel  Johnson’s  regiment 
to  clear  them  out  and  communicate  with  West.  If  there  be  two  gui]- 
boats  on  the  station  you  can  bring  over  the  Fourth  Delaware,  who 
are  plucky.  If  West  has  provisions  and  ammunition  he  can  hold 
against  10,000  men,  and  the  enemy  can’t  spare  that  number ; so  he  must 
hold  on.  I have  asked  Admiral  Lee  to  send  a gunboat  up  James  Eiver. 
During  the  day  the  gunboat  should  move  up  and  down  between  York- 
town and  West’s  Landing. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


264 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  April  11,  18G3. 

Brigadier-General  King,  Yorlctown : 

I have  directed  a stern-wheel  steamer  for  West  to  be  sent  up  if  one 
can  be  had. 

If  West  does  not  waste  his  * ammunition  he  ought  to  do  five  times  as 
much  damage  to  the  enemy  as  he  receives.  I cannot  understand  how 
the  500  got  below  Fort  Magruder.  Did  they  cross  the  James  Eiver  ? 

Do  all  you  can  to  supply  West  and  to  encourage  him  and  his  men  to 
fight. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  April  11,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  King,  Yorlctown : 

Order  Colonel  West  to  cease  firing  on  Williamsburg  unless  he  knows 
the  enemy  are  present  there  in  arms.  He  will  waste  his  ammunition. 
That  town  must  be  held  as  a shield,  and  it  must  not  be  destroyed  ex- 
cept in  accordance  with  my  orders. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 

[April  12, 1863.] 

Brigadier- General  King: 

The  line  of  defense  at  Fort  Magruder  ought  not  to  be  given  up  lightly. 
You  ought  not  bring  away  anything  from  Gloucester  Point.  You  may, 
hoAvever,  use  your  discretion  about  sending  another  regiment  of  infantry 
toward  Williamsburg. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


Yorktown,  April  12,  1863—9  a.  m. 

Colonel  West  telegraphs  that  all  is  quiet  as  yet  at  the  front;  that  the 
enemy  are  in  large  force  on  the  other  side  of  the  town.  He  recommends 
abandoning  the  town  and  establishing  his  pickets  on  this  side,  as  his 
force  is  not  strong  enough  to  guard  the  Peninsula.  We  have  taken  10 
prisoners,  one  of  them  an  ofiScer,  who  corroborates  the  rumor  of  yester- 
terday  that  Wise  has  issued  orders  to  take  the  forts  at  all  hazards. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Fort  Monroe. 


Yorktown,  April  12, 1863 — 11.35  a.  m. 

Major  Chamberlin,  who  has  just  come  in  from  Fort  Magruder,  bring.^ 
me  a verbal  communication  from  Colonel  West  to  the  effect  that  he  thinks 
Ids  position  insecure  and  the  line  too  extended  to  be  successfully  de 
fended.  From  prisoners  and  deserters  he  learns  that  Wise,  who  is  ir 
command  of  the  enemy’s  force,  has  4,000  infantry,  500  or  600  cavalry 
and  G or  8 pieces  of  artillery ; that  his  orders  from  Eichmond  are  t( 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  WILLIAMSBUR0,  VA. 


265 


take  and  hold  Williamsburg  and  Fort  Magruder,  and  that  he  expresses 
his  determination  to  do  so.  The  prisoners  say  that  their  attack  yester- 
day would  have  succeeded  if  the  infantry  that  came  around  in  rear  of  our 
cavalry  camp  had  not  been  too  late.  They  also  report  that  Longstreet 
was  to  have  attacked  Suffolk  and  Fitzhugh  Lee  Gloucester  at  the  same 
time  that  Wise  assailed  our  front.  Colonel  West  thinks  that  it  will  be 
difficult  to  hold  his  position  without  more  infantry.  He  would  also  like 
two  more  12-pounders.  Unless  he  can  be  thus  re-enforced  he  advises 
an  abandonment  of  the  present  line  and  the  establishment  of  a new  and 
shorter  one,  say  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  brick  hospital.  A tug-boat 
came  down  James  Eiver  as  far  as  King^s  Mill  Landing  yesterday  and 
went  uj)  again,  n Wise,  with  his  troops,  is  still  at  Williamsburg  await- 
ing re-enforcements,  as  is  said,  though  the  attack  may  be  renewed  at 
any  moment.  All  quiet  thus  far  to-day. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  Genera  L 

Major-General  Keyes. 


Yorktown,  April  12,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 

Colonel  West  telegraphed  an  hour  ago  that  the  enemy  were  reported 
to  be  advancing,  and  that  his  troops  were  under  arms;  but  as  we  have 
lieard  no  firing,  the  report  was  probably  unfounded. 

Fourteen  rebel  prisoners,  two  of  them  lieutenants,  have  arrived  here 
from  Fort  Magruder.  They  will  be  sent  to  Fort  Monroe  in  the  morning. 

Are  we  to  continue  to  supply  the  patients  in  the  insane  asylum  at 
Williamsburg? 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Norfolk. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

April  12, 1863 — 4 p.  m. 

Brigadier-General  King,  Yorktown^  Ya.: 

Until  you  receive  further  dispatches  from  me,  do  as  circumstances  re- 
quire; but  I do  not  advise  sending  up  any  artillery  to  Williamsburg.  I 
think  it  will  be  far  more  dangerous  to  withdraw  from  that  line  than  to 
hold  it. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — Keep  me  advised  by  telegraph. 


Yorktown,  Va.,  April  12,  1863. 

I do  not  think  the  line  of  defense  now  established  will  be  given  up. 
Colonel  West  is  confident  that  he  can  hold  his  ground.  No  change  will 
be  made  at  Gloucester  Point  unless  unforeseen  circumstances  require 
it.  I shall  keep  a gunboat  lying  off*  Queen’s  Creek,  which  will  communi- 
cate with  Colonel  West. 

Three  more  prisoners  were  brought  in  to-night  and  others  on  the  way. 

Everv thing  quiet. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Keyes. 


266 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.^ 

Yorktown,  A]^ril  12,  1863—10.20  p.  m.  : 
I have  just  received  a dispatch  from  Fort  Magruder.  All  quiet  there, i 
but  an  attack  on  the  redoubts  is  expected  in  the  morning.  Ooloneli 
West  suggests  that  a gunboat  stationed  off  College  Creek,  in  James! 
Kiver,  would  prevent  the  enemy  from  turning  his  left  and  thus  proba 
blv  enable  him  to  keep  his  line  unbroken. 

RUFUS  KING, 

Brigadier-General,  , 

Major-General  Keyes,  Norfolk, 


Yorktown,  A]gril  12,  1863 — 9 a.  m.  i 

Colonel  West,  Fort  Magruder: 

Do  as  you  think  best  about  drawing  your  pickets  in  closer  to  the  forts 
Keep  me  advised  of  any  change  in  the  situation  of  affairs  and  of  youi  ■ 
wants.  General  Keyes  telegraphs  from  Norfolk  that  the  line  betweei  ' 
Williamsburg  and  Yorktown  must  be  held  at  all  hazards. 

RUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Fort  Magruder,  April  12, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  C.  SuydAM: 

I did  not  understand  by  your  last  dispatch  whether  Colonel  John 
son’s  regiment  is  to  remain  here  or  return.  He  wants  to  know  so  a 
to  provide  himself  and  fix  camp  where  they  are.  There  are  no  bridge 
on  King’s  and  College  Creeks.  The  enemy  did  not  cross  the  creek 
they  stole  down  along  College  Creek  and  so  around  by  the  Brie 
Church  road.  They  cannot  do  it  again  without  my  knowledge. 

ROB’T  M.  WEST, 
Commanding  Advance  Brigade, 


April  12,  1863. 

Colonel  West  : 

Colonel  Johnson’s  regiment  will  remain  with  you  for  the  presen 
He  had  better  get  five  days’  supplies.  ^ ^ SUYDAM 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jhap.xxx.]  siege  of  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

APRIL  11-MAY  4,  1863.— Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va. 

STJMIiyEjkliY  OW  THE  EHUSTCIE^E  EXTENTS. 


267 


ipril 


vlay 


11,  1863. — Coufederate  forces,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Gen.  James  Long- 
street,  advance  upon  Suffolk. 

Skirmish  on  the  South  Quay  Road,  near  the  Blackwater. 

12-13,  1863. — Skirmishes  on  the  Edenton,  Providence  Church,  and  Somerton 
Roads. 

14,  1863. — Engagement  at  the  mouth  of  West  Branch  and  near  the  Norfleet 

House,  Nansemond  River. 

15,  1863.— Engagement  near  the  Norfleet  House. 

Skirmish  on  the  Edenton  Road. 

17,  1863. — Skirmishing  generally  along  the  lines. 

19,  1863.— Capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Hill’s  Point. 

23,  1863. — Affair  at  Chuckatuck. 

24,  1863.— Skirmish  on  the  Edenton  Road. 

1,  1863. — Skirmish  at  South  Quay  Bridge. 

2-  4,  1863. — Confederate  forces  retire  from  Suffolk. 

3,  1863. — Skirmishes  near  Hill’s  Point  and  Reed’s  Ferry,  Nansemond  River. 
Skirmish  at  Chuckatuck. 

Reconnaissance  on  the  Providence  Church  Road. 

4, 1863.— Skirmish  at  Leesville. 


HEEOHTS,  ETC.* 


^o.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  Vir- 
ginia, with  congratulatory  orders.! 

^o.  2.— Abstract  from  ‘‘Record  of  Events”  in  the  Department  of  Virginia,  April 
11-May  4. 

fo.  3.  Capt.  Charles  L.  Davis,  Eighty-second  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  Chief  Signal 
Officer. 

lo.  4. — Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Suffolk.! 
lo.  5. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

lo.  6. — Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Division,  Sev- 
enth Army  Corps. 

Maj.  Alexander  G.  Patton,  First  New  York  Mounted  Rifles,  of  skirmish  on 
the  Edenton  Road,  April  15. 

lo.  8.— Itinerary  of  the  First  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  D.  Terry,  U.  S.  Army,  com- 
manding, April  11-30. 

lo.  9.  Col.  Robert  S.  Foster,  Thirteenth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
i Brigade. 

Ifo.  10.— Lieut.  Col.  John  McConihe,  One  hundred  and  sixty-ninth  New  York  Infantry, 
lo.  11.— Itinerary  of  the  Third  Brigade,  Col.  Mathew  Murphy,  One  hundred  and 
eighty-second  New  York  Infantry,  commanding,  April  9-May  3. 
fo.  12.— Col.  William  McEvily,  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York  Infantry, 
lo.  13.  Itinerary  of  the  Reserve  Brigade,  Col.  David  W.  Wardrop,  Ninety-ninth  New 
York  Infantry,  commanding,  April  24-May  1. 
fo.  14.  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  C.  Dodge,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Southeast  Front. 

* For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee,  Lieuts.  W.  B.  Cushing  and  R.  H. 
ramson,  and  Actg.  Master  C.  H.  Brown,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secre- 
ary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 

! See  also  dispatches  between  Keyes,  Dix,  Hooker,  and  Peck,  April  11-May  4,  and 
bxs  and  Peck’s  telegrams  to  Halleck,  in  “ Correspondence,  etc.,”  post. 


268  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Caap.  XXxJ 

No.  15.— Brig.  Gen.  George  W.  Getty,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Division,  Nintl 
Army  Corps. 

No.  16. — Col.  Harrison  S.  Fairchild,  Eighty-ninth  New  York  Infantry,  commandinj 
First  Brigade. 

No.  17.— Col.  William  R.  Pease,  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York  Infantry,  j 

No.  18. — Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Harland,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  19.— Col.  John  E.  Ward,  Eighth  Connecticut  Infantry,  of  the  capture  of  Batterj 
Huger,  April  19. 

No.  20. — Col.  Griffin  A.  Stedman,  jr..  Eleventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  21.— Col.  Arthur  H.  Dutton,  Twenty-first  Connecticut  Infantry,  commanding 
Third  Brigade. 

No.  22.— Maj.  Hiram  B.  Crosby,  Twenty-first  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  23. — Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Reserve  Division,  o 
operations  May  1-4. 

No.  24. — Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  o 
Southern  Virginia. 

No.  25. — Maj.  L.  M.  Shumaker,  C.  S.  Artillery,  Chief  of  Artillery,  of  the  capture  o 
Battery  Huger,  April  19. 

No.  26. — Maj.  F.  J.  Boggs,  C.  S.  Artillery,  of  the  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  April  19 

No.  27. — Maj.  James  Hearing,  C.  S.  Artillery,  of  the  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  April  19 

No.  28. — Capt.  Robert  M.  Stribling,  Fauquier  Artillery,  of  the  capture  of  Batter 
Huger,  April  19. 

No.  29. — Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Jones,  Forty-fourth  Alabama  Infantry,  of  the  capture  o 
Battery  Huger,  April  19. 

No.  30. — Col.  John  K.  Connally,  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolinat  Infantry,  of  the  capture  o 
Battery  Huger,  April  19. 

No.  31. — Maj.  Gen.  George  E.  Pickett,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Division,  of  skirmisl 
on  the  Edenton  Road,  April  24. 


No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Rix,  TJ,  8.  Army^  commanding  the  Depart 
ment  of  Virginia,  with  congratulatory  orders. 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  19, 1863. 

I deem  it  due  to  the  forces  at  Suffolk  to  notice  briefly  their  gallan 
conduct  during  the  last  six  days.  On  Tuesday  General  Peck’s  right  wa»‘ 
attacked  and  the  enemy’s  advance  was  gallantly  met  by  Colonel  Foster^ 
light  troops,  driving  him  back  to  the  line  of  his  pickets  j Anderson’^ 
division  was  engaged  at  the  same  time  on  the  water  front  with  oni 
gunboats  and  batteries,  and  suflered  materially.  On  AVednesday  J 
rebel  battery  of  20-pounder  rifled  guns  was  effectually  silenced,  am 
an  attack  on  the  Smith  Briggs,  an  armed  quartermaster’s  boat,  waj 
repulsed.  Bepeated  attempts  have  been  made  on  our  lines  but  havi 
all  been  foiled.  The  storming  of  the  enemy’s  battery  near  the  Wes 
Branch  of  the  Nansemond  by  General  Getty  and  the  gunboats  nude: 
Lieutenant  Lamson  of  the  Navy,  and  the  capture  of  six  guns  and  20< 
prisoners  closes  the  operations  of  the  six  days  against  the  enemy’i 
large  force  very  satisfactory. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General  in-  Chiaf. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


'lAP,  XXX.] 


269 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,' VA. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Armv  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  Va.,  May  23,  1803. 
General  : lu  the  latter  part  of  September  last  the  town  of  Suffolk 
as  threatened  by  the  enemy,  who  had  concentrated  a large  force  on 
le  Blackwater.  Brigadier-General  Ferry,  who  commanded  at  Suffolk, 
lade  the  best  practicable  arrangement  of  his  troops  to  meet  the  enemy’s 
(Ivance,  but  the  place  was  entirely  without  intrenchments.  It  had 
een  occupied  from  the  time  the  enemy  evacuated  FTorfolk,  but  without 
oy  definite  purpose,  except  as  an  advanced  position  from  which  the 
)untry  east  of  the  Blackwater  and  Chowan  and  between  the  James 
iver  and  Albemarle  Sound  might  be  watched  and  the  land  communi- 
ition  be  kept  up  between  Norfolk  and  North  Carolina  east  of  the 
ismal  Swamp. 

I suggested  last  autumn  the  relinquishment  of  this  position  on  account 
’ some  inherent  objections  to  it,  since  explained  in  my  letter  of  May 
)th  instant,  and  the  occupation  of  a more  defensible  line  nearer  Nor- 
ilk.  It  was  decided  at  that  time  to  hold  it,  and  Major-General  Peck, 
horn  I ordered  to  take  command  at  Suffolk  on  September  22,  and  in 
hose  experience,  discretion,  and  military  skill  1 had  entire  confidence, 
iinediately  commenced  the  execution  of  a system  of  intrenchments 
[ianned  by  himself,  which  the  physical  conformation  of  the  place  and 
le  contiguous  country  necessarily  rendered  very  extensive.  For  six 
onths  a portion  of  the  troops  under  his  command  were  diligently  en- 
iged  in  the  construction  of  these  works. 

With  a view  to  have  them  fully  occupied  and  to  inure  them  to  more 
Jtive  service  I directed  him  to  keep  about  one-third  of  his  force  con- 
antly  in  motion  and  to  harass  the  enemy  on  the  Blackwater  by  all 
actical  means.  My  directions  were  carried  out  with  good  judgment 
id  with  very  satisfactory  results.  Frequent  expeditions  were  made ; 
le  enemy  was  repeatedly  attacked.  In  nearly  every  renconter  the 
Wantage  was  on  our  side;  prisoners  were  taken,  munitions  of  war 
ere  captured,  and  a rocket  battery  fell  into  our  hands.  While  engaged 
these  labors  and  active  movements  General  Peck,  by  constant  atten- 
OD,  brought  his  command  to  an  excellent  state  of  discipline. 

On  April  11  the  enemy  suddenly  advanced  with  a large  force,  com- 
anded  by  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet,  which  had  been  quietly  as- 
f.mbled  on  the  Blackwater,  intending  to  take  Suffolk  by  assault ; but 
iding  the  place  well  prepared  for  defense,  after  repeated  unsuccessful 
(tempts  on  our  lines  in  all  of  which  he  was  signally  repulsed,  he  sat 
)wn  before  it  and  commenced  an  investment  according  to  the  most 
)proved  principles  of  military  science.  The  details  of  all  the  opera- 
ous  of  the  siege,  which  terminated  at  the  end  of  twenty-two  days  by 
s retreat  in  the  night,  are  fully  given  in  the  report  of  Major-General 
eck,  which  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith. 

When  the  enemy  appeared  before  Suffolk  I was  in  the  city  of  New 
ork  with  leave  of  absence  for  a few  days  on  a surgeon’s  certificate  of 
sability. 

I On  the  following  day  (Sunday,  April  12)  I received  a dispatch  in- 
Tining  me  of  the  enemy’s  presence  and  I left  the  same  evening,  reach- 
jig  Suffolk  on  Tuesday  morning,  the  14th.  From  this  time  I was  every 
ternate  day  at  Suffolk  and  on  the  Nansemond  River,  where  the  gun- 
oats  belonging  to  the  blockading  squadron  of  Admiral  Lee  were  en- 
iged  with  the  enemy’s  batteries,  being  thus  enabled  to  bear  testimony 
oin  personal  observation  to  the  good  conduct  of  all  concerned  in 
isisting  the  enemy’s  advance.  The  large  force  of  the  enemy,  amount- 


270 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


ing  to  some  35,000  men,  and  the  character  of  the  Tipper  Nansemond-  - 
running  back  to  the  rear  7 miles  with  a very  narrow  channel  and  afford! 
ing  very  extraordinary  facilities  for  cutting  off  our  communications  witl 
Norfolk — rendered  incessant  vigilance  necessary  to  defeat  his  purpose 
and  unremitting  labor  to  cover  weak  points  with  additional  works.  TIk  I 
successful  termination  of  the  investment  is  due  in  a great  degree  h 
the  industry  of  Major-General  Peck  in  putting  his  position  in  a stat 
of  defense,  the  judicious  arrangements  made  to  repel  attacks  upon  hi.} 
works,  and  his  unslumbering  vigilance  from  the  advance  of  the  enemy’ I; 
forces  to  their  final  retreat;  and  I desire  to  acknowledge  his  great  prompt;; 
itude  in  carrying  out  all  my  suggestions  and  orders  and  his  good  judg; 
ment  in  the  far  more  numerous  exigencies  in  which  he  acted  on  his  own 
discretion.  , 

To  his  officers  and  men  the  highest  praise  is  due  for  their  gallantrji 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy  and  their  zealous  devotion  to  all  their  dutiet^*- 
including  the  construction  of  extended  and  heavy  intrenchments — th'ij 
least  attractive  but  often  the  most  essential  service  of  an  army  in  tbl 
field.  Particular  reference  is  due  to  Brigadier-General  Getty,  who  wa 
placed  in  charge  of  the  Nansemond,  the  most  vulnerable  part  of  our  line  ' 
and  under  whose  direction  a portion  of  our  force  was  thrown  across  tbij 
river  and  a battery  of  five  guns  carried  by  storm.  | 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Admiral  Lee,  who  co-operated  by  means  of  hi  ! 
gunboats  in  preventing  the  enemy  from  crossing  the  Nansemond,  am 
to  Lieutenants  Cushing,  Lamson,  and  Harris,  who  displayed  great  cool 
ness,  gallantry,  and  good  judgment  in  the  management  of  their  vessels! 
Lieutenant  Lamson  deserves  particular  mention  as  having  suggested 
the  capture  of  the  battery  on  the  river  and  having  aided  General  Gett;i 
in  carrying  the  plan  into  execution.  I desire  to  refer  to  the  report  Oj 
Major-General  Peck  for  a more  particular  mention  of  the  services  of  hi  ! 
officers  and  men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX,'  j 
Major-General,  ij 


Maj 


. Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

' General-in-Chief. 


( 

{ 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  A.  C., 

No.  32.  j Fort  Monroe^  Fh.,  May  6,  1803.  i 

The  major-general  commanding  congratulates  Major-General  Peel; 
and  the  troops  under  his  command  at  Suffolk  on  the  sudden  retreat  oi 
the  enemy  to  the  Blackwater,  after  a close  investment  of  the  place  fof 
more  than  three  weeks  by  a superior  force  led  by  some  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished generals  in  the  service  of  the  insurgents.  The  enemy  lud 
sustained  a loss  of  five  guns,  and  not  less  than  1,500  men  in  prisoners', 
killed,  wounded,  and  deserters,  while  ours  is  limited  to  a comparative]; 
small  number  of  killed  and  wounded.  For  this  result  the  highest  prais* 
is  due  to  Major-General  Peck,  through  whose  untiring  industry  aiu  1 
good  judgment  during  the  last  six  months  the  place  has  been  strongl;* 
fortified,  and  through  whose  watchfulness  it  has  been  held  duriug  tb' 
investment.  The  same  high  praise  is  due  to  the  troops  under  his  coni 
mand  and  to  their  officers.  Their  courage  and  vigilance,  their  firmues:; 
in  resisting  the  enemy’s  attacks,  their  gallantry  in  assaulting  him  in  bi 
works  on  repeated  occasions  deserve  the  heartfelt  thanks  which  tb*. 
major-general  commanding  hereby  tenders  to  them. 

The  major-general  commanding  avails  himself  of  the  occasion  to  ac 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


271 


knowledge  the  gallant  and  efficient  co-operation  of  the  gunboats  sent 
by  Admiral  Lee  into  the  I^ausemond,  under  Lieutenants  Gushing  and 
Lauison,  in  silencing  the  enemy’s  batteries,  in  resisting  the  enemy’s 
attempts  to  cross  the  river,  and  especially  the  assistance  lent  by  the 
latter  to  General  Getty  in  capturing  five  of  the  enemy’s  guns. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Dix: 


D.  T.  VAN  BUEEN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

t 

Abstract  from  ^‘’Record  of  Events'^’’  in  Departmeyit  of  Virginia^  April  11- 

May  4.* 

i April  11. — The  enemy  advanced  upon  Suffolk,  Va.,  from  Blackwater, 
IrovO  in  our  pickets,  capturing  the  outpost  of  cavalry  on  South  Quay 
nad,  and  was  not  checked  until  within  artillery  range,  when  he  was 
Iriven  back. 

April  12. — He  advanced  on  the  Somerton  road,  but  wms  repulsed, 
•etiring  hastily,  and  our  infantry  pickets  were  posted  on  the  original 
ines. 

April  13. — The  enemy  concentrated  along  the  Nansemond,  erected 
leavy  batteries,  and  succeeded  in  blockading  the  river;  he  failed  in  all 
lis  attempts  to  effect  a crossing.  The  gunboats  and  onr  batteries  were 
ilmost  incessantly  engaged  and  several  times  silenced  the  enemy’s 
)atteries. 

April  19. — The  enemy  opened  on  the  gunboats  from  Fort  Huger.  A 
)lan  was  immediately  agreed  upon  by  General  Getty  and  Lieutenant 
jamson,  U.  S.  Navy,  to  cross  the  river  and  attack  the  fort.  The  gun- 
i)oats  and  batteries  opened  upon  it  impetuonsly.  In  the  mean  time  a 
letachment  from  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers  and  from  the 
Eighth  Connecticut  crossed  on  the  gunboat  Stepping  Stones  and  stormed 
he  fort,  and  were  highly  successful,  capturing  five  pieces  of  artillery, 
wo  20-i)ounder  Parrotts  and  three  12  pounder  howitzers;  also  129  pris- 
•ners,  including  9 officers. 

April  20. — Major  Stratton,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  visited 
fiizabeth  City,  N.  C.,  and  found  it  abandoned  by  our  forces. 

April  27. — A reconnaissance  in  force  was  made  upon  the  enemy’s  right 
lank  on  the  Edenton  road,  also  on  the  Somerton,  and  after  some  skir- 
mishing the  enemy  was  driven  from  his  rifle-pits  back  upon  his  main 
ine.  Two  transports  ran  the  blockade  under  the  volunteer  pilotage  of 
lieutenants  Eowe  and  Horton,  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers, 
lany  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy,  but  little  damage  was  done  to  the 
teamers. 

I Apni  28,  29,  and  30. — Skirmishing  on  the  river  between  our  gunboats 
jnd  the  enemy. 

: The  following  re-enforcements  arrived  during  the  month: 

' April  12. — Ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  assigned  to  Getty’s  division. 

April  14. — Nineteenth  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  assigned  to  Getty’s  di- 
ision  (transferred  April  28). 

April  16  and  17. — Two  brigades  assigned  to  Abercrombie’s  division, 
onsisting  of  eight  regiments;  one  regiment  transferred  to  General  Cor- 
oran’s  division. 

Ap7'il  18. — One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York  Volunteers,  as- 


From  Returns  of  Seventh  Army  Corps  for  April  and  May,  1863. 


272 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


signed  to  General  Getty,  and  One  hundred  and  sixty -ninth  New  York 
Volunteers,  assigned  to  General  Corcoran. 

April  19. — Detachment  of  the  Third  New  York  Volunteers  and  the  | 
First  Delaware,  Sixteenth  and  Nineteenth  New  York  Batteries. 

April  17. — The  Ninth  Vermont  was  assigned  to  General  Getty  and  i 
transferred,  April  24,  to  the  Keserve  Brigade.  The  Twenty-sixth  Michi-  i 
gan  and  One  hundred  and  fifty-second  New  York  assigned  to  General ; 
Corcoran. 

April  22. — The  Tenth  New  Jersey  was  assigned  to  General  Corcoran  1 
and  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  New  York  assigned  to  Eeserve , 
Brigade.  ! 

The  following  officers  were  killed  and  wounded  during  the  month : 

April  8.— -Captain  Bowdish,  commissary  of  subsistence;  killed  by  ac- 
cident on  the  railroad. 

April  12. — Lieut.  Col.  Edgar  A.  Kimball,  Ninth  New  York  Volun- 
teers; killed  by  Brig.  Gen.  M.  Corcoran  while  on  duty. 

April  23. — Capt.  John  E.  White,  Ninety -ninth  New  York  Volun- 
teers ; wounded  by  rebel  sharpshooters. 

April  24. — Surg.  James  Wilson,  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers; 
wounded  by  rebel  sharpshooters.  Second  Lieut.  B.  Conron,  Thirteenth 
Indiana  Volunteers;  killed  in  skirmish  on  Somerton  road.  Col.  C.  Buell, 
One  hundred  and  sixty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers;  wounded  in  skir- 
mish on  Somerton  road.  Maj.  Alonzo  Alden,  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
ninth  New  York  Volunteers;  wounded  in  skirmish  on  Somerton  road. 

April  15. — Capt.  J.McAnally,  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  York 
Volunteers ; wounded  in  the  skirmish  on  Eden  ton  road. 

April  24. — Second  Lieut.  T.  J.  Cantwell,  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth 
New  York  Volunteers ; wounded  in  the  skirmish  on  Edenton  road. 

May  1. — The  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers  had  a’skirmish  with 
the  enemy  on  South  Quay  road,  near  Suffolk.  Loss : killed,  4 ; wounded,  42. 

May  2. — Two  companies  of  the  Third  Pennsylvania  Artillery  reported. 

May  3. — Keconnaissance  on  the  Petersburg  road  by  General  Getty; 
enemy  driven  from  their  rifle-pits  on  their  main  line.  Loss,  killed  and 
wounded,  60.  After  dark  the  enemy  abandoned  the  siege  of  Suffolk,  re- 
tiring in  haste  toward  the  Blackwater. 

May  4. — Colonel  Foster  commenced  pursuit  after  the  enemy,  coming  on 
the  rear  guard  at  Leesville,  which  were  dispersed  and  most  of  them  cap- 
tured. General  Corcoran  pursued  them  on  the  Edenton  road.  General 
Terry  on  the  South  Quay  road,  and  a cavalry  detachment  on  the  Peters- 
burg road,  but  all  were  unable  to  come  across  any  force.  Many  prisoners 
were  captured,  mostly  stragglers  (about  250),  including  4 officers.  One 
hundred  and  thirty  signified  their  willingness  to  take  the  oath  of  alle- 
giance and  were  sent  North. 


No.  3. 

Report  qf  Capt.  Charles  L.  Davis,  Eight y- second  Rennsylvania  Infantry, 

Chief  Signal  Officer. 

Office  of  Chief  Signal  Officer,  Dept,  of  Va., 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  May  9,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Signal  Corps  in  the  siege  of  Suffolk,  lasting  from 
April  11  to  May  2 : 

For  some  months  past  I have  had  a signal  station  on  a tree  near  the 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


273 


crossing  of  the  Seaboard  and  Eoanohe  and  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Eail- 
I'oads,  to  which  the  pickets  on  the  South  Quay  and  Carrs ville  roads  were 
instructed  to  report  for  orders  in  case  of  attack.  Through  this  station 
the  commanding  general  at  Suffolk  was  kept  informed  of  movements  on 
the  front  toward  the  Blackwater. 

This  station  stood  at  the  junction  of  two  roads,  on  each  of  which  a 
comi)any  of  cavalry  was  stationed  1,200  yards  in  advance. 

At  3.30  p.  m.  April  11  a contraband  reported  to  the  officer  (Lieuten- 
ant Tliayer)  on  duty  at  this  station  that  the  enemy  was  advancing  in 
force  on  both  roads  and  only  a few  miles  distant.  Through  the  extraor- 
dinary promptness  of  this  officer  this  information  was  immediately 
transmitted  to  General  Peck  by  Lieutenant  Strong,  who  received  it  by 
signals  at  Suffolk.  A few  minutes  afterward  Lieutenant  Thayer  (notic- 
ing the  cavalry  soldiers  coming  in  at  a furious  rate,  riding  barebacked) 
sent  to  General  Peck  by  signals  the  message,  “Pickets  driven  in. 
Ee-enforcements  needed.^^ 

In  the  absence  of  a commissioned  officer  to  command  the  infantry 
pickets  Lieutenant  Thayer  took  command  and  made  such  disposition 
of  them  as  he  thought  necessary  to  check  the  advance  of  the  enemy’s 
vanguard  and  prevent  the  cutting  off  of  the  cavalry  pickets  on  the 
South  Quay  road. 

This  action  he  immediately  reported  by  signals  to  General  Peck,  and 
while  so  doing  the  enemy  opened  fire  with  their  sharpshooters  on  Lieu- 
tenant Thayer  and  his  flagmen  (Privates  A.  H.  Eames  and  W.  J.  Mott), 
who  were  located  in  the  top  of  a high  tree  performing  their  duty,  and 
so  remained  until  the  arrival  of  a regiment  of  cavalry,  when  Lieutenant 
Tliayer  was  ordered  to  abandon  his  post  and  come  in. 

On  the  12th  I was  notified  by  telegraph  that  signal  supplies  and  offi- 
cers were  needed  at  Suffolk.  The  supplies  were  promptly  sent,  and  I 
received  orders  from  the  commanding  general  of  the  department  to 
luoceed  there  at  once,  taking  with  me  such  officers  as  could  be  spared 
from  elsewhere. 

Communication  was  immediately  opened  by  Captain  Tamblyn  between 
the  signal  tower  (which  had  been  previously  erected  in  the  town  of  Suf- 
folk for  this  very  emergency)  and  the  fronts,  commanded  by  Generals 
Terry,  Corcoran,  and  Dodge.  These  lines  of  communication  were  con- 
stantly employed  in  transmitting  intelligence  as  to  the  movements  of 
the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  a message  was  received  from  Lieutenant 
Strong,  on  General  Terry’s  front,  that  the  enemy  had  established  a sig- 
nal station  at  the  junction  of  the  Seaboard  and  Eoanoke  and  Norfolk 
and  Petersburg  Eailroads  and  were  signaling.  This  information  I im- 
mediately gave  to  General  Peck,  and  was  directed  by  him  to  ascer- 
tain from  Captain  Lee  whether  he  could  shell  the  enemy  from  their 
position,  and  if  so,  direct  him  to  do  it.  Captain  Lee,  from  his  gunboat 
ill  the  Nansemond  Eiver,  immediately  opened  his  lire,  and  being  en- 
tirely unable  to  see  where  his  shot  struck  on  account  of  the  intervening 
woods  he  was  directed  in  his  firing  by  signals.  The  point  where  each 
shot  struck,  with  directions  as  to  change  of  range,  was  given  him  through 
signals  hy  Lieutenant  Thayer,  who  noted  the  effect  of  each  shot  from 
the  tower  in  Suffolk  and  transmitted  the  same  to  Captain  Lee  by  sig- 
nals. After  firing  a number  of  shots,  most  of  which  struck  well.  Lieu- 
tenant Thayer  signaled  to  Captain  Lee  that  the  enemy’s  signal  station 
was  abandoned. 

Oil  the  14th  Lieutenant  Young,  stationed  at  headquarters  of  General 
Corcoran,  at  Port  Union,  together  with  numerous  other  messages,  trauS’ 
18  R 11 — VOL  XVII I 


[Chap.  XXX 


274  north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


mitted  the  information  from  General  Corcoran 'to  General  Peck  that  the 
enemv  had  attacked  on  the  Somerton  road.  Promptly  orders  were 
returned  to  General  Corcoran  to  open  fire.  These  messages  were  trans- 
mitted while  the  shells  of  the  enemy  were  falling  around  them  and  evi- 
dentlv  directed  at  the  signal  flag  of  Lieutenant  Young,  who,  with  his  flag- 
man (Private  J.  W.  Brown),  exhibited  great  coolness  during  the  attack. 

These  lines  of  communication  were  kept  open  and  transmitting  much 
valuable  information  until  the  IGth,  when,  the  enemy  threatening  to 
cross  the  Nansemond  Elver  and  attack  our  right  and  rear.  General  Peck  ^ 
directed  communication  to  be  opened  with  General  Getty’s  front  and 
the  forces  on  the  Yansemond.  Captain  Tamblyn  was  therefore  directed 
to  break  up  communication  with  the  other  fronts,  as  of  less  importance,  | 
and  open  a line  down  the  Nansemond  Eiver.  This  was  accomplished 
in  a \4ry  short  time,  and  the  line  was  constantly  used  in  transmitting 
important,  and,  in  some  cases,  confidential  messages  between  the  dif- 
ferent stations.  This  line  was  composed  of  four  stations,  and  the  ofS- 
cers  and  men  operating  them  were  all  so  constantly  on  duty,  night  and 
(lav  sleeping  and  eating  only  when  a short  leisure  would  permit,  that 
without  relief  some  of  them  must  have  succumbed  had  not  matters 


taken  a change.  • • c 

This  line  of  communication  was  kept  open  and  (until  the  raising  ot 
the  siege  and  departure  of  the  enemy)  was  continually  useful. 

A field  telegraph  train  would  have  been  of  eminent  utility  in  this 
locality,  and  I shall  have  one  or  more  .of  these  trains  at  my  disposal  m 

a few  days.  , . ^ i.  i 

In  closing  this  report  I wish  to  state  that  officers  and  men  all  stood 
up  to  their  duty  nobly  and  when  nearly  worn-out  with  fatigue  by 
watching  and  working  night  and  day  and  under  fire  of  the  enemy.  To 
Capt.  W.  Tamblyn,  acting  signal  officer,  the  senior  officer  of  that  part 
of  my  detachment  at  Suftblk,  great  credit  is  due  for  his  faithful  super- 
vision of  affairs.  _ ^ . -r.  i tt  -d 

Lieuts.  A.  M.  Thayer,  E.  P.  Strong,  George  F.  Young,  and  H.  E. 

Murray,  acting  signal  officers,  deserve  special  mention  for  having  stood 
faithfully  to  their  duties  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters. 

Flagmen  A.  H.  Fames,  AY.  J.  Mott,  0.  H.  Treadwell,  and  J.  M • 
Brown  performed  their  duties  faithfully,  even  when  the  flag  they  held 
in  their  hands  was  the  special  mark  of  the  enemy. 

I inclose  herewith  a map,  showing  the  different  lines  ot  commuuicu- 
tion  had  by  signals.  The  small  red  flags  indicate  the  stations  and  the 
dotted  lines  the  lines  of  communication  had  at  different  times.- 
All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  theTionor  to  be,  colonel,  very ^ respectfully,  your  obedient 

CHARLES  L.  HAVIS, 

Captain  and  Chief  Signal  Officer,  Dtpartment  of  Virginia. 
Lieut.  Col.  Louis  H.  Pelouke,  Assistani  Adjutant- Qencral. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J,  Peclc,  U.  8.  Anmjj  commanding  at  Suffolk. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Suffolk,  Va.,  May  5,  1803. 

Colonel:  On  September  22,  1802,  I was  ordered  to  Suffolk,  with 
about  9,000  men,  to  repel  the  advance  of  Generals  Pettigrew  and  French 


Chai*.  XXX.] 


SIKGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


275 


from  the  Blackwiiter,  with  15,000  men.  No  artifieial  defenses  were 
found  nor  had  any  plan  been  prepared.  Situated  at  the  head  of  the 
Nausemoud  Eiver,  with  the  railways  to  Petersburg  and  Weldon,  Suffolk 
is  the  key  to  all  the  approaches  to  the  mouth  of  the  James  Eiver  on  the 
north  of  the  Dismal  Swamp.  Eegarding  the  James  as  second  only  in 
importance  to  the  Mississippi  for  the  Confederates  and  believing  that 
sooner  or  later  they  would  withdraw  their  armies  from  the  barren  wastes 
of  Northern  Virginia  to  the  line  of  the  James  and  attempt  the  recovery 
of  Portsmouth  and  Norfolk  as  ports  for  their  iron-dads  and  contraband 
trade,  I prepared  a system,  and  on  the  25th  commenced  Fort  Dix.  From 
that  time  until  the  present  I spared  no  pains  for  placing  the  line  of  the 
river  and  swamp  in  a state  of  defense.  My  labors  alarmed  the  authori- 
ties at  Eichmond,  who  believed  I was  preparing  a base  for  a grand 
movement  upon  the  rebel  capital,  and  the  whole  of  the  Blackwater  was 
fortified,  as  well  as  Cypress  Swamp  and  Birchen  and  Chipoak  Eivers. 
Tliis  line  rests  upon  the  James  near  Fort  Powhatan. 

About  February  26  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  was  detached  from 
Lee’s  army  and  placed  in  command  of  the  Department  of  Virginia,  with 
headquarters  at  Petersburg.  Of  his  corps,  15,000  were  on  the  Black- 
water  and  15,000  between  Petersburg  and  the  river,  near  the  railway. 
Til  is  distribution  enabled  him  to  concentrate  in  twenty  four  hours  within 
a,  few  miles  of  Suffolk  and  looked  threatening.  Eeports  were  circulated 
and  letters  written  to  the  effect  that  Longstreet  was  in  South  Carolina 
and  Tennessee  with  all  his  forces  with  the  view  of  throwing  me  off  my 
guard. 

My  information  was  reliable,  and  I fully  advised  the  department  of  the 
])resence  of  this  force,  and  bn  March  14  Getty’s  division  (Ninth  Corps) 
reported  for  duty.  Early  in  April  deserters  reported  troops  moving  to 
the  lUackwater,  that  many  bridges  were  being  constructed,  and  that  a 
])ontoon  train  ]iad  arrived  from  Petersburg. 

On  the  Gth  I was  advised  that  General  Foster  was  in  great  need  ot 
troops  and  asked  to  send  him  3,000.  I replied  that  no  soldiers  ought 
to  leave  the  department,  but  I would  spare  that  number  provided  they 
could  be  supplied  at  short  notice. 

On  the  10th,  at  4.30  p.  m.,  as  the  troop  train  was  leaving,  I was  in- 
formed of  the  contents  of  a captured  mail  by  General  Viele  to  the  effect 
that  General  Longstreet  would  attack  me  at  once  with  from  40,000  to 
60,000  j that  he  had  maps,  plans,  and  a statement  of  my  force,  and  that 
General  Hill  would  co-operate. 

On  the  11th  Hood’s  division  followed  up  my  cavalry,  returning  from 
Llackwater  on  the  South  Quay  road, and  about!  p.  m.  captured,  with- 
out a shot,  the  cavalry  outposts.  Others  followed  on  other  roads  and  a 
surprise  in  open  day  was  attempted.  The  signal  officers,  under  Cap- 
tain Tamblyn,  rendered  most  signal  service.  Lieutenant  Thayer  held 
his  st  ation  for  a long  time  in  spite  of  the  riflemen  about  him. 

On  the  12th,  about  noon,  Pickett’s  division  advanced  on  the  Somerton 
mid  Jenkins’  on  the  Edenton  road,  and  a large  column  on  the  river  by 
the  Providence  Church  road.  Much  fine  skirmishing  took  place  on  ail 
tliese  roads,  but  the  pickets  were  pressed  back  and  the  enemy  was  not 
checked  until  he  came  within  artillery  range.  He  sustained  some  loss 
and  fell  back  a few  miles  to  his  line  of  battle. 

On  the  13th  the  enemy  skirmished  with  our  light  troops  on  all  the  ap- 
]>roaches.  On  the  Somerton,  Colonel  Foster  handled  him  very  roughly, 
driving  him  back  and  restoring  his  picket  line  at  sundown.  On  the 
river  the  contest  was  sharp  and  long,  bnt  the  batteries  and  gunboats 
held  the  enemy  at  bay. 


276  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  p 

On  the  14tli  Lieutenant  Cushing,  U.  S.  Navy,  was  hotly  engaged  for 
several  hours  with  a large  force  at  the  mouth  of  the  West  Branch.  His 
loss  was  severe,  but  the  enemy  suffered  much  and  had  some  artillery  dis- 
mounted. The  enemy  opened  a ten-gun  battery  near  the  Norfleet  house 
for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  gunboats  and  of  covering  a crossing. : 
Ijieutenant  Lamson,  with  the  Mount  Washington,  West  End,  and  Step- 
ping Stones,  engaged  the^  battery  for  some  hours  in  the  most  gallant 
manner,  but  was  compelled  to  drop  down  to  the  West  Branch.  The 
Mount  Washington,  completely  riddled  and  disabled,  grounded,  as  did 
the  West  End,  and  both  were  towed  off’  by  the  Stepping  Stones.  The 
rudder  of  the  Alert  was  broken.  Several  batteries  on  the  river  were  i 
opened  with  fine  effect  and  others  were  pushed  with  all  dispatch  toward 
completion.  More  or  less  skirmishing  and  artillery  fire  on  all  portions 
of  the  lines.  In  the  night  the  Smith  Briggs,  lying  near  my  headquar- 
ters, was  attacked,  but  Captain  Lee  and  the  guns  of  the  draw-bridge 
repulsed  the  enemy. 

On  the  15th  the  force  between  Suffolk  and  West  Branch  was  reported 
by  the  best  authorities  at  10,000,  with  a pontoon  train  under  the  imine 
diate  command  of  General  French.  About  noon  our  batteries,  undei 
the  direction  of  General  Getty,  below  the  mouth  of  Jericho  Creek,  were 
warmly  engaged  with  the  Norfleet  battery.  Four  of  the  rebel  20-pounder 
rifles  were  dismounted  and  the  battery  was  silenced.  A party  sent  out 
on  the  Edenton  road  captured  the  camp  equipage  of  one  regiment.  Fear 
of  an  ambuscade  prevented  taking  of  many  prisoners. 

On  the  17th  Major  Stratton,  with  a force  of  cavalry,  held  South  Mills, 
which  is  the  key  to  nearly  all  the  approaches  from  North  Carolina  on 
the  south  side  of  the  Dismal  Swamp.  There  was  much  skirmishing  on 
all  the  avenues  of  approach  with  some  field  artillery.  General  Terry’s 
front  was  much  annoyed  from  the  first  day  by  the  near  approach  of 
riflemen.  Under  his  orders  the  enemy  was  signally  punished.*  Gen- 
eral French’s  engineer  was  taken  prisoner  by  Lieutenant  Cushing’s 
pickets.  He  was  laying  out  works  and  had  a map  of  Suffolk,  which  he 
tore  to  pieces. 

On  the  18th  the  enemy  was  very  active  in  throwing  up  new  batteries 
and  rifle-pits  along  the  river.  A heavy  one  was  in  progress  near  tlie 
mouth  of  West  Branch  on  Hill’s  Point.  Admiral  Lee,  U.  S.  Navy,  or- 
dered all  the  boats  out  of  the  Upper  Nansemond,  lest  they  should  he 
destroyed,  leaving  the  whole  defense  of  the  river  to  the  land  forces. 
Tlie  admiral  was  urged  to  reconsider  his  orders.  Upon  my  representa- 
tion the  order  was  temporarily  suspended. 

On  the  10th,  about  dusk,  General  Getty  and  Lieutenant  Lamson  ex 
edited  most  successfully  a plan  which  had  been  agreed  upon  for  cross- 
ing the  river  and  capturing  Battery  Huger  at  the  mouth  of  the  West 
Branch.  The  Eighty-ninth  New  York  and  Eighth  Connecticut  were 
taken  over  on  the  Stepping  Stones.  Five  pieces  of  artillery,  0 officers, 
and  120  soldiers  were  captured.  It  was  well  conceived  and  ably  con 
diK'ted,  and  reflects  great  honor  on  the  combined  arms.  Lieutenant 
Lamson  suggested  the  enteriu'ise,  lauded  with  four  of  his  howitzers, 
and  played  a brilliant  part.  Captain  Stevens  was  conspicuous  for  liis 
gallant  conduct  in  this  affair  and  deserves  mention;  also  Lieutenants 
McKechnie  and  Faxon,  aides  of  General  Getty. 

Uii  the  20th  Major  Stratton  visited  Elizabeth  City,N.  C.,  and  foiiiifl 

Retarii  of  Terry's  brigade,  First  Division,  Seventh  Army  Corps,  for  April, 
gives  the  following  casualties  in  this  affair  of  the  17th : Throe  privates  killed  and  10 
wounded. 


Chap.  XXX.]  SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA.  277 

it  abandoned  by  our  troops.  He  found  General  Longstreet^s  pickets  in 
the  vicinity  of  Sandy  Cross. 

On  the  21st  the  command  was  highly  honored  by  a visit  from  Major- 
General  Halleck,  Commander-in-Ohief,  accompanied  by  Major-General 
Dix. 

On  the  22(1  a heavy  rain-storm  commenced,  suspending  all  hitigue 
labors,  but  adding  materially  to  the  strength  of  the  swamp  on  the  left 
flank. 

On  the  24th  a demonstration  was  made  upon  theenemy^s  right  flank, 
on  Ihe  Edenton  road,  under  General  Corcoran  and  Colonels  Foster  and 
vS])ear,  while  a feint  was  made  on  the  Somerton  by  Colonel  Buehler.  The 
enemy  was  driven  in  confusion  from  all  his  advance  points  and  rifle 
])ifs  back  upon  his  main  line  of  defense  behind  the  dam  and  swam])  at 
Darden’s  Mill.  A force  estimated  at  about  1,500  was  believed  to  be 
massed  on  that  front.  The  object  of  the  move  was  attained  and  the  com- 
mand withdrawn.  Colonels  Beach,  llrake,  and  Murphy  had  provisional 
brigades,  and  handled  them  extremely  well;  Captain  Simpson  com- 
manded the  artillery. 

On  the  25th  information  was  received  of  the  arrival  of  heavy  artillery 
from  Petersburg.  Troops  were  reported  on  this  side  of  the  Chowan,  on 
the  way  from  General  Hill,  under  General  Garnett. 

On  the  27th  Major  Stratton  occupied  Camden  Court-House  and 
burned  a ferry-boat  of  the  enemy’s.  Bebels  were  very  active  at  night, 
chopping,  moving  troops,  and  signaling.  A new  battery  of  three  guns 
was  opened  by  them  below  the  Norfleet  Battery.  Chopping  parties 
were  broken  up  by  the  Eedan  and  Mansfield  Battery.  Thev  reoccupied 
the  Hill’s  Point  Battery  in  the  night.  The  steamers  Commerce  and 
Swan,  under  the  volunteer  pilotage  of  Lieutenants  Bo  we  and  Horton, 
of  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Yolunteers,  ran  down  past  the  batteries 
in  the  night,  but  not  without  many  shots.  These  officers  are  entitled  to 
much  credit  for  this  service. 

On  the  28th  Suffolk  was  visited  by  a heavy  storm.  A rebel  work  for 
several  guns  was  discovered  on  the  river. 

On  the  29th  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  State,  W.  H.  Seward,  |)aid  a visit, 
in  company  with  Major-General  I)ix,  to  this  command. 

Oil  tlie  30th,  early  in  the  morning,  the  enemy  opened  with  one  Whit- 
worth, one  30  and  one  35  pounder  Parrott.  Toward  night  they  o])ened 
fire  upon  the  Commodore  Barney,  and  the  battery  was  silenced  by  the 
Barney  (Lieutenant  Cushing,  U.  S.  Navy)  and  Captain  Morris,  batferv 
m Fort  Stevens. 

^ Mai/l. — There  was  a sharp  skirmish  on  General  Terry’s  front  about 
o p.  m.*  The  enemy,  re-enforced  largely,  was  held  in  check  from'the  guns 
of  Nansemond,  South  Quay,  and  Eosecrans  with  considerable  loss. 
Another  brigade  from  North  Carolina  was  reported  to  have  ioined  Lou«’- 
street.  ‘ 

Jllaj/  3. — A reconnaissance  in  force  was  made  by  Generals  Getty  and 
llarland  on  the  enemy’s  left  flank.  The  troops  crossed  at  9 a.  n'l.,  at 
Uie  draw-bridge,  under  the  fire  of  Battery  Mansfield,  the  Onondaga, 
and  the  Smith  Briggs,  and  seized  the  jilateau  near  Pruden’s  house'  in 
Slide  of  sharpshooters  in  the  riflc-])its,  orchards,  and  woods.  The  ad- 
vance was  slow,  every  inch  being  hotly  contested.  The  movement  r(‘- 
fldled  in  bringing  heavy  re-enforcements  for  the  enemy.  His  numbers 
and  artillery  failed  to  (dieck  the  troo])s.  By  night  the  enemy  was  massed 

If  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Department  of  Virginia,,  for  the  month  of 

tins  affair  as  follows:  Four  killed  and  42  wounded,  all  of 
the  Ninety-nmth  New  York  Infantry. 


■278 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ou  bis  strong  line  of  intrencbments  and  under  tbe  fire  of  a numerous 
artillery.  The  purpose  of  the  movement  having  been  attained,  the 
troops  were  directed  to  remain  on  the  ground  awaiting  events. 

Ill  conjunction  with  the  above,  Major  Crosby  crossed  the  I^ansemond  i 
near  Sleepy  Hole  with  the  Twenty-first  Connecticut,  a section  of  the 
Fourth  Wisconsin  Battery,  and  eleven  mounted  rifles.  At  4 a.  m.  pushed 
on  and  occujiied  Chuckatuck,  driving  out  300  rebel  cavalry.  He  skir- 
mished all  the  way  to  Eeed’s  Ferry,  capturing  IG  prisoners,  and  then 
returned  to  the  river  under  cover  of  the  gunboats.  At  the  same  time 
Colonel  Dutton  crossed  in  boats  and  occupied  HilPs  Point  with  the  I 
Fourth  Ehode  Island,  a portion  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  I 
New  York,  and  a detachment  from  the  Commodore  Barney.  He  ad-  f 
vanced  some  distance,  but  was  met  by  a suiierior  force  posted  strongly  1 
in  the  woods,  and  after  much  skirmishing  returned  upon  HilFs  Point,  1 
from  which  the  enemy  could  not  dislodge  him.  * 

I again  take  pleasure  in  acknowledging  the  valuable  services  of  Lieu-  | 
tenants  Cushing,  Lamson,  and  Harris,  U.  S.  Navy.  These  officers  ren-  j 
dered  every  assistance  in  their  power  in  crossing  the  river.  Lieutenant  | 
Cushing  sent  a boat  howitzer  and  detachment  with  the  Fourth  Ehode 
Island,  under  Colonel  Dutton. 

I regret  to  state  that  Colonel  Eingold,  of  the  One  hundred  and  third  i 
New  York,  lost  his  life  from  two  wounds  while  leading  on  his  men  in  < 
the  most  gallant  manner.  He  was  a meritorious  officer. 

May  4. — About  9 p.  m.  on  the  3d  the  enemy  commenced  retiriiig  j 
upon  the  Black  water.  His  strong  line  of  i)ickets  prevented  deserters  ; 
and  contrabands  from  getting  through  with  the  information  until  he  had  i 
several  hours  the  start.  Generals  Corcoran  and  Dodge  were  promptly  ; 
in  pursuit  on  theEdenton  road  while  Colonel  Foster  followed  upon  the  ; 
Somerton.  By  G a.  m.  Colonel  Foster  was  pressing  the  rear  of  a formida-  ■ 
ble  column  on  the  old  road  near  Leesville.  He  was  compelled,  from  the  i 
smallness  of  his  force,  to  wait  for  the  command  under  General  Corcoraii  . 
and  could  not  again  strike  the  column  before  it  reached  the  river. 
The  cavalry  of  Colonels  Spear  and  Onderdonk  were  pushed  on  numer- 
ous roads,  and  rendered  valuable  services  in  t)rocuring  information  and 
capturing  prisoners. 

Thus  ends  the  present  investment  or  siege  of  Sufiblk,  which  had  for 
its  objects  the  recovery  of  the  whole  country  south  of  the  James  ex-  1 
tending  to  tlie  Albemarle  Sound  in  North  Carolina,  the  i^orts  of  Nor-  i 
folk  and  Portsmouth,  80  miles  of  new  railroad  iron,  the  equipments  of 
two  roads,  and  the  capture  of  all  the  United  States  forces  and  property 
with  some  thousands  of  contrabands. 

General  Longstreet  finding  that  an  assault  at  the  outside  upon  works 
defended  by  one-half  his  own  force  would  be  expensive  and  uncertain, 
and  having  failed  in  turning  either  flank,  decided  to  besiege  the  place 
and  asked  for  re-enforcements ; probably  not  less  than  two  divisions 
joined  from  General  Hill.  The  works  constructed  are  on  the  most 
extensive  scale  and  in  the  most  approved  manner. 

The  rules  and  regulations  prescribed  by  military  authorities  for  the 
conduct  of  siege  operations  have  been  observed.  Some  idea  may  he 
formed  of  this  so-styled  foraging  expedition  when  I state  that  not  less  i 
than  10  miles  of  batteries,  covered- ways,  and  rifle-pits  have  heen  i 
thrown  u[);  most  of  the  artillery  was  luotected  by  embrasures;  the  • 
parapets  were  from  12  to  15  feet  in  thickness  and  well  revetted,  while  I 
th(‘,  (covered- ways  were  from  8 to  10  feet.  Longstreet  had  a wire  laid  | 
from  the  Blackwater,  and  telegraphed  arrangements  throughout  his.i 
lines. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK;  VA. 


279 


RESULTS. 

We  Lave  taken  five  pieces  of  the  famous  Fauquier  Artillery,  about 
400  prisoners,  some  rifles,  and  camp  equipage.  Probably  500  or  600 
have  been  Icilled  and  wounded  and  500  have  deserted,  making  a total 
loss  of  at  least  1,500. 

Our  own  killed  is  44  ; wounded,  202,  and  missing,  14.  Total,  260.* 

All  the  morale^  prestige,  and  glory  belong  to  the  patient  and  brave 
officers  and  men  of  the  Federal  Army. 

Besides  these  brilliant  results,  this  command  has  held  the  masses  of 
the  enemy  around  Suffolk  in  order  that  General  Hooker  might  secure 
the  crowning  victory  of  the  war,  and  it  is  entitled  to  a share  of  the  glory 
that  may  accrue  to  his  arms.  My  thanks  are  due  all  officers  and  sol- 
diers who  have  worked  cheerfully  and  pa-triotically  on  these  fortifica- 
tions. They  now  see  that  their  labors  are  not  in  vain.  • 

The  truth  of  history  requires  that  I should  state  that  a small  portion 
of  the  One  hundred  and  twelfth  New  York  became  homesick  and  dis- 
contented, and  said  that  they  came  to  fight  and  not  to  dig.  This  feel- 
ing was  seized  upon  by  politicians,  and  since  the  adjournment  of  the 
Senate  I have  been  advised  that  efforts  were  made  to  defeat  my  con- 
firmation in  consequence  thereof.  Soldiers  who  love  their  country  will 
cheerfully  perform  any  duty  assigned  themj  men  .who  know  howto 
build  fortifications  will  knowhow  to  defend  or  assault  them.  It  should 
not  be  forgotten  that  the  principal  rebel  successes  have  been  behind 
intrenchments,  as  at  Manassas,  Fredericksburg,  Eichmond,  Vicksburg, 
Charleston,  &c. 

It  is  an  unpleasant  duty  to  state  that  most  of  the  Ninth  New  York, 
Colonel  Hawkins,  left  this  command  on  the  3d,  by  expiration  of  their 
term  of  service,  while  their  comrades  were  actively  engaged  with  the 
(memy.  It  can  be  regarded  only  as  an  unfortunate  termination  of  a 
hitherto  brilliant  career  of  service. 

To  Generals  Corcoran,  Terry,  Dodge,  and  Harland,  and  Colonels 
Dutton  and  Gibbs,  commanding  fronts  or  lines ; Colonels  Spear  and 
iOnderdonk,  of  the  cavalry  5 Colonels  Gurney  and  Wardroj),  command- 
ing reserves,  and  Captain  Follett,  chief  of  artillery,  I am  under  very 
great  obligations  for  the  able,  faithful,  judicious,  and  cheerful  discharge 
of  every  duty  incident  to  their  important  positions. 

General  Getty  was  intrusted  with  the  river  line  below  the  Onondaga 
Battery,  the  key  of  the  position  and  about  8 miles  in  length — a very^difli- 
cult  line  to  defend  against  an  enterprising  enemy  acquainted  with  every 
by-])ath  Jind  guided  by  owners  of  the  soil.  His  responsibilities  were  of 
tlie  highest  order,  and  the  labors  of  his  troops  were  incessant.  Under  his 
vigilant  supervision  everything  was  done  that  could  be  for  the  security 
of  the  right  flank,  and  the  enemy  was  foiled  in  all  plans  for  crossing. 

Col.  E.  S.  Foster,  of  Indiana,  commanding  brigade  and  a portion^  of 
the  front,  added  fresh  laurels  to  the  high  reputation  which  he  estab- 
lished in  West  Virginia  and  on  the  Peninsula.  He  was  at  home  in  grand 
^skirmishes,  and  the  enemy  always  recoiled  before  him. 

General  Gordon  reported  three  days  before  the  conclusion  of  the  siege 
and  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Eeserve  Division.  His  long 
and  varied  experience  rendered  his  judgment  of  great  value,  and  I re- 
gret that  he  has  been  called  to  another  field. 

My  thanks  are  due  General  Viele,  of  Norfolk,  for  the  prompt  trans- 
mission of  important  intelligence  and  for  the  alacrity  with  which  my 
Balls  were  responded. 

* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  288. 


280 


NOUTia  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Captain  Ludlow,  quartermaster  at  Norfolk,  deserves  mention  for  his 
untiring  efforts  in  forwarding  the  main  bulk  of  supplies  for  the  army. 

The  medical  department,  under  the  able  management  of  Dr.  Hand, 
was  in  excellent  working  order  and  equal  to  every  emergency.  The 
wounded  were  promptly  cared  for  and  spared  all  unnecessary  suffering. 
The  commissary  dei)artment  was  admirably  managed  by  tlie  late  Oa]) 
ta:n  Bowdish,  and  since  bis  death  by  Captain  Felt. 

Colonel  Murphy  commanded  brigade;  Colonel  Drake,  Fort  Union; 
Colonel  Hawkins,  Fort  Nansemond;  Captain  Sullivan,  Fort  Halleck; 
Colonel  Davis,  the  Draw-Bridge  Battery ; Colonel  Worth,  Battery  Mans- 
field; Colonel  Thorp,  the  Eedan  and  Eosecraus;  Captain  Johnson,  Bat- 
tery Monday;  Colonel  England,  Battery  Montgomery;  Colonel  Pease, 
Battery  Stevens,  and  Colonel  McEvily,  Fort  Dix,  with  ability,  and  their 
troops  were  always  ready  for  the  enemy. 

Major  Stratton,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  was  at  South  Mills 
watcliing  the  operations  of  the  troops  from  Carolina.  By  his  discretion 
and  energy  the  rebels  were  prevented  from  penetrating  the  Dismal 
Swamp. 

Captain  Tamblyn,  Lieutenants  Seabury,  Young,  Thayer,  Strong,  and 
M urray,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  have  been  indefatigable  day  and  night  and 
of  the  greatest  service  in  their  department.  Captain  Davis  shares  the 
above  commendation  for  the  few  days  he  was  here. 

The  conduct  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Nixon,  Ninety-ninth  New  York ; 
of  Captain  Morris,  Lieutenants  Hasbrouck,  Hunt,  Whitney,  and  Beecher, 
of  the  artillery;  Lieutenants  James,  Grant,  Macardle,  Soederquist,  and 
Burleson,  on  engineer  duty;  of  Lieutenant  Buttz,  assistant  provost- 
marshal,  and  of  Major  Wetherill,  was  conspicuous.  Major  Stewart,  of 
the  Engineer  Corps,  joined  for  a few  days,  evincing  the  same  lively 
interest  which  characterized  his  valuable  services  on  the  Peninsula. 

The  command  is  mainly  indebted  to  the  provost-marshal,  Major  Smith, 
of  the  One  hundred  and  twelfth  New  York,  for  the  good  order  and 
cleanliness  which  has  prevailed  in  town  and  camp. 

The  co-operation  of  the  gunboats,  under  Lieutenants  Cushing,  Lain 
son,  and  Harris,  U.  S.  Navy,  sent  by  Admiral  Lee,  has  been  very 
effective,  and  I take  great  pleasure  in  acknowledging  the  gvillaut  serv- 
ices of  their  officers  and  crews.  The  army  gunboats  Smith  Briggs  and 
West  End,  commanded  by  Captain  Lee  and  Lieutenant  Eowe,  proved 
invaluable.  The  Smith  Briggs  was  for  many  days  the  only  boat  above 
the  West  Branch,  in  consequence  of  the  order  of  Admiral  Lee. 

My  personal  staff  have  all  earned  a place  in  this  record  by  their  zeal, 
fidelity,  and  unremitting  labors  day  and  night,  increased  by  injuries 
which  I sustained  from  the  fall  of  my  horse.  Their  claims  to  promotion 
were  established  long  before  the  siege  of  Suffolk.  Maj.  B.  B.  Foster,  as-' 
sistant adjutant-general;  Capt. George S. Dodge, quartermaster;  Lieuts. 
Charles  E.  Stirling  and  James  D.  Ontwater,  aides-de-camp ; Lieut.  A.  B. 
Johnson,  ordnance  officer,  and  Lieut.  James  D.  Mahon,  judge  advocate.. 

Doubtless  many  names  have  been  omitted,  but  discrimination  is  im- 
possible where  all  have  done  so  well. 

For  the  conclusion  is  reserved  the  agreeable  duty  of  testifying  to  the 
cordial  and  efficient  support  I have  ever  received  from  Major-General 
Dix.  No  request  or  suggestion  has  ever  escaped  his  attention,  and 
most  of  my  requirements  have  been  anticipated  by  his  liberal  and  com 
l)rehensive  policy. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 

Col.  D.  T.  Van  Buren,  A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  Va. 


L^HAP.  XXX.] 


281 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,- VA. 

Headquarters, 

JS^ew  Berne,  N,  €.,  December  18,  i863. 

General  : My  excuse  for  this  trespass  upon  your  most  valuable  time 
is  that  I have  been  unofficially  advised  that  Admiral  Lee  has  endeav- 
ored to  depreciate  the  importance  of  LongstreeUs  campaign  against  me. 

This  is  very  singular,  for  he  did  not  visit  Suffolk  during  the  nine 
months  I was  in  command,  and  saw  nothing  of  my  system  of  fortifica- 
tions or  of  LongstreeUs,  the  development  of  which  "was  from  9 to  10 
miles.  His  headquarters  were  at  ]!^ewport  JS’ews,  some  30  miles  from 
mine.  His  views  were  based  entirely  upon  the  impressions  of  young 
ind  inexperienced  subordinates,  whose  vision  was  limited  to  short  dis- 
tances beyond  the  gunboat  decks. 

Oil  April  20,  thirteen  days  before  the  conclusion  of  the  siege,  he 
wdered  all  the  boats  to  HilFs  Point  for  safety,  7 miles  from  Suffolk, 
igainst  which  I protested,  and  some  sharp  correspondence  ensued. 
Besides  the  distance  the  densely-wooded  banks  of  the  l^ansemond  were 
infavorable  for  forming  a judgment  of  the  numbers  and  labors  of  the 
aiemj^,  everywhere  screened  in  timber.  The  whole  country  was  one  vast 
nrest,  out  of  which  I had  to  cut  a field  of  fire  for  my  artillery.  Admiral 
Bee  thinks  that  Longstreet  brought  a force  of  negroes  for  building  his 
extensive  line  of  works.  On  his  arrival  the  negroes  ceased  to  come  into 
iiy  lines,  and  parties  were  sent  out  to  bring  them  in  for  information, 
)iit  without  success. 

After  his  repulse  on  May  3 and  night  retreat  some  blacks  escaped 
Voin  Franklin  and  informed  me  that  all  the  contrabands,  except  servants 
ind  drivers,  were  left  at  Franklin,  across  the  Blackwater,  to  ])revent 
heir  escape.  They  also  stated  that  they  prayed  very  loud  that  “ Massa 
Bongstreet  might  be  whipped  by  you  folks.” 

Captain  Lamson,  one  of  the  most  gallant  officers  in  the  IT.  S.  Navy, 
mmmanded  the  flotilla  in  the  Upper  Nansemond,  and  was  on  the  staff 
)f  the  acting  admiral.  He  says  he  made  a complete  examination,  during 
wo  days,  of  LongstreeFs  lines  after  his  retreat,  and  changed  his  opinion 
iiid  so  told  the  admiral ; he  estimated  the  rebel  force  from  35,()0()  to 
)0,00().  Major-General  Dix  was  over  my  lines,  including  the  Nanse- 
uond,  every  alternate  day,  and  had  favorable  opportunities  for  judg- 
lig;  he  says  some  35,000.  General  Gordon  states  that  the  works  he 
examined  could  not  have  been  made  by  less  than  30,000. 

Major-General  Keyes  concluded  my  situation  was  so  critical  that  I 
luglit  to  evacuate  the  lines  to  save  the  troops  from  capture.  On  my 
lositive  refusal  he  called  for  two  corps.  He  estimated  40,000  jirior  tn 
dill’s  arrival. 

A mail,  with  several  hundred  letters,  was  taken,  showing  that  Hill 
vas  to  co-operate,  and  that  they  had  a statement  of  my  force,  artillery, 
ind  a map  of  the  works. 

General  Hooker  telegraphed  that  his  reliable  spy  in  llichmond  ad- 
ised  that  Jeff.  Davis  had  ordered  Hill  to  leave  North  Carolina  and 
oin  Longstreet  at  Suffolk.  All  prisoners,  deserters,  and  Union  peojile 
igrced  as  to  this  co-operation. 

About  April  26  a division  arrived  from  Little  Washington,  having 
Tossed  the  Chowan  near  Gatesville.  General  Hill  joined  with  his  en- 
ire  command  on  May  1,  by  way  of  Weldon,  Franklin,  and  Holland’s 
orners.  Hill’s  letter  to  Longstreet,  asking  orders,  is  in  my  xiossession. 

General  Dix  employed  a spy  to  visit  the  armies  of  Longstreet  and 
jce  in  February  and  March.  He  was  two  weeks  in  Ijongstreet’s  lines 
tud  longer  in  Lee’s.  Tlirough  a friend  in  the  War  Office  in  Richmond 


282 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


lie  was  allowed  entire  freedom  in  the  camps  and  sold  his  goods  to  officers 
and  men  on  credit.  He  reported  28,000  to  30,000  in  March  in  my  gen- 
eral front  and  one  hundred  and  nine  regiments,  of  some  84,000,  in  the 
army  of  Lee.  Then  28,000,  with  the  forces  of  Hill  from  North  Carolina,  j 
represent  generally  the  mass  opposed  to  me.  My  effective  force  for  , 
some  days  was  14,928.  I asked  for  one  division  only.  For  a few  days  I 
1 had  about  29,000  effectives  on  a line  from  below  HilPs  Point,  on  the  i 
river,  extending  across  to  the  Dismal  Swamp  of  at  least  15  miles  in 
length,  with  a detachment  of  the  same  at  South  Mills,  30  miles  distant, 
the  key  to  the  southern  approaches  of  the  swamp. 

The  campaign  will  be  clear  when  it  is  stated  that  Hill  was  to  make  : 
noisy  and  furious  demonstrations  in  Carolina,  for  the  purpose  of  induc- 
ing General  Foster  to  call  for  troops  from  Virginia.,  Accordingly,  ] 
Pettigrew  appeared  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Berne  and  Hill  attacked  or 
cannonaded  Washington. 

Our  casualties  were  6 at  New  Berne,  but  I have  failed  to  learn  that 
any  occurred  at  Washington.  Ten  thousand  were  asked  for  General 
Foster,  and  I was  called  upon  to  contribute  from  my  15,000  on  tbe 
10th  April.  Against  my  judgment  T consented  to  send  3,000,  and  they 
were  on  the  troop  train.  Longstreet  was  advised  of  this  detachment 
in  a few  hours  and  advanced  that  very  night.  With  your  approval  I 
brought  back  the  3,000  at  dusk,  and  very  luckily  for  our  affairs  in  that 
quarter. 

The  operations  about  Suffolk,  ending  May  4,  were  suddenly  eclipsed  in 
the  night  of  general  gloom  and  painful  anxiety  which  attended  Hooker’s 
great  disaster  at  Chancellorsville.  Attention  was  not  again  awakened 
upon  that  field,  and  the  campaign  has  been  imperfectly  understood  by 
the  public. 

I desire  to  thank  you  for  the  liberal  support  sent  me  at  Suffolk. 

With  sentiments  of  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

eTOHN  J.  PECK. 

Major-General  Halle CK, 

Commander -in- Chiefs  W asliington^  D.  G. 

[In  closure.] 

% 

From  the  Philadelphia  Enquirer,  April  24,  1863. 


THE  GALLANT  CAMPAIGN  AT  SUFFOLK. 

Having  in  our  recent  articles  'traced  the  progress  of  the  war  in  the 
Southwest,  in  Tennessee,  and  in  North  Carolina,  we  follow  them  up 
this  morning  by  a review  of  the  short  and  exciting  campaign  about  > 
Suffolk.  This  campaign,  in  presence  of  some  of  the  vast  events  of  the 
war,  appears  to  be  nothing  more  than  an  episode,  but  in  our  judgment 
it  is  entitled  to  considerable  prominence.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
the  military  authorities  charged  with  the  occupation  of  Norfolk  estab- 
lished an  important  post  at  a considerable  distance  to  the  southwest  ol 
that  city — at  Suffolk,  where  the  Petersburg  and  Norfolk  Eailroad  in- 
tersects the  Seaboard  and  Eoanoke  Eailroad,  leading  to  Weldon,  N.  0. 
Suffolk  is  also  at  the  head  of  navigation  on  the  Nansemond  Eiver, 
which  empties  into  the  James  Eiver  near  its  mouth.  From  this  post 
the  National  troops  were  enabled  to  operate  to  a distance  in  the  inte- 
rior of  the  south  side  of  Virginia,  keeping  the  country  comparatively  - 
clear  of  guerrillas,  contraband  traders,  and  spies,  and  thus  more  effect ; 
ually  guarding  Norfolk. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


283 


For  a long  while  the  rebel  leaders  at  Eichmond  permitted  this  occu- 
pancy by  the  Union  forces  to  pass  without  interference,  although  it  was 
exceedingly  unpalatable  to  their  adherents  in  the  country  occupied. 
Within  the  last  two  or  three  weeks,  however,  for  reasons  that  may  ap- 
pear ill  the  sequel,  they  detached  a heavy  force,  under  their  pet  gen- 
eral— Longstreet — to  recover  Suffolk  and  to  bring  Norfolk  once  more 
under  the  sway  of  the  rebellion.  The  movement  commenced  about  the 
same  time  with  that  of  General  Hill  against  General  Fosters  garrison 
at  Washington,  N.  G.,  and  the  two  were  unquestionably  intended  to 
co-operate  with  each  other. 

Having  massed  some  38,000  men  behind  the  Blackwater  Eiver  Gen- 
eral Longstreet  began  the  execution  of  his  plan  on  the  10th  instant  by 
crossing  his  grand  army  over  that  stream  by  means  of  five  pontoon 
bridges. 

On  the  next  night  his  advance  drove  in  our  pickets  in  front  of  Suf- 
folk, and  the  situation  of  jour  forces  began  to  look  serious. 

The  rebel  plan  was  to  cut  the  Nansemond  Elver  some  G miles  or  so 
below  Suffolk,  on  our  right  flank,  while  another  force  was  to  be  thrown 
against  the  Norfolk  Eailroad,  on  our  left  flank  and  rear,  and,  thus  sur- 
rounded, General  Peck’s  entire  army  and  the  city  of  Norfolk  were  to 
fall  a rich  and  easy  prize  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  It  so  happened, 
however,  that  two  matters  over  which  the  rebel  chieftains  could  exer- 
cise but  little  control  interfered  to  defeat  the  scheme.  In  the  first  place 
Grenepl  Peck,  who  was  in  command  of  the  National  force,  was  entirely 
too  vigilant,  too  active,  and  too  enterprising  for  General  Longstreet ; 
ind  in  the  second  place  General  Foster’s  resolute  resistance  against; 
Hill  at  Washington,  N.  0.,  where  the  latter  stubbornly  persisted  in 
holding  out  after  his  adversary  claimed  that  he  was  hopelessly  cut  otf, 
areyented  Hill  from  coming  up  in  time  to  execute  his  share  of  the  grand 
ichievement.  Nevertheless,  General  Longstreet  went  at  his  i)lau  with 
mergy,  and  from  April  11,  when  he  first  drove  in  our  pickets,  until 
Fuesday  last  he  kept  up  an  incessant  series  of  attacks  of  the  most 
larassing  and  vexatious  character  to  General  Peck’s  troops.  He  rushed 
»is  squadrons  of  cavalry  against  our  lines  in  one  place  and  established 
jatteries  of  field  artillery  to  sweep  the  Nansemond  Eiver  at  others.  He 
naneuvered  to  overwhelm  us  here  and  flank  us  there,  and  in  every  way 
endeavored  to  penetrate  our  lines,  but  was  baffled  in  every  attempt  by 
be  watchfulness,  activity,  endurance,  skill,  and  courage  of  General 
Peck  and  his  brave  companions  in  arms. 

^ Among  those  who  were  conspicuous  on  our  side  General  Getty, 
Jolonel  Foster,  of  the  light  troops,  and  Lieutenant  Lamson,  of  tln^ 
S^avy,  are  mentioned  by  General  Hix;  Colonel  Foster  having  repelled 
111  assault  upon  the  right,  and  General  Getty,  with  Lieutenant  Lamson, 
laving  stormed,  in  the  most  gallant  manner,  a troublesome  battery  of 
;ix  guns,  which  they  captured,  with  160  prisoners. 

Thus  repulsed  at  every  point,  Longstreet  appears  to  have  abandoiuMl 
lis  enterprise,  at  least  for  the  present,  for  the  latest  advices  stale  that 
skirmishing  ceased  on  the  21st. 

Now,  what  is  the  importance  of  this  defeated  movement  of  Long- 
itreet’s?  To  get  an  intelligent  answer  to  tliat  question  we  have  onfv 
0 look  at  contemporaneous  operations  on  the  James  lUver.  For  sev- 
Tal  weeks  past  the  rebels  have  been  quite  busy  fortifying  its  banks 
ust  as  they  have  fortified  the  Mississippi.  They* are  casemating  I\)rt 
*owhatan,  and  have  three  batteries  thoroughly  finished.  I'he>  ar(‘ 
aking  up  the  obstructions  at  Fort  Hailing."  They  know  the  value  of 
v'ater  communication  to  us,  and  of  what  priceless  advantage  it  is  to  them 


284 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


to  be  able  to  prevent  our  passage.  This  is  the  lesson  they  have  learned 
at  Vicksburg,  Port  Hudson,  Port  Pemberton,  and  at  Charleston. 

If  they  fortify  the  James  down  to  its  mouth  it  is  closed  for  our  i)ur- 
poses  and  left  free  for  theirs.  It  brings  their  iron-clads,  now  lying  idle 
at  Eichmond,  clear  down  to  Hampton  Eoads,  where  they  may  lie  in 
wait  and  have  their  opportunities  always  in  sight.  To  complete  this 
grand  scheme  of  operations  PTorfolk  is  wanted,  and  then,  with  their 
iroii-clads,  that  city  would  bo  an  open  port  until  we  could  complete 
another  fleet  of  monitors  to  close  it  up  again.  We  tried  to  develop  all 
this  some  days  ago.  Moreover,  there  are  indications  that  the  rebel 
leaders  intend  to  defend  Eichmond  with  a much  smaller  army  than 
that  hitherto  devoted  to  that  purpose,  and  upon  a line  much  nearer  to 
that  city  than  the  Eappahannock.  That  is  the  reason  why  there  is  so 
much  activity  in  strengthening  the  works  immediately  in  front  of  Eich- 
mond. They  know  that  we  can  scarcely  assail  that  city  by  the  land 
route,  for  that  compels  a long  line  of  communications,  which  experience 
tells  them  they  can  break  up  with  a small  and  active  body  of  cavalry ; 
hence  another  reason  for  fortifying  the  James  and  closing  the  water 
approaches  against  our  iron-clads.  All  these  considerations  make  the 
campaign  about  Suffolk  a rather  important  feature  of  the' war  and  not 
a mere  episode.  It  appears  to  be  over  for  the  present,  but  we  trust  that 
the  vigilance,  activity,  and  skill  which  have  thus  far  baffled  the  enemy 
will  continue  to  be  exerted,  and  that  General  Peck  will  have,  supports 
at  hand.  LongstreePs  withdrawal  may  only  be  temporary,  to  wait  the 
tardy  arrival  of  Hill  from  North  Carolina. 

The  Eichmond  Examiner  of  November  27,  1863,  has  the  following  in 
its  leading  editorial  upon  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  and  his  Knox- 
ville and  Suffolk  campaigns,  which  are  pronounced  as  parallel  failures. 
The  liberal  admissions  by  the  rebel  press  at  the  time  and  now  respect- 
ing the  Suffolk  operations  are  highly  creditable  to  the  command  of 
Major-General  Peck,  and  ought  to  satisfy  those  who  sought  to  under- 
rate that  campaign : 

Perhaps  the  result  might  have  been  different  if  Longstreet  and  his  corps  of  the  Vir- 
ginia army  had  been  in  line.  His  operations  in  East  Tennessee  afford  little  compen- 
sation for  the  reverse  at  Chattanooga,  nor  have  the  late  hare  and  scanty  news  IVoni 
that  quarter  sustained  the  high  hope  which  the  public  justly  based  on  the  first  intel- 
ligence briskly  forwarded  by  General  Bragg.  His  telegram  declared  that  Longstr('et’s 
cavalry  had  pursued  the  enemy  into  Knoxville,  that  the  infantry  was  close  up,  and 
it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  the  next  news  would  he  that  of  Knoxville’s  recaj)ture; 
but  the  next  news  from  Longstreet  contained  a mention  of  intrenching,  which  sug- 
gested disagreeable  reminiscences  of  Suflblk.  Since  then  little  or  nothing  has  been 
heard  from  Longstreet  unless  we  are  to  receive  the  unofficial  story  of  the  telegra])li 
this  morning  to  be  trustworthy.  Oh,  that  it  may  be  so!  His  pressure  on  Burn.side 
has  undoubtedly  quickened  Grant’s  attack  on  Bragg,  while  the  absence  of  his  whole 
corps  from  the  Confederate  line  at  the  time  of  Sherman’s  arrival  in  the  Federal  host 
has  given  the  enemy  a great  opportunity.  It  was  during  the  parallel  campaign  of 
Longstreet  against  Suffolk  that  Hooker  made  his  coup  at  Chancellorsville ; but  he 
found  there  Jackson,  while  Grant  had  to  do  with  Bragg  alone. 


Hdqrs.  Army  and  District  of  North  Carolina, 
Nc7v  Berne,  A.  C7.,  Beeember  25,  1863. 

General  : I liave  the  honor  to  make  the  following  supplementary 
report  as  a part  of  my  report  of  operations  during  the  siege  of  Suflblk 
in  April  and  May  last: 

The  name  of  Col.  .1.  P.  McMahon,  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  New 
York,  should  have  been  in  the  paragraph  commencing  with  ‘^Colonel 
Murphy,  commanding  brigade.” 


CUAP.XXX.] 


285 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK/  VA. 

My  right  flank  rested  upon  the  tipper  Kansemoud  for  some  8 miles, 
a narrow,  shallow,  and  tortuous  stream,  offering  great  faeilities  to  an 
enterprising  enemy  for  crossing  and  cutting  the  communications  with 
ilorfolk.  Including  this  the  whole  line  extending  to  the  Dismal  Swamp 
was  from  12  to  15  miles  in  length ; besides  a force  in  observation  was 
requisite  at  South  Mills,  30  miles  distant,  the  key  of  the  southern  aj)- 
proaches  to  the  swamp.  In  view  of  these  and  other  objections  I advised 
the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  to  a new  and  short  line  near  Portsmouth 
after  the  reduction  of  the  rebel  and  Union  fortifications. 

The  advance  of  Pettigrew  toward  Uew  Berne  and  of  Hill  upon  Little 
Washington  were  only  feints  (our  casualties  being  less  than  a dozen  at 
both  places)  made  by  order  of  Longstreet  some  days  before  the  date 
tixed  for  his  own  advance  upon  Suffolk  for  the  purpose  of  inducing  the 
authorities  in  North  Carolina  to  call  on  Virginia  for  re-enforcements. 
As  designed,  10,000  were  asked  for  North  Carolina,  of  which  I was  con- 
tributing 3,000  on  the  10th.  The  information  reached  Longstreet  at 
Franklin,  and  he  crossed  the  BlackwatCr  that  night. 

Major-General  Hooker  kindly  telegraphed  that  he  had  advices  that 
General  Hill  would  join  Longstreet.  The  time  when  the  North  Caro- 
lina troops  arrived  is  material.  Major  Stratton,  of  the  cavalry,  re- 
ported the  fact  on  the  20th,  and  I did  the  same  on  the  25th,  some  of 
them  being  captured.  Major  Stratton  was  correct,  for  Major-General 
Foster  advised  that  the  enemy  retired  from  Little  Washington  on  the 
i3vening  of  the  15th,  and  that  the  deserters  said  the  cause  was  that  they 
were  ordered  to  re-enforce  the  army  in  Virginia. 

May  4,  while  in  full  pursuit  of  the  columns  of  Longstreet  and  Hill 
toward  the  Blackwater,  an  order  was  received  to  dispatch  General  Gor- 
lon  with  a large  force  to  West  Point.  Ten  thousand  additional  were 
ilso  ordered  to  be  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice,  leav- 
ing but  the  ordinary  small  garrison  intact  at  Suffolk  and  of  course  end- 
ing oflensive  operations. 

On  May  4 prisoners  were  taken  representing  forty  odd  regiments  and 
ndependent  commands,  v^rhich  gives  some  idea  of  the  organization  and 
nasses  of  the  enemy.  The  many  miles  of  earthworks  thrown  up  by  the 
rebels  were  construeted  by  the  troops.  Lest  the  contrabands  should 
H)me  into  my  lines  the  bulk  of  them  were  left  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Blackwater. 

It  is  proper  to  remark  that  the  forces  under  my  command  from  Sep- 
tember to  April,  1863,  were  rated  by  the  public  at  twice  and  even  thrice 
he  actual  numbers. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General^  U.  IS.  Army. 


[Tudorsemciit.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  East, 

Neio  Yorlc  City,  January  21,  1864. 

Kespectfu lly  forwarded. 

The  withdrawal  of  the  troops  to  a line  nearer  Norfolk  was  suggested 
jy  me  after  the  investment  of  Suffolk  and  was  ordered  by  the  General- 
11-Chief. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


286 


NORTH  CAROLINA  :AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chat.^^XX 


No.  5. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  etc.] 


KiUed. 

Wounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

Command. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Aggregate. 

GOBGOBAN'S  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  MICHAEL  Corcoran. 

Terry's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  D.  Terry. 

1 

5 

6 

1 

4 

5 

1 

1 

Total  Terry’s  hrigade  

2 

10 

12 



Foster's  Brigade. 

Col.  Kobert  S.  Foster. 

Tiirluuit*,  - 

1 

1 

Cf  ll  TVf * 

] ll'tli  New  York  * 

1 09 til  Now  York  ............. 

1 

3 

4 

8 

1 05th  Pennsy  1 van ia  ................ ............. 

1 

4 

5 

100th  Pennsylvania ...... ........... 

15 

l" 

16 

Total  Poster’s  brigade 

2 

4 

23 

1 

30 

Murphy's  Brigade. 

Col.  Mathew  Murphy. 

lOlli  New  * - --- 

m*V  

1 

4 

.5 

2(^4t]x  N'^W  - - - ' - . 

1 

1 

8 

10 

"VatV  * ......  ... 

'N(>w  Vorkf  

(*) 

IVTnrpby’s  bHn-n.flA 

1 

2 

12 

15 

1 

Total  Corcoran’s  division 

5 

G 

45 

1 

57 

gettts  division. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  NT.  Getty. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  Push  C.  Hawkins. 

li  N^ew  "Vei’V  ... 

3 

1 

9 

13 

1h*^w  

1 

2 

2 

15 

2t 

Pirst,  Brigade 

1 

5 

3 

24 

3: 

— 

* No  loss  reported. 

1 Or  Sixty -ninth  Now  York  National  Guard  Artillery. 


CHAr.  XXX.]  SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces — Continued. 


287 


Command. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Harland. 


8th  Connecticut. 
11th  Connecticut. 
ISth  Connecticut. 
lf)th  Connecticut. 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Arthur  H.  Dutton. 


ilst  Connecticut 

13th  New  Hampshire 

25th  New  Jersey 

4th  Rhode  Island  — 


Total  Third  Brigade 

Light  Artillery. 


let  Pennsylvania,  Battery  A’' 
5th  H.  S.,' Battery  A 


Total  Light  Artillery 

Total  Getty’s  division 

aUENBTS  DIVISION. 
Col.  "WilliaSi  Gurney. 
Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Burr  Porter. 


22d  Connecticut 

40th  Massachusetts. 
4l8t  New  York 


Total  Second  Brigade  

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Robert  S.  Hughston. 


127 th  New  York. 
142(1  New  York. 
143(1  New  York. 
14lh  New  York. 


Total  Third  Brigade 

Total  Gurney’s  division t 

RESERVE  BRIGADE. 
Col.  David  "W.  "Wardrop. 


!«)th  New  York.. 
il8th  New  York*. 
9th  V ermont* . . . 
lOth^isconsin*. 


Total  Reserve  Brigade . 


KiUed. 


o 


20 


Wounded. 


13 


13 


41 


34 


102 


54 


54 


Captured  or 
missing. 


* No'loss  reported, 
t No  loss.  “ Not  under  fire.” 


54 


43 


3 

3 

133 


71 


71 


288 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chaf.  XXX  jj 


lieturn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces — Continued. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

i Enlisted  men. 

i 

Aggregate. 

CAVALRY. 

4 

1 

S 

4 

1 

5 

LIGHT  ARTILLERY. 

Capt.  Ekedeuick  M.  Eollett. 

JfL  TT  Q R.i+liifAr  'O  

4tli  W iscoiisin  Bfittjcry 

Total  Light  Artillery* 

— 

- .. 

HEAVY  ARTILLERY. 

Capt.  John  A.  Blake. 

Jtl  IStltlelilOll,  XilllU  x CllLlSj  IVOiUitl  - 

UNASSIGNEH. 

n ?*‘i 71 /I  l.rif n 1 

3 

38 

18 

205 

2 

* Xo  loss  reported. 


Officers  killed.— C'ol.  Benjamin  Ilinsold,  One  hundred  and  third  New  York  ; Capt.  Lewis  H.  Buzzoll 
Thirteentli  New  Hampshire;  and  Chaplain  Francis  E.  Butler,  Twenty-ntth  New  Jersey. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Firs 
Division,  Seventh  Army  Corps. 

llDQiis.  First  Division,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Suffollc,  Va.,  May  — , 18G3. 

Major  : In  compliuiice  with  orders  from  headquiirters  I respectlull; 
submit  tlie  following  report  as  to  the  operations  on  the  Edenton  jm( 
Somerton  roads  and  the  line  of  defenses  under  my  (xnnmand,  exteudiii; 
from  Fort  Naiisemoud  to  Fort  Ilalleck,  during  the  late  investment  o 
this  place  by  the  enemy : 

On  Saturday,  April  11,  it  being  reported  that  the  enemy  was  advaur  ■ 
ing  against  this  place,  I immediately  repaired  to  my  front  and  had  al 
the  troops  placed  under  arms  and  ready  for  action.  The  enemy  die 
not,  however,  advance  within  sight,  and  this  condition  of  atlairs  re 
mained  until  Monday  afternoon  following,  when  an  advance  was  madt 


Chap*  XXX.] 


289 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,' VA. 

• 

by  tbe  eueuiy  ou  tlie  Somerton  road.  He  oi^ened  upon  us  with  artillery. 
The  guns  of  Forts  Union,  iN^ansemond,  and  McClellan  replied  with  such 
effect  as  to  very  soon  silence  theirs  and  drive  the  enemy  back.  Some 
skirmishiijg  ensued,  in  which  detachments  from  the  Thirteenth  Indiana 
and  One  hundred  and  twelfth  FTew  York  Volunteers  and  One  hundred 
and  sixty-fifth  and  One  hundred  and  sixty-sixth  Pennsylvania  Militia 
took  part  and  deserve  great  credit  for  their  actions  on  that  occasion. 
Our  picket  lines  were  re-established  that  afternoon. 

On  Wednesday,  the  15th,  Col.  J.  P.  McMahon,  of  the  One  hundred 
and  .5;ixty-fourth  Kegiment  Hew  York  Volunteers,  went  out  on  the 
Edenton  road  for  the  purpose  of  reconnoitering  the  enemy’s  position. 
He  brought  with  him  three  companies  of  infantry,  one  from  the  One 
hundred  and  sixty-fourth.  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth,  and  One  hundred 
and  seventieth  Eegiments  respectively,  two  companies  of  cavalry  of 
the  First  Hew  York  Mounted  Eifles,  under  the  command  of  Major  Pat- 
ton, and  one  howitzer.  They  started  out  just  before  daylight,  drove  in 
tlie  enemy’s  pickets,  and  engaged  the  Seventeenth  Virginia  Eegiment, 
capturing  4 i)risoners  and  killing  and  wounding  several.  They  found 
that  the  enemy  were  in  considerable  force  a short  distance  from  his 
outposts. 

On  the  same  day  Colonel  Spear,  of  the  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cav- 
alry, went  out  on  the  Somerton  road  with  a small  force,  consisting  of 
four  companies  of  infantry,  two  from  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth 
and  One  hundred  and  sixty-sixth  Pennsylvania  Militia  respectively,  two 
pieces  of  the  Seventh  Massachusetts  Battery,  one  company  of  his  own 
regiment,  with  guns,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  made  an  at- 
tempt to  charge  their  rifle-pits,  but  this  movement  w^as  not  as  success- 
ful as  was  anticipated  it  would  be.  Small  parties  were  from  time  to 
time  afterward  sent  out  on  the  several  roads,  also  in  the  direction  of 
the  Dismal  Swamp  and  along  the  Jericho  Canal,  but  nothing  of  interest 
occurred.  The  object  of  the  parties  sent  in  the  latter  direction  was  to 
discover  if  the  enemy  were  endeavoring  to  get  through  in  that  locality, 
l)ut  no  evidence  of  any  such  attempt  could  be  discovered. 

Ou  April  24  an  expedition,  which  had  been  for  some  time  in  contem- 
plation, Vv^ent  out  under  my  command  on  the  Edenton  road.  It  con- 
sisted of  about  5,000  infantry,  500  cavalry,  and  10  pieces  of  artillery. 
1 assigned  Col.  E.  S.  Foster  to  the  command  of  the  infantry;  Colond 
|Si)ear  had  charge  of  the  cavalry,  and  Captain  Simpson  of  the  artillery. 
LV  small  party  went  out  at  the  same  time  on  the  Somerton  road  to  en- 
jgage  the  attention  of  the  enemy  there  and  co-operate  with  us  on  the 
! Edenton  road  if  necessary.  We  advanced  about  4 miles  and  met  the 
enemy’s  outposts.  The  pickets  retired,  and  we  found  the  enemy’s  ad- 
vance behind  rifle-pits.  Our  artillery  opened,  and  after  considerable 
firing  on  both  sides  the  enemy  was  driven  from  his  position  and  our 
I skirmishers  occupied  it.  The  firing  still  continued  a short  time,  and 
llinally  the  enemy  fell  back  some  distance  and  ceased  firing.  In  accord- 
^ance  with  my  instructions  I gave  instructions  not  to  follow,  and  we 
^slowly  returned  to  camp.  As  full  reports  of  this  and  the  other  affairs 
above  alluded  to  have  already  been  furnished  I refrain  from  giving  any 
extended  or  detailed  account  of  them. 

On  tbe  2d  instant,  about  11  p.  m.,  we  received  information  from  two  de- 
. fierters  that  the  enemy  was  retreating  from  our  front,  and  1 immediately 
jwent  in  person  to  the  major-general  commanding  and  reported  the  in- 
mrmation  and  that  I had  ordered  a force  out  on  the  Edenton  and 
Somerton  roads.  The  major-general  having  approved  of  my  action  I 
Itarted  out  myself,  ordering  an  additional  force  to  follow.  Colonel  Fos- 
19  R K — YOL  XYIII 


290 


NORTH  CAROLINA  ANU  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ter  went  on  the  Somertou  road  and  General  Dod^e  on  the  Eden  ton.  ^ I 
accompanied  the  latter.  He  crossed  over  to  the  Somerton  and  met  the 
force  under  Colonel  Foster  at  Leesville;  we  advanced  some  distance 
farther,  and  as  it  was  then  apparent  that  the  enemy  were  beyond  reach  I . 
ordered  the  troops  to  return,  except  a few  cavalry  left  for  the  purpose 
of  picking?  up  the  enemy’s  stragglers.  On  the  march  we  captured  a large 
number  of  prisoners,  arms,  &c. 

From  the  commencement  of  the  aflair  the  officers  and  men  evinced 
the  most  commendable  disposition  to  do  their  Avhole  duty,  always  on  the 
alert  and  ever  ready  to  obey  all  commands  of  their  superior  officep. 

The  worlvs,  which  at  the  beginning  were  untinished,  by  unceasing  ex- 
ertions were  soon  completed,  while  other  v/orks  of  defense  were  also  as 
rapidly  and  cheerfully  erected.  The  woods  in  front  were  cleared  to  a 
great  extent  by  slashing  parties,  who  w^ere  at  w^ork  at  times  night  and 
day.  The  inckets  maintained  their  ground,  except  upon  two  or  three  ^ 
occasions  when  they  were  forced  to  retire  by  overimwering  numbers,  I 
and  deserve  great  praise  for  their  courage  and  vigilance;  in  fact  the  j 
desire  exhibited  by  the  troops  to  meet  the  enemy  either  inside  or  outside  J 
the  works  gave  undoubted  assurance  that  the  enemy  wmuld  have  been  ^ 
encountered,  had  he  attempted  to  carry  out  Ins  intention  of  attacking 
this  place,  with  as  courageous  and  determiued  a resistance  as  could  pos-  i 
sibly  be  made  by  gallant  men.  I feel  called  upon  to  state  that  I vms  i 
ably  assisted  throughout  the  whole  time  by  General  Dodge  and  Colonel  1 
Foster,  who,  resi>ectively,  commanded  ])ortions  of  my  front,  and  that  i 
tl»ey  w ere  always  at  the  post  of  duty  and  carried  out  their  instructions  ^ 
upon  all  occasions  promptly  and  cheerfully.  I send  their  reports  here- 
with. '! 

1 remain,  major,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

MICHAEL  CORCORAK, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding.  ■[ 

Maj.  B.  B.  Foster,  I 

Assistant  Adjutant- Geiieral.  j 

Headquarters  Division,  J 

Fairfax  Court-House^  Fu.,  December  14,  18G3. 

Major:  I beg  leave  to  state  that  I understand  I inadvertently 
omitted  to  give  in  my  report  of  the  operations  at  Suffolk,  Va.,  an  esti- 
mate as  to  the  probable  strength  of  the  enemy  during  the  investment, 
and  therefore  request  that  the  following  supplement  may  be  api)ended 
to  said  report : 

From  information  received  from  deserters  the  strength  of  Longstreet’s 
forces  at  his  approach  ranged  between  32,000  to  45,000,  none  under  the 
former,  which  w^as  corroborated  by  the  statement  of  a man  claiming  to 
have  been  in  the  commissary  department,  wdio  reported  that  34,000 
rations  had  been  issued  at  the  Blackw  ater  when  Longstreet  was  pre- 
})aring  to  cross. 

During  the  first  three  days  not  less  than  40  prisoners  and  deserters  : 
were  examined,  whose  statements  convinced  me  that  the  strength  ol  i 
the  enemy  at  that  time  was  not  less  than  32,000.  The  deserters  from;i 
Fickett’s  division  established  the  fact  that  many  off  the  regiments  had  J 
just  been  filled  up  to  900  men;  some  w^ere  very  weak,  but  the  average;! 
seems  to  have  been  about  500. 

Many  of  the  deserters  had  run  great  risks  to  reach  our  lines,  aud,q 
being  either  of  Northern  birth  or  Irishmen,  were  anxious  to  give  accu-,^ 
rate  information.  • 


Jhap.  XXX.  1 


291 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

It  is  certain  that  the  whole  of  Longstreet’s  grand  corps,  comprising 
he  entire  divisions  of  Pickett,  Hood,  and  French,  were  eugaged  in  the 
irst  advance  on  Suffolk,  as  well  as  Jenkins’  division,  of  the  Blackwater 
loops,  who  took  position  on  the  Edenton  road  on  the  fourth  day  of  the 
iege. 

The  disposition  of  the  rebel  force  during  the  tirst  two  weeks  of  the 
iege  was,  in  my  opinion,  as  follows : Jenkins’  (probably  4,000  strong) 
lainly  in  jxisition  on  the  Edenton  road  near  Darden’s  "Mill ; Pickett’s 
ivision  (of  four  brigades)  on  the  Somerton  road,  his  right  meeting 
enkins’  left  in  the  woods  between  the  Edenton  and  Somerton ; Hood’s 
Ivision  on  the  South  Quay,  connecting  with  Pickett  opposite  Fort 
lansemond;  French  on  the  Providence  Church  road  and  river  line. 
During  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  on  the  morning  of  their  retreat 
May  4),  we  ascertained  beyond  the  possibility  of  a doubt  that  on  May 
or  2 two  brigades  of  I^orth  Carolina  troops  (Garnett’s  and  another) 
lined  Pickett,  and  encamped  with  him  on  the  Somerton.  During  that 
ursuit  nearly  300  prisoners  were  captured  from  forty  different  regi- 
lents,  all  of  which  had  been  encamped  on  the  Edenton' and  Somerton 
jads,  and  were  from  Jenkins’  and  Pickett’s  divisions  and  the  two  North 
larolina  brigades  exclusively. 

These  prisoners  rather  increased  than  diminished  the  previous  esti- 
lates  of  the  enemy’s  strength  and  confirmed,  fully  the  statements  of 
eserters  and  people  residing  in  the  vicinity. 

The  vast  and  formidable  lines  of  the  enemy’s  works  could  not  have 
eeu  constructed  in  twenty-three  days  by  less  than  35,000  troops,  con- 
deriug  the  constant  state  of  activity  in  which  they  were  kept  by  the 
lovements  of  our  forces.  Our  own  troops  were  incessantly  engaged  in 
itigue  duty,  and  certainly  performed  less  than  one-fourth  of  the  labor 
one  by  the  enemy. 

1 am  convinced  by  the  foregoing  facts  that  the  enemy  under  command 
: Longstreet  during  the  investment  of  Suffolk  was  not  les«  than  34,000 
en,  exclusive  of  Hill’s  re- enforcements. 

I am,  major,  yours,  very  respectfully,  ' 

MICHAEL  CORCOEAN, 

Brigadier- General. 

Maj.  R.  B.  Foster, 

AssUtant  Adjuta7it- General. 


No.  7. 

eport  of  Maj.  Alexander  G,  Patton,  First  Few  Yoric  Mounted  Rifles,  of 
^ slcirmish  on  the  Edenton  road,  April  15. 

Camp  First  Mounted  Rifles, 

Suffolk,  Va.,  April  18,  1803. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  3 o’clock  on  the  morn- 
g of  the  15th  instant  I left  this  camp  to  make  a reconnaissance  on  the 
uentoii  road,  to  attack  the  enemy,  and,  if  possible,  to  ascertain  his  force, 
y command  consisted  of  Company  E,  Captain  Gregory;  Company  M, 
iptain  Masten,  and  one  howitzer,  in  charge  of  Corporal  McConnoll,  of 

impany  D,  all  of  this  regiment.  At  Fort  Dix  I was  joined  by  Colonel 
Mahon  with  two  companies  of  infantry. 

We  proceeded  cautiously  for  some  2J  miles,  when,  having  approached 
^^o  the  enemy’s  pickets,  I directed  one  shot  to  be  fired  from  the 


292 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XX3 


howitzer ; Captain  Gregory  to  charge  down  the  road  with  his  compau.\ 
Captain  Masten  supporting  him,  the  howitzer  party  having  direction: 
to  advance  at  quick-time  with  the  infantry,  supported  by  a detail  fror 
onr  ])icket  guard  under  Captain  Poor  commanding  Company  D.  Th! 
road  was  found  to  have  been  barricaded  no  less  than  eight  times,  bui 
such  was  the  rapidity  of  our  movement  that  the  outer  sentry  at  th 
enemy’s  camp  was  captured. 

tMiarging  upon  the  right  of  the  enemy  they  were  found  to  be  draw 
up  in  line  of  battle  in  the  woods,  and  the  advance  fell  back  to  await  th 
arrival  of  the  remainder  of 'the  party,  which  on  coming  up  was  forme 
in  an  open  field  on  the  right  of  the  road  and  in  front  of  the  enem.) 
Company  D was  then  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  the  edge  of  the  wood 
(o  cover  our  right  and  a charge  made  upon  the  right  of  the  eneiuA 
whicdi  was  met  by  a galling  fire  and  we  were  forced  to  fall  back.  A 
about  the  same  moment  the  infantry  ruslied  forward,  cheering,  and  a 
tacked  their  left,  and  by  their  rapid  and  effective  fire,  in  conjunctio 
with  that  of  the  howitzer  opening  on  their  right,  forced  them  to  ta 

back  through  their  camp  on  the  cross-roads  leading  just miles  t 

tlie  Somerton  road.  At  this  point  we  charged  again,  driving  the  enein 
some  distance,  but  losing  2 men  of  Companj^  I),  whom  (the  enemy  { 
length  having  received  re-enforcements  of  infantry  and  artillery)  v 
wei  e forced  to  leave  in  their  hands. 

Having  accomplished  the  object  of  the  movement  and  destroyed  tli 
camp  of  the  enemy  we  fell  back  leisurely,  without  annoyance,  the  ei 
emy  appearing  to  be  too  much  cripified  to  attempt  any  offensive  open 
tions. 

Our  loss  in  the  affair  was  2 men  wounded  and  prisoners  from  Cou 
pany  D,  and  1 wounded ; and  1 man  wounded  in  the  howitzer  part; 
and  18  horses  killed  and  wounded. 

I have  to  acknowledge  the  efficient  aid  rendered  me  by  Colonel  M 
iMahon  and  the  infantry  under  his  command,  and  to  present  to  yoi 
notice  Corporal  McConnoll,  who  handled  the  howitzer  in  the  most  efl 
cient  manner. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obediei 
servant, 

A.  G.  PATTON, 

Major,  First  New  ^orA;  Mounted  Rijlcs. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  Corcoran. 


No.  8. 

Itinerary  of  the  First  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  I).  Terry,  U.  S.  Arm 
eommanding,  April  11-30.* 

April  11,  Saturday. — The  enemy  appeared  before  and  invested  8ii 
folk.  The  brigade  immediately  took  ijosition  in  the  trenches  and  ha’ 
remained  there  ev'er  since. 

April  17,  Friday. — A reconnaissance  was  sent  our,  consisting  of  s 
companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York  Yolunteers,  tv 
c()m])anies  of  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  one  coinpai 
of  the  New  York  State  Sharpshooters,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertainii 
the  force  of  the  enemy  in  front.  They  were  found  in  force  in  rifle-pi 
with  large  reserv^es.  The  loss  sustained  was  as  follows:  Killed,  2 p 


* From  Return  of  Brigade  for  April,  1863. 


Jiur.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


293 


vates  of  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers  and  1 private  of  the 
One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York  Volunteers  j wounded,  4 privates 
of  the  Ninety -ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  5 privates  of  the  One  hun- 
ilred  and  thirtieth  New  York  Volunteers,  and  1 private  of  the  eighth 
company  New  York  State  Sharpshooters. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Robert  S.  Foster.,  Thirteenth  Indiana  Infantry,  command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

IlEADQUARTEES  FOSTER’S  BRIGADE, 

Suffollc,  Ya.,  May  9,  I860. 

Captain  : In  pursuance  of  circular  from  your  headquarters  I have 
the  honor  of  submitting  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  my 
(‘ommand  during  the  twenty-three  days  of  the  investment  of  Suffolk : 

Upon  receiving  information  on  Saturday,  April  11,  of  the  approach 
of  the  enemy  1 immediately  visited  my  command  and  found  them  occu- 
pying their  respective  iiositions  previously  assigned.  Every  arrange- 
im‘nt  was  made  to  secure  as  strong  a defense  as  possible.  No  evidence 
of  the  enemy’s  appearance  on  my  front  until  Sunday. 

On  Monday,  the  13th,  the  pickets  on  the  Somerton  road  were  driven 
in  by  a force  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  the  pickets  maintaining  their 
f»round  as  long  as  possible.  The  enemy  opened  on  us  with  artillery, 
mid  immediately  the  guns  from  Forts  Union,  Nansemond,  and  McClel- 
lan responded  and  silenced  their  guns.  At  3.30  p.  m.  I sent  out  a party 
)f  skirmishers,  accompanying  them  myself,  consisting  of  details  from 
tlie  Thirteenth  Indiana,  One  hundred  and  twelfth  New  York  Volun- 
teers, and  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  and  One  hundred  and  sixty-sixth 
Pennsylvania  Militia.  They  advanced  rapidly  and  drove  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers  back  to  their  reserve  at  Brothers’  house,  on  the  Somerton 
'’oad.  I then  established  my  old  picket  line,  extending  from  the  right 
if  Fort  Union  to  Fort  Nansemond,  and  have  maintained  said  line 
liroughout  the  siege. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  to  the  detachments  from  the  above- 
nentioned  regiments  in  their  skirmishing  on  that  day.  At  the  earnest 
solicitations  of  Colonel  Spear,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  I sent 
)ut  two  pieces  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Battery,  under  Captain  Vallee, 
siipjiorted  by  one  company  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fifth  Pennsyl- 
vania Militia.  After  having  fired  a few  rounds  I recalled  them.  In  the 
norning  I ordered  the  houses  on  the  Somerton  road  near  the  reserve 
picket  station  burned,  which  was  accomplished.  The  enemy  used  the 
‘.vhite  house  of  Brothers  as  a shelter,  and  I was  anxious  to  destroy  it  if 
)ossible.  To  this  end  I dispatched  on  several  occasions  a party  of 
fkirmishcrs  to  effect  this  object,  but  the  overpowering  force  of  the 
*nemy  prevented. 

I On  VYednesday  Colonel  Spear  (with  orders  from  General  Corcoran) 
ook  command  of  a small  party,  consisting  of  two  companies  of  the  One 
iundred  and  sixty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Militia,  two  companies  of  the  One 
lUTidred  and  sixty-sixth  Pennsylvania  Militia,  two  pieces  of  the  Sev- 
oth  Massachusetts  Battery,  one  company  of  his  own  regiment,  with 
Sons,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  made  an  attempt  to  charge 
liieir  ride-pits  at  Brothers’  house,  but  without  success. 

On  Thursday,  April  16,  a party  of  skirmishers,  under  Lieutenants 


294 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Wallick  and  Conron,  of  tlie  Thirteenth  Indiana,  were  sent  out.  They 
exchanged  a few  shots  with  the  enemy,  but  found  them  too  strong  to 
make  any  advance. 

On  the  succeeding  day  I sent  Lieutenants  Zent  and  Oonron  with  a 
party  of  the  Thirteenth  Indiana  t(5  flank  the  works  at  the  white  house 
if  possible.  After  a sharp  engagement  they  were  obliged  to  withdraw. 
In  this  encounter  Lieutenant  Conron  received  a wound  from  which  he 
died  a few  days  after.  He  was  a brave  and  gallant  officer,  and  sacri- 
ficed his  life  in  his  zeal  to  accomplish  my  desire.  In  all  these  skir- 
mishes the  men  and  officers  from  the  difierent  regiments  behaved  in  a 
gallant  and  praiseworthy  manner,  and  one  name  I wish  particularly  to 
mention : Private  Bircham,  Company  F,  Thirteenth  Indiana  Volunteers. 

On  Saturday,  the  18th,  an  unusual  quietude  prevailed  on  the  picket 
lines.  The  pickets  of  the  One  hundred  and  twelfth  ISTew  York  ex- 
changed newspapers  with  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  received  the  assur- 
ance they  would  not  be  fired  on  as  pickets.  The  Thirteenth  Indiana 
was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Getty  at  the  small-pox  hospital. 

On  Sunday  a portion  of  my  command  was  ordered  to  be  in  readiness 
to  form  a part  of  an  expedition  on  the  Edenton  road,  and  I also  organ- 
ized a party  to  push  out  on  the  Somerton  road  to  co-operate  with  the 
former  party.  Said  expedition  was  postponed  and  did  not  go  out  until 
the  succeeding  Friday. 

The  forces  from  my  front  consisted  of  the  Eleventh,  Fitteenth,  and 
Sixteenth  Connecticut  and  the  Thirteenth  Indiana,  under  command  of 
Colonel  Beach,  Sixteenth  Connecticut;  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-i 
ninth  i^ew  York  and  five  companies  of  the  One  hundred  and  twelfth 
New  York  forming  a part  of  Colonel  Drake’s  command.  I was  intrusted 
with  the  command  of  infantry.  A report  has  already  been  furnished  of 
the  result  of  the  expedition.*  I have  kept  large  details  from  the  dif- 
ferent regiments  at  work  during  the  whole  time  building  new  works 
and  strengthening  the  old,  chopping  the  trees  on  the  front,  and  in 
(‘very  way  doing  all  I conld  to  make  our  means  of  resistance  as  snc 
<'esefid  a.s  possible.  Upon  hearing  of  the  enemy’s  departure,  early  or 
Monday  morning,  and  under  General  Corcoran’s  directions,  I startei 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  the  result  of  which  has  already  been  fnrnishec 

you  officially.  . . ^ r 4- 

During  the  time,  1 have  had  the  following  regiments  on  my  front 
The  One  hundred  and  sixty-ninth  New  York  was  added  to  my  brigadi 
on  April  17.  In  addition  to  my  brigade  the  Eleventh,  Fifteenth,  aii( 
Sixti'cnth  (Connecticut  and  One  hundred  and  forty-third,  One  hundrei 
ami  twenty-seventh,  and  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  New  \ork  hav* 
occn]>ied  a portion  of  my  front  at  different  periods.  The  Seventh  Mas 
sachusetts,  First  Delaware,  Sixteenth  New  York,  and  Fourth  and  Sec 
oml  Wisc^oiisin  Batteries  also  constituted  at  different  times  a part  o 
my  caimmand.  All  the  above  commands  exerted  themselves  to  the  di.^ 
cliiiroe  of  their  duties  in  an  acceptable  and  jiraiseworthy  manner,  at  a 
times  meeting  every  detail  with  promptness  and  in  every  way  discliar? 
im'’  their  duties  in  a soldierlike  manner.  During  the  time,  in  the  c i 
lerent  expeditions  and  skirmishes,  the  enemy  met  with  a heavy  loss,  r 
subsequent  events  prove. 

Colonel,  Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  J.  J.  Blodgett, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  

Se^iut  BrhraAe,  Thi^d  Division,  Seventh  Army  C(.rps,  lor  the  inoi.t 
of  April,  1863,  shows  a loss  in  this  alVair  of  3 killed  and  11  wounded. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


295 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


No.  10. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  MeConihe,  One  hundred  and  sixty-ninth  New 

York  Infantry. 


Headquaktees  169th  New  York  Volunteers, 
Cam])  Griswold,  Suffolk,  Ta.,  May  8,  1863. 

Adjutant  : In  pursuance  of  your  circular,  dated  May  7,  requiring- 
commanders  of  regiments  to  prepare  and  send  in  an  official  report  of 
the  i)art  taken  by  their  respective  commands  in  the  scenes  of  the  past 
twenty-three  days,  I beg  leave  to  report  that  the  One  hundred  and 
sixty-ninth  Eegiment  New  York  State  Volunteers  left  Martindale  Bar- 
racks, Washington,  D.  0.,  on  the  morning  of  April  15,  with  orders  to 
go  to  Norfolk,  reporting  en  route  at  Fort  Monroe,  We  were  transported 
by  the  steamer  John  •Warner  to  Norfolk,  Va.,  arriving  there  on  the  16th 
instant.  The  same  day  we  were  transported  by  rail  to  Suffolk,  Va., 
arriving  there  late  in  the  night,  and  on  the  morning  of  April  17  we 
were,  by  order  of  Gerneral  Peck,  attached  to  Acting  Brigadier-General 
Foster’s  brigade,  and  occupied  a camp  near  the  breastworks  on  the 
Somerton  road.  From  this  date  up  to  April  24  we  continued  to  furnish 
fatigue  parties  to  work  on  the  fortifications. 

On  Airnl  24  the  regiment  was  placed  in  the  Second  Provisional  Bri- 
gade, Col.  J.  G.  Drake  commanding,  and  moved  out  on  the  Edenton 
road  with  the  other  forces,  and  took  part  in  the  reconnaissance  in  force 
made  by  General  Corcoran  on  that  occasion.  The  regiment  was  placed 
far  in  advance  of  all  others  in  support  of  Captain  Follett’s  battery  (D, 
Fourth  D.  S.  Artillery),  and  unflinchingly  faced  a continuous  and  un- 
abating  shower  of  shell,  grape,  and  canister  from  the  well-directed  fire 
of  the  enemy  until  orders  were  received  to  retire,  the  object  of  the  re- 
r.onnaissance  having  been  accomiffished.  The  colonel  (Clarence  Buell) 
was  severely  wounded  by  a piece  of  shell,  and  Lieutenant  Hughes,  of 
Company  A,  was  badly  injured  in  the  leg  by  a shell  j E.  H.  Brock,  of 
Company  H,  was  instantly  killed,  the  back  and  top  of  his  head  being 
carried  away  by  a shell ; Major  Alden’s  horse  was  wounded  in  the  neck 
by  a shell  and  the  major  bruised  j Corporal  Noyes,  Privates  Falen, 
Fogarty,  and  Kennely  were  wounded. 

On  April  28  Captain  Vaughn,  of  Company  F,  was  detailed  for  the 
purpose  of  making  a reconnaissance  through  the  Jericho  Oanah^  which 
expedition  was  eminently  successful,  being  made  through  an  overflowed 
swamp,  almost  impenetrable  on  account  of  the  depth  of  the  water  and 
the  nature  of  the  vines,  brush,  and  timber,  and  at  a time  when  the  rain 
fell  unceasingly  for  the  two  days  (the  28th  and  20th)  that  the  said  com- 
pany was  absent. 

j On  ]M ay  3 the  regiment  stood  under  arms  on  Main  street  during  the 
(lay,  being  ordered  to  act  as  a reserve,  in  conjunction  with  the  Thir- 
teenth Indiana  Eegiment,  under  Colonel  Dobbs,  to  a force  which  crosscnl 
the  Nansemond  at  the  foot  of  said  street,  and  attacked  the  enemy  on 
the  Providence  Church  road.  During  the  night  the  regiment  occu]h(‘d 
Fort  Peck  and  the  rifle-pits  on  the  left  of  said  fort  at  the  foot  of  Main 
street. 


Monday,  the  4th,  the  regiment  returned  to  camp,  and  has  been  en- 
gaged in  doing  picket  duty  and  furnishing  fatigue  parties. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

JOHN  McGONIHE, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  S.  E.  Marvin,  A.  A.  A.  G.,}Gen.  Foster'’ s Brigade,  Sufolk,  Va. 


296 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  i 


No.  11. 

Itinerary  of  the  Third  Brigade,  Col.  Mathew  Murphy,  One  hundred  and  ' 
eighty-second  Hew  Torh  Infantry,  commanding,  April  ^-May  3.* 

lu  accordance  with  General  Orders,  No.  22,  from  Headquarters  United 
States  Forces,  Suffolk,  Ya.,  issued  April  9, 1863,  Brigadier-General  Cor- 
coran assumed  command  of  the  First  Division,  Seventh  Army  Corps; 
whereupon  the  senior  colonel,  Mathew  Murphy,  assumed,  by  right  of 
rank,  command  of  the  Irish  Legion,  and  immediately  issued  Ins  General 
Orders,  No.  5,  to  that  effect,  appointing  Lieut.  J.  Townsend  Connolly,  of 
the  Sixty-ninth  Kegiment,  his  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  and 
established  his  headquarters  at  Fort  Dix,  on  the  southeast  front  of  our 
lines,  facing  the  Edenton  road. 

April  11. — The  enemy  invested  Suffolk  and  soon  after  (the  next  day 
or  so)  worked  around  gradually  from  the  South  (Jaay,  when  our  pickets 
were  first  driven  in  to  the  Jamestown  and  Edenton  roads.  Immediately 
on  the  first  alarm  the  long  roll  was  beaten,  and  the  troops  deployed  in 
line  along  the  breastworks,  running  right  and  left  from  Fort  Dix.  Their 
relative  conditions  continued  as  follows  until  the  siege  Avas  raised:  The 
Sixty-ninth  Eegiment  defending  works  in  front  of  its  camp,  on  the  right 
of  the  line;  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  Eegiment  next  in  line  and 
first  on  the  left  of  the  said  fort;  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  at  first 
marched  up  from  their  camp  in  reserve  and  formed  along  the  works, 
bivouacking  at  night  between  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  and 
One  hundred  and  Seventieth  Eegiments,  and  on  the  left  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  sixty-fourth. 

April  15. — No  action  was  taken  offensively  on  the  part  of  this  Legion 
against  the  enemy  until  the  15th  instant,  when  a small  force  was  sent 
out  on  the  Edenton  road  to  reconnoiter.  This  force  consisted  of  one 
company  from  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  Eegiment  (Company  1), 
one  company  from  the  One  hundred  and  seventieth,  and  one  company 
Irom  the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  (Company  C),  together  with  a 
squadron  of  cavalry  from  the  First  New  York  Mounted  Eifles,  and  one 
6-pounder,  the  whole  force  under  the  command  of  Colonel  McMahon,  of 
the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  Eegiment,  Major  Patton  having  charge 
of  the  cavalry  and  gun.  It  started  from  Fort  Dix  at  2.30  a.  m.,  and, 
after  marching  2J  miles  out  on  the  Edenton  road,  drove  in  the  enemy’s 

mounted  pickets,  followed  them  as  rapidly  as  possible  to Mill, 

where  they  found  a rebel  regiment  drawn  up  in  line  ot  battle  to  receive 
them.  Tlie  enemy  were  posted  in  the  rear  of  a large  field,  on  the  right 
of  the  road  covering  a cross-road,  which  led  across  the  mill-djmi  to  the 
Somerton  road.  Here  a conflict  ensued  of  half  an  hour’s  duration,  when 
the  enemy  retreated,  taking  up  his  second  position  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  mill-pond.  A few  well-directed  shots  from  the  G-pounder  gnn 
drove  him  from  this  place,  when  re-enforcements  arrived  to  the  enemy. 
Colonel  McMahon,  after  advising  with  Major  Patton,  deemed  it  best  to 
retire,  the  object  of  the  reconnaissance  being  accomplished,  the  entiiv 
camp  equipage  of  the  enemy  captured,  besides  some  provisions  and 

prisoners.  Our  loss  was  9 men  wounded  and  3 killed — 12  in  all.  ^ 
list  of  casualties  that  have  occurred  in  the  entire  brigade  has  been  for 
warded  through  the  proper  channels,  with  names,  nature,  &:c. ; hence  il 
will  be  better  not  to  recapitulate  here,  as  our  space  is  limited.  Fron 
this  date  (15th)  until  the  24th  the  brigade  Avas  engaged  night  and  da} 

^ From  Return  of  tlie  Corcoran  Irish  Legion,  Seventh  Army  Corps,  for  month  o, 
April,  lB6ii. 


Chap.  XXX.]  ' SIEGE  OP  SUFFOLK,  VA.  297 

in  building  intrencbments,  digging  and  slashing,  cutting  trees  to  give 
full  range  to  the  guns,  &c. 

April  23. — The  Tenth  New  Jersey  was  assigned  to  this  Legion,  when 
the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  returned  to  camp  in  reserve  and  the 
Tenth  New  Jersey  took  its  place  between  the  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
fourth  and  One  hundred  and  seventieth  Eegiments. 

April  24. — The  brigade  accompanied  General  Corcoran  on  the  grand 
reconnaissance  in  force  of  that  date.  Marching  from  Fort  Dix  down 
tlie  Edenton  road,  double  column  closed  in  mass,  it  brought  up  the  rear 
of  tlie  column  and  marched  with  it  until  halted  in  a large  field  on  the 
right,  and  formed  line  of  battle  to  the  right,  while  the  artillery,  cavalry, 
and  skirmishers  in  front  carried  on  the  affair.  Only  one  regiment  was 
inarched  from  this  line  (the  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth.  Colonel  Mc- 
Mahon) previous  to  halting  and  forming  linej  it  was  sent  to  the  front, 
under  orders  of  General  Corcoran,  to  support  a line  of  skirmishers.  In 
this  regiment  occurred  our  only  loss.  While  occupying  the  enemy’s 
rifie-pits  15  men  were  wounded  (1  mortally)  and  all  borne  off  the  field, 
when  the  order  was  given  to  fall  back.  The  remaining  regiments  did 
not  engage  the  enemy,  and  consequently  lost  none.  The  column  started 
from  Fort  Dix  at  about  2 p.  m.  and  returned  about  6 p.  m.  From  this 
(late  until  May  3 none  of  the  regiments  were  engaged  on  other  duty  than 
fatigue,  picket,  «&;c. 

May  3. — The  One  hundred  and  seventieth  Eegiment  accompanied 
General  Getty  on  his  reconnaissance  in  force  across  the  Nansemond 
Eiver,  on  the  Smithfield  road.  An  account  of  the  proceedings  in  May 
will  be  deferred  to  the  report  of  that  month. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Col.  William  McEvily,  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  New  Yorh 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  155th  Eegt.  N.  Y.  State  Vols., 
Corcoran  Legion,  1st  Div.,  7th  Army  Corps, 

SuffoTJc^  Ya.^  May  11,  1863. 

In  compliance  with  orders  received  I here  forward,  for  the  informa- 
tion of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  southeast  front  during  the 
time  of  the  investment  of  Suftblk  by  the  enemy,  a detailed  account  of 
the  operations  of  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-fifth  Eegiment  New  York 
Volunteers,  under  my  command : 

An  alarm  from  the  apprehended  approach  of  the  rebels  in  force  com- 
menced in  the  afternoon  of  April  11,  and  five  companies  of  the  regi- 
nient  were  sent  to  man  the  breastworks  and  four  ordered  to  garrison 
Fort  Dix. 

From  April  11  to  10  the  regiment  remained  doiug  duty  on  the  line  of 
breastworks,  on  which  latter  date  all  but  three  companies  returned  to 
eamp,  where  an  order  was  received  to  bo  in  readiness  for  an  advance 
against  the  enemy,  but  this  order  was  not  carried  into  effect  as  antici- 
pated. 

On  the  morning  of  April  14  Company  I,  with  detachments  from  other 
regiments  under  the  command  of  Col.  J.  P.  McMahon,  One  hundred 
aiid  sixty-fourth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  had  a skirmish  with 
the  enemy,  and  behaved  with  great  gallantry,  coolness,  and  determimi- 
tion,  driving  the  rebel  forces,  though  superior  in  number,  back  on  their 
line  of  intrenehments.  (hii)taiu  McAnally  and  Privates  Michael  Den- 


298 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


iiison,  John  Glennon,  John  Gallivan,  and  John  Leary  were  wounded  in 
this  fight. 

On  the  21st  the  regiment  was  ordered  out  for  a reconnaissance,  and 
])roceeded  as  far  as  the  breastworks,  where  it  remained  from  10  a.  m. 
to  1.30  p.  m.,  when  the  order  was  countermanded,  and  the  regiment, 
after  relieving  the  companies  then  in  Fort  Dix,  with  others  returned 
to  camp. 

Nothing  of  importance  transpired  until  April  24,  when  the  regiment 
l)repared  to  move  to  Fort  Halleck,  according  to  an  order  received  the 
(lay  previous,  but  did  not  go  on  account  of  a second  order  countermand- 
ing it  and  requiring  the  regiment  to  at  once  get  ready  to  go  on  a re- 
connaissance, which  it  did,  starting  at  2 p.  m.  and  returning  at  6 p.m., 
liaving  marched  out  about  3 miles  on  the  Edenton  road.  No  casualties 
occurred,  the  regiment  not  being  called  into  action.  The  regiment  re- 
' inained  in  camp  till  the  26th,  on  which  day  Colonel  McEvily  received 
an  order  from  Brigadier- General  Dodge  charging  him  with  the  defense 
of  Fort  Dix  and  the  battery  adjoining. 

Until  May  2 nothing  momentous  occurred.  At  10  o’clock  in  the  even- 
ing of  that  day  the  long  roll  was  beat,  and  the  regiment  marched  up  to 
l^\)rt  Dix,  wlmn,  under  command  of  General  Corcoran,  it  went  out  on 
the  Edenton  road  and  re-established  our  pickets  that  had  been  driven 
in,  went  close  to  the  enemy’s  lines  and  then  returned,  arriving  in  camp 
at  2 a.  m. 

At  3.45  o’clock  on  May  4 the  regiment,  with  other  troops,  started 
out  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  who  were  retreating,  marching  past  their 
fortifications  on  the  Edenton  road  and  turning  off  on  the  Somerton 
road,  and  was  ordered  to  halt  and  hold  the  cross-roads  known  as  Hol- 
land’s Corners  ; the  remainder  of  the  force,  the  One  hundred  and  sixty- 
fourth  New  York  Volunteers,  Sixty-ninth  New  York  National  Guard, 
and  Company  A,  Thirteenth  Indiana,  together  with  a number  of  other 
regiments,  went  ahead  in  pursuit.  Quite  a number  of  prisoners  here 
gave  themselves  up  into  our  hands,  and  many  were  captured  and  sent 
back  by  the  forces  ahead.  Toward  evening  all  the  troops  returned  to 
the  Corners,  and  reported  the  enemy  across  the  Blackwater  Eiver,  since 
which  the  usual  routine  of  regimental  and  garrison  duties  have  been 
resumed. 

During  the  period  of  the  investment  of  Suffolk  by  the  enemy,  inilor- 
tunately  no  opportunity  occurred  for  the  regiment  to  distinguish  itself, 
although  both  officers  and  men  showed  by  their  cheerful  discharge  ot 
every  duty  their  willingness  and  anxiety  to  render  every  possible  aid 
toward  the  discjomfiture  of  the  enemy, 

1 am,  lieutenant,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  McEVILY, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment. 

Lieut.  J.  T.  Connelly,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  13. 

Tiinerary  of  the  Reserve  Brigade.,  Col.  David  W.  Wardrop,  A inety-nmih 
New  YorJc  Infantry,  commanding,  April  24i-3lay  1.* 

This  brigade  was  formed  and  Colonel  Wardrop  assigned  to  the  com 
maud  by  Special  Orders,  No.  106,  dated  April  24,  1863,  from  Head 

*From  Returns  of  the  Reserve  Brigade,  Seventh  Army  Corps,  for  the  months  of  Apri 
and  May,  1863. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


299 


quarters,  Suffolk,  Ya.,  Major-General  Peck  commanding.  It  then  con- 
sisted of  the  Kinth  Vermont  Volunteers,  I^ineteenth  Wisconsin  Volun- 
teers, Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  One  hundred  and  eighteenth 
New  York  Volunteers,  and  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-second  New  York 
Volunteers.  By  Special  Orders,  No.  109,  dated  April  2(3,  1863,  from 
Headquarters,  Sufiblk,  Va.,  the  One  hundred  and  fifty-second  New  York 
V'olunteers  was  detached  from  the  brigade  and  attached  to  General 
Terry’s  lu'igade.  During  the  siege  of  Suffolk  all  the  regiments  have 
been  actively  employed  in  manning  the  rifle-pits  and  strengthening  the 
fortifications  and  other  duties  of  the  defense.  The  following  officers 
liave  been  wounded  by  sharpshooters  during  the  month,  but  before  the 
formation  of  the  brigade : 

April  23. — Capt.  John  E.  White,  commanding  Company  G,  Ninety- 
ninth  New  ATork  Volunteers;  thigh  and  arm,  slightly. 

April  24. — James  Wilson,  M.  D.,  surgeon  Ninety-ninth  New  ATork 
Volunteers;  chest,  slightly. 

May  ]. — At  the  beginning  of  the  month  the  various  regiments  com- 
])osing  the  brigade  were  posted  in  different  parts  of  the  defenses,  under 
the  immediate  orders  of  the  commanders  of  the  several  fronts  on  which 
they  were  stationed. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  1st  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers, 
then  under  orders  of  Brigadier-General  Terry,  was  sent  out  to  recon - 
noiter  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits.  The  enemy  was  found  in  strong  force  and 
the  regiment  was  obliged  to  retire.  Loss,  13  killed  (or  died  of  wounds) 
and  31  wounded.  Two  officers,  Capt.  James  H.  Hart  and  Capt.  Charles 
E.  Cartwright,  were  wounded;  both  slightly. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  G.  Dodge,  JJ.  8.  Army,  commanding  South- 
east Front. 

Headquarters  Southeast  Front,  Fort  Dix, 

Svffolh,  Va.,  May  7,  1863. 

Captain  : In  accordance  with  circular  just  received  I have  the  honor 
to  submit  the  following  report  of  operations  upon  this  (southeast)  front, 
extending  from  Forts  Union  to  Halleck,  inclusive,  since  Saturday,  April 
11,  when  I first  assumed  command: 

As  at  that  time  the  enemy  were  already  in  our  immediate  front  and 
the  general  disposition  of  our  force  complete,  it  only  remained  for  me 
to  carry  out  the  orders  received  from  Brigadier-General  Corcoran,  com- 
manding front  defenses,  to  watch  closely,  and,  if  advisable,  counteract 
any  movement  of  the  enemy;  to  make  every  x>reparation  in  my  iiower 
for  the  defense  of  my  line;  to  keep  the  troops  constantly  on  the  alert 
and  ready  for  immediate  service;  to  finish  as  rapidly  as  possible  the 
various  works  then  in  process  of  erection,  or  which  thereafter  might  be 
decided  uijon,  including  a large  amount  of  slashing,  &c.  These  orders 
were  diligently  complied  with. 

It  seeming  advisable  to  ascertain  the  force  and  intentions  of  the  enemy 
upon  this  immediate  front,  a detachment,  under  command  of  Colonel 
McMahon,  One  hundred  and  sixty-fourth  Eegiment  New  York  Volun- 
teers, and  consisting  of  three  companies  of  infantry,  a squadron  of  cav- 
alry (the  First  New  York  Mounted  Rifles),  and  a mountain  howitzer. 


300 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E,  VIRGINIA. 


[ClTAP.  XXX. 


was  advanced  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  — ultimo,  and  vigor- 
ously engaged  the  rebel  outposts,  driving  them  quite  back  upon  their 
reserves,  who  retired  nearly  a mile  to  the  old  mill,  about  5 miles  from 
this  place.  At  this  time  about  3,000  men  were  reported  on  the  Edenton 
road  and  vicinity. 

The  rebels  at  once  commenced  throwing  up  a redan  and  strong  breast- 
works conipletely  commanding  the  road  and  approaches  to  their  posi- 
tion. Ilitie  pits  for  the  protection  of  their  outposts  were  also  con- 
structed. It  was  not  considered  advisable  to  attempt  to  prevent  this 
as  our  forces  were  at  that  time  too  much  engaged  upon  important  duty 
under  General  Getty.  Slight  skirmishing  between  the  outposts  con- 
tinued daily,  with,  however,  but  2 casualties  upon  our  part.  Scouts 
were  continually  out,  and  every  exertion  was  made  to  keep  us  fully 
informed  of  whatever  the  enemy  might  be  attempting.  Occasional  de- 
serters from  their  ranks  aided  us  greatly  in  this  respect. 

On  the  — a force  of  some  200  infantry  and  an  equal  number  of  cav- 
alry, uiider  the  command  of  Col.  S.  P.  Spear,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania 
Cavalry,  endeavored  to  again  feel  the  enemy  on  our  front,  but  was 
unable  to  drive  them  from  their  rifle-pits,  which  were  uncommonly  de- 
fensible. 

On  the  — most  of  the  troops  along  this  front  were  detailed  by  the 
brigadier- general  commanding  for  a reconnaissance  in  force  under  his 
own  command.  During  his  absence  it  became  my  duty  to  dispose,  as 
advantageously  as  possible  along  General  Corcoran’s  front,  such  fresh 
troops  as  had  been  ordered  up  to  defend  the  line  in  place  of  those  re- 
lieved, and  to  prepare  for  any  emergency  that  might  occur  upon  either 
the  Edenton  or  Somerton  roads,  upon  which  our  forces  were  engaged. 
General  Corcoran  reported  the  enemy  re-enforced  to  about  6,000  or  8,000 
imm  and  eight  pieces  of  artillery  on  the  Edenton  road. 

From  the  — ultimo  to  the  2d  instant  nothing  of  moment  occurred 
along  this  front,  and  our  men  were  kept  most  busy  at  the  various  fatigue 
work  necessary. 

About  11  o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  3d  instant  the  oflicer  of  the 
day  reported  with  two  deserters,  who  informed  us  that  the  enemy  were 
ra])idly  withdrawing  their  forces  and  en  route  for  the  Blackwater.  The 
troops  were  at  once  ordered  under  arms  and  the  report  forwarded  to 
headquarters  south  front.  Investigation  and  additional  deserters  soon 
confirmed  tlie  first  report,  and  with  a column  of  about  150  cavalry,  four 
])ieces  of  light  artillery,  and  three  regiments  of  infantry  I started,  by 
command  of  Brigadier-General  Corcoran,  in  pursuit.  Advancing  rap- 
idly but  cautiously  we  soon  arrived  at  the  enemy’s  earthworks,  which 
were  found  quite  deserted.  Pushing  on,  a small  cavalry  detachment 
was  sent  to  Cypress  Chapel,  on  the  Edenton  road,  where  several  rebel 
oflicers  and  men  were  secured,  and  with  the  main  body  we  moved  by 
the  first  available  road  over  to  the  main  Somerton  road,  and  leaving 
a force  at  the  cross-roads  pushed  on  to  Leesville,  where  we  united  with 
Colonel  Foster’s  column,  wdiich,  starting  simultaneously  with  ourselves 
and  having  some  5 miles  less  distance  to  travel,  had  reached  that  point 
in  advance  of  us  and  succeeded  in  picking  up  large  numbers  of  strag- 
glers and  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  rear  guard  as  prisoners. 

Brigadier-General  Corcoran  then  assuming  command  of  the  united 
forces,  we  advanced  some  distance  toward  Holland’s  Corners,  where,  upon 
consultation,  it  was  decided  that  no  advantage  could  be  gained  by  push- 
ing the  infantry  farther,  as  our* advanced  scouts  and  others  reported 
the  main  force  of  the  enemy  already  over  the  river  and  occupying  their 
strong  earthworks  there.  Cavalry,  however,  was  thrown  forward  to 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


301 


Hollaud’s  Coruers,  Carrsville,  Deserted  House,  &c.j  aud  succeeded  in 
bringing  in  some  40  or  50  prisoners.  The  entire  column  was  then  re- 
turned to  Suffolk  and  the  troops  resumed  the  usual  regimental  and 
general  duties. 

During  the  time  that  I have  been  in  command  of  this  part  of  General 
Corcoran’s  front  occasional  but  immaterial  ehanges  have  occurred  in  the 
troops  and  their  dispositions. 

1 liaA'e  but  few  casualties  to  report,  a list  of  which  has  been  forwarded. 
^Inch  arduous  labor  has  been  accomplished,  which  can  but  prove  satis- 
factory to  the  general  commanding. 

1 am  happy  to  say  in  conclusion  that  with  scarce  an  exception  officers 
and  men,  under  every  circumstance  of  exposure,  fatigue,  and  danger, 
have  exhibited  such  cheerful  endurance,  eairnest  faithfulness,  and  eager 
desire  to  meet  the  enemy  as  must  always  insure  them  success,  while  it 
merits  the  admiration  and  gratitude  of  the  commanding  generals. 

Very  respectfullj",  your  obedient  servant, 

OHAELES  C.  DODGE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Capt.  J.  J.  Blodgett, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  15. 

/ 

Eeport  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  W.  Getty.,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third 
Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqks.  TniRD  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Suffollc,  Ya.,  May  12,  1863. 

Sir:  On  April  11,  the  alarm  of  the  enemy’s  approach  being  given, 
in  compliance  with  the  orders  of  the  major-general  commanding,  the 
troops  of  this  division  were  called  out  under  arms.  The  pickets  along 
the  northeastern  front  were  strengthened ; two  companies  of  the  Tenth 
New  Hampshire  were  placed  in  Eort  Halleck,  where  they  remained 
until  May  10;  the  troops  under  Colonel  Dutton  engaged  in  fortify  in  g 
the  river;  the  Twenty-first  Connecticut  and  five  companies  of  the  Thir- 
teenth New  Hampshire  at  Fort  Connecticut;  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island, 
One  hundred  and  third  New  York^  and  the  remainder  of  the  Thirteenth 
New  Hampshire  at  Fort  Stevens  were  called  in.  Three  companies, 
however,  of  the  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire  were  ordered  to  remain  at 
Fort  Connecticut,  with  orders  to  observe  the  river,  resist  any  attempt 
of  the  enemy  to  cross  until  the  last  moment,  and  then  to  fall  back  to 
Suflblk  over  the  corduroy  bridge  across  Broer’s  Creek,  taking  up  the 
bridge.  The  troops  remained  under  arms  and  on  the  alert  during  the 
night.  The  Second  Brigade  strengthened  the  south  front  between 
Forts  Union  and  McClellan,  and  remained  in  this  xmsition  until  Ax)ril 
28,  with  the  exception  of  the  Eighth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  which,  on 
the  14th,  was  ordered  to  the  river  front,  where  it  has  since  remained. 

Oil  the  18th  General  Harland  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the 
front  from  Fort  Halleck  to  Battery  Onondaga,  and  on  the  28th  the 
Eleventh  and  Fifteenth  Eegiments  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  on  the 
2()th  the  Sixteenth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  reported  to  him. 

On  the  12th  Col.  A.  H.  Dutton,  commanding  the  Third  Brigade, 
was  jfiaced  in  command  of  the  line  of  defenses  included  between  Forts 
Jericho  aud  Halleck,  and  at  once  set  to  work  throwing  up  rifle-pits 


302 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


iiiid  fortifyiug  liis  ])ositiou.  Under  Colonel  Dutton’s  supervision  the 
front  between  Fort  Halleck  and  Battery  Onondaga  was  very  materially 
strengthened.  Eifle-ints  were  thrown  up,  covering  all  the  approaches 
by  the  Portsmouth  road,  and  a second  line  on  the  west  baidv  ot  Jericho 
Creek  and  Port  Dutton,  on  the  left  of  Fort  Jericho,  was  t hrown  up.  lie 
was  relieved  on  April  18  by  Brigadier-General  Harland  and  assigned  to 
the  command  of  the  river  defenses  between  the  mouth  of  Jericho  Creek 
and  Dr.  Council’s.  The  Eighty-ninth  Eeginient  Eew  York  Volunteers 
was  [Jaced  in  Fort  Montgomeiy,  where  it  remained  until  May  0 with 
the  exception  of  temporary  absences. 

On  the  13tli  the  Fourth  Eegiment  Ehode  Island  Volunteers  was  or- 
dered to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Corcoran  and  was  stationed  by 
him  behind  the  breastwork^ on  the  left  of  Fort  Union.  It  occupied  this 
position  until  May  1,  when  it  was  relieved  by  the  Ninth  Vermont  and 
placed  on  the  line  of  river  defenses  hear  Fort  Connecticut,  where  it  now 
is.  The  One  hundred  and  third  New  Y^ork  was  stationed  on  the  13th 
instant  behind  the  breastworks  to  the  left  of  Fort  Union,  a i)ositioii 
which  it  held  until  May  G.  The  Ninth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers 
was  ])laced  in  Fort  Nansemond,  where  it  remained  until  relieved  and 
sent  North  on  May  3. 

It  is  my  painful  duty  in  this  connection  to  animadvert  ui)on  the  course 
j)ursued  by  the  Ninth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  who  for  the  first 
time  in  their  military  history  turned  their  backs  upon  the  enemy,  and, 
deaf  to  the  appeals  of  the  commander  of  the  department,  persisted  in 
returning  home,  when  every  consideration  of  i)atriotism,  honor,  and 
])ride  called  upon  them  to  remain  and  share  the  dangers  of  battle  with 
their  comrades  in  the  field.  Most  deeply  do  I regret  that  a regiment 
whose  career  since  they  entered  the  service  two  years  ago  has  been 
most  brilliant  should  at  the  close  sully  their  glorious  reputation  by  such 
an  act  j but  it  is  due  to  truth  to  say  that  in  my  opinion  the  fault  lies 
('hiefly  with  the  officers,  and  most  of  all  with  the  commanding  officer, 
whose  whole  course  in  this  affair  seems  to  have  been  actuated  by  per- 
sonal j)ique  and  caprice. 

On  April  14,  reconnoitering  along  the  river,  I discovered  a battery  of 
the  enemy  at  Norfleet’s  farm,  which  in  an  engagement  that  morning 
with  our  gunboats  had  disabled  the  Mount  Washington  and  repulsed 
the  remainder.  I found  that  this  battery  mounted  four  guns — two 
pounder  Parrotts  and  two  brass  12-i)ounders ; that  it  commanded 
completely  a point  directly  opposite  and  extending  out  some  distance 
from  this  side,  and  that  a large  party  of  the  enemy  was  at  work  strength- 
ening the  battery  and  throwing  up  additional  works  and  rifle-pits.  1 
immediately  sent  for  guns  and  troops,  negroes  and  tools,  which  arrived 
in  the  course  of  the  afternoon. 

During  the  night  I filled  the  i)oint  with  sharpshooters  to  dispute  the 
l)assage  of  the  enemy  in  case  he  attempted  to  cross,  and  posted  the 
Tenth  New  Hampshire  and  a section  of  artillery  to  check  his  farther 
advance  in  case  he  succeeded  in  driving  our  sharpshooters  and  efiecting 
a lodgment  on  the  point.  Their  position  was  strengthened  with  rifle-i)its 
during  the  night.  Two  positions  were  selected  for  batteries,  one  near 
the  base  of  and  a little  to  the  right  of  the  point,  since  named  Battery 
Kimball,  distant  some  1,200  yards  from  the  enemj^’s  battery,  the  other 
on  the  left  side  of  the  point,  at  the  mouth  of  Broer’s  Creek,  distant  000 
yards  from  the  enemy’s  battery,  and  since  named  Battery  Morris. 

The  works  were  pushed  vigorously  during  the  night.  Battery  Mor- 
ris, constructed  by  Captain  Beger,  Second  Wisconsin  Battery,  who, , 
with  three  guns  of  his  battery  (10-pounder  Parrotts),  had  been  sent  to 


Chap.  XXX.] 


303 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

me  by  the  order  of  the  commanding  general,  was  completed  and  the  guns 
placed  in  position  before  2 a.  m.  Battery  Kimball  was  completed  about 
midnight.  Two  20-pounder  Parrott  guns,  under  Captain  Morris,  Ninth 
Kegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  and  one  3-inch  gun  of  the  Fourth  Wis 
consin  Battery,  also  under  his  charge,  were  placed  in  position.  Both 
batteries  were  screened  by  trees  and  underwood. 

At  daylight  the  next  morning  Captain  Beger,  cutting  away  the  trees 
which  intercepted  his  fire,  opened  on  the  enemy’s  battery,  firing  percus- 
sion-shell from  one  gun,  fuse-shell  from  a second,  and  case-shot  from 
the  third.  In  a few  moments  the  enemy  replied,  firing  briskly.  Several 
of  the  20-pounder  shells  passed  through  and  through  the  frail  para])et 
of  Battery  Morris.  As  soon  as  his  whole  attention  was  engaged  with 
Battery  Morris  and  the  position  of  his  guns  ascertained  from  their  fire, 
the  screen  was  thrown  aside  from  Battery  Kimball  and  Captain  Morris 
opened  fire  from  all  his  guns,  directing  his  whole  fire  on  one  ])iece  of 
the  enemy,  and  successively  on  two  others,  silencing  all  three  in  turn. 
Captain  Beger  meanwhile  keeping  up  a hot  and  well-directed  fire  from 
his  three  guns  in  Battery  Morris.  At  the  end  of  two  hours  the  enemy’s 
tire  slackened  and  became  very  feeble.  In  another  hour  he  was  entirely 
silenced.  , 

During  the  action  our  sharpshooters,  who  had  been  placed  on  the 
point  and  on  an  island  in  the  marsh  to  the  right,  kept  up  a fire  which 
must  have  proved  very  annoying  to  the  enemy’s  gunners,  since  it  i)ro- 
roked  one  or  two  discharges  of  canister.  The  following  night  he  with- 
Irew  his  guns. 

The  only  casualties  were  3 drivers  of  Battery  A,  Fifth  United  States 
Artillery,  wounded,  1 mortally.  One  of  the  26-pounder  Parrotts  threw 
)tt‘  its  muzzle  after  firing  twelve  rounds  and  was  replaced  by  a 3-inch 
;uu  from  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Battery,  a section  of  which  had  been 
5eut  to  me  and  was  kept  in  reserve. 

The  three  days  following  every  nerve  was  strained  to  put  the  river  in 
i thorough  state  of  detense.  The  military  road  already  completed  to 
b"ort  Connecticut  was  extended  to  Fort  Stevens.  Batteries  and  rifle- 
fits  were  thrown  up  on  all  the  exposed  points.  The  troops,  as  fast  as 
hey  arrived,  were  sent  into  the  trenches,  and  on  the  18th  the  following 
vas  the  disposition  of  the  troops  along  the  line  of  the  river: 

Lieut.  G.  B.  Easterly,  Fourth  Wisconsin  Battery,  at  Battery  Kimball, 
vith  one  20-pounder  Parrott  and  two  3-inch  gunsj  Thirteenth  New 
lampshire  Volunteers,  with  one  company  of  sharpshooters,  lidding 
losition  next  below  the  mouth  of  Jericho  Creek ; Captain  Beger,  Second 
Visconsin  Battery,  with  two  guns,  in  Battery  Morris,  supported  by  orni 
‘ompany  of  the  Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey  Volunteers ; Lieutenant  Crabb, 
nth  one  section  of  light  12-pounders;  Lieutenant  Schulz,  with  one  sec- 
ion  of  lO-pounder  Parrotts ; the  Tenth  New  nampshire  Volunteers, 
Ninth  Vermont  Volunteers,  one  company  of  the  Twenty-fifth  New  Jer- 
ey  Volunteers,  and  four  companies  of  the  Nineteenth  Wisconsin  Vol- 
mteers,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Donohoe,  Tenth  New  Hampshire 
»^olunteers,  holding  position  of  Fort  Connecticut,  from  Broer’s  Creek  to 
ir.  Council’s;  Captain  Morris,  with  two  20-pounder  Parrotts  in  Battery 
jfievens,  supported  by  Colonel  Pease,  One  hundred  and  seventeenth 
l^ew  York  Volunteers;  Major  Wheelan  on  the  right  of  Colonel  Pease, 
|‘ith  four  companies  of  Mounted  Bifles,  and  five  gunboats  between  the 
^outh  of  Broer’s  Creek  and  a point  half  a mile  below  Dr.  Council’s  land- 
ig.  Gunboats  below  West  Branch;  number  not  known.  Two  regi- 
lents  of  infantry,  the  Eighth  Connecticut  and  Nineteenth  Wisconsin 
oluuteers,  six  companies,  and  one  section  of  artillery  in  reserve. 


304 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


On  the  14th  instant  the  enemy  had  planted  a battery  in  the  earth- 
works on  Hill’s  Point,  and,  in  the  engagement  that  ensued  between 
them  and  oiir  naval  forces  in  the  river,  almost  entirely  destroyed  the 
gunboat  Mount  Washington.  After  this  action  five  gunboats  returned 
to  the  Upper  Nansemond,  above  Hill’s  Point,  and  it  became  evident 
that  their  safety  required  that  this  battery  should  be  silenced,  for  the 
channel  of  the  river  runs  within  50  yards  of  Hill’s  Point,  and  the  actiou 
of  the  14tli  showed  conclusively  that  it  would  be  almost  certain  de- 
struction for  any  boat  to  attempt  to  run  past.  It  was  therefore  with 
a view  to  deliver  our  gunboats  from  a dangerous  position,  as  well  as  to 
annoy  the  enemy  and  to  gain  possession  of  an  important  point  for 
future  operations,  that  an  expedition  to  cut  out  the  battery  was  under- 
taken. The  plan  of  operation,  as  arranged  with  Lieutenant  Lamson, 
U.  S.  IsTavy,  commanding  flotilla,  was  as  follows : Five  hundred  men 
were  to  embark  on  the  gunboat  Stepping  Stones  at  Hr.  Council’s  land- 
ing, proceed  down  the  river,  land  on  Hill’s  Point  just  above  the  bat- 
tery, and  charge  the  works  with  the  bayonet.  Lieutenant  Lamson 
volunteered  to  land  four  boat  howitzers  to  co-operate  in  this  movement, 
and  at  his  request  was  furnished  with  40  men  to  man  the  drag-ropes. 

At  5.30  p.  m.  on  April  19,  detachments  of  130  men  from  the  Eighth 
Connecticut  and  140  men  from  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York  embarked 
on  the  Stepping  Stones  at  Hr.  Council’s  landing.  A canvas  screen, 
which  efiectually  concealed  the  men,  was  drawn  up  all  around  the  deck, 
and  the  boat  pushed  off  and  steamed  rapidly  down  the  stream.  As  she 
approached  the  battery  not  a shot  was  fired  or  a sound  heard  to  indi- 
cate the  presence  of  the  enemy.  He  was  waiting,  with  all  his  guns 
double-shotted  with  canister,  until  the  vessel  should  come  abreast  and 
within  50  yards  of  his  battery.  At  300  yards  above  the  battery  Lieu- 
tenant Lamson  headed  his  boat  inshore,  but  striking  on  a spile  she 
glanced  off,  and,  borne  on  the  ebb-tide,  was  on  the  eve  of  shooting  in 
front  of  the  battery,  when  Lieutenant  Lamson,  with  admirable  presence 
of  mind,  reversed  the  paddle-wheels  and  backed  her  aground.  The 
men  jumped  off  from  both  ends  of  the  boat  up  to  their  waists  in  mud 
and  water,  scrambled  hastily  ashore,  and  with  a cheer  dashed  for  the 
battery.  In  an  instant  Lieutenant  Lamson  had  landed  his  howitzers 
and  followed.  The  enemy,  apprised  of  our  approach  by  the  cheers, 
o[)ened  a hot  fire  of  musketry,  and  was  enabled  even  to  reverse  and 
fire  one  of  his  guns ; but  seeing  himself  cut  off,  and  receiving  one  or 
two  discharges  of  canister  from  Lamson’s  howitzers,  he  surrendered. 
The  capture  of  5 guns,  7 officers,  and  130  men,  the  liberation  of  the  five 
gunboats  above,  and  the  occupation  of  a point  of  vital  imi)ortance  to 
the  enemy  and  an  admirable  point  of  operations  for  us  were  the  results 
of  one  of  the  most  brilliant  achievements  of  the  war.  Our  loss  was  1 
killed  and  10  wounded. 

The  battery  taken,  our  whole  attention  was  turned  to  fortifying  thi 
l)osition  and  preparing  for  attack.  The  boat  howitzers  were  placed  ii 
battery  just  above  the  landing  jdace  in  a position  to  sweep  the  plain  ii 
front  over  which  the  attacking  party  must  pass,  rifle-pits  were  com 
menced,  and  pickets  thrown  out.  Col.  A.  H.  Hutton  was  placed  in  coui 
mand.  Five  companies  of  the  Tenth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  j 
detachment  of  00  men  of  the  Ninth  Vermont,  Colonel  Pease,  One  huii 
dred  and  seventeenth  New  York,  with  four  companies  of  his  regimeiil 
and  Lieutenant  Crabb,  Battery  A,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  with  gun  dc 
tachments  to  man  the  captured  pieces,  were  sent  over  to  re-enforce  tb< 
position,  and  by  morning  a formidable  line  of  rifle-pits  and  batteries  wa, 
erected. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


305 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


Tbe  boat  howitzers  were  withdrawn  and  re-embarked  on  the  arrival 
of  Lieutenant  Crabb.  Contrary  to  expectation  the  morning  dawned 
without  an  attack.  A section  of  Battery  A,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery  under 
tlie  command  of  Lieutenant  Murray,  and  the  remainder  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  seventeenth  New  York  were  sent  across.  The  day  was  spent 
in  fortit,\iug  and  strengthening  the  position.  No  demonstration  was 
made  by  the  enemy  during  the  day  with  the  exception  that  in  the 
morning  a line  of  skirmishers  advanced  across  a field  and  afterward 
withdrew. 

In  compliance  with  the  order  of  the  major-general  commanding,  given 
upon  my  representations,  the  position  was  evacuated  on  the  night  of 
the  20th.  The  movement  began  soon  after  dark.  The  artillery,  in- 
trenching tools,  surplus  ammunition,  &c.,  were  embarked  on  the  Step- 
ping Stones,  and  the  troops  ferried  across  and  landed  on  the  marsh  op- 
posite by  the  West  End  and  by  small  boats.  The  picket  line  was  held 
to  tlie  last  moment,  and  at  12.30  o^clock  the  last  load  crossed  over  un- 
[bstiirbed  by  the  enemy,  who  during  the  whole  evacuation  scarcely  fired 
i shot  or  gave  the  least  annoyance. 

Aftei  the  capture  of  HilFs  Point  Battery  nothing  of  special  impor- 
ance  occurred  until  May  3.  The  enemy^s  sharpshooters  caused  consid- 
wable  annoyance  to  our  pickets  and  working  parties;  nevertheless  the 
vorks  were  pushed  vigorously,  every  available  man  being  sent  into  the 
Tenches. 

On  the  18th  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  two  heavy  guns  in  sunken 
latteries  on  the  West  Branch,  a few  hundred  yards  above  Hill’s  Point; 
Hit  the  capture  of  Hill’s  Point  on  the  19th  exposed  them  to  a similar 
ate  and  necessitated  their  withdrawal.  They  were  withdrawn  on  the 
light  of  the  19th. 


Vermont,  Eighth  Connecticut,  and  the  Nine- 
eenth  Wisconsin  Volunteers  were  ordered  by  the  major-general  com- 
fianding  to  report  to  General  Dodge  to  take  part  in  a reconnaissance 
nder  direction  of  General  Corcoran.  They  returned  the  following 
lorning.  ^ 

On  the  2/th  instant  a new  battery  of  the  enemy  was  discovered  some 
istance  west  of  Norfleet’s  house,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  it 
pened  fire  on  the  Swan  and  Commerce,  two  unarmed  steamers  which 
assed  dovm  the  river  from  Suffolk. 

On  April  30  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  a battery  of  three  heavy  guns 
; Le  Compte  s house  on  the  West  Branch.  After  a short  engagement 
nth  the  gniiboats  and  the  two  20-pounder  Parrotts,  under  Captain 
I orris,  in  fort  Stevens,  the  battery  was  silenced. 

On  May  2 I received  orders  to  make  a reconnaissance  on  the  Provi- 
ence  Church  road  the  following  day. 

llie  operations  of  the  3d  instant  constituted  a reconnaissance  designed 
> a.y;ertain  tlie  number  and  position  of  the  enemy’s  force  and  his  move- 
t'lits.  Ih^y  were  threefold.  The  main  force  was  to  advance  on  the 
rovKience  Church  road,  while  two  expeditions  were  to  cross  the  Nanse- 
|Ond  helow  at  different  points,  seize  Need’s  Ferry,  and  feel  the  enemy’s 
a i hundred  and  third  and  Eighty-ninth  Regiments  New 

ork  Volnnteers,  supported  by  the  Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey  and  Thir- 
ientii  ^ew  Hampshire,  crossing  tlie  bridge  over  the  river,  deployed  as 
lirmishers  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  road  and  advanced,  driving  the 
winy  back  from  position  to  position  until  he  took  refuge  in  his  rifle- 
ifii +1  Hasbrouck’s  battery  followed  along  the  road,  and, 

airx  of  Davis’  battery,  kept  silent  the  enemy’s  artillery, 

ajor  Wheelan,  with  four  companies  of  the  Mounted  Rifles,  followed 
20  R R — VOL  XVIII 


306 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


Hasbrouck’s  battciy  but  was  uot  brought  into  action.  The  Connecticut 
regiments,  Eleventh,  Fifteentb,  and  Sixteenth,  under  General  Harland, 
followed  and  supi)orted  the  advance,  relieving  the  advance  regiments 
as  they  exhausted  their  ammunition  and  holding  the  ground  already 
gained;  Colonel  Onderdonk’s  cavalry,  the  One  hundred  and  forty-third, 
One  hundred  and  forty-fourth,  and  One  hundred  and  seventieth  Kegi- 
ments  New  York  Volunteers,  constituted  the  reserve,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Mclvor,  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventieth  Eegiment 
New  York  Volunteers. 

The  enemy  was  found  strongly  posted  at  the  forks  of  the  Providence 
Church  and  Eeed\s  Ferry  roads.  An  earthwork  on  his  left  rested  on  a 
swamp,  from  which  strong  rifle-pits  extended  across  his  whole  front 
and  rested  on  liis  right  on  a branch  of  the  river.  It  will  be  seen  that 
the  position  could  not  be  turned,  and  to  carry  it  a direct  assault  had  to 
be  made  on  the  front,  which,  even  if  successful,  must  inevitably  have 
resulted  in  a great  sacritice  of  life.  It  was  determined,  therefore,  on 
consultation  with  the  major-general  commanding,  that  the  objects  of  the 
reconnaissance,  in  revealing  the  position  and  force  of  the  enemy,  were 
attained  as  far  as  was  possible  under  the  circumstances,  and  therefore 
nothing  remained  but  to  withdraw  with  as  little  loss  as  possible.  Ac- 
cordingly, the  rifle-pits  on  the  enemy’s  side  next  the  draw-bridge  were 
manned  by  the  One  hundred  and  seventieth  New  York  Volunteers,  and 
the  whole  force  was  rapidly  and  quietly  withdrawn  without  the  loss  of  a 
man.  The  movement  was  completed  by  9 p.  m.  and  the  bridge  taken  up. 

We  lost  in  this  engagement  Col.  Benjamin  Eingofd,  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  third  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers,  a most  gallant  and  val- 
uable oflicer,  who  fell  at  the  head  of  his  regiment  late  in  the  afternoon.* 

Meanwhile  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island  Volunteers  crossed  in  boats  at 
Hill’s  Point  at  daylight  and  advanced  across  the  field  toward  the  woods, 
but,  encountering  a superior  force  of  the  enemy  advantageously  posted 
in  the  woods,  they  were  compelled,  after  considerable  skirmishing,  to 
withdraw  upon  Hill’s  Point,  from  whence  they  were  withdrawn  to 
this  side  the  following  night.  The  Fourth  Ehode  Island  was  assisted 
by  a boat  howitzer  from  the  Commodore  Barney  and  b.y  a detachment 
of  the  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York  Volunteers.  The 
Twenty-first  Connecticut,  a section  of  Vallee’s  battery.  Fourth  Wiscon- 
sin, and  a sergeant  and  10  men  from  the  Mounted  Eifles,  under  command 
of  Miijor  Crosby,  of  the  Twenty-first  Connecticut,  crossed  the  river  near 
Sleepy  Hole,  with  the  assistance  of  the  gunboats,  and  advanced  to 
Chuckatuck,  where  they  drove  out  some  300  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry, 
part  of  which  retreated  on  the  route  leading  to  Isle  of  Wight  and  the 
rmnainder  on  the  road  leading  to  Everett’s  Bridge,  some  3 miles  above 
Eeed’s  Ferry.  Skirmishing  all  the  way,  they  pushed  forward  to  Eeed’s 
Ferry,  which  they  occupied  after  a brisk  skirmish,  in  which  they  caj)- 
tured  a lieutenant  and  15  men.  Being  unable  to  communicate  with  our 
forces  on  the  left,  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island,  or  the  main  advance.  Major 
Crosby,  moved  dov/n  the  left  bank  of  the  West  Branch  to  the  jNanse- 
mond  and  took  up  an  intrenched  camp,  from  which  he  was  withdrawn 
the  following  day.  He  lost  2 killed  and  4 wounded. 

On  May  5 the  commanding  general  published  General  Orders,  No.  31, 
announcing  the  retreat  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  7th,  Field  Orders,  No.  14,  were  issued,  disposing  the  troops  of 
this  division  as  follows,  wliich  positions  they  now  occupy:  The  Second 


* lietiirn  of  the  Soveiitli  Army  Corps,  Department  of  Virginia,  for  the  month  of  May, 
1803,  gives  the  following  casualties  in  this  affair:  Sixty  killed  and  wounded. 


OUAP.  XXX.l 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


307 


Brigade,  Greneral  E.  Harlaiid,  from  Fort  Halleck  to  the  moiitli  of  Jerielio 
(Jaiial ; the  Third  Brigade,  Col.  A.  H.  Dutton,  on  the  river,  from  the 
mouth  of  Jerielio  Creek  to  Battery  Stevens;  the  First  Brigade,  Col. 

H.  S.  Fairchild,  in  reserve  along  the  line  of  Suffolk  County  road  from 
Jericho  Canal  to  Calhoun’s;  the  artillery  in  the  batteries  along  the 
river. 

The  amount  of  work  performed  by  troops  on  this  line,  taken  in  con- 
nection with  the  great  amount  of  picket  duty  necessitated  by  the  extent 
.if  the  line  and  the  incessant  watchfulness  imposed  by  the  presence  of 
the  daring  and  enterprising  enemy  in  great  force,  is  astounding.  On  the 
front,  from  Fort  Halleck  to  Battery  Onondaga,  there  have  been  thrown 
n[)  3,434  yards  of  rifle-pits  and  308  yards  of  parapet,  7 feet  high  and  7 
feet  in  thickness  on  top.  On  the  river  line,  4,308  yards  of  rifle  pits, 

I, 944  feet  of  parapet,  with  an  average  height  of  8 feet  and  thickness  of 
something  over  10  feet  on  top,  were  constructed.  In  addition  to  which 
some  10  miles  of  entirely  new  roads,  including  several  bridges  over 
impassable  creeks  and  marshes  and  miles  of  corduroying,  Avere  made. 
Much  of  the  work  was  done  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters, 
who  proved  exceedingly  annoying  during  the  whole  course  of  the  siege. 
These  results  could  not  have  been  obtained  had  I not  had  the  efficient 
support  of  Colonels  Dutton  and  Pease,  commanding  the  upper  and  lower 
defenses  respectively,  and  their  officers  and  men.  Both  of  these  offi- 
cers worked  day  and  night. 

Colonel  Dutton,  in  addition  to  his  duties  as  a commanding  officer,  w as 
also  obliged  to  assume  those  of  an  engineer,  and  personally  laid  out  and 
constructed  many  of  the  most  important  works  on  this  line. 

Lieutenant  Murray,  of  Battery  A,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery,  w as  also  of 
great  service  in  constructing  works.  Fort  Larnson  and  a battery  next 
below  Dr.  Council’s  w^as  laid  out  by  him. 

The  services  of  Colonel  Derrom,  in  constructing  roads  and  bridges, 
were  of  the  utmost  value.  Without  the  bridge  constructed  by  him 
across  Broer’s  Creek  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  line  of  the  riyer  could 
have  been  held  with  the  small  force  at  my  disposal. 

Colonel  Stevens,  also,  of  the  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire,  is  deserving’ 
of  credit.  Both  Colonels  Stevens  and  Derrom  displayed  zeal,  judg- 
ment, and  courage  on  the  3d  instant. 

The  whole  deportment  of  the  troops  was  excellent;  with  a single  ex- 
ception there  was  no  complaint.  Every  order  was  obeyed  with  the 
utmost  cheerfulness,  and  the  same  men  who  came  off  picket  duty  in  the 
morning  went  on  fatigue  duty  at  night  without  a murmur. 

The  artillery  is  especially  deserving  of  great  credit.  Captain  Morris, 
Ninth  NeAV  York  Volunteers,  with  a battery  of  2()-pounder  Parrotts, 
with  the  assistance  of  three  10-pounder  Parrotts  of  Captain  Beger’s 
battery,  silenced  most  effectually  the  enemy’s  battery  at  Norfleet’s,  and 
afterward  rendered  good  service  in  silencing  his  batteries  at  LeCompte’s. 

The  seiwices  of  the  signal  officers.  Lieutenants  Thayer  and  Murray, 
were  great,  and  rendered  always  cheerfully  and  prolnptl3^ 

1 cannot  close  this  report  without  acknowledging  the  important  serv- 
ices rendered  b^^  the  naA^al  forces  co-operating  in  the  river,  a tribute 
wlii(4i  they  have  richly  merited.  Lieutenants  Cushing  and  Larnson 
ami  tlic  officers  and  men  of  their  commands  have  shown  that  in  their 
eonntry’s  service  they  know  no  fear,  and  that  the  old  breed  of  naval 
lieioes  is  not  extinct ; but  to  Lieutenant  Larnson  in  particular,  whose 
gallantry  exhibited  in  his  engagements  at  Norlleet’s  and  at  Hill’s  Point 
has  been  fully  eapialed  by  the  willingness  and  desire  he  hiis  shown  on 
nil  occasions  to  co  operate  with  the  land  forces  and  to  do  ever^ffhing 


I 


308 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  ? 


for  the  ^ood  of  the  service,  my  tliaohs  are  due.  But  iu  acknowledging  i 
the  services  of  meritorious  officers  I must  not  omit  those  ot  my  own  ' 
staff.  To  their  services  I am  myself  a witness,  and  with  great  pleasure 
am  I able  to  state  that  in  every  emergency  they  have  responded  to  the  ^ 
call  made  upon  them  with  alacrity  and  willingness.  Captain  Gardner,  , < 
assistant  adjutant-general  j Bieutenants  McKechnie  and  haxon,  aides- 
de-camp:  Dr.  Humphreys,  medical  director,  and  Lieutenant  Herbert, 
ordnance  ofhcer,  did  their  whole  duty,  and  in  this  is  comprised  every- 

^^Capt.  Hazard  Stevens,  assistant  adjutant-general,  whose  distinguished 
services  and  conduct  have  been  acknowledged  in  previous  reports,  was 
particularly  conspicuous  throughout  the  operations  above  recited.  On 
all  occasions,  whether  in  the  discharge  of  his  legitimate  duties  m the 
trenches,  reconnoitering,  or  on  the  field  under  the  enemy’s  fire,  lie 
evinced  an  earnestness  and  devotion  worthy  of  emulation  and  deserv- 
ing the  highest  praise.  i 

I append  lists*  of  officers  and  men  of  the  Eighty-nmth  New  York 
and  Eighth  Connecticut  Yolunteers,  who  participated  in  the  storming 
of  the  enemy’s  battery  at  Hill’s  Point ; also  reports  of  brigade,  ba,ttery, 
^lD(l  Lists  of  CEisuJiltiGS  alretidy  trixosiinttou.t 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  otiedi^t  servant, 

GEO.  W.  GEJ-Ljl, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Dimsion. 

Maj.  B.  B.  Foster, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Suffolk,  Ya. 


No.  16. 

Re])ort  of  Col.  Harrison  S.  FaireUld,  Eighty -ninth  Eeic  York  Infantry, 
eommanding  First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Fear  Sufolk,  Va.,  May  7,  1803. 

Sir  : In  compliance  to  circular  orders  from  Headquarters,  Third  Di- 
vision, dated  May  5,  1863,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  lollowing  re- 

the  evening  of  April  11,  by  your  orders,  I sent  two  companies  of 
the  Tenth  New  Hampshire  to  Fort  Halleck,  and  on  the  morning  o tlie 
12th  tlie  remaining  eight  companies  of  this  regiment  were  sent  to  iT'lievc 
the  Eighty-ninth  New  York  Yolunteers,  on  yucket  at  the  Jericho  Camii, 
and  the  Eighty-ninth  llegiment  ordered  to  Fort  Montgomery. 

On  the  13th  the  Tenth  New  Hampshire  Yolunteers  was  relieved  in 
the  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire  Yolunteers  and  returned  to  camp,  vm 
the  afternoon  of  Ayiril  13  the  One  hundred  and  third  Legiment  Alev 
Y^ork  Yolunteers  was  sent  to  the  front,  on  the  right  ot  hort  Union,  aiu 
the  Ninth  New  York  Yolunteers  was  held  in  reserve  between  Torts 
Union  and  McClellan  until  evening  and  theA  sent  to  Fort  ^^^^^semoiu  . 
On  the  same  afternoon  the  eight  companies  of  the  Tenth  New  1 an  j 
shire  Yolunteers  were  sent  to  the  Nansemond  Biver,  below  3ericiio 
Canal,  near  the  small-pox  hospital.  This  disposition  ot  the  regimen^ 


* Not  found. 


t Embodied  iu  revised  statemeut,  p.  286. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  tA. 


309 


of  the  brigade,  and  subsequently  placed  under  different  commanders 
otlier  than  the  brigade  commander,  remained  so  until  April  23,  when 
Col.  K.  C.  Hawkins  assumed  command  of  this  brigade  by  Special  Or- 
ders, ^o.  100,  dated  Headquarters  Third  Division,  April  23,  1863. 

,,,9“  May  2,  by  Special  Orders,  Ko.  109,  dated  Headquarters 

Ihird  Division,  May  2,  1803, 1 again  assumed  command  of  the  brigade, 
but  haviDg  no  command  assigned  me  on  the  front  with  any  portion  of 
the  brigmde,  consequently  not  being  in  a position  personally  to  observe 
tlie  actions  of  the  several  regiments,  I can  only  submit  reports  of  the 
regimental  commanders,  giving  an  account  of  their  operations,  and  a list 
ol  casualties  in  each  regiment,  which  are  herewith  inclosed.* 

General,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

H.  S.  FAIEOHILD, 

^ ^ Colonel.  Commandinq. 

General  George  W.  Getty, 

Commanding  Third  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps. 


No.  17. 

Reports  of  Col.  William  E.  Pease,  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  YorJc 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  One  hundred  and  seventeetnh  IST.  Y.  Yols. 

Calhoun>s  Point,  Va.,  April  19,  1863—11.30  a.  in. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  about  10.15  a.  m.  to-day  a new 
•ebel  battery,  opposite  Stevens’  battery  at  this  Point,  opened  fire  on  the 
qiiiboat  below  here.  They  fired  two  or  three  shots  before  the  boat 
eplied.  The  boats  from  above  moved  down  to  a point  opposite  this 
•amp  and  opened  fire.  Stevens’  battery  opened  as  soon  as  possible  and 
'ery  satisfactorily.  A new  battery  of  the  enemy,  heretofore  unknown 
0 us,  below  the  old  battery,  opened  the  fire,  and  we  believe  that  it  has 
)een  pretty  effectually  silenced.  I filled  the  rifle-pits,  dug  last  night 
nth  sharpsliooters,  and  a brisk  fire  has  been  kept  up  on  their  sharp- 
jiooters.  The  enemy  have  not  replied  to  the  fire  of  the  battery  on  this 

oint.  They  have  not  fired  for  the  last  forty  minutes.  The  gunboats 
re  liring  occasionally.  All  is  well.  Yo  casualties  known. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

..  , ^ W.  E.  PEASE. 

General  Getty, 

Commanding  Third  Division. 


Headquarters, 

^ Calhoun’s  Point,  Va.,  April  21,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  6 o’clock  p.  m.  vestcr- 
^ay  I received  an  order  from  the  commanding  general  to  hold  the  One 
seventeenth  Yew  York  Volunteers  and  a section  of  the 
rouith  W isconsin  Battery  in  readiness  to  march  to  the  landing  at  Dr 
foiinciPs  house  and  embark  for  Hill’s  Point  in  case  the  party  sent 
!6«tinst  the  enemy’s  work  at  that  place  were  successful.  The  place  was 


Embodied  ia  revised  statement,  p.  286, 


310 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


carried  about  7 o’clock  p.  m.,  aud  this  command  marched  immediately. 
Oil  arriving  at  Dr.  Council’s  no  boat  was  ready  to  take  the  command 
over.  About  10  o’clock  p.  m.  Captain  Vallee  received  an  order  to  return 
with  his  section  of  artillery  to  Calhoun’s  Point.  The  One  hundred  and 
seventeenth  New  York  Yolunteers,  720  stroii-,  remamed  in  the  road 
until  about  12  p.  m.,  and  received  an  order  to  report  to  Colonel  Donohoe, 
Tenth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  about  IJ  miles  above  Dr.  Councils. 
The  reffimeut  reported  as  ordered,  and  about  2.30  p.  m.  on  the  20th  an 
order  was  sent  to  send  four  companies  -of  the  One  hundred  and  seven- 
teenth New  York  Volunteers  back  to  Dr.  Council’s  house  to  embark  for 
Hill’s  Point.  A special  order  was  received  from  the  commanding  ftvn- 
eral  for  the  colonel  of  the  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York  Vol- 
unteers to  take  command  of  the  four  companies  of  his  regiment  and 
accompany  them  to  Hill’s  Point.  Companies  D,  F,  H,  and  K were  the 
companies  sent  over ; they  arrived  at  4 o’clock  p.  m.  and  began  to  in- 
trench. A detail  was  made  from  the  companies  to  furnish  skirmishers. 
The  skirmishers  were  deployed  and  exchanged  shots  with  the  enemy,  in 
which  First  Sergt.  William  Casselman,  Company  D,  One  hundred  and 
seventeenth  New  York  Volunteers,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  right 
leg  by  a rilie-ball  from  the  enemy’s  skirmishers.  The  first  h re  apphwl 
to  the  building  on  Hill’s  Point  was  set  by  Second  Lieut.  D.  B.  Magill, 
One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York  Volunteers,  who  volunteeivd 
to  perform  the  service.  At  10  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  20th  the  remainder 
of  the  regiment  arrived  and  reported  and  were  set  to  work  intrmiching. 
At  3 o’clock  p.  m.  the  order  to  evacuate  the  Point  was  issued.  The  em- 
barkation commenced  on'  one  of  the  gunboats,  and  after  landing  about 
400  men  on  the  marsh  opposite  Hill’s  Point  the  small  boats  were  substi- 
tuted, and  the  crossing  of  all  was  completed  about  12.30  a.  m.  on  the 
morning  of  the  21st.  All  reached  their  old  camp  in  safety. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your 

Colonel,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  V.  Y.  Vols. 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  N.  Y.  Vols., 
Calhowds  Point,  Va.,  April  22,  1863—8.30  a.  m. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  all  quiet  on  this  end  of  the  line. 
No  movement  of  the  enemy  discovered  last  night ; no  evidences  of  any 
parties  working  during  the  night.  If  Ave  could  have  the  use  ot  a 
pounder  boat  howitzer  it  would  be  very  effective  indeed  m preventinji 
the  enemy  from  placing  artillery  in  the  battery  on  the  opposute  shore. 
Captain  Morris  informs  me  that  the  howitzer  can  be  obtained  Iroin  Lap 
tain  Cushing,  on  the  gunboat.  I have  a four-gun  Latteryj^early  com- 
pleted, and  respectfully  request  that  the  remainder  ot  Captain  \ allee  ^ 
pieces  be  sent  down.  There  was  no  movement  of  the  gunboats  during 

the  night.  , x *- 

Very  respectfully,  captain,  your  obedient  sei-vant, 

W.  Iv.  i LAoIi/, 

Colonel,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  N.  Y.  Vols. 

Captain  Stevens, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Chai*.  XXX.  ] 


311 


- SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

Headquarters  Calhoun’s  Point,  Ya., 

May  1,  18G3. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  gunboats  all  below  Hill’s 
Point.  They  were  fired  upon  while  moving  down  about  7 o’clock  p.  m. 
yesterday.  The  officer  in  command  of  the  picket  at  Hill’s  Point  last 
night  reports  that  about  9.40  p.  m.  his  sentinels  saw  men  approaching 
in  small  parties  of  2 and  3,  and  our  men  who  were  on  guard  in  advance 
of  the  rifle-pits  opened  fire  upon  them.  The  enemy  returned  it  and  con- 
tinued to  advance,  increasing  in  numbers.  Our  sentinels  fell  back,  firing, 
and  the  men  behind  the  rifle-pit  opened  fire;  but  the  enemy  still  ad- 
vanced and  greatly  outnumbered  our  party.  Our  men  took  to  the  boats 
and  on  reaching  the  boats  not  a piece  was  loaded  to  give  the  signal 
agreed  upon  in  case  they  were  obliged  to  retreat.  The  officer  in  com- 
mand, Lieutenant  Magill,  then  fired  three  shots  from  his  revolver,  which 
was  the  signal,  and  all  put  off.  They  reached  the  opposite  bank  in 
safety  a few  minutes  past  10  o’clock  p.  m.  There  Avas  no  firing  from  the 
enemy  after  the  boats  reached  the  shore,  but  in  going  they  fired  several 
volleys.  There  is  nothing  in  reference  to  the  enemy’s  batteries  since  7 
o’clock  p.  m.  yesterday.  The  30-i)ounder  Parrott  has  not  arrived. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

VV.  E.  PEASE, 
Colonel^  Commanding. 

Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.j  Third  Division.,  Ninth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Calhoun’s  Point,  Ya., 

May  4,  1863 — 8.45  p.  m. 


Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I this  morning  sent  Lieu- 
tenant Risley,  of  the  One  hundred  and  seven  teen  tli  New  York  Yolun- 
teers,  with  30  men  of  his  regiment,  across  the  river  with  orders  to  ad- 
vance as  far  as  possible,  and  gain  such  information  as  he  could  of  the 
movements  of  the  enemy.  He  landed  and  sent  a party  of  his  men  out  as 
skirmishers,  advancing  slowly;  seeing  some  indications  of  the  enemy,  I 
ordered  him  to  return  to  the  rifle-pits  until  I could  send  for  one  of  tlie 
gunboats  to  come  up  and  i)rotect  his  left  flank  and  rear.  At  1.30  p.  m., 
tliere  being  no  indications  that  we  were  to  receive  any  assistance  from 
the  gunboat,  I directed  Lieutenant  Risley  to  advance  slowly  and  go  as 
far  as  he  could.  He  started  and  found  no  iini)ediinent  to  his  progress; 
he  ])assed  four  batteries  in  the  woods  along  the  marsh  on  the  right  bank 
of  the  West  Branch  all  bearing  on  the  river.  He  reports  that  the  enemy 
kei)t.  the  right  bank  of  the  West  Branch  very  strongly  picketed.  He 
l)assed  on  to  the  battery  on  the  hill  at  Le  Coinpte’s  house.  The  position 
is  a very  strong  one;  an  excavation  made  behind  a fence,  revetted  with 
timbers  and  two  embrasures;  rifle-pits  on  the  right  and  rear  of  the 
buildings.  Lieutenant  Risley  sent  a citizen  and  a negro,  both  of  whom 
1 sent  to  headquarters  of  the  division. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  It.  PEASE, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 


Capt.  Hazard  Stevens, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps. 


312 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Ilarland^  TJ.  iS.  Armijj  eommanding  Second 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  [Second  Brig.,]  Third  Div.,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Suffolk^  Va.j  May  G,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  tlie 
movements  of  the  troops  of  this  brigade  from  April  11  to  the  present 
time : 

On  the  afternoon  of  April  11  the  brigade  was  jdaced  under  arms  in 
consequence  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  I received  orders  from 
General  Peck  to  hold  my  command  in  readiness  to  support  either  Gen- 
eral Terry  or  Colonel  Foster,  who  had  commands,  respectively,  on  the 
right  and  left  of  Fort  Nansemond. 

The  troops  remained  under  arms  during  the  night,  and  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  12th,  by  order  of  General  Peck,  I sent  the  Eighth  and  Six- 
teenth Eegiments  Connecticut  Volunteers  to  occupy  a portion  of  the 
breastworks  on  the  right  of  Fort  Union.  About  noon  of  the  same  day 
I received  verbal  instructions  from  Brigadier- General  Corcoran  to  take 
command  of  the  line  of  defenses  between  Forts  Union  and  McClellan. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  the  entire  brigade  was  posted  along  the 
line  of  breastworks  under  my  command.  That  evening,  by  order  of 
General  Peck,  I sent  the  Eighth  Connecticut  to  report  to  General  Getty 
for  instructions,  since  which  time  the  regiment  has  not  been  under  my 
command. 

On  April  18  1 was  ordered  to  take  command  of  the  line  of  defenses 
extending  from  Fort  Halleck  to  Battery  Onondaga.  The  Eleventh  and 
Fifteenth  Regiments  reported  to  me  on  April  28  and  the  Sixteenth  on 
the  29th. 

Nothing  of  any  importance  occurred  until  May  3,  when,  with  the 
Eleventh,  Fifteenth,  and  Sixteenth  Eegiments,  I took  part  in  the  re- 
connaissance on  the  Providence  Church  road.  The  regiments  crossed 
the  Nansemond  at  the  draw-bridge  at  about  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
May  3.  Immediately  after  the  brigade  had  crossed  the  bridge  the  One 
hundred  and  third  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York,  in  the  advance,  engaged 
tlie  enemy’s  pickets.  The  brigade  halted,  and  remained  in  this  posi- 
tion until  about  12  m.,  when  I crossed  the  river  to  confer  with  General 
Getty,  and  received  orders  from  him  to  send  one  regiment  to  support 
the  One  hundred  and  third  New  York,  which  was  reported  to  be  with- 
out ammunition,  and  also  to  return  and  take  the  general  direction  of 
the  movement. 

I recrossed  and  sent  the  Sixteenth  Connecticut,  under  command  of 
Colonel  Beach,  up  to  the  support  of  the  One  hundred  and  third  Regi- 
ment, and  having  reached  said  regiment  relieved  it.  After  relieving 
the  One  hundred  and  third  the  Sixteenth  engaged  the  enemy  and 
moved  forward  a short  distance  until  the  right  of  the  regiment  rested 
on  the  bank  of  the  river.  This  position  was  held  by  the  regiment  until 
night,  when  the  troops  were  withdrawn  to  the  other  side  of  the  river. 

Soon  after  sending  the  Sixteenth  Connecticut  to  support  the  One 
hundred  and  third  New  York  I received  word  from  Colonel  Derrom, 
commanding  the  Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey,  on  the  right  of  the  road,  that 
he  needed  support ; also  word  to  the  same  effect  from  Colonel  Stevens, 
commanding  the  ThirteontU  New  Hampshire,  which  w^s  on  the  left  of 


CiiAi*.  XXX.  ] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


313 


the  road.  I sent  the  Fifteenth  Connecticut,  under  Colonel  TJpham,  to 
re-enforce  the  right,  and  the  Eleventh  Connecticut,  under  Colonel  Stcd- 
man,  to  re-enforce  the  left. 

The  reports  of  the  commanders  of  these  dilferent  regiments  are  here- 
with forwarded,  by  which  it  will  be  seen  that  their  positions  did  not 
vary  materially  during  the  rest  of  the  day.  The  general  position  re- 
mained the  same  throughout  the  day,  with  the  exception  that  part  of 
the  artillery  took  up  a more  advanced  position  about  5 p.  m.,  by  order 
of  General  Getty.  About  the  same  time  I placed  the  One  hundred  and 
forty-third  ^^^ew  York,  one  of  the  regiments  held  in  reserve  in  the  or- 
chard, on  the  left  of  the  road.  The  regiment  was  deployed  in  a direc- 
tion parallel  to  the  line  of  battle^  the  right  resting  about  100  yards  in 
rear  of  the  left  of  the  advance  while  the  left  of  the  regiment  rested  on 
a bay  that  set  back  from  the  river. 

About  sunset  Captain  Stevens,  of  General  Getty’s  statf,  informed  me 
that  General  Getty  wished  me  to  withdraw  the  troops  to  tlie  other  side 
of  the  river  as  soon  as  I could,  under  cover  of  night;  that  he  desired 
the  pickets  withdrawn  last,  and  that  he  wished  one  section  of  Howard’s 
battery  and  one  of  Davis’  battery  to  remain  until  the  bulk  of  the  troops 
had  crossed.  Captain  Stevens  indicated  the  positions  which  General 
Getty  desired  those  sections  of  batteries  to  occupy.  He  also  stated 
that  General  Getty  wished  me  to  direct  Colonel  Derrom,  of  the  Twenty- 
fifth  'New  Jersey,  to  make  a detail  of  men  from  his  regiment  to  take 
up  the  bridge  after  the  troops  had  all  crossed,  and  to  superintend  the 
work  himself.  I sent  one  staff  officer  to  give  the  necessary  orders  to 
the  troops  on  the  right  of  the  road  and  another  to  those  on  the  left. 
Before  these  staff  officers  returned  Lieutenant  Faxon,  aide-de-camp  of 
General  Getty  informed  me  that  General  Getty  wished  to  see  me  at 
General  Peck’s  headquarters.  I found  General  Getty,  who  told  me  that 
lie  had  given  orders  that  four  pieces  of  Davis’  batterv  instead  of  two 
were  to  remain  to  protect  the  troops  in  falling  back,  and  that  Colonel 

Davis,  of  the  Eegiment,  would  superintend  the  taking  of  the 

iridge  instead  of  Colonel  Derrom,  and  that  he  wished  me  to  have  a 
letail  of  men  sufficient  for  that  purpose  report  to  Colonel  Davis  at  the 
)ridge.  General  Getty  further  directed  me  to  place  one  of  the  regi- 
iients  which  had  been  held  in  reserve  during  the  day  in  the  rifle-pits  on 
lie  left  bank  of  the  river,  to  serve  as  a rear  guard.  I went  to  the  other 
;ide  of  the  river  to  superintend  the  withdrawal  of  the  forces. 

After  the  troops  had  all  crossed  the  river  except  the  One  hundred 
md  seventieth  New  York,  which  was  then  marching  from  the  rifle-pits 
where  it  had  been  placed  to  serve  as  a rearguard  to  the  bridge),  I saw 
■lieutenant  Faxon,  who  informed  me  that  it  was  not  General  Getty’s  in- 
'entions  that  the  troops  should  be  withdrawn  until  further  orders  were 
eceived  from  him;  that  he  had  heard  that  the  enemy  were  retreating 
|nd  it  so  he  wished  to  be  in  a position  to  follow  them  up  in  the  mornin<^. 

: he  movement  had  then  been  conducted  so  far  that  in  a few  minutes  all 
he  troops  would  be  across.  I therefore  did  not  order  the  crossing  to 
(ease,  but  waited  until  the  last  had  crossed  and  then  reported  in  person 
0 General  Getty  that  the  troops  were  across  and  that  Colonel  Davis 
|ras  commencing  to  take  up  the  bridge.  General  Getty  repeated  what 
aeutenant  Faxon  had  informed  me— that  it  was  not  his  intention  to 
ave  the  forces  withdrawn  until  ordered  by  him.  As  the  rumor  that 
ne  enemy  were  retreating  proved  to  be  true  it  is  to  be  regretted  that 
Ins  singular  misunderstanding  should  have  arisen. 

I forward  herewith  regimental  reports  of  the  movements  of  the  dif- 


314 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XXX. 


Icrcnt  rcKi.ue..ts  i.i  this  brigade  from  April  11  to  April  30  aml  rc  orts 
of  the  comraaiKlers  of  the  Eleventh,  Eifteenth,  and  Sixteenth  begi- 
inents  of  the  part  taken  by  their  respective  regiments  in  the  recon- 
naissance of  the  3d  instant.  Lists  of  casualties  have  already  been 

torwa  ^ captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BDWAKD  HAKLAND, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Charles  T.  Gardner, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  G crier al. 


No.  19. 


Bevort  of  Col.  John  E.  Ward,  Eighth  Connecticut  Infantry,  of  the  capture 
of  Battery  Huger,  April  19. 


Hdqrs.  Eighth  -Regiment  Connecticut  Vols., 

^ Suffolk,  Va.,  May  G,  18G3. 

General  : I liave  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
talven  by  my  regiment  in  the  capture  of  the  rebel  battery  at  Fort  Hugei, 

^^On  the  aftmmoon  of  April  19,  in  accordance  witli  orders  from  General 
Gcttv  I marched  from  my  bivouac  with  six  companies  (loO  men)  of  iii} 
!;"hnent  mufeXrked  on  the  gunboat  Stepping  Stones  iii  company 
with  Lieutenant-Colonel  England  and  about  150  men  ot  the  Eighty-nmtli 
New  Yolrvoliinteers.  We  were  landed'  at  Hill’s  Point,  in  the  rear  ot 
Fort  Hiio-er  a little  before  sunset,  immediately  charged  upon  the  works, 
ami  idteu  a verLhort  struggle  captured  the  fort,  with  five  pieces  ol 
artillery  a large  quantity  of  ammunition,  and  about  130  prisoners,  m- 
cludin'>-  7 officers.  Having  taken  possession  we  immediately  proceeded 
to  place  the  captured  guns  in  position  to  resist  any  attempt  of 
to  retake  the  Point,  and  commenced  intrenching  ourselves  as  well  a> 
Tio'^sible  with  the  means  at  our  disposal.  . . • 

^ Re-enforcements,  including  the  other  four  companies  of  my  regiment 
soon  arrived,  and  all  were  employed  during  the  night  in 
pits,  removing  ammunition  from  the  fort,  and  performing  picket  dut> 
At  about  10  o’clock  our  pickets  stationed  a short  distance  outside  tb 
ffirt  were  attacked  and  driven  in,  but  were 

held  their  position  until  the  regiment  was  relieved  at  noon  the  lollo 

IdmTass  of  my  regiment  in  this  affair  was  1 killed,  4 severely  wounded 
and  several  otlLrs'very  slightly  injured.  A list-  of  the  names  of  tb 
killed  and  wounded  isdorwarded  herewith. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  j,  jwAKD  WAKD, 

Colonel  Eighth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers. 


Brig.  Gen.  J.  D.  AVilliams, 


\_djutant- General  State  of  Connecticut. 


* Embodied  in  rcyised  statcynciit,  p.  287. 


315 


Chap.  XXXJ  SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

No.  20. 

Reports  of  Col.  Griffin  A.  f^teclman^  Jr..,  Eleventh  Conneetieut  Infantry. 

IIdqrs.  Eleventu  Connecticut  Volunteers, 

May  3,  1803. 

Sir  : I liave  the  Ijonor  to  report  that  the  Eleventh  Eegiment  Coniiee- 
ticut  \olimteers  crossed  the  Nansemond  lliver  at  the  draw-bridge  this 
moriiing,  being  part  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Third  Division.  About 
midday  it  was  ordered  to  the  front  to  support  the  Thirteenth  New 
Hampshire  Volunteers,  which  was  skirmishing  on  the  left  of  the  new 
Brovidence  Church  road.  By  order  of  Colonel  Stevens,  in  charge  of 
the  troops  in  that  place,  the  regiment  was  deployed  and  became  a part 
of  the  line  of  skirmishers.  After  advancing  some  distance  into  the 
woods  (50  rods)  the  line  halted,  by  command  of  Colonel  Stevens,  and 
remained  in  that  position  until  withdrawn  by  command  of  Brigadier- 
General  Hariand.  During  this  time  the  line  was  within  20  yards  of  the 
enemy  aud  exchanged  shots  constantly. 

Casualties:  Capt.  Kandall  H.  Eice,  Company  A,  wounded  in  leg  aud 
in  the  arm;  both  wounds  serious.  Private  John  Bracken,  Company 
F,  wounded  in  the  abdomen ; Private  Samuel  Bassett,  Company  A, 
wounded  in  the  knee;  and  Private  Auguste  Didier,  Company  I,  missing; 
he  was  sent  forward  and  did  not  return ; supposed  to  have  been  shot 
or  captured.  The  regiment  marched  with  220  enlisted  men  and  20 
ofiQcers,  and  returned  to  camp  without  a straggler. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEIFFIN  A.  STEDMAN,  Jr., 

Colonel  Eleventh  Conneetieut  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  H.  P.  Gates, 

Aeting  Assistant  Adjutant- Ge^ieral,  Seeond  Brigade. 


Hdqrs.  Eleventh  Connecticut  Volunteers, 

iSuffolhj  P«.,  May  5,  iSG3. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  78,  dated  Headquarters 
Second  Brigade,  Third  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps,  May  1,  18G3,  I 
liave  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  rei)ort  of  the  operations  of  this 
regiment  from  April  11  to  April  30 : 

At  the*  time  of  the  alarm  the  regiment  was  ordered  under  arms  and 
remained  so  until  the  evening  of  April  12,  when  the  men  were  allowed 
to  go  to  their  quarters  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  it  was  ordered  to  the  parapet,  on  Foster’s 
iront,  between  Forts  Union  and  McClellan. 

On  April  21  it  composed  a part  of  a reconnoitering  force  on  the  Eden- 
lon  road,  under  Brigadier-General  Corcoran.  During  this  reconnais- 
sance the  regiment  was  deployed  as  skirmishers.  Casualties  were  1 man 
iclled  and  1 wounded. 


on  Foster’s  front  and 
Hariand,  on  the  river 


On  the  28th  ultimo  it  was  relieved  from  duty 
i^eceived  orders  to  report  to  Brigadier-General 
Tout,  where  it  still  remains. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEIFFIN  A.  STEDMAN,  Jr., 

T . Colonel  Eleventh  Connecticut  Volunteers, 

Lieut.  H.  P.  Gates, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


316 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr,  XXX. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Col.  Arthur  H.  Dutton^  Twenty-first  Connecticut  Infantry,  coin 
manding  Third  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Suffolk,  Va.,  May  — , 18G3. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  recent 
operations : 

Early  in  the  month  of  April  my  command  was  constituted  as  follows: 
The  Eourth  Rhode  Island  and  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers, 
stationed  on  the 'Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad,  three-quarters  of  a 
mile  north  of  Suffolk;  the  Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey  Volunteers,  on  Jericho 
Creek,  three-quarters  of  a mile  northwest  of  the  above,  and  the  Twenty- 
first  Connecticut  Volunteers,  on  the  Nansemond  River,  3 miles  below 
Suffolk.  The  latter  regiment  had  just  commenced  the  work  now  known 
as  Fort  Connecticut,  and  on  April  8 was  joined  by  three  companies  of 
the  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire,  under  Major  Storer. 

On  the  10th  ultimo,  information  having  been  received  that  the  enemy 
was  advancing  from  the  Blackwater,  I was  ordered  to  proceed,  with  the 
Eourth  Rhode  Island,  the  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire,  and  the  One  hun- 
dred and  third  New  York,  to  a point  on  the  Nansemond  opposite  the 
mouth  of  Western  Branch,  fortify  the  position,  open  direct  communica- 
tion with  the  Twenty-first  Connecticut,  and  hold  the  entire  line  between 
the  said  point  and  the  mouth  of  Jericho  Creek,  to  prevent  any  crossing 
of  the  enemy.  Below  this  point  the  river  was  safely  held  by  gunboats. 
The  command  arrived  at  the  point  designated  about  midnight.  At  sun- 
rise the  work  on  the  fortifications  commenced;  trees  were  felled,  riGe- 
pits  made.  Battery  Stevens  commenced,  and  Lieutenant  Bruce,  of  my 
staff,  reconuoitered  a site  for  a military  road  to  the  camp  of  the  Twenty- 
first  Connecticut.  A road  was  already  in  progress  from  the  latter  camp 
direct  to  Jericho  Creek,  and  only  awaited  the  completion  of  a trestle 
bridge  over  Broer’s  Creek,  under  charge  of  Colonel  Derrom,  Twenty-fifth 
New  Jersey. 

On  the  evening  of  the  11th,  however,  orders  were  received  to  return 
instuntly  to  Suffolk.  No  means  of  transportation  being  at  hand,  it  be- 
came necessary  to  leave  a considerable  quantity  of  baggage  and  a small 
guard.  The  battalion  of  Major  Storer  was  retained  at*Fort  Connecticut, 
with  instructions  to  maintain  a strict  watch  on  all  sides  to  prevent  a 
crossing  of  the  enemy,  if  possible,  and,  if  forced  to  retreat,  to  do  so  by 
way  of  the  new  road,  destroying  camp  equipage,  &c.,  and  demolishing  the 
trestle  bridge.  No  attack  being  made,  on  the  following  day  our  position 
was  strengthened.  I was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  line  of  defense 
included  between  Forts  Halleck  and  Jericho.  On  this  line  I threw  up 
rifle-pits  and  posted  the  troops  in  the  most  advantageous  manner  for  con- 
centration upon  any  given  i)oint,  while  at  the  same  time  I held  myself 
in  readiness  to  support  General  Corcoran,  on  my  immediate  right,  should 
his  be  the  line  attacked.  Not  thinking  it  safe  to  send  a train  of  wagons 
j'or  the  abandoned  baggage,  I dispatched  two  or  three  at  a time  to  Bat- 
.tery  Stevens,  and  by  this  means  transferred  everything  in  safety  from  that 
point  to  my  headquarters.  Six  men  from  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  re- 
mained there  permanently  to  observe  the  enemy.  The  baggage  of  the 
Twenty-first  Connecticut  was  transferred  b^’  hand  over  Broer’s  Creek 
and  thence  by  wagons  to  its  camp. 

On  the  12th  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  was  assigned  to  the  command 
of  Bri|?adier-General  Corcoran, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


317 


On  tlie  13tli  the  Mueteeutli  Wisconsin  was  assigned  to  my  command, 
and  on  the  day  tollowmg  the  Ninth  Vermont  also  reported  to  me. 

On  tlie  15tli  my  line  of  defense  was  extended  to  Battery  Onondaga, 
at  tlie  montli  of  Jencho  Creek.  It  may  suflice  here  to  remark  thattli 
points  of  the  defenses  have  been  constantly  strengthened  each,  day  since 
tlie  commencement  of  the  siege,  all  soldiers,  including  pickets,  liein" 
required  to  labor  day  and  night  on  the  intrenchments. 

'|'«esday  the  14th,  the  enemy  having,  from  a battery  nearly  op- 
posito  the  small  pox  hospital,  engaged  and  damaged  the  naval  forces  on 
the  liver,  I was  ordered  to  reconnoiter  positions  for  counter  batteries 
and  superintend  their  construction.  Under  the  supervision  of  the  "-en- 
eral  commanding  division  I constructed  Batteries  Kimball  and  Morris 

the  Tenth  and  Thirteenth  Kew  Hampshire  and  Eighth  Connecticut  biv- 
ouacking near  at  hand  as  supports.  couch  u uiv 

Early  on  morning  of  the  15th  these  batteries,  consisting  of  two 
-0-poiinder  Parrotts,  two  3-inch  rifled  gnus,  and  three  10  pounder  Par- 
‘’etachments  from  the  Second  and  Fourth  Wisconsin  and 
ciased  to“reply“  ^'■^1  and  by  10  o’clock  the  rebels 

■ I*!®  Vermont  Volunteers  proceeded  to  Fort  Con- 

iiecticut.  Meantime  the  military  road  from  Suffolk  to  Fort  Stevens  had 
been  completed  by  the  Twenty-fifth  Kew  Jersey  Volunteers,  five  com- 
panies  ot  which  regiment  were  in  camp  at  Broer’s  Creek 

Harland  superseded  me  in  command  of  the  troops 
mi  the  Jericho,  and  I was  assigned  to  duty  on  the  19th  on  the  line  of  the 
Nanseanond,  making  my  headquarters  at  Fort  Connecticut. 

n the  evening  of  the  19th  the  rebel  battery  of  five  guns  at  Hilfs 
I oiut  was  captured  by  detachments  from  the  Eighth  Connecticut  and 

ftlfe'&To^f of  the  Stoe 
ot  t le  Hill  s 1 oint  Battery  on  the  Kansemoud  River: 

Sliortly  before  simset  the  gunboats  on  the  river  and  the  four  rifled 
„uiis  at  and  near  Battery  Stevens  (two  20  pounder  Parrotts  Captain 
Morris,  and  two  3-iiich  ordnance  guns,  Captain  .Vallee)  oiiened  a terrific 
S nt  '/wci^v  .’^^ttery.  Meantime  detachments  from  the  Eighty- 
in  n P I ^1  w’  ^,'®“tenant-Colonel  England,  and  the  Eighth  Connel 
ticut.  Colonel  Ward,  embarked  on  the  gunboat  Stepping  Stones  Lieu- 
^nankLamson,  at  a point  about  a mile  above  the  battery.  Protected 
0 the  artillery  fire  the  gunboat  boldly  steamed  down  the  river  and  ran 
lose  to  he  .shore,  about  200  yards  above  the  rebel  work-the  shoVat 
he  point  being  an  abrupt  blufl’.  Immediately  the  troops  disLbaiked 
vifoi'"”/®  **,®’*'  water,  ascended  the  bluff’,  and  with  loud  cheers 

I'oi'ir  Meantime  the  gunboat’s  crew  had  landed 

J mi  boat  howitzers,  placed  them  in  position!  and  opened  oiitlieZ  t 

irwoorth'rn’n*‘‘^7  completely  by  surprise,  were  ableV  di.scliarge  but 
two  01  three  volleys  of  musketry  and  one  gun,  when  our  troops  entered 

lien  consisting  of  7 oflicere  and  130 

r ii'c  brass  gun.s  and  a large  supply  of  ammunition. 

1 w.rs  now  directed  by  Brigadier-General  Getty  to  assume  comiiiand 
It  inv  .Pnf  rt  in  a state  of  defense  during  the  night.  The  force 

' 0 mec&T  consisted  of  detachments  of  the  Eighth 

.oiiiiecticuf.  Eighty-ninth  Now  York,  Tenth  New  Hampsliire  and  Ninth 

h 'll?"  The  soldiers,  althimgh  lat?S  illld 

i!  I ' I-  orbed  with  a most  commendable  zeal  to  intrench  themselves 
«s  wo  tiilly  expected  an  attack  in  t lie  morning.  tliemsUves, 

l■l(^"hpe'l?  n?  1*  ‘iofncliiiieiits  first  named  especial  credit  is  due.  They 
under  arms  nearly  all  day;  had  most  gallantly  captured  the 


318 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCllAF.  XXX. 


battery  ill  the  evening  f had  been  a considerable  time  without  food, 
and  were  drenched  with  the  water  through  which  thej^  were  forced  to 
wade  in  landing,  yet  not  a murmur  was  heard  from  them  thronghont.. 

I forward  herewith  a sketch  from  memory,  showing  the  location  of 
the  rebel  battery  and  the  works  thrown  np  for  our  own  defense.  Half 
an  hour  before  daylight  oiir  preparations  were  nearly  complete  and  the 
troops  in  position.  The  artillery  was  massed  on  the  left,  covering  the 
point  of  disembarkation,  three  gnus  being  in  Battery  A and  one  how- 
itzer in  Battery  D.  All  were  loaded  with  eauister  and  directed  to 
sweep  the  plain  by  which  the  enemy  must  approach.  One  howitzer 
was  disabled,  the  trail  of  the  carriage  being  broken.  My  design  was 
to  defend  the  entire  line  if  possible,  and  if  forced  to  abandon  a portion 
to  withdraw  the  troops  on  the  right  across  the  ravine  and  concentrate 
my  entire  force  upon  the  left,  which,  besides  being  the  strongest  posi- 
tion, also  covered  the  communication  with  the  naval  forces. 

At  early  daylight  a line  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  vras  discovered 
advancing  about  1,000  yards  distant.  They  covered  themselves  behind 
trees  and  fences  and  a few  were  observed  entering  a house  a few  hun- 
dred yards  in  front  of  our  left. 

About  this  time  the  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York,  Colonel 
Pease,  and  a section  of  Gilliss’  battery  (A,  Fifth  U.  S.  Artillery)  arrived 
and  were  duly  posted,  the  latter  in  Battery  0 and  subsequent!}^  in  Bat- 
tery B. 

It  now  became  apparent  that  the  enemy  did  not  meditate  an  attack, 
but  contented  himself  with  annoying  our  pickets  by  occasional  scatter- 
ing shots.  I accordingly  gave  direction  that  the  house  above  alluded 
to  should  be  fired  and  the  woods  shelled.  This  being  accomplished  we 
were  troubled  no  more. 

During  the  day  (20th)  our  troops  continued  to  strengthen  the  defenses, 
but  in  the  afternoon  orders  were  received  to  evacuate  the  place.  Tliis 
was  done  by  the  assistance  of  the  naval  forces.  The  intrenching  tools, 
artillery,  limber-chests,  &c.,  were  placed  aboard  the  gunboat  Stepping 
Stones  before  dark,  quakers  being  substituted  in  the  batteries  5 but 
during  the  process  the  ebbing  tide  left  the  steamer  aground,  and  fears 
were  entertained  that  the  enemy  might  attack  us  before  she  floated 
again,  in  which  event  the  destruction  of  the  vessel  and  the  loss  of  much 
material  might  have  resulted.  Immediately  after  dark,  however,  tlie 
process  of  ferrying  the  troops  across  the  river  in  row-boats  commenced 
and  was  safely  accomplished  by  midnight;  meantime  the  steamvr  was 
got  oft*  in  safety.  The  evacuation  was  thus  completed  without  the  loss 
of  a man  or  a single  article  of  property. 

■ In  this  connection  I cannot  forbear  paying  a tribute  to  the  valor  and 
energy  of  the  naval  forces  under  Lieutenant  Lamson.  This  gallant 
ofticer  has  at  all  times  shown  himself  most  willing  to  render  invaluable 
assistance  to  the  land  forces  with  men  and  material,  fearlessly  imperil- 
ing the  safety  of  himself,  fiis  men,  and  his  vessels. 

The  day  following  the  evacuation  of  Hill’s  Point  I was  assigned  to 
the  command  of  all  the  troops  on  the  Nansemond  from  dericho  Creek  t(» 
Dr.  Council’s  ])lace.  They  consisted  of  the  Tentli  New  Hampshire  Vol- 
unteers, the  Twenty-first  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the  Thirteenth  N(uv 
Hampshire  Volunteers,  the  Eighth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the  Twenty- 
second  Connecticut  Volunteers,  the  Ninth  Vermont  Volunteers,  Cilliss* 
battery  (A,  Fifth  U.  S.  .Artillery),  three  guns  of  Beger’s  (Second  Wis- 
e.onsin)  battery,  four  guns  of  Vallee’s  (Fourth  Wisconsin)  battery,  one  20- 
])ounder  Parrott  (unassigned),  and  four  guns  cajrtured  from  the  enemy. 

The  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire  I'ejrlaced  the  Nineteenth  Wisconsin, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


319 


winch  regiment,  by  command  of  General  Getty,  has  been  sent  to  Suffolk 
lor  disgraceful  conduct.  The  infantry  and  artillery  was  advantageously 
jiosted  along  the  river  and  the  fortifications  advanced  daily.  ^sTo  action 
occurred  previous  to  May  3 except  continual  firing  between  opposing- 
batteries  and  pickets.  . ^ » 

On  the  night  preceding  May  3,  as  a part  of  a combined  movement, 
J was  directed  to  send  the  Fourth  Khdde  Island  Yolunteers  across  the 
Nansemond  at  HilPs  Point  in  row-boats,  to  march  thence  at  daybreak 
and  occu])y  the  Suttblk  and  Smithfield  road  near  its  junction  with  the 
Providence  Church  road,  communicating  with  the  Twenty-first  Connec- 
ticut at  IteecPs  Ferry,  on  the  West  Branch;  also  to  cross  the  Twenty- 
first  Connecticut  some  3 miles  lower  down  with  a section  of  Yallee’s  bat- 
tery and  a squad  of  cavalry.  This  force  was  to  advance  to  Chuckatuck 
aiul  communicate  with  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island  at  EeeTs  Ferry. 

The  latter  force  crossed,  as  directed,  under  command  of  Major  Crosby 
and  marched  to  Chuckatuck,  his  progress  being  constantly  impeded  by 
the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  who  resisted  his  advance  with  tenacity  although 
111  small  force.  Eeaching  Chuckatuck  he  did  not  consider  it  safe  to  send 
a detachment  to  Eeed’s  Ferry,  and  therefore  proceeded  to  that  place 
^vith  his  entire  column.  Not  meeting  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island  at  that 
DOint,  as  expected,  and  having  no  other  means  of  communicating  with 
jo-operative  forces— the  Eeed’s  Ferry  Bridge  being  burned— he  marched 
lown  the  Yest  Branch  to  the  Nansemond,  losing  some  half  a dozen 
nen.  His  march  was  impeded  from  beginning  to  end  by  the  enemy’s 
^irmishers,  but  his  movements  were  continued  regardless  of  obstacles 
Tis  regiment  behaved  with  great  gallantry.  While  already  nearly  ex- 
lausted  with  fatigue  and  picket  duty  it  performed  in  twelve  hours  a 
narch  of  18  miles,  8 miles  of  which  were  through  an  enemy’s  country 
hove  its  opponent  before  it,  and  brought  in  IG  prisoners,  including  1 
)fhcer.  For  further  details  of  Major  Crosby’s  march  I refer  to  his  graphic 
■eport,  herewith  forwarded. 

J\reantime  Lieutenant-Colonel  Buffum,  with  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island 
-oO  strong,  occupied  the  opposite  shore  before  daybreak,  but  not  being 
aimhar  with  localities  disembarked  by  mistake  half  a mile  above  Hill’s 
omt.  I had  urged  upon  him  the  importance  of  taking  a guide,  which, 
lowever,  he  declined  to  do,  pleading  a perfect  understanding  of  «he 
position.  I joined  his  command  at  daybreak  and  instantly  saw  the 
lusfortune  that  might  have  resulted  from  his  error  had  the  enemv 
'ccupied  Hill’s  Point  in  any  force,  as,  by  holding  the  intrenchments 
liere  thrown  up  by  me  on  April  20,  they  might  have  easily  kept  us 
way.  We,  however,  immediately  occupied  the  place,  driving  out  about 
Jlozeii  rebels.  I now  formed  line  of  battle,  threw  out  skirmishers,  and 
(i  \ anceiL  Immediately  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  behind  fences  and 
rees.  VV  e drove  them  about  three-quarters  of  a mile,  to  the  edge  of 
orest  which  completely  environed  the  position  ‘from  shore  to  shore. 
<‘i(‘  their  fire  was  so  rapid  that  I halted  to  study  the  position.  I drew 
Heir  lire  in  volleys  two  or  three  times  to  determine  their  force,  Avhich 
estimated  at  from  200  to  400.  Between  me  and  them  there  was  a 
narter  ot  a mile  of  open  ground,  over  which  we  could  not  have  ad- 
anced  without  tremendous  loss.  I then  threw  skirmishers  into  the 
'auier  on  the  right  and  there  also  discovered  the  enemy  in  greater  or 
'sa  lorce.  It  seemed  therefore  that  to  advance  fartlier  would  insure 
'.V  iXMiig  cut  oil  from  Hill’s  Point  and  perhaps  captured.  I therefore 
1 oiHtlc  and  proceeded  to  the  gunboat  Barney  to  consult  with  Caiitain 
asiiing.  Here  it  was  reported  that  the  enemy  had  TOO  men  at  Le 


320 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Compters  house,  about  half  a mile  to  the  right  of  my  advauce,  between 
me  and  Eeed’s  Ferry. 

It  now  occurred  to  me  that  if  the  main  advance  from  Suffolk  was 
successful  the  force  opposed  to  me  would  be  intercepted  between  Gen- 
eral Getty,  the  West  Branch,  and  myself,  and  I accordingly  resolved 
to  attract  their  attention  by  continual  skirmishing.  Captain  Cushing 
kindly  supplied  me  with  a boat  howitzer  and  a detachment  of  sailors. 
Colonel  Pease,  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  New  York,  also  sent  me, 
at  my  request,  100  men,  and  I once  more  advanced,  driving  the  enemy 
to  the  skirt  of  the  woods.  Skirmishing  continued  for  a couple  of  hours, 
when  the  enemy  brought  artillery  and  opened  fire  upon  me.  My  how- 
itzer having  expended  its  ammunition  I again  retired  with  slight  loss. 

During  the  engagement  the  officers  of  the  regiment  behaved  with 
great  coolness  and  bravery,  and  there  were  individual  instances  of  gal- 
iantry  among  the  men,  but  I regret  to  state  that  the  mass  of  the  meu 
exhibited  an  aversion  to  exposing  themselves,  a willingness  to  retreat, 
and  a contempt  for  good  order  that  I scarcely  expected  in  a regiment  of 
two  years’  experience  and  which  has  five  battles  inscribed  ui)on  its  flag. 

At  about  3 p.  m.  I received  a dispatch  from  Major  Crosby  announc- 
ing his  success.  I therefore  meditated  a joint  movement  of  the  two 
regiments  upon  the  enemy  near  Le  Compte’s  house,  which  I was  as- 
sured would  result  successfully  though  involving  considerable  loss; 
but  learning  that  the  Twenty-first  Connecticut  was  utterly  exhausted 
and  without  food  for  man  or  horse  I concluded  to  await  orders  from  the 
general  commanding.  After  dark,  by  order  of  General  Getty,  I with- 
drew the  troops  from  Hill’s  Point,  bringing  over  also  some  valuable 
pieces  of  timber,  which  I found  useful  the  following  day. 

On  the  4th  the  enemy  retired  altogether  from  our  front,  and  I with- 
drew Major  Crosby’s  force.  The  horses  and  artillery  were  embarked 
by  the  aid  of  an  improvised  floating  wharf  which  I constructed  out  of 
row-boats  and  loose  timber. 

Ever  since  the  commencement  of  the  siege  I have  been  generally  well 
seconded  by  the  officers  and  soldiers  under  my  command.  All  have 
nobly  done  their  duty,  but  some  have  done  more.  Among  these  I take 
ifleasure  in  mentioning  Maj.  H.  B.  Crosby,  of  the  Twenty-first  Connec- 
licut,  who  has  always  shown  himself  a zealous,  industrious,  brave,  and 
trustworthy  officer."  I would  also  specially  commend  Colonel  Derrorn, 
Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey,  to  whose  ability  as  an  engineer  the  service  is 
much  indebted ; Colonel  Donohoe,  of  the  Tenth  New  Hampshire,  to 
whom  I am  indebted  for  valuable  co-operation  in  su])erintemling  the 
river  defenses;  Major  Storer,  of  the  Thirteenth  New  Hampshire;  ( ap- 
tains  Brown  and  Keed,  of  the  Fourth  IMiode  Island,  and  Lieutenant 
Bruce,  of  my  staff,  for  their  faithful  and  soldierly  deportment  in  the 
various  trying  scenes  in  which  they  separately  i)artici})ated.  I am  in- 
debted for  repeated  and  valuable  favors  to  Lieutenants  Cushing  and 
Lamsou,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  flotilla.  I also  take  pride  in  calling 
the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  the  general  admirable  he 
luivior  in  action  of  the  three  new  regiments  of  my  brigade.  1 transmit 
herewith  a list  of  casualties  in  my  brigade.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servmnt, 

A.  H.  DUTTON, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Capt.  Charles  T.  Gardner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* Embodied  in  revised  st.'itcment,  p.  287. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

No.  22. 


321 


Report  of  Maj.  Hiram  B.  Crosby^  Twenty-first  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-first  Eegt.  Connecticut  Vols., 

SuffollCj  Va.j  May  5,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with 
orders  from  the  general  commanding  1 crossed  the  Nansemond  on  Sun- 
day, at  4 o’clock  in  the  morning.  May  3,  having  under  my  command  the 
Twenty-first  Regiment  Connecticut  Yolunteers,  a section  of  the  Fourth 
Wisconsin  Battery  under  Lieut.  Martin  McDevitt,  and  a sergeant  with 
10  men  of  the  First  New  York  Mounted  Rifles.  My  orders  were  to 
march  to  Chuckatuck  and  from  thence  to  Reed’s  Ferry,  opening  com- 
munication with  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  on  my  left. 

The  troops  were  under  way  for  Chuckatuck  at  4.30  o’clock  Sunday 
morning,  the  distance  being  2J  miles.  My  skirmishers  came  upon  the 
line  of  rebel  pickets  about  half  a mile  from  the  Nansemond,  their  fires 
still  burning.  The  rebel  pickets  fell  back  to  Chuckatuck  as  we  ad- 
vanced. When  within  half  a mile  of  the  village  we  saw  a company  of 
rebel  cavalry  drawn  up  in  the  main  street  leading  into  the  village.  I 
ordered  Lieutenant  McDevitt  to  open  fire  upon  them  with  artillery,  and 
the  rebels,  after  a few  rounds,  retired  to  the  farther  side  of  the  village, 
at  the  junction  ot  the  Reed’s  Ferry  and  Isle  of  Weight  roads.  I advanced 
the  skirmishers  to  the  village  and  moved  up  the  column.  Appearances 
indicated  that  the  enemy  would  make  a stand  at  that  point,  but  they 
again  retired,  a portion  of  their  force  taking  the  Isle  of  Wight  road, 
but  the  greater  number  retiring  by  the  Reed’s  Ferry  road. 

As  soon  as  my  command  were  in  the  village  I sent  Sergeant  Trow- 
bridge, of  the  Mounted  Rifles,  and  his  detachment  of  cavalry  to  recon- 
noiter  the  road  leading  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  also  ordered  Captain 
Spittle,  acting  major  of  the  Twenty-first,  with  Companies  A and  K,  to 
skirmish  along  the  Reed’s  Ferry  road.  From  the  accounts  given  by 
contrabands  at  this  point  the  enemy’s  cavalry  were  estimated  at  about 
300  strong,  and  that  they  had  a camp  at  Isle  of  Wight  and  also  on  the 
Reed’s  Ferry  road.  I ordered  Lieutenant  McDevitt  to  put  the  artillery 
in  i)osition  to  command  both  roads  until  they  could  be  reconuoitered. 
On  discovering  that  the  enemy  intended  to  make  no  resistance  at  this 
point  the  column  was  moved  ahead  on  the  Reed’s  Ferry  road.  Captain 
Spittle  came  upon  the  camp  on  this  road  about  haff  a mile  beyond 
Chuckatuck.  The  enemy  had  but  just  left;  their  camp-fires  still  burn- 
ing. About  a mile  beyond  Chuckatuck  the  roads  branch  ofi*,  one  leading 
to  Reed’s  Ferry  the  other  to  Everett’s  Bridge.  The  foot-prints  indicated 
that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  retired  by  the  latter  road,  but  as  the  two 
roads  ran  near  together  for  quite  a distance  I halted  the  column  at  this 
point,  put  the  guns  in  position  commanding  both  roads,  and  ordered 
Captain  Spittle  to  reconnoiter  them.  The  enemy  were  then  reported 
nowhere  in  sight. 

The  column  was  at  once  ^et  in  motion  along  the  Reed’s  Ferry  road 
with  the  exception  that  Lieutenant  McDevitt,  with  one  piece  of  artillery 
and  a sufficient  support,  was  left  behind  to  command  the  Everett’s 
Rndge  road  until  an  advance  was  secured.  The  column  had  moved 
out  ail  eighth  of  a mile  in  advance  when  I ordered  Sergeant  Trow- 
bridge to  make  a reconnaissance  on  the  Everett’s  Bridge  road  for  about 

21  R R — VOL  XVIII 


322 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


50  rods,  passing  over  the  same  ground  which  onr  skirmishers  had  pre- 
viously gone  over.  The  cavalry  had  gone  hiit  a short  distance  when 
the  eiiemv,  who  had  suddenly  returned,  opened  fire  upon  them,  killing 
1 and  Avonuding  2 of  their  number.  Lieutenant  McDevitt  opened  upon 
them  at  once  and  shelled  them  back  toward  Everett^s  Bridge. 

The  column  was  delayed  at  this  i>oint  about  halt  an  hour,  but  theie 
being  no  signs  of  the  enemy’s  returning  I advanced  the^  skirmishers 
rapidly  on  the  Reed’s  Ferry  road,  and  again  set  the  column  in  mo- 

^^^oiir  march  was  necessarily  slow,  owing  to  the  thick  underbriish 
through  which  the  skirmishers  were  obliged  to  make  their  way.  On 
approaching  the  West  Branch  we  again  discovered  the  enemy  s pickets. 
The  skirmishers,  under  Captain  Spittle,  Captain  Shepard  ^nd  Captain 
Belden,  advanced  gallantly  and  were  soon  engaged.  The  artillery  was 
moved  up  with  supports  and  opened  fire  at  once,  commanding  the  oppo- 
site bank  of  the  creek,  where  the  enemy  had  two  campanies  of  sharp- 
shooters as  a support.  The  skirmish  at  this  point  was  short  and 
spirited,  resulting  in  our  capturing  1 lieutenant,  3 ^ 

porals,  and  10  privates  of  the  enemy.  Our  loss  was  3 wounded,  1 ol 
whom  died  some  two  hours  afterward  as  we  were  without  suigical 

We  encamped  Sunday  night  on  the  Ransemond, 
under  protection  of  the  gunboats.  On  the  next  morning  Captain  Spittle 
was  sent  out  with  Companies  A and  K to  reconnoiter,  and  retuimed 
bringing  2 deserters,  who  were  dispatched  to  the  general  comman^ng. 
He  further  reported  that  the  enemy,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  West 
Branch  from  us,  commenced  their  retreat  on  the  evening  previous  at 
8 o’clock,  an4  that  the  most  of  their  forces  had  retired  before  midnight, 
burning  behind  them  the  bridge  at  Page’s  Mill.  i 

I am  under  great  obligations  to  Flag-Officer  Captain  Cushing  and 
also  to  Cantain  Lamson.  Acting  Master’s  Mate  ' 

great  assistance  in  giving  information  where  to  post  the  artillep  so  a 
to  be  of  service  to  our  troops  engaged  with  the  enemy  on  the  other  side 
of  the  creek,  and  also  took  quite  an  active  part  in  the  sl^irinish.  > 
thanks  are  due  to  the  officers  of  the  regiment  for  their  prompt  and 

^^Th^e  patie\ice  and  courage  of  the  men,  after  the  fatigue  of  the  past 

ten  days,  is  deserAung  of  especial  praise.  ^ n t • ^ ^ Tvin 

I take  pleasure  in  mentioning  the  gallant  conduct  of  Lieutenant  IN  - 
Hevitt,  of  the  Fourth  Wisconsin  Battery,  and  the  prompt  and  efficient 
manner  in  which  both  he  and  his  men  performed  their  duty. 

The  detachment  of  New  York  Mounted  Rifles,  under  Sergt.  [Jaint. 
L.l  Trowbridge,  are  also  deserving  of  great  praise,  for,  though  tew  n 
number,  they  ay  ere  of  the  greatest  assistance.  . 

The  casualties  are  as  follows:  Company  killed,  Pmate  Altre 
J.  Freeman;  Company  x\,  wounded,  PriA-ate  Hiram  C.  Loomis;  Con 
pany  K,  Private  Lyndes  C.  Bushnell.  , . 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  o})^t|ient  s^waid, 

HIRAM  B.  CKUoBi, 

Major,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Cr.  A.  Bruce,  , ^ t.  • 7 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Third  Brigade. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


323 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


1^0.  23. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon.,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  Reserve 
Division,  of  operations  May  1-4. 

Headquarters  Gordon’s  Division, 

Folly  Island,  8.  C.,  October  21,  1863. 

General  : Constant  service  in  the  field  has  delayed  a report  of  my 
])articipation  in  the  memorable  siege  of  Sufiblk,  V'a.,  during  portions  of 
tlie  months  of  April  and  May  in  the  present  year.  Deporting  to  Major- 
General  Dix,  commanding  the  Department  of  Virginia,  on  April  2!),  I 
was  ordered  to  join  you  at  Suffolk,  Va.,  to  assume  command  of  a division 
of  troops  within  the  almost  closely-invested  town.  I reported  on  May  1 
and  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Deserve  Division,  consisting  of 
two  brigades,  the  Second  and  Third,  of  what  was  formerly  Abercrombie’s 
division,  the  Second,  commanded  by  Col.  Burr  Porter,  of  the  Fortieth 
Massachusetts  Degiment,  consisting  of  his  own  regiment,  the  Twenty- 
second  Connecticut,  One  hundred  and  forty-first  Dew  York,  and  Elev- 
enth Dhode  Island  Degiments;  the  Third,  commanded  by  Col.  William 
Gurney,  of  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Dew  York  Degiment, 
consisting  of  that  regiment  and  the  One  hundred  and  forty-second.  One 
biindred  and  forty-third,  and  One  hundred  and  forty-fourth  Dew  York 
Degimentsj  in  all,  eight  regiments,  numbering  over  5,000  officers  and 
men.  The  siege  had  continued  for  some  days  before  my  arrival.  I fouiul 
tlie  enemy  holding  a belt  of  woods  that  surrounded  the  town  in  front 
and  fiank  from  the  Dansemond  on  the  right  to  the  Dismal  Swamp  on 
the  left.  His  rifle-pits  covered  his  line  far  to  the  front,  while,  his  sharp- 
shooters annoyed  not  only  our  gunners  at  their  pieces  but  the  men  in 
their  encampments. 

All  had  been  done  that  skill  could  suggest  to  strengthen  your  posi- 
tion. An  outer  and  inner  line  of  forts  protected  the  front;  strong 
inclosed  works  defended  the  flanks,  the  whole  connected  by  a line  of  in- 
trenchments  for  infantry  protected  by  ditches  and  abatis.  The  woods 
cleared  from  your  front  gave  a full  sweep  to  the  artillery.  Every  pre- 
caution by  artificial  works,  by  the  advantages  of  strong  natural  sites, 
and  by  a judicious  disposition  of  the  troops  to  repel  an  assault,  seemed 
to  me  to  have  been  taken.  The  sudden  flight  of  the  enemy  from  the 
front  on  the  night  of  May  3,  thus  raising  the  siege,  placed  my  division 
at  the  disposal  of  the  commander  of  the  department,  by  whom  I was 
immediately  ordered  on  the  important  duty  of  occupying,  holding,  and 
fortifying  West  Point  as  a military  base  for  future  operations.  The 
removal  of  the  enemy  from  our  front  developed  the  whole  of  his  opera- 
Itions  and  gave  me  a good  opportunity  of  judging,  from  the  extent  and 
character  of  his  works,  the  force  which  threatened  your  position. 

It  w^as  well  known  that  Generals  Longstreet  and  Hill,  of  the  rebel 
service,  had  united  their  forces  in  front  of  Suffolk.  Without  taking 
into  consideration  the  reports  of  deserters  and  facts  revealed  by  recon- 
|tiaissances,  special  as  well  as  in  force,  but  simply  judging  from  the 
imount  of  labor  performed  in  completing  their  lines  of  investment,  the 
Jesieging  force  could  not  have  been  less  than  30,000.  Everywhere  in 
rout,  from  the  Dansemond  to  the  swamp,  they  had  thrown  up  heavy 
ntrenchments  for  infantry.  On  all  the  roads  batteries  for  artillery,  in 
cnibrasure,  well  revetted,  with  ditches  wide  and  deep,  and  abatis  skill- 
mlly  hiid  and  thickly  interwoven,  rendered  a sortie  almost  hopeless. 
Mot  only  one  line  of  such  defenses  covered  the  enemy’s  front  but  on 
Jome  roads  three,  four,  and  even  five  i)arallel  lines  of  formidable  works 


324 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


were  formed,  indicating  in  the  clearest  manner  a strengthened  base  from 
which  the  approaches  were  to  be  made  and  upon  which  the  enemy  could  . 
retire  if  forced  back  in  their  attack. 

These  works  were  made  with  great  skill  and  of  great  strength,  f he 
parapet  for  infantry  defense  could  have  resisted  the  heaviest  rifle  caliber, 
being  not  less  than  12  feet  thick.  Apart  from  lines  of  earthworks  for 
offensive  operations  there  were  also  temporary  structures  in  process  ot 
erection,  covered  sheds  to  protect  supplies,  and  every  evidence  ot  prepa- 
rations for  the  reduction  of  the  fortifications  of  Suffolk. 

While  thankful  for  the  movement  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  which 
cave  the  disappointed  rebel  commanders  an  opportunity  of  withdrawing 
from  yonr  front,  as  every  humane  soldier  should  be  at  being  spared  the 
sacrifices  of  an  unnecessary  conflict,  regret  will  mingle  with  triumph 
that  he  who  came  strong  in  the  conviction  of  an  easy  victory  did  not 
try  your  metal,  but,  satisfied  with  a glance,  turned  from  the  offensive  to 
the  defensive  and  finally  stole  away  in  the  night,  under  pressure  ot  a 
strong  reconnaissance  of  your  forces,  which  drove  him  from  his  rifle- 
pits  back  to  his  first  line  of  defenses.  , , 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obediMt 

GrEO.  II*  GrOEI/vJ-^  j 
Brigadier 'General  of  TJ.  S.  Yolunteers. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck, 

Commanding^  North  Carolina, 


No.  24. 

iJenorts  of  Mm.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French,  0.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  T)e- 
j)artment  of  Southern  Virginia. 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  Southern  Virginia, 

Near  Suffolk.,  Va.,  April  22,  18G3. 

Sir  : I respectfuUy  submit  to  the  lieutenant-general  cominambbig  the 
following  report  respecting  the  loss  of  the  guns  of  Stribling  s battery  : 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant  I started  from  my  camp  on  the 
South  Quay  road,  at  the  request  of  Lieutenant-General  LongsU’ect,  to 
endeavor  to  destroy  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy  in  the  Nansemond  Ri\ci. 
Stribling’s,  Bradford’s,  and  [J.  0.]  Coit’s  battenes  were  taken 
Only  one  gunboat  could  be  seen,  and  she  was  lying  behind  the  ot 
land  below  the  mouth  of  the  Western  Branch  ot  the  Nansemond.  flu 
batteries  were  put  in  position  in  the  hope  she  would  move  up,  init . 
storm  coming  on  and  the  near  approach  of  night  induced  me  to  withdu 
the  guns.  The  engineer  informed  me  that  he  and  otlmr  offioers  luui 
selected  two  sites  for  batteries— the  one  near  tlie  lett  ' 

line  of  battle,  in  which  there  was  in  a work  constructed  a battei\ 
field  artillery  and  an  infantry  force  for  protection ; the  otlicr  ^vas  t 
work  built  for  the  defense  of  the  river  when  we  held  Suffolk  and  Uux 
in  it  was  an  infantry  force,  but  no  artillery.  I directed  Maj.  L.  ^ 
maker,  my  chief  of  artillery,  on  the  night  of  the  10th  to  take 
houses  on  a farm  near  by  materials  to  construct  Platlorms  aud  betor 
morning  to  put  the  guns  of  Stribling’s  battery  in  the  voik.  llns 

accomplished.  ciu* 

The  next  morning  three  gunboats  attempted  to  pass  nj). 
ceeded,  but  was  severely  damaged,  tvhen  the  other  Dvo  turned  back. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


325 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

bad  y^tilocted  the  site  for  pits  for  two  32-pouuders,  aud  on  the  night  of 
the  18th  the}^  were  completed  and  the  guns  placed  in  position.  For 
the  protection  of  these  guns  in  the  pits  I asked  that  three  companies 
of  infantry  be  sent,  designing  to  use  them,  however,  to  guard  also  the 
road  where  all  the  camps  were,  but  the  lieutenant-general  ordered  down 
the  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  Eegiment,  Colonel  Connally  commanding. 

On  Sunday,  the  19th,  the  situation  of  affairs  was  thus:  Bradford’s  bat- 
tery was  in  the  new  work,  with  instructions  from  my  chief  of  artillery 
while  the  work  was  defended  by  troops  from  Hood’s  division,  and  bv 
his  officers  they  were  posted,  relieved,  and  got  their  orders.  In  the 
Hill’s  Point  Battery  were  Stribling’s  battery,  with  my  instructions  • 
the  work  defended  by  two  companies  of  infantry,  under  instructions 
irom  the  officers  placing  them  there.  The  32-pounders  were  in  position 
and  a company  of  the  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  near  by,  while  the  other 
companies  were  a supporting  force  to  either  of  these  last  two  batteries. 
All  the  batteries  were  to  receive  further  support  from  General  Hood’s 
command  if  required,  and  all  my  officers  were  so  informed,  and  couriers 
were  left  there  to  communicate  such  intelligence  to  General  Law  who 
was  on  the  extreme  left,  if  his  aid  should  be  required.  The  river  as 
low  down  as  the  mouth  of  the  West  Branch  was  guarded  by  the  troops 
ot  General  Hood,  and  reported,  of  course,  to  their  commanders.  I was 
ill  on  Sunday  and  could  not  ride  down  the  river,  but  sent  Col.  G.  A 
Cunningham.  There  were  four  gunboats  above  the  work  on  Hill’s  Point 
aud  three  below,  and  five  or  six  land  batteries  and  sharpshooters  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  river. 

i^out  10  a.  m.  the  four  gunboats  above  and  the  land  batteries  opened 
a sharp  fire  on  the  Hill’s  Point  work,  and  two  gunboats  from  below 
iimved  up  to  aid  them,  when  the  32-pounders  opened  fire  on  them,  and 
alter  a spirited  engagement  one  was  slightly  injured  and  both  were 
driven  back.  The  fire  on  the  work,  however,  continued  until  near  4 
p.  111.,  when  it  ceased.  Major  Shumaker  then  communicated  with  Captain 
Stribling,  and  although  it  was  reported  that  the  gunboats  had  troops 
on  board  his  note  does  not  intimate  that  he  apprehended  an  attack  by 
a lorce  of  the  enemy  landing  for  that  purpose. 

About  4 p.  m.  Colonel  Cunningham  instructed  Colonel  Connally  to 
support  the  batteries,  and  this  was,  as  he  states,  about  an  hour  and  a 
halt  before  the  guns  were  lost.  In  that  time  he  might  have  been  near 
the  work,  so  far  as  distance  is  concerned,  but  I have  my  doubts  if  any 
regiments  could  have  passed  the  wide  plain  and  rendered  any  real  sup- 
port under  the  fire  that  was  or  could  have  been  brought  to  bear  on  their 
approach.  The  manner  of  attack  appears  to  have  been  to  have  sent  one 
gunboat  down  as  though  she  was  going  to  pass  the  work  to  engage  the 
attention  of  the  men  in  the  fort,  while  from  the  other  boats  a force  of 
about  oOO  men  was  landed.  It  ajipears  to  me  that  if  the  garrison  was 
mrprised,  they  were  negligent ; if  not  surprised,  they  did  not  offer  a 
sufficient  resistance. 

I inclose  herewith  papers  marked — 

A— Order  detailing  Colonel  Connally’s  regiment,  by  direction  of  the 
general  commanding. 

B— Copy  of  orders  given  Colonel  Connally. 

C — Colonel  Connally’s  report.* 

— ^^Maj.  L.  M.  Shumaker’s  report.! 

L and  F— General  French’s  orders  to  Major  Shumaker. 

^asi^l  Shumaker’s  note  to  Captain  Stribling  after  the  cannonade 

I *See  Report  No.  30. 


t See  Report  No.  25. 


326 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


H— Captain  Stribling’s  answer ; shows  he  apprehended  no  land  at-  'i 
tHiCk. 

j_LEei)ort  of  property  lost  by  the  capture. 

or  10  mite 

advance  of  the  work,  and  to  have  retaken  the  work  by  cessing  the  open 
r.iMit,  ,n  dor  the  fire  of  seven  gunboats  stationed  near  the  fort,  that  ot 
the  land  batteries  and  that  of  the  enemy  in  the  work  was  believed  would 
?<re  a saSce  of  men  of  more  value  to  ns  than  the  fort  it  recaptured. 
T e euemr^  are  aware,  the  night  following  evacuated  the  work 
T e reiVt  sho4  that  93  men,  all  the  horses,  harness,  ^ " 

tiou  of  fi  bind  uttuck.  i 4. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,^  ^ PHtENGH, 

Major-Oeneral,  Commanding. 

Maj.  G.  AIoxley  Sorrel, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters, 
Near  Suffollc,  Pa.,  April  25,  1803. 

:rF:.w.i“ 


See  Report  No.  26. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


327 


counted  the  number  of  shots  per  minute.  In  no  instance  did  they  exceed 
thirteen  to  the  minute;  the  average,  I think,  was  about  eight. " Of  the 
thirteen  shots  that  could  have  been  fired  at  a command  charging  across 
the  field  after  night  it  is  not  likely  that  more  than  four  could  have  taken 
effect,  and  those  ought  not  to  be  expected  to  destroy  more  than  2 men 
per  shot.  So  1 think  it  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  fort  and  battery 
could  have  been  recaptured  Vvith  the  loss  of  75  men.  Many  of  the  offi- 
cers were  of  limited  experience,  however,  and  I have  no  doubt  acted  as 
they  thought  best.  1 do  not  know  that  any  of  them  deserve  particular 
censure.  This  lesson,  it  is  hoped,  will  be  of  service  to  us  all.  The  com- 
mand at  the  fort  seems  to  have  been  completely  surx)rised,  and  is  prob- 
ably less  excusable  than  other  parties  in  the  affair. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 

[luclosure  A.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  ErenciFs  Command, 

No.  3.  i April  17,  1863. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  E.  Davis  will  detail  three  companies  of  the  Fifty-fifth 
North  Carolina  Troops,  Col.  J.  K.  Connally,  to  proceed  immediately  to 
Norfleet’s  house,  on  the  Feed’s  Ferry  road,  to  report  to  Maj.  L.  M.  Shu- 
maker for  duty  in  guarding  the  batteries  located  in  that  vicinity.  One 
day’s  rations  will  be  taken.  The  remainder  of  the  regiment  will  march 
to  the  same  place  to-morrow  morning  for  i)ermanent  duty  on  the  river. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French : 

GRAHAM  DAVES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

General  J.  R,  Davis,  Commanding^  &€. 


[Inclosure  B.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  French’s  Command, 

No.  7.  ] April  18,  1863. 

I.  Col.  J.  K.  Connally,  commanding  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  Troops, 
will  detail  two  companies  from  his  regiment  for  picket  duty  to-night, 
one  to  take  post  near  the  fish-house  (Le  Compte’s)  to  prevent  a landing 
by  the  enemy.  In  case  a landing  should  be  attempted,  the  boats  will 
be  ])ermitted  to  reach  the  shore  before  being  fired  upon.  This  company 
will  furnish  a picket  force  of  4 men  (in  charge  of  a corporal)  to  take 
])osition  on  the  Reed’s  Ferry  road  half  a mile  below  Le  Compte’s  house. 
Prompt  information  will  be  given  of  an  advance  of  the  enemy  in  force, 
but  care  will  be  taken  not  to  give  false  alarms.  The  second  company 
will  take  post  near  the  battery  now  erecting  (Smoot’s).  This  company 
will  furnish  a party  to  assist  in  loading  the  wagons  with  forage  and 
lu'ovisions  from  Riddick’s  farm.  In  case  of  attack  Colonel  Connally 
will  hold  his  regiment  in  readiness  to  suiiport  the  artillery  and  will 
maintain  his  position  until  the  last. 

##**#** 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French : 

GRAHAM  DAVES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


328 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


[Inclosure  E.] 

April  19, 1863. 

Major  Shumaker: 

I will  have  this  matter  of  forage  attended  to.  I hope  you  may  suc- 
ceed in  sinking  those  infernal  gunboats  that  have  shown  no  considera- 
tion for  women  or  children,  if  you  cripple  one  and  can  use  the  field 
batteries  against  her  do  so.  I felt  too  ill  from  the  medicine  I took  to 
come  down  this  morning.  Keep  me  advised. 

Yours,  truly, 

’ S.  G.  FRENCH, 

Major-General. 

[Inclosure  E.] 


Headquarters,  Ap^il  19, 1863. 


Major  Shumaker: 

Let  me  know  what  the  result  of  the  heavy  cannonade  now  going  on. 
Show  this  to  Colonel  Connally  and  have  him  post  his  regiment  to  repel 
any  landing  of  infantry  against  the  batteries.  They  had  better  move 
down  near  the  battery  of  Stribling.  The  countersign  is  “ Morgan  for 


to-night. 

Yours,  truly. 


S.  G.  FRENCH, 

Major-General. 


[Inclosttre  G.] 


Moore’S  House,  April  19,  1863. 

Captain:  Let  me  know  the  result  of  the  enemy’s  fire  to-day.  AVe 
have  information  that  the  boat  you  disabled  day  before  yesterdaj’^  has 
been  towed  down  the  river,  sunk  about  to  her  gunwales.  Citizens  Irom 
the  other  side  of  the  river  saw  her.  She  will  not  trouble  you  again  soon. 
I ixo  up  to  headquarters  to-night  and  wish  to  take  a report  to  the  general. 

^ ^ L.  M.  SHUMAKER, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Artillery . 


[Inclosure  H.] 

Battery  at  Hill’s  Point,  Va., 

April  19,  1863. 


Major  : The  enemy  has  shelled  us  steadily  for  about  three  hours 
from  gunboats  lying  up  the  river.  There  are  four  of  them,  and  from 
their  movements  I think  they  are  preparing  to  run  down  at  least  one  ot 
them.  The  lower  boats  have  been  otherwise  occupied.  There  are  no 
casualties,  and  we  will  be  prepared  to  give  them  a warm  reception  should 
any  attempt  to  run  down.  Our  embrasures  are  now  widened,  so  that  v c 
will  be  able  to  give  the  boat  three  shots  from  each  gun  as  they  run  b^ . 

With  respect,  _ 

R.  M.  STRIBLING, 
Captain^  Commanding  Battery. 


[Indorsement.! 


This  note  was  written  just  before  the 
that  landed  and  carried  the  work. 


work  was  attacked  by  the  party 

S.  G., FRENCH, 

Major-General. 


329 


I ■ 

i Chap.  XXX.] 

1 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 
[Inclosure  J.] 


Camp  near  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  20, 1863. 

jAfaj.  L.  AI.  Shumaker: 

1 Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  order,  received  this  morning,  I have  the 
honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  condition  of  Stribling^s  bat- 
tery. The  battery  was  captured  by  the  'enemy  yesterday  evening,  when 
the  loss  was  as  follows : 

Commissioned  officers . 

iNon-commissioned  officers ’ q 

Privates [ 47 

!l2-pounder  guns o 

i4-pounder  howitzers ” „ 

I!liests  with  12-pounder  ammunition q 

Chests  with  24-pounder  ammunition ^ 0 

The  present  condition  of  the  battery  is  as  follows: 


Commissioned  officers  present  for  duty 

N'on-commissioned  officers  present  for* duty 
hivates  present  for  duty 

Aggregate  present 


’uhlic  horses 

Vagons * q 

i mbu  lances ! - 1 y."  *[*.'.*.  1 1 

i hrges 1 

huiiiing-gear  to  caissons '.'.V.'.V."  r 

jffiests  of  12-pounder  gun  ammunition n 

'^lests  of  24-pounder  howitzer  ammunition  o 

I 

Remaek.— In  addition  to  the  number  of  men  stated  above  as  present 
or  (luty  there  are  6 privates  absent  sick,  who  may  reasonably  be  ex- 
pected to  join  their  company  within  a few  weeks. 

With  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEAY  CAEROLL, 

Lieutenant^  Coinmanding  Stribling^s  Battery. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Southern  Virginia, 

' May  25,  1863. 

! General:  During  the  three  weeks  that  Lieutenant-General  Lon«-- 
itreet  kept  the  enemy  confined  within  Suffolk  there  was  an  effort  macle 

0 remove  the  iron  from  the  Seaboard  and  Eoanoke  Railroad.  Com- 
lencmg  near  Suffolk,  the  engineer  department  succeeded  in  taking  up 
hout  3 miles  of  the  rails  and  removed  it  toward  Franklin  and  depos- 
^eu  It  at  or  near  a place  known  as  Beaver  Dam,  where  it  could  be  pro- 
:H:te(l  by  the  forces  near  Franklin.  After  we  withdrew  from  Suffolk 

1 le  enemy  discovered  the  effort  made  to  secure  the  iron  on  our  part 
ud  soon  niarched  to  Carrsville  with  a force  of  between  9,000  and  10,00() 
iiantry , 30  pieces  of  artillery,  and  cavalry,  and  immediately  fortified 
itii  iiosition  and  commenced  takincr  up  the  track  and  removing  it 


Jenkins  assembled  all  the  available  forces, 
n i 1 1 • crossed  over  and  drove  in  all  their  advanced 

ncs  DeJiind  their  intrench  men  ts  and  kept  them  there  for  near  three 
^ abandon  the  road  this  side  of  Carrsville,  and 

the  road  to  that  point,  except  a few 
aimrecl  >ards,  and  the  iron  brought  from  near  Suffolk.  The  enemy 


i 


330 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX 1 


would  not  leave  Ids  works  to  attack  us,  and  "witli  our  small  force  liad- 
VrdrhZ  liim  from  Ids  intrenchments  it  would  have  been  a victory , 
bilrreu  of  results  and  involving  a heavy  sacrifice  of  men  on  our  part., 
All  this  time  while  confronting  him  we  were  removing  the  iron  as  rap- 
idly as  possible.  The  road  destroyed,  the  enemy  fell  back  and  imme 
diateh-  with  his  whole  force  assumed  a position  at  Windsor  on  he; 
I^orfoik  and  Petersburg  Kailroad,  and  simultaneously  moved  up  the 
(Miowaii  with  gunboats  above  the  Nottoway  Iviyer. 

"im  some  force  to  attack  the  gunboats  m ease  they  came  up  1; 
asseniWed  about  3,000  men  .and  on  Saturday  afternoon  crossed  tin, 
ifilackwater  at  the  Blackwater  Bridge  by  means  of  pontoons  and  moiei 
bi  the  direction  of  Windsor.  I found  the  enemy  again  with  all  his  forci 
ill  a thick  woods,  his  lines  running  from  the  railroad  to  across  the  Black 
water  road.  His  outposts  and  advanced  lines  were  rapidly  diiven  in 
and  I assumed  a line  of  battle  in  hopes  he  would  move  to  the  attack 
Th\s  hfclid  not  do,  and  after  dusk  I withdrew  to  the  right  bank  of  th 
river  There  were  no  results  that  seemed  m anywise  attainable  tha 
would  have  justified  me  in  attacking  the  enemy,  outnumbering  us  foui 

While  over  the  river  information  was  received  tha,t  the  Sue 

boats  had  moved  up  the  Meherrin  and  taken  possession  of  Murfreesboi 
ou'di  H 0.  General  Jenkins  the  same  night  moved  to  Franklin,  air 
with  his’forces  was  directed  to  operate  against  the  puboa,ts.  I do  nc 
know  what  forces  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  has  m North  Carolina  to  ^uar 

‘’"^fislor^a  source  of  great  regret  that  so  of  the  iron  from  tb 

two  railroads  referred  to  was  taken  up  during  the  tune  General  Lou, 
street  was  at  Suffolk.  I am  sure  had  there  been  any  concert  or  a propi 
concerr  of  action  in  the  departments  the- bridge  over  the  Blackwat. 
could  have  been  built,  and  by  constructing  a 

ing  of  the  roads  near  Suffolk  trains  could  have  beeu  run  from  Pctei 
biiro-  to  Franklin  via  Suffolk  and  both  roads  taken  up.  Had  a bii  , 
Imen  thrown  across  the  Zuni  before  General  Lougstreet  i>'.oved  a 
during  the  mouth  he  was  making  preparations,  every  bar  of  iron  coii 
have  been  secured  while  we  were  there  at  Sulloik. 

Yours,  very  respectfully,  ^ FKENCH, 

Major- General.,  Commandmj. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


[Indorsement.] 


Engineer  Bureau,  June  9, 1803. 

Kespectfully  returned  to  the  honorab^ 


wL  sp^  -on  from  the  Norfolk  and  Pete  ^ 

bur'.-  road  and  from  the  Seaboard  road  while  General  Loiigstieet  v as 
command;  but  his  efforts,  assisted  by  the  eugiueers  under  b'S  couti. 
were  given  to  the  collection  of  supplies  for  the  army,  these  beiii„ 
sidered  of  the  first  importance.  Every  thing  possible  with  tbe  eiigmie 


has  been  .lone  to  save  the  iron  in  question,  and  lam  “ow  able  to  rep 
of  the  iron  from  tlie  Seaboard  Ladroad  is  on  the  i p 


that  a large  iiart  of 
bank  of  the  Blackwater., 


J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  of  Engineers,  and  Chief  of  Bureau 


Chap.  XXX.] 


331 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 

IS^o.  25. 

Rqwrt  of  Maj.  L.  M.  Shumalcer,  C.  8.  Artilley^  Chief  of  Artillery^  of  the 
capture  of  Battery  Huger ^ April  19. 

Headquarters, 

Near  Elfs^  Fa.,  April  21,  1863. 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  order  I have  the  honor  to  report  that 
on  the  morning  of  the  19th  I directed  Major  Boggs  to  send  Capt.  [D.  L.] 
Smoot,  [Alexandria  Light  Artillery,  or  Company  E,  Eighteenth  Battal- 
ion Virginia  Artillery],  with  his  two  30-pounder  Parrott  guns,  into  the 
works  constructed  for  him  to  the  west  of  Hill’s  Point  Battery,  occupied 
by  Captain  Stribling.  Captain  Smoot  got  into  position  just  before  day- 
light, and  I directed  Major  Boggs  to  order  him  not  to  unmask  or  fire 
until  the  boats  above  Hill’s  Point  attempted  to  come  down  or  those  be- 
low attempted  to  pass  up.  I also  directed  him  to  send  Captain  Brad- 
ford, with  his  four  heavy  12-pounders,  to  relieve  Capt.  [S.  T.]  Martin, 
[Battery  B,  Twelfth  Virginia  Battalion],  then  occupying  Major  Henry’s 
position  with  four  12-pounder  howitzers',  and  to  instruct  him  not  to  fire 
at  anything  but  a gunboat,  and  only  then  when  they  came  within  short 
range,  stating  that  your  orders  to  me  were  to  sink  the  boats  if  possible. 
Captain  Stribling’s  battery  was  placed  in  the  work  at  Hill’s  Point  after 
1 had  explained  the  position  and  character  of  the  work  to  both  General 
Longstreet  and  yourself. 

On  Thursday  night,  the  16th,  I had  thoroughly  inspected  the  work, 
and,  finding  the  platforms  burned  away,  took  the  heavy  siding  from  a 
corn-crib  on  the  Eiddick  farm  to  make  floors  for  the  carriages.  These 
floors  did  not  raise  the  guns  sufficiently  to  fire  over  the  parapet,  con- 
structed originally  for  guns  of  heavy  caliber,  mounted  on  barbette  car- 
riages. I ordered  Captain  Stribling  to  cut  embrasures  for  all  his  pieces, 
which  was  done  as  far  as  could  be  that  night  and  finished  the  succeeding 
night,  so  that  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  I had  three  batteries  in  posi- 
tion on  the  Nansemond  Eiver,  to  wit : Bradford’s  at  Norfleet’s  Landing, 
Major  Henry’s  position ; Captain  Stribling’s,  consisting  of  two  24-pounder 
howitzers  and  three  12-pounder  Napoleons,  at  Hill’s  Point,  in  a very 
strong  earthwork;  and  Captain  Smoot,  with  two  30-pounder  Parrott 
rifles,  to  the  west  of  and  about  two-thirds  of  a mile  from  Hill’s  Point, 
where  the  river  widens  and  a semicircular  bluff  bounds  a large  marsh. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  there  were  three  gunboats  above  Hill’s 
Point  and  below  Norfleet’s  Landing,  and  five  below  Hill’s  Point  lying 
below  the  mouth  of  the  West  Branch  of  the  Nansemond  Eiver.  About 
10  o’clock  three  of  these  attempted  to  pass  up  by  the  battery  at  Hill’s 
Point,  and  one  of  them  succeeded  in  passing;  the  others  were  driven 
back,  one  of  them  severely  damaged,  as  she  was  towed  down  the  river 
afterward,  disabled,  and  thought  by  the  citizens  to  be  sinking. 

Thus,  on  the  morning  of  the  19tli  there  were  four  gunboats  above 
Hill’s  Point  and  three  below.  About  10  o’clock  Colonel  Cunningham 
came  down  from  headquarters  (as  I understood  from  himself  and  Lieu- 
tenant Etting)  to  relieve  me,  and  he  at  once  took  charge  and  went  around 
to  Smoot’s  position.  Shortly  afterward  the  30-pounder  guns  opened, 
and  tlien  commenced  a general  firing  from  all  the  gunboats  and  two  of 
the  enemy’s  land  batteries,  four  of  the  boats  and  two  batteries  firing  upon 
Hill’s  Point,  the  others  directing  their  fire  upon  Smoot’s  position  and 
Occasionally  shelling  the  woods  where  our  sharpshooters  were.  About 
i o’clock  there  was  a general  cessation  of  firing,  and  I sent  a messenger 


332 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  B.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX  j 


to  Captain  Stribling  with  a note  inquiring  into  the  casualties,  a copy 
of  which  is  herewith  inclosed,  with  Captain  Stribling’s  indorsement 
thereon.*  About  1 o’clock  Major  Boggs  informed  me  that  the  gun- 
boats above  Hill’s  Point  had  moved  farther  up  the  river,  their  decks 
covered  with  troops,  and  Captain  Martin  also  reported  to  me  that  a large 
body  of  infantry  (he  thought  a regiment,  if  not  more)  had  passed  bis 
position  (Norfleet’s  Landing)  the  day  before,  moving  down  the  river. 
These  facts  I mentioned  to  General  Law  immediately  after  being  in- 
formed of  them,  he  having  come  to  Moore’s  house  where  I then  was. 

Shortly  after  receiving  Stribling’s  reply  to  my  note  I received  a note 
from  yon  giving  me  general  directions,  and  I determined  not  to  return 
to  camp.  About  sunset  I saw  the  boats  in  motion  above  Hill’s  Point, 
and  from  the  signal  whistles  I judged  that  one  or  more  of  them  intended 
to  try  to  pass  the  batteries.  I dispatched  a messenger  to  Captain  Smoot 
to  hold  himself  ready,  and  held  Coit’s  two  3-inch  rifled  guns  to  dash 
out  whenever  I could  make  them  available  in  sinking  any  boat  that  we 
might  disable.  In  a short  time  I heard  a volley  of  musketry,  then  a 
few  scattering  shots,  and  then  loud  and  continued  cheering.  In  a few 
moments  a messenger  informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  landed  a large 
body  of  infantry  from  three  boats  above  Hill’s  Point,  and  had  charged 
and  taken  the  position.  I immediately  sent  Major  Boggs  to  inform 
Colonel  Connallj^,  who  at  once  moved  his  regiment  down.  I then  sent 
a courier  to  General  Law,  one  to  General  Hood,  and  one  to  yourself. 
The  courier  to  General  Law  returned,  bringing  me  word  from  him  that 
he  could  not  send  us  assistance,  and  I at  once  directed  Major  Boggs  to 
order  Captain  Bradford  out  from  his  position  and  sent  Captain  Smoot 
an  order  to  get  his  guns  and  ammunition  out  into  the  road  as  soon  as 
possible.  I then  ordered  Coit’s  two  light  guns  forward  and  went  to- 
ward the  fort  or  work  as  far  as  the  farm-houses  to  ascertain  the  position 
of  affairs.  I soon  became  satisfied  that  any  attempt  to  retake  the  guns 
with  the  force  we  had  must  fail,  and  that  neither  infantry  nor  artillery 
could  cross  the  plateau  under  the  cross-fire  of  seven  gunboats  and  two 
land  batteries,  with  an  unknown  body  of  infantry  filling  the  work  and 
lining  the  river  bank.  I therefore  returned  to  the  Eeed’s  Perry  road 
to  await  your  coming  and  to  direct  the  movements  of  the  remaining 
batteries.  Your  note  directing  me  to  have  Connally  post  his  regiment 
to  support  Stribling’s  battery  and  to  prevent  the  landing  of  troops  was 
not  received  until  8 o’clock,  an  hour  or  more  after  the  position  had  been 

I herewith  inclose  Major  Boggs’  and  Lieutenant  Carroll’s  t reiiorts,  and 
cojiies  of  the  various  notes,  directions,  &c.,  referred  to  above. 

In  conclusion,  general,  I have  the  honor  to  ask  tor  a court  of  iiiquir} 
as  well  to  verify  the  facts  stated  in  the  foregoing  report  as  to  have  a 
record  answer  to  any  charge  of  neglect  of  duty,  either  exxiressed  or  im 


plied. 

Very  respectfully. 


L.  M.  SHUMAKER, 
Major  and  Chief  of  Artillery. 


Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  Pkench, 

Commanding  Division. 


p.  s. — It  may  be  proper  to  state  that  the  work  is  a heavy  earthwork 
fronting  down  the  river,  Avith  heavy  traverses  between  the  guns,^< 


* See  luclosiires  G and  H to  Major-General  French^e  report,  No.  24. 
t See  inclosure  J to  Major-GenSral  French’s  report,  No.  24, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


333 


right  gun  being  the  only  one  able  to  fire  across  the  river  ift  right  ano-les 
The  gUDS  could  not  be  tired  to  the  rear,  as  there  was  rising  f round  m' 
mediately  in  rear  of  and  higher  than  the  work  itself,  and  it  las  behind 
this  in  rear  of  the  work  that  the  landing  was  effected,  there  beintr  no 
pickets,  as  I understood,  on  the  river  above  to  give  information.  ^ 


No.  26. 

Ueporl  of  Maj.  F.  J.  Boggs,  C.  S.  Artillery,  of  the  capture  of  Battery 

Huger ^ April  19. 

Providence  Church.  Ya.,  April  21,  1863 
ilAJOE:  In  re.spouse  to  your  call  for  a detailed  report  of  the  occur 
rences  on  the  tOth  I regret  to  say  I have  but  an  imperfect  recollection 
If  '''ore  than  general  affairs.  Captain  Smoot  wont  into  batterv  on  he 
light  of  the  18th.  On  the  19th  I went  to  the  point  below  him?in  vi^v 
>f  the  gunboat,  to  watch  the  efiect  of  his  shot  if  he  sljould  oi)eii  The 
nstruc  ions  1 gave  him  as  received  from  you  were  to  w^t  imtil  a boat 

la’s  I.li  ^ * to  take  a nearer  position,  as  on  the  day  before, 

was  not  a little  surprised  to  hear  Smoot’s  guns  open,  as  the  boat  I 
^ight,  had  not  gone  up  far  enough.  The  shots,  homier®  were  good 
>ne,  I am  conhdent,  struck  on  the  starboard  side  in  front  iuk  unde?^the 
uirricane  deck.  During  the  night  succeeding  you  orS  Smoot  iii 
n\  jiresence,  to  come  out  cautiously,  removing  his  guns  first  bv  ha’nd 
ihich  he  did,  and  last  night  succeeded  in  getting  out  Ws  caissons  The 
ri  ers  given  by  me  and  from  you  to  Stribling  tere  to  firTlt  nlhin® 

ms  sirdlobeyeff*®™^*”'^ 

f britilf  <,mi'*’  ® ’^oats  from  below  came  up  iu  line 

f battle  and  opened  a terrific  fire  on  Stribling’s  position  the  rear  hoaf« 
ontniuing  the  fire  while  the  first  boat  passed.  Lieutenant  Marshall  b, 
•inied  me  in  the  evening  that  two  shots  were  fired  at  the  leading  boat 
le  taking  a damaging  effect.  Seven  shots  were  tired  at  the  .second 
oat,  fi\e  taking  effect  and  the  sixth  striking  down  the  flag-staff'  Sev- 
I'a  s f H."*  '«y  acffua^ntance  informed  me  that  she  was  towed  below 

a sinking  condition.  I witnessed  this  fight  also,  and  heard  the  crash 
I fnnlicr  I roni  the  shots  on  the  second  boirt. 

Ir  \v  Irl  I sunset,  I was  standing  with  you  and 

1 1.  U iterbnry  in  Mrs;  Moore’s  yard  when  we  heard  lielivy  lirii?|  and 

■<ler  to  Colonel  ConiniKr  t ^ nnniediately  communicated  yoiir 

o'cntll  C^  pYec  n ^ regiment,  which  order  was 

Id  I (In  „^®'*^,.^*-ctiou  was  also  carried  in.  The  shelling  was  terrific 

rters  t le  tto^^^^  the  trip  from  Eiddick’s 

le  ellbl  f Sn,  C.  I ® "?t)rmng  of  this  day,  while  1 was  watching 
1‘iroo  ii/u!  ^ ^ <^bserve(l  tliree  boats  above  the  fort,  oue 

■orm  ilT.  this  one,  at  least,  loaded  with  troops.  ’T  ds 

Heel  r A • ff  ““'“fated  to  you,  and  expressed  my  fears  to  several 
1>  i nms  f l there  would  be  an  effort  to  land  troops! 

ni  a 'tertherer  ort  reardAA'^'"®  l A’’®  and  troops, 

marl  tciepoit  reached  us  of  the  capture  of  Stribling’s  battery  you 

1 aiked  that  you  had. sent  to  General  Law,  but  that  ho  inforimid  vm. 

’ l.nd  not  the  troops  to  spare.  1 think  you  rlnarkecfylu  had  lso  ^0" 


334 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


to  General  Hood.  Without  delay,  as  I thought,  Generals  Hood  and 
Law,  and  shortly  after  General  French,  were  at  the  cross  roads  and 
dispositions  of  iiifautry  made.  Bradford’s  battery  was  occupjung  the 
works  above  Henry’s,  and  were  ordered  out  by  you  through  me,  ^id  I 
had  succeeded  in  getting  out  all  the  pieces  but  oue. 
ordered  it  back  again,  where  it  remained  until  last  night,  \vhui  ei  cp- 
thing  was  brought  out  in  safety.  The  orders  given  to  and  obeyed  by 
Captain  Bradford  were  to  fire  at  nothing  but  boats  in  passing  oi' t m 
enemy  at  short  range.  One  wheel  in  this  battery  was  shattered  iind  the 
muzzle  molding  of  one  gun  struck  by  the  shot  ot  the  ^ 

terv,  as  well  as  the  Hill’s  Point  Battery,  was  commanded  the  foimer  by 
three,  the  other  by  two,  land  batteries  over  the  river,  and  both  by  large 
bodies  of  sharpshooters.  ^ ^ BOGGS 

Major,  Gommanding. 

Maj.  L.  M.  Shumaker,  Chief  of  Artillery. 


No.  27. 

Benort  of  Maj.  James  Bearing,  C.  8.  Artillery,  of  the  capture  of  Battery 

Huger,  April  19.  ■ 

''  ’ ArRiL  21,  1803. 

General:  Your  letter  recommending  me  a quartermaster  was  re 
ceived  just  as  we  were  starting  on  to  Suffolk,  and  this  is  the  hist  opjior- 
tuiiity  i have  had  of  replying.  I sent  up  a recommendation  aiiproi  wl 
bv  General  Pickett  and  General  Longstreet  about  a weeli  t®'' 
before  receiving  your  letter,  and  hope  every  day  to  see  the  pin/  ot 
my  quartermaster.  I have  two  medical  officers  with  my  battalion,  one 
ordiiaiice  officer,  one  adjutant,  and  a lieutenant  acting  as  qnarterniastei. 

I had  just  succeeded  in  getting  Capt.  [M.  C.]  Macon  tom  JJ’ 

giving  him  a battery  of  four  Napoleons  and  two  1 arrotts,  and 
ting  him  50  conscripts.  Capt.  [W.  H.]  Caskie  was  in  ^ 

four  Napoleons,  and  I was  hard  at  work  to  obtain  a rifle  1 an  ott  b.  t 
tery,  if  possible,  for  Capt.  [J.  G.]  Blount,  when  we  were  o^l®*'®’  ’ " 

side  of  the  Blackwater.  Soon  after  getting  here— that  R’'  y' 
miles  of  Suffolk— Major-General  French  came  down,  and  " 

command  (though  being  the  ranking  ma.ipr-se''®ra\.’‘®\®)’  j 

Longstreet  finally  gave  him  the  command  of  all  the  artillci y . Gi  ^ • 
French  immediately  took  two  of  my  batteries— Ca]>tain  btribliiig  .s  . 
Caritain  Bradford’s,  which  had  been  assigned  me  at  1 etersbiiig,  i-  > 
posed  of  four  12-pouuder  brass  pieces— and  sent  tlimii  away  dii'U 
Nansemoiid  River,  some  15  miles  from  me,  putting  Captain  »*•''>  '- 

between  two  streams  just  where  they  unite  and  both  ot  tliein  n.i  ?-■ 
for  gunboats,  giving  Captain  Stribliiig  only  two  coinpaiiies  ot  mtaiit  y 
as  a support.  The  enemy  came  up  in  front,  on  both  flanks,  and  ic. 
and  captured  Captain  Stribliiig,  his  battery  ot  three  ^apok  UN  a ii< 
two  24-pounder  brass  howitzers,  and  5()  ot  his  men.  ihe  c.iis.Mii  , 
the  chests  taken  off,  and  the  horses  were  halt  a mile  back  ami  RR  ■ 1 . 
Lieut.  [G.|  Carroll  also  escaped,  not  be  ng  present.  He 
men  and  the  horses  yet  remaining.  All  ot  the 

French  has  turned  over  to  some  other  batteries.  I do  think  it  r uy  . 
to  have  one’s  command  thus  split  up  and  captured,  especially  ni  sii u 
wav  as  this  has  been  done.  If  it  is  a military  necessity  to  ® ' ' 

talioiJS  no  oue  will  more  cheerfully  acquiesce  tliau  my  sell  j but  t 


jjHAP.XXX.]  SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA.  ' 335 


)roveii  itself  not  to  be  such  an  one,  for  General  French  has  hastened 
i 0 remove  all  batteries  remaining-  near  that  point  to  some  safe  inland 
position. 

T have  been  worldng  hard  and  straining  every  point  to  fully  equip 
Hid  man  my  battalion,  and  was  flattering  myself  that  I was  succeeding 
iretty  well  when  this  drawback  comes  upon  me.  It  does  seem  that  it 
s but  a poor  inducement  for  one  to  get  a fine  battalion  if  he  is  to  have 
lothing  to  do  with  commanding  it  in  times  of  peril— if  it  is  to  be  placed  * 
n traps  to  be  captured  without  fighting.  I had  hoped  that  I might 
[lave  the  honor  ot  commanding  my  own  battalion  on  a battle-field,  there 
:o  share  its  honors,  victories,  or  defeats;  but  it  seems  otherwise.  I had 
|io  idea  of  accepting  a sinecure  when  I became  a field  officer  of  artil- 
i^r^  , and  when  my  battalion  is  needed  I wish  to  carry  it  into  battle 
lyself. 

I have  received  both  of  the  papers  recommending  officers  for  CaskieH 
[littery.  He  has  one  vacancy  for  a lieutenant,  and  I should  much  pre- 
^r  Lieut.  [S.  F.]  Chapman  to  [L.]  Booker.  I sent  Captain  Caskie  him- 
elt  back  to  Richmond  to  see  if  he  could  hasten  the  filling  of  the  requisi- 
ion  for  his  guns.  I have  written  to  him  on  the  subject  and  am  expecting- 
n answer  daily.  Some  charges  against  Lieut.  [T.  B.l  McCurdy,  of  the 
xme  battery,  came  down  to-day,  and  I have  just  ordered  him  back  to 
}port  to  Colonel  Crutchfield  for  trial.  He  appears  to  be  an  indifferent 
nd  worthless  officer  and  talks  of  resigning.  I hope  he  may,  if  mv  im- 
ressions  prove  true.  ^ 

I hope,  general,  you  will  allow  me  to  have  the  Parrott  gun  Captain 
askie  turned  over  to  Colonel  Crutchfield.  I am  greatly  in  need  of 
ties,  and  wish  much  to  have  a rifle  battery,  and  besides  reallv  think 
am  justly  entitled  to  that  gun.  The  battery  was  sent  to  me  without 
orses  or  guns,  though  it  had  both,  and  both  ought  rightfullv  to  have 
0611  sent— at  least  all  he  had.  My  horses  are  doing  w^elJ,  and  if  Cap- 
mi  Stribling  had  his  battery  and  I had  the  Parrotts  for  Captain  Blount 
would  be  satisfied. 


Believe  me,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  HEAPING, 

^ _ Major,  Commanding  Battalion. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  N.  Pendleton, 

Chief  of  Artillery,  Army  of  Northern  Virginia. 


I . S.  I foigot  to  mention  that  Lane’s  Whitworth  g'un  burst  in  North 
irolina,  and  that  both  of  his  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  have  been  dis- 
)led  down  here;  one,  elevating  screw  was  broken;  the  other  gun  was 
acked.  i hoiiPiVf*.  ® 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqes.  Aetilleey  Ooeps,  April  27,  1SG3. 
Tifcspecttully  forwarded  to  thecommanding  geuoral  for  Ids  information 
III  to  express  the  anxiety  of  the  undersigned  lest  much  care  in  adjust- 
g our  artdiery  organization  be  frustrated  by  change  of  system  in  those 
liownV  ^ serving  elsewhere.  Major  Dearing’s  views  and  feelings  seem 
oVVa  . soldier-hke.  It  is  hoped  they  may  be  in  the  main  ap- 

o\  oil  by  (jeneral  Lee  and  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet 
licspectfully  submitted. 

W.  N.  PENDLETON, 
Brigadier- General  and  Chief  of  Artillery. 

reflection  whatever  upon  General  French  is  intended  by 
- undersigned,  who  has  a favorable  and  very  kind  recollection  of  Geil- 


336 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


eriil  r.  Unaware,  however,  of  the  difficulties  incident  to  the  rupture 
and  readjustment  of  recent  battalion  organizations,  he  may  not  quite 
fully  appreciate  the  importance  of  not  permanently  weakening  a bat- 
talion as  such.  To  encourage  these  efficient  young  battalion  com- 
manders seems  practically  wise.  The  other  points  mentioned  by  Major 
D.  are  attended  to. 

Respectfully,  p 


No.  28. 

Report  of  Capt.  Robert  M.  Stribling,  Fauquier  Artillery,  of  the  capture 
of  Battery  Huger,  April  19. 

Petersburg,  Ya.,  AFay  G,  1863. 

General  : In  reply  to  your  request  of  this  morning  I have  the  honor 
of  making  the  following  report  of  the  capture  of  my  battery  on  tlie  Nan- 
semond  Eiver  on  the  evening  of  April  19  : . . . 

About  11  p.  m.,  Anril  IG,  my  battery  was  placed  in  position  m tlie 
old  fort  on  Hill’s  Point  by  Major  Shumaker,  chief  of  artillery,  with 
orders  from  him  to  fire  upon  any  boats  running  up  or  down  the  river 
that  might  attempt  to  pass  the  fort,  and  to  fire  under  no  other  circum- 
stances except  when  the  fire  would  bo  undoubtedly  with  effect,  but  to 
keep  the  men  under  cover  as  well  as  possible.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Coleman,  of  General  Law’s  brigade,  was  in  the  fort  with  some  infantry 
wlien  I went  into  position.  The  next  morning  the  enemy  opened  upon 
the  fort  from  gunboats  below  and  above,  and  also  from  a land  bat- 
tery upon  the  opposite  shore.  About  11  a.  m.  three  boats  attempted 
to  run  by  the  fort — one  ran  aground  about  600  yards  below,  and  only 
one  succeeded  then  in  passing ; we  fired  upon  it  and  made  several  holes 
through  it.  Toward  sunset  the  boat  which  had  been  aground  got  oil 
and  passed  by ; we  made  seven  holes  through  her,  and  I understood 
permanently  disabled  her.  Saturday  was  a day  of  comparative  quiet, 
no  shots  of  any  consequence  being  fired  at  the  fort  and  we  not  firing 

at  all.  1^1 

Early  Sunday  morning  firing  commenced  from  the  gunboats  and 
about  1 p.  m.  became  quite  furious  and  continued  so  until  between  sun- 
down and  dark,  when,  upon  a signal,  all  firing  ceased,  and  immediate!, \ 
one  of  the  boats  above  ran  near  the  shore  and  rapidly  landed  two  oi 
more  regiments  about  400  yards  abpve  the  fort.  They  double-quicked 
by  the  flank  across  the'  neck  of  land,  thereby  cutting  oft  all  cominuni^ 
cation.  They  then  faced  to  the  front,  discharged  their  pieces,  and 
charged  upon  the  fort.  The  pieces  which  had  been  turned  toward  tbj 
land  and  the  infantry  supports  (two  companies,  numbering  about 
men,  and  commanded  by  Captain  Bozeman,  of  Forty-fourth  Alabama 
Begiment,  General  Law’s  brigade)  opened  upon  them  and  held  then 
in  check.  They  soon,  however,  flanked  the  fort  on  either  side  an( 
entered  it  through  a swamp  and  over  the  parapets  on  the  river  side  am 
in  rear  of  the  guns.  We  were  hastened  offi  with  the  greatest  rapidiu 
and  put  on  board  the  boat.  . i 

About  2 o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  16th  the  pickets  stationed  up  th( 
river  fell  back  to  the  fort,  reporting  that  the  enemy  had  landed  in  larg< 
force  above.  Notice  was  immediately  sent  through  one  of  my  sergeant! 
to  General  Law.  In  the  mean  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  Coleman  art 
vanced  his  skirmishers  ui)  the  river  and  found  no  enemy  at  the  point 


j»AF.  XXX.]  SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA.  337 

iidicated.  They  bad  re-embarked,  as  I learned  after  my  capture.  My 
sergeant  returned  and  reported  that  a regiment  was  in  the  woods,  about 
hree-qnarters  of  a mile  distant,  having  been  sent  down  to  our  support. 
A’ hen  the  enemy  landed  on  the  evening  of  the  19th  there  was  no  picket 
)r  lookout  ui)  the  river;  no  gun  was  fired  or  no  notice  whatever  served 
)f  their  approach,  and  as  the  shore  was  heavily  wooded  we  could  see 
lothing  from  the  fort.  1 had  been  led  to  suppose  that  the  banks  of  the 
iver  were  picketed  and  that  I would  receive  notice  of  the  approach  of 
b land  force,  and  also  that  there  was  a regiment  in  supporting  distance, 
die  construction  of  the  fort  was  of  such  a nature  that  I could  not  use 
ay  guns  with  full  elfect  against  a land  force,  though  it  was  admirably 
idapted  to  resist  an  attack  from  the  gunboats  and  to  blockade  the  river 
.t  that  point. 

I neglected  to  state  that  while  the  gunboat  was  aground  during  the 
Horning  of  the  17th  no  gun  in  the  fort  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
t on  account  of  the  narrowness  of  the  embrasure  which  had  been  hastily 
lit  out  the  night  before.  That  night  they  were  widened  sufficiently  to 
;ive  command  of  the  point. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  M.  STRIBLING, 
Captain  Fauquier  Artillery. 

[Maj,  Gen.  S.  G.  French.] 

P.  S. — It  might  be  well  to  add  that  on  the  night  of  the  IGth,  when 
he  alarm  was  given,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Coleman  told  me  that  he  had 
rders  to  notify  General  Law  should  any  force  cross  the  river,  and  that 
e had  no  courier.  As  my  sergeant  had  a horse  1 offered  him  to  the 
olonel,  and  he  was  sent  by  his  order. 


[Indorsement.] 

Stribling’s  guns  were  lost  because  the  infantry  placed  in  the  work 
8 a garrison  by  Generals  Hood  and  Law,  and  from  whom  they  received 
11  orders,  were  captured.  When  Hood’s  infantry  garrison  surrendered 
'je  guns  were  caiitured.  Why  not  inquire  how  it  was  the  garrison 
)imd  in  the  fort  was  captured*? 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 
Major-General.,  Commanding. 


No.  29. 

teport  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Jones,  Forty -fourth  Alabama  Infantry,  of 
the  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  April  19. 


'amen  of  the  companies  and  their  strength  captured  in  the  fort  at  Hill’s  Point,  on  the  Nan- 
seniond  River,  April  19,  all  from  the  Forty-fourth  Alabama  Regiment. 


Officers. 

Non-com- 

missioned 

officers. 

Privates. 

Aggregate. 

•iiipaiiv  A 

4 

6 

18 

28 

amx>any  Ji 

1 

6 

3G 

43 

Total 

5 

12 

54 

71 

— 

JNO.  A.  JONES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Forty-fourth  Alabama  Vols. 
22  R R — YOL  XVIII 


338 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


I Chap.  XXX. 


Report  of  Col.  John  K.  Connally.,  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  Infantry.,  of 
the  capture  of  Battery  Huger ^ April  10. 

April  22,  1863. 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  state  that  in  compliance  with  Special  Orders, 
No.  3,  Headquarters  French’s  Command,  dated  April  17,  three  compa 
nies  from  my  regiment  marched  on  Friday  night,  the  17th,  to  Norfleet’s, 
house,  on  the  Feed’s  Ferry  road,  and  on  Saturday  morning,  the  18tb„i 
reported  to  Major  Shumaker  for  duty,  as  specified  in  the  order.  Tbel 
fort  intended  for  the  reception  of  the  two  32-pounder  rifled  pieces  whicb 
my  regiment  was  to  support  not  having  been  completeil,  a detail  of  CO 
men  was,  by  order  of  Major  Shumaker,  made  from  the  three  companies 
to  finish  it.  This  having  been  done  on  Saturday  evening,  the  18th,  tbef 
guns  were  placed  in  position  during  the  night. 

On  Saturday  morning,  the  18th,  I moved  with  the  seven  remaining 
companies  of  my  regiment  to  Norfleet’s  house,  and  some  time  during 
the  evening  communicated  with  Major  Shumaker,  who  advised  me  to 
place  4 men  and  a corporal  at  Le  Oompte’s  house,  4 men  and  a corpora] 
at  Feed’s  Ferry,  4 men  and  a corporal  at  a point  nearly  equi-distaiit 
between  Le  Oompte’s  house  and  the  ferry,  and  a company  at  Moore’s 
house  to  support  the  three  points  mentioned.  He  also  advised  me  to . 
lilace  a company  near  the  gate  at  the  entrance  of  the  field  in  which  tbei 
battery  of  32-pounder  pieces  was  situated  to  support  it.  In  addition  tc 
this  advice  I received  an  order  from  General  French  in  exact  accordanc(r^ 
Avitk  the  major’s  advice,  except  that  the  company  placed  at  Moore’n^ 
should  be  placed  at  Le  Compte’s  house.  In  posting  my  men  I obeyeti 
General  French’s  order  to  the  letter  except  as  to  placing  a company  ai 
Le  Gompte’s  house.  This  I did  not  do  because  Major  Shumaker  told 
me  that  he  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  posts  mentioned,  and 
that  it  was  better  to  place  the  company  at  Moore’s,  which  I did. 

On  Sunday  evening,  the  19th,  Colonel  Cunningham  rode  up  to  m\ 
quarters  some  time  between  4 and  6 o’clock  and  told  me  in  substance— 
1 do  not  remember  his  language — that  Geueral  French  wished  me  to 
support  the  batteries-.  The  order  was  general,  and  I immediately  or 
dered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith  and  Maj.  [A.  H.]  Belo  to  go  and  ascer 
tain  the  position  of  the  batteries,  the  number  of  men  necessary  for  tlicii 
support,  the  ground  to  be  occupied  by  the  support,  and  to  report  to  in( 
as  early  as  possible.  They  had  not  been  gone  more  than  an  hour  or  ai 
hour  and  a half  when  I heard  loud  cheering  in  the  direction  of  the  river 
A few  moments  afterwards  an  officer  (I  know  not  who)  rode  up  aiu 
reported  that  Stribling’s  battery  had  been  charged  by  the  enemy  aiu 
captured.  I immediately  ordered  my  regiment  under  arms,  left  oia 
company  at  Moore’s  house  to  support  the  three  posts  mentioned  above 
two  companies  at  the  gate  referred  to  to  support  the  battery  of  32’ 
])ounder  pieces,  and  with  the  seven  other  comi)anies  proceeded  as  raj* 
idly  as  poSvSible  to  the  house  nearest  Stribling’s  battery,  which  was  in  tla 
fort  known  as  the  Old  Fort.  There  1 came  np  with  Capt.  [L.  F.]  Ter 
rell.  General  Law’s  assistant  adjutant -general,  with  two  companies  froii 
the  Forty-eighth  Alabama  Fegiment.  1 inquired  of  the  captain  wha 
he  was  doing  there,  and  learned  that  he  had  been  sent  b^^  General  Lav 
Avith  the  two  companies  mentioned  to  relieve  the  two  companies  wliicl 
were  in  the  fort  when  it  was  ciaptured.  He  stated  that  he  had  arrives 


\AV.  xxx.l 


SIEGE  OF  SUFFOLK,  VA. 


339 


)0  late — that  the  fort  had  been  taken  l)etbre  he  could  render  assist- 
ice.  I had  never  been  to  the  fort,  knew  nothino:  of  its  position  or  the 
^Ollnds  around  it,  and  asked  Captain  Terrell  if  he  could  £>'ive  me  any 
[formation  (•oileernin^^  it,  tellin^^  him  that  1 intended  to^charge  and 
take  the  guns.  He  stated  that  he  had  been  to  the  fort  and  knew  all 
)out  its  j)osition;  that  it  was  situated  on  a point  of  land  extending 
)\Mi  to  the  river,  and  that  there  was  a deep  ravine  or  marsh  in  its 
ant  over  which  my  men  could  not  possibly  charge.  In  addition  to 
I is  tiie  fort  was  defended  by  six  gunboats— three  above  and  three 
1‘low— and  two  land  batteries  across  the  river.  I intended  to  charge 
i d retake  the  fort,  if  possilde,  but  uj)on  learning  its  position  and  de- 
ase  from  Captain  Terrell  knew  that  it  would  be  worse  than  folly  to 
ike  the  attempt.  Wishing,  however,  to  ascertain  if  it  was  still  oecn- 
id  by  the  enwny  I moved  up  to  within  some  500  or  000  yards  of  the 
’t,  formed  line  ot  battle,  and  ordered  the  men  to  lie  down.  1 then 
lered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  with  two  companies  dejiloyed  as 
irmishers,  to  advance  until  fired  ujion,  then  to  fall  back  upon  tiie  regi- 
ait.  He  had  not  advanced  more  than  50  or  00  yards  before  he  was 
3d  ui)on  by  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  and,  as  ordered,  fell  back.  The 
3 of  my  skirmishers  discovered  to  the  enemy  the  position  of  the  reg- 
ent, when  they  opened  upon  me  a heavy  cross-fire  from  the  six  gun- 
ats  and  two  batteries.  1 immediately  withdrew  my  regiment  out  of 
ige  of  their  grape-shot,  and,  thinking  they  would  probably  advance 
:h  the  intention  of  capturing  tlie  battery  of  32-ponnder  pieces  in  my 
r,  fonned  a second  line  of  battle  about  half  a mile  from  the  Old  Fort 
■ew  forward  skirmishers  under  command  of  Major  Belo,  and,  although 
illed  from  the  gunboats,  awaited  patiently  the  enemy’s  advance  until, 
iippose,  about  1 a.  m.,  when  General  Law  came  up  and  told  me  that 
’as  too  far  in  advance  and  to  fall  back  upon  the  skirt  of  woods  some 
liter  ot  a mile  in  my  rear;  also  to  draw  in  my  line  of  skirmishers, 
'beyed  General  Law’s  orders.  This,  as  stated  above,  was  about  1 
ock.  At  daylight,  or  very  soon  thereafter.  General  Hood  came  up 
I placed  me  under  command  of  General  Eobertson,  with  whom  I re- 
ined until  near  sundown,  when  I was  ordered  by  General  Hood 
ough  General  Eobertson,  to  rejoin  my  brigade.  General  Law  not 
mipting  to  retake  the  fort  during  the  night  of  the  19th,  and  General 
3d  not  attempting  it  on  the  20th,  establishes  the  fact  that  the  attempt 
lid  have  been  injudicious,  and  that  I was  fortunate  in  meeting  with 
)tain  Terrell,  whose  statement  relative  to  its  position  and  defense 
le  ])revented  my  making  it. 

t will  be  seen,  major,  from  tliis  report  that  I did  not  have  any  men 
r near  the  fort  when  it  was  captured;  that  it  was  attacked  so  soon 
r Colonel  Cunningham  left  me  that  I could  not  possibly  have  placed 
I in  position  for  its  support;  that  when  captured  two  companies  from 
leral  Thaw’s  brigade  were  moving  forward  to  relieve  the  two  com- 
ics which  were  in  it,  and  that  I moved  with  all  possible  dispatch  to 
ipture  the  fort,  had  it  been  possible. 

8 1 was  the  commanding  ollicer  on  the  field  at  the  time,  I deem  it 
iluty  to  give  Captain  Terrell’s  statement  concerning  the  action  of  tlui 
companies  under  his  command,  which  was  that  ail  the  men  in  the  two 
pames  deserted  him  except  nine.  1 do  not  know  the  names  of  the 
1 men  who  remained  with  the  captain  or  1 would  give  them,  thinking 
deserve  favorable  notice. 

le  fire  upon  my  regiment,  as  you  may  well  imagine,  was  very  heavy 
^ed,  yet  both  ofiicers  and  men  received  it  untiinchingiy  and  with 


340 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chai>.  XXX. 


veteraTi-like  steadiness.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  Major  Belo,  and 
Adit  rn  T1  Jordan  behaved  with  the  utmost  coolness  and  gallantr}. 
1 had  10  inen  wounded  (1  mortall.v)  and  1 man  missing,  supposed  to  have 

Coluncl  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops. 

IMajor  Daves. 


[Indorsements.] 


Camp  near  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  22, 1863. 

I do  not  know  the  precise  hour  the  instructions  were  given  Colone 
Coiinallv  but  think  it  was  earlier  than  4 p.  m.  They  would  have  beei 
delivered’ in  the  forenoon,  but  Colonel  Connally  was  aflseut  from  cam) 
with  Ceneral  liaw.  I had  left  the  batteries  and  arrived  at  camp  befor 
the  attack  was  made. 

Bespectfully,  ^ CUNNISGHAM. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffollc,  Da.,  April  22, 18G3. 

Colonel  Connally  is  in  error,  perhaps,  in  regard  to  the  time  he  sa- 
Colonel  Cunningham  and  received  his  instructions.^  FRENCH, 

Major-General. 


No.  31. 


Report  ofAluj.  Gen.  George  E.RieUtt,  C.  H.  Army,commanmg  Bimsw 

^ ^ of  skirmish  on  the  Fdenton  Roael,  Va.,  April  2i. 


nEADQUAIlTEltsFlCKETT’S^Dm|ION,^^ 

Mmop  • I liave  the  honor  to  inclose  report*  of  Col.  [ J.  B.]  Magruilt 
of  the  Eifty-seventh  Virginia,  commanding  on  the 

ll^SrUmrbeen  Imuded  bt  d^of  the  ’plUets  thoright  ^ 

•■■reat  difficulty  in  making  their  men  come  up  to  the  mark.  , 

with  the  attack  on  the  AVhitemarsh  road  the  enem>  adtantui 
;;:v^’Ufd\ate  S ope  irom  one  of  r'i  ' 

;;;k 


eserve  wliicli  1 Had  seiic  np  lo  ‘ . rVof  t e 

1 am  sor'y  to  report  that  two  very 
/irjiiiiia  were  very  seriously  wounded  [ ‘ 

I^Compauy  B],  and  [P.]  Poindexter,  [Company  I].  1 } ^ 


^ Not  found. 


nxv.xXx:] 


fiECONi^AiSSANCE,  ETO. 


S4l 


1 the  execution  of  their  duty  with  the  most  advanced  of  the  scouts, 
ilso  two  men  of  the  Twenty-ninth  Virginia,  Corse’s  brigade,  slightly 
’ouuded. 

The  officers  and  men  engaged  all  acted  with  great  coolness  and  readi* 
ess,  and  it  is  evident  the  enemy  was  badly  hurt. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  E.  PICKETT, 
Major-General,  Commanding.  . 

Maj.  G.  Moxley  Sorrel, 

Aiist.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 


TRIL  12,  1863. — Reconnaissance  from  Gloucester  Point  to  the  vicinity  of 

Hickory  Forks,  Va. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  C.  Tevis,  Fourth  Delaware  Infantry. 

Camp  Gilpin,  Gloucester  Point,  Va., 

April  12,  18G3. 

Colonel  : In  pursuance  of  your  orders  I marched  a detachment  of  150 
len  (infantry),  taken  from  the  Fourth  Delaware  Regiment,  to  the  points 
idicated  in  your  instructions  to  me.  I felt  all  the  woods  between  York 
hver  and  the  main  county  road  as  far  up  as  Timber  Neck  Creek,  and 
lien  took  what  is  called  the  Pine  Swamp  road  until  its  intersection  with 
he  Bell  Roy  road,  about  IJ  miles  above  Hickory  Fork. 

All  the  country  was  carefully  examined  by  my  line  of  skirmishers, 
nd  indications  of  the  recent  presence  of  the  enemy  were  found,  iiarticu- 
irly  at  a small  Methodist  cbapel  called  Providence  Chapel,  about  5 
dies  beyond  our  lines.  All  the  inhabitants  concurred  in  stating  that 
bout  200  cavalry  (Captains  Littleton’s,  Clopton’s,  and  Allen’s  compa- 
ies),  under  Colonel  Godwin  and  Major  Vaughan,  had  been  down  since 
Tiday  morning,  and  had  returned  about  0 j).  m.  to-day  to  King  and 
hieen’s  Court-House,  where  they  are  encamped.  I found  a consider- 
ble  quantity  of  grain  in  the  mill  belonging  to  Coleman  Roberts,  on  the 
>ell  Roy  road,  and  as  the  rebels  are  in  the  habit  of  picketing  there  to 
uit  their  horses,  and  as  the  owner  confessed  to  correspondence  with 
h(‘ir  leaders,  I burned  the  mill.  My  detachment  returned  by  the  main 
ounty  road,  only  halting  to  destroy  a grist  and  saw  mill  belonging  to 
Tosser  Tabb,  near  Hickory  Fork,  in  which  large  quantities  of  flour  have 
*een  lately  ground  for  the  use  of  the  Richmond  army.  I would  esi)e- 
ially  call  attention  to  Charles  Curtis,  at  Wilson’s  Creek,  who  receives 
lores  for  the  rebels  and  who  had  rented  the  last-mentioned  mill. 

I have  the  honor  to  forward,  too,  the  papers  taken  from  two  cavalry 
oldiers  belonging  to  the  Fifth  Virginia  Cavalry,  whom  I captured,  and 
viio  were  empowered  by  the  rebel  general,  Stuart,  to  collect  horses  for 
iiis  regiments.  The  men  and  officers  of  my  command  did  their  duty  well. 

would  speak  x)articularly  of  the  services  of  Lieut.  John  J.  Toner,  regi- 
inontal  quartermaster,  and  of  Dr.  Hopkins,  regimental  surgeon,  who 
vere  of  material  assistance  to  me  in  the  cai)ture  of  the  prisoners. 

Very  respectfully, 

CHARLES  CARROLL  TEVJS, 
IJeutenant-Colonel  Fourth  Delaivare  Volunteers. 

Col.  A.  11.  Grimsiiaw, 

Fourth  Delaware  Volunteers,  Commanding  Post. 


[Chap. 


342  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

APRIL  16,  1863.— Affair  on  the  Pamunkey  River,  near  West  Point,  Va. 

Report  of  Maj.  Peyton  Wise^  Forty-sixth  Virginia  Infantry. 

Headquarters, 

White  House.,  Va.,  April  19,  1803. 

General:  I have  just  returned  from  Taylor’s  Quarter,  2 miles  fron 
West  Point,  to  wliicb  place  I was  called  on  Thursday  evening  last  by  oc 
currences  of  which  the  following  shall  be  a report.  Permit  me  only  to  pro 
mise  that  this  should  have  been  sent  to  you  earlier,  but  that  a dispatch 
which  reached  me  at  the  place  just  named,  and  other  reports  which  caiiK 
to  me  tending  to  show  that  you  had  retired  from  Williamsburg,  left  riu 
iu  ignorance  of  your  whereabouts.  On  Thursday  evening  last  a dis^ 
patch  reached  me  by  courier  from  Capt.  [G.  W.]  Abbitt  (stationed  all 
Taylor’s  Quarter,  on  the  Pamunkey  Eiver,  with  his  own  company  aiu 
that  of  Capt.  [G.  D.J  Huffman  and  a section  of  artillery  under  Lieuteii 
ant  Hudgin)  that  two  gunboats  were  descried  in  York  Eiver  slo^Yl^ 
approaching  West  Point.  I immediately  telegraphed  this  tact  to  Gen 
eral  Elzey,  and  then,  after  sending  an  order  to  Captain  Haynes  (sta 
tioned  at  Canton,  in  King  William  County,  near  Mattapony  Eiver,  will 
a company  of  cavalry)  to  scout  the  Mattapony  Eiver  down  to  its  moutli 
with  a view  to  watcli  out  for  and  prevent,  as  far  as  jmssible,  any  at 
tempted  landing  of  the  enemy  above  us  on  that  river,  or  anj^  raid  o 
gunboats,  I proceeded  directly  to  Taylor’s  Quarter.  This  was  the  sceiu 
of  the  little  action  which  I shall  relate  to  you.  The  two  gunboats  re 
ferred  to  were  steam  propellers,  one  of  large  size,  the  other  of  dmieii 
sions  not  so  great  but  respectable,  and  both  conveying  troops.  Tlw 
lact  that  they  bore  troo])S  is  distinctly  vouched  for  by  citizens  at  Wes 
Point,  who  were  not  only  close  enough  to  both  to  see  with  ease  whn 
was  on  board  of  them  but  were  not  so  far  removed  from  the  smaller  o 
the  two  as  that  they  could  not  hear  voices  on  it.  The  larger  ot  the  giui 
boats  lay  off  abreast  the  point  and  near  the  opposite  shore,  on  wind 
is  the  -‘brick  house.”  The  smaller  one  luassed  West  Point  up  intc 
t he  Panuuikey  about  half  a mile.  At  this  distance  she  was  o])ened  upoi 
by  our  artillery,  which  consisted  of  two  small  guns  (of  the  Blakely  pat 
tern)  with  round  shot.  The  first  shot  was  ineffectual,  but  the  secoiK 
and  third,  following  in  quick  succession,  went  tearing  and  crashmj 
right  through  her.  It  is  supposed  that  she  was  struck  twice  afterward 
but  certain  it  is  that  after  an  action  of  about  three-quarters  of  an  hoii 
she  retired,  evidently  with  tlie  greatest  difaculty  and  very  badly  dam 
aged.  As  she  repassed  West  Point  groans  and  screams  of  the  inos 
heart  rending  descrij)tion,  heard  with  the  utmost  distinctness  at  tli*^ 
Point,  told  not  only  of  damage  done  to  vessel  but  that  her  crew  had  ex 
perienced  the  effect  of  the  iron  hail.  When  this  gunboat  rejoined  he 
consort  they  both  steamed  down  York  Eiver  and  have  not  been  hean 
of  since.  Next  day  at  as  early  an  hour  as  possible  General  Elzey  \va 
informed  of  wliat  had  been  done.  Col.  [E.  T.  W.]  Duke  was  informer 
of  it  with  equal  promptness  by  his  pickets  (Capt.  [J.  C.]  Hill’s  company 
at  Eltham,  who  were  witnesses  of  the  whole  transaction.  I shall  lca^ 
you  to  judge,  sir,  what  was  the  destination  of  the  troops  on  board  r 
these  vessels,  but  to  enable  you  to  form  as  correct  a judgment  as  possi 
ble  ])ermit  me  to  state  that  1 am  now^  firmly  convinced  that  the  only  oi 
j(*ct  of  the  small  gunboat  in  entering  the  Pamunkey  Eiver  was  the  caj 
ture  of  a large  schooner  which  wtis  pushing  its  way  down  the  river  air 
was  near  Eitham.  The  larger  one,  too,  went  toward  the  Brick  Hou> 
Jjanding  and  lay  near  it.  Can  these  troops  have  been  destined  to  ihui 


cAi-.XXX.l  SKIRMISH  AT  WISE’s  CROSS-ROADS,  N.  C. 


343 


If  mj  command,  while  performing  the  special  service  assigned 
) It,  has  been  indeed  instrumental  in  protecting  your  rear,  you  need 

Sdien^tTe^-vaut™'^*^^  grateful  for  it  than  your 

PEYTON  WISE, 

‘ Major,  Commanding,  &e. 

Brig.  Geii.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Commanding,  &c. 


PEIL  27,  1863.-^Expedition  from  Yorktown  beyond  Hickory  Forks,  Va. 

Extract  from  Record  of  Events'^'’  of  Seventh  Army  Corps.* 

27.— Lieutenant-Colonel  Tevis,  Fourth  Delaware  Volunteers, 
ith  a detachment  from  lus  regiment  and  a detachment  from  the  Sec- 
jid  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  went  some  distance  above  Hickory  Forks 
listioyed  a large  amount  of  stores  of  the  rebel  army,  oonsisting  of  grain! 
tton,  bacon,  flour,  salt,  coffee,  sulphur,  powder,  flints,  percussion-caps, 

tlm  oc'o  within  the  Knes  57  head  of  horned 

ttle,  260  sheep,  and  8 horses  and  miiles. 


*RIL  27  1,  1863.— Expdition  from  Hew  Berne  toward  Kinston, 

H.  C.,  and  skirmish  (28thf  at  Wise’s  Cross-Roads. 


RKFOIRTS. 


o B.  S.  Army,  commanding  Expedition. 

Col.  George  H.  Peirson„Fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

3. — Lieut.  Col.  Luke  Lyman;  g'wenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry 

4. -C0I.  Charles  L.  Holbrook,  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

5. -C0I.  Charles  E.  Codman,  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

6.  Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Ho.  1. 


ports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Innis  JSF.  Palmer, 

dition-. 


U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Expe- 


n BIdqrs.  First  Hitision,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps 
Core  Creelc,  Dover  Road  Crossing,  N.  C.,  April  28^  18G3— 9 p.  m.' 

™'4da3’  to-day  the  weather  cleared  up  a little  and 
lemonstration  was  made,  having  for  its  object  principally  the  c^pCe 
of  the  enemy  who  mmht  be  on  .,  S.otuIv  i 


.ly  ot  ;hriTS'V„:aragr"SK 


:d  c'";  rf  pint  where  thelfl- 

h/  a'  1 FU  i^oad  cross.  Colonel  Jones,  witli  his  own  regiment  Ithe 

mSuimDoverTnd'  ‘‘t/  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  Ivas 
treu  up  the  Dor  er  road.  Tlie  arrangement  was  that  the  two  colmnns 


^ From  Return  for  month  of  April,  18G3. 


344 


NOIOTI  CAROLINA  ANt)  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


slioiild  meet  at  tlie  junction  mentioned.  I recollected  what  General 
Foster  had  told  me  about  making  the  demonstration  with  infantry,  and 
also  about  giving  Colonel  Jones  a command.  All  the  other  forces  werc^ 
held  in  readiness  to  move  in  any  direction.  Nothing  was  found  on  the 
ridge,  the  intrenchments  nearest  Core  Creek  having  been  abandoned. 
The  forces  arrived  at  the  junction  nearly  at  the  same  time  and  there 
found  intrencliments  with  a force  to  defend  them.  A sharp  skirmish 
took  place,  when  the  enemy  were  driven  out,  leaving  2 men  dead  and  1 
wounded.  They  retired  up  the  railroad  in  the  direction  of  Kinston. 
Their  line  of  retreat  they  had  taken  care  to  keep  open  and  it  was  im- 
possible to  get  behind  them.  . i , t , 

Tlie  wounded  man  found  in  the  enemy’s  works  is  with  Colonel  Jones 
command,  which  has  not  yet  arrived  in  camp.  I will  get  all  the  infor- 
mation I can  from  him  as  soon  as  he  arrives  here  and  communicate 
further  with  you  to-morrow. 

Our  loss  is  1 man  killed  and  6 wounded. 

This  skirmish  took  place  some  10  miles  this  side  of  Kinston.  The 
only  information  I have  been  able  to  obtain  thus  far  in  regard  to  the 
enemy’s  position,  &c.,  at  Kinston  is  from  a negro,  who  says,  ihej  have 
plenty  men,  plenty  guns,  plenty  forts.” 

We  have  provisions  enough  for  to-morrow.  If  more  provisions  arc 
sent  some  wagons  should  be  sent  to  transport  them,  for  the  roads  arc 
very  bad  between  here  and  the  railroad.  1 have  had  them  repaired  as 
far  as  possible  to-day. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ^ I.  N.  PALMEK, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

AHHiHtant  Adjutant- General^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


llDQRS.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 
Core  Creek  Railroad  Crossing,  April  20,  1803. 

Colonel  ; The  rebel  works  carried  yesterday  are  8 miles  from  Kin 
ston.  They  command  the  railroad  and  the  Dover  road.  They  wer< 
erected  last  week  and  have  four  embrasures.  General  Eansom,  with  hi 
brigade  (six  regiments),  is  2 to  4 miles  nearer  Kinston.  General  11  li 
has  another  division  in  that  vicinity,  at  different  points,  where  thei- 
are  other  defenses.  I cannot  tell  the  condition  of  the  bridge  at  Kinston 
the  wagon-road  bridge  is  good.  I think  we  have  impressed  them  will 
the  belief  at  Kinston  that  the  whole  Union  force  m this  vicinity  is  to  ) 
hurled  on  them.  I send  down  2 wounded  men  and  2 dead  (one  ot  tli 
Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  and  one  of  the  Forty-fitth  Alassachusetts), 
both  the  wounded  are  of  the  Forty-fifth.  One  Confederate  woiiiulc' 
also  goes  down.  It  Avas  a hard  day’s  Avork  yesterday.  The  command 
returned  at  midnight.  The  roads  are  dreadtul. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  ^ ^ PALMEll, 

Brigadier- General . 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 

p.  s.— Yours  of  ()  a.  m.  to-day  received.  The  position  of  the  force, 
around  Kinston  are  undoubtedly  as  I have  given  aboA^e. 


1U1>.  ] SKIRMISH  AT  wise’s  CROSS-ROAHS,  n.  c.  345 

Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N G.,  May  2,  18G3. 

Colonel:  In  accordance  with  instructions  from  department  head- 
uarters  of  April  2G,  18G3,  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  instant  I embarked 
) 3' division  upon  the  cars,  and  at  3 p.  m.  all  the  command  were  at  Batch- 
lller’s  Creek.  The  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Amory  commanding,  was 
0ut  forward  on  the  railroad  to  Core  Creek.  In  accordance  with  my 
rders  he  took  possession  of  the  bridge  at  that  point  and  sent  a force 
n mediately  across  the  creek  to  the  switch  but  found  nothing.  His 
omraand  bivouacked  on  the  railroad  immediately  behind  the  creek, 
'hile  the  remainder  of  the  command,  consisting  of  the  brigade  of  Colonel 
iee,  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Colonel  Jones,  one  sec- 
ion  of  Eiggs’  battery,  and  a company  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry, 
loved  up  a cross-road  to  the  Neuse  road,  and  from  thence  to  the  Dover- 
oad  Crossing  of  Core  Creek,  behind  which  we  encamped.  Thus  was 
Lie  command  posted  on  two  different  roads,  some  2J  miles  apart,  with 
good  cross-road  connecting. 

Immediately  after  my  arrival  at  the  Dover-road  Crossing  I sent  a force 
cross  the  creek  and  beyond  to  feel  the  enemy ^s  pickets,  but  the  party 
)und  nothing. 

At  midnight  it  commenced  to  rain  very  heavily  and  continued  until 
oon  of  Tuesday,  the  28th  instant.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  storm  the 
'hole  country  seemed  flooded — the  roads  in  a horrible  condition ; still 
determined  to  make  a movement  on  Sandy  Eidge  so  that  the  enemy 
light  at  least  be  kept  on  the  alert,  even  if  we  effected  no  captures  or 
lught  no  fight.  I felt  confident,  however,  that  we  should  find  some  of 
lie  enemy’s  troops  at  the  crossing  of  the  Dover  road  with  the  railroad, 
nd  perhaps  some  few  in  the  intrenchments  at  the  easterly  portion  of 
iaiidy  Eidge.  I therefore  ordered  the  following  movements : 

Colonel  Amory,  with  two  regiments  (the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts 
7'olunteers  and  the  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia),  was 
rdered  to  march  up  the  railroad  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  point 
t'here  the  railroad  and  Dover  road  cross.  I will  here  say  that  Colonel 
^mory,  who  has  been  ill  for  some  time,  was  not  able  to  go  with  the 
•rigade,  inasmuch  as  it  was  impossible  to  march  horses  on  the  railroad, 
le  therefore  returned  to  the  bivouac,  leaving  Colonel  Codman,  of  the 
'Yrty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  in  command. 

Colonel  Jones,  with  his  own  regiment  (the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania) 
nd  tlie  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
^yinan,  one  company  of  the  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Mi- 
itia,  and  two  companies  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalr^^  was  ordered 
orwnrd  on  the  Dover  road,  the  understanding  being  that  the  two  col- 
iinns  should  join  hands  at  the  above-mentioned  crossing.  In  accord- 
uce  with  orders  from  the  commanding  general  the  artillery  was  not 
aken  beyond  Core  Creek.  All  the  other  troops  were  held  in  readiness 
0 move  in  any  direction.  Colonel  Jones  moved  cautiously,  and  finding 
lie  intrenchments  on  Sandy  Eidge  abandoned  he  pushed  on  with  his 
oluinn  be^mnd  the  ridge,  seeing  nothing  of  the  enemy  until  the  head 
I*  the  column  arrived  within  ioo  yards  of  the  crossing,  when  he  was 
iiddenly  saluted  with  a volley  of  musketry  from  the  opposite  side  of 
he  railroad.  Supjxising  that  there  was  a chance  the  party  might  be  a 
'ortion  of  Colonel  Amory’s  column  he  took  measures  to  discover  the 
ruth,  and  found  the  enemy  posted  in  rifle-pits,  siweral  hundred  feet  in 
pigth,  and  entirel.y  concealed  in  the  thick  brush.  Some  75  yards  in 
sar  was  found  another  line  of  heav,y  earthworks  of  some  500  or  GOO 


346 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VlROINlA. 


(CiiAi'.  XXXJ 


feet  front,  witli  an  einbrnsnre  looldngdown  the  Dover  road,  but  withoutS 
a gun.  Doth  these  lines  were  parallel  to  The  railroad  and  strongly  pro! 
teeted  on  the  hanks  by  marsh  and  thick  underbrush,  which  was  takeiil 
advantage  of  by  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters.  j 

Colonel  Jones  immediately  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  works,  grad ; 
ually  advancing,  and  was  making  preparations  to  turn  both  flanks  of  tluf 
'position  at  the  same  moment,  when  a brisk  fire  was  opened  from  dowi- 
the  railroad  from  the  column  of  Colonel  Amory’s  brigade  under  Colonei 
Codman.  After  delivering  one  volley  two  companies  dashed  down  th( 
track  with  fixed  bayonets  and  took  possession  of  the  work.  This  del 
cided  the  aflair,  the  enemy  retiring  in  disorder  up  the  railroad  towarci 
Kinston,  leaving  4 killed  and  2 wounded  (1  mortally)  on  the  groundi! 
One  of  the  w^ounded  was  brought  in.  . ^ ^ 

The  force  of  the  enemy  is  variously  estimated;  probably  about  30(.j 
men.  He  had  no  artillery.  It  was  impossible  to  get  in  the  rear  antt^ 
capture  this  force,  for  they  had  taken  care  to  keep  the  line  of  retrea  i 
])erfectly  clear.  After  destroying  the  enemy’s  camp,  both  columns  re  > 
turned  to  their  respective  camps. 

The  following  day  (the  29th  instant)  I directed  that  one  regiment  o ii 
Colonel  Amory’s  brigade  be  sent  up  the  railroad  beyond  Core  Creek  b I 
support  a fatigue  party,  which  was  to  make  a show  of  repairing  the  rail  r 
road.  The  Forty -third  Massachusetts  was  sent  upon  this  duty,  and  o\H 
this  and  the  day  following  succeeded  in  putting  the  road  in  good  con  • 
dition  for  a distance  of  2J  miles  beyond  the  creek. 

During  the  day  of  the  29th  two  cavalrymen,  with  some  of  the  infantri; 
and  artillery,  went  out  a short  distance  from  camp,  when  they  were  at » 
tacked  by  a party  of  guerrillas.  The  two  cavalrymen  were  killed.  The;:! 
had  permission  Korn  their  commanding  officer  to  leave  camp.  The  othe 
men,  1 have  no  doubt,  were  on  a pillaging  expedition,  and  I am  rathe  . 
sorry  that  they  were  not  the  sufferers.  Cavalry  and  infantry  were  imme  ;i 
diately  sent  in  pursuit.  They  brought  in  several  prisoners,  evidentl;  ■ 
citizens.  A careful  examination  of  these  men  convinced  me  that  the; ; 
could  not  be  the  perpetrators  of  the  deed.  I therefore  released  them  ' 
with  the  admonition  that  if  anything  of  the  kind  again  occurred  in  thei 
neighborhood  they  would  be  held  responsible. 

On  the  30th  a general  move  was  made  on  different  piads  in  such  ; 
way  as  to  create  the  impression  that  all  the  roads  leading  to  Kinstoi 
were  filled  with  troops  advancing  on  that  place,  and  I have  no  doub 
that  the  enemy  at  Kinston  believed  it.  The  column  on  the  railroa* 
worked  at  the  repairs  with  a will,  while  the  occasional  whistle  of  tli 
cars  undoubtedly  conveyed  the  idea  that  troops  were  coming  up  froi 
New  Berne.  Colonel  Lee,  with  a portion  of  the  Twenty-seventh  am 
Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Eegiments,  was  sent  to  reconnoiter  the^roa' 
leading  from  a point  a mile  or  two  across  Core  Creek  (Dover-road  Cros." 
ing)  to  the  Neuse  road,  while  Colonel  Jones,  with  the  cavalry  oifl> 
moved  by  still  another'path  to  strike  the  Keiise  road  higher  up.  Tli 
Fifth  Massachusetts,.  Colonel  Peirson,  of  the  Second  Brigade,  move 
down  the  Dover  road  toward  the  point  at  which  the  skirmish  took  plac 
on  the  28th  instant.  Colonel  Lee  went  through  to  the  Keuse  road, 
distance  of  about  G miles,  and  returned,  finding  nothing  but  the  trace 
of  a small  party  which  had  been  in  the  neighborhood  a day  or  tM 
before.  Colonel  Jones,  with  the  cavalry,  moved  to  a cross-road  in  fror 
of  the  one  followed  by  Colonel  Lee  and  struck  the  Keuse  road  at  r>i< 
die’s,  Ji  i)oint  some  G miles  from  Core  Creek.  Here  he  expected  to  liu 
a picket,  which  he  hoped  to  capture,  but  on  arriving  he  found  they  ha. 
fallen  back.  He  then  pushed  on  toward  Moseley’s  Creek.  The  inhabi 


iiiAP.XXX.]  Sl^lHMiSH  AT  WISE^S  CROSS-KOADS,  N.  C.  347 

informed  liiin  that  a brigade  of  infantry,  with  artillery,  was  stronaly 
iitrenched  at  Moseley’s  Creek,  but  on  arriving  at  that  point  he  found 
he  whole  force  had  retired  toward  Kinston  on  hearing  of  the  skirmish 
t Tuesday. 

the  position  at  Moseley’s  Creek  Colonel  Jones  reports  to  be  quite 
troug.  The  creek  here  has  two  branches,  behind  each  of  which  the 
labels  had  thrown  up  earthworks.  The  first  line  is  some  400  feet  long, 
ith  one  embrasure  looking  down  the  road.  The  front  is  broken  into 
astions  and  a rifle-pit  is  placed  in  the  rear.  The  second  work  has  two 
inbrasures,  more  extensive  than  the  other,  flanking  arrangements, 
reader  and  deeper  water  in  front,  and  is  altogether  a formidable 
air.  Ihe  camps  in  rear  of  these  works  Colonel  Jones  burned  and 
estroyed. 

I From  the  information  procured  by  Colonel  Jones  I have  no  doubt  the 
!iem>  drew  in  all  their  forces  on  all  the  roads  leading  to  Kinston  after 
le  advance  and  skirmish  by  the  two  columns  on  the  28th  instant, 
i ^ onel  1 eirson,  with  his  command,  made  a successful  reconnaissance 
pwn  the  JJover  road,  resulting  in  some  useful  information  in  regard  to 
le  character  of  the  country  and  road,  location  of  cross-roads,  houses, 
c.,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  accompanying  sketch.  On  arriving  within 
)out  ly  miles  of  the  intrenchments  on  the  railroad  Colonel  Peirson 
ove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  reconnoitered  their  position,  which  he 
ports  was  occupied  by  a strong  force  j what  number  it  was  impossible 
r lum  to  discover. 

On  receipt  of  Special  Orders,  Ko.  125,  from  Headquarters  Eighteenth 
rmy  Coips,  on  the  1st  instant,  I immediately  returned  to  Kew  Berne 
ith  my  division,  by  railroad,  sending  Colonel  Jones,  with  his  regiment 
Id  the  cavalry,  around  by  the  Keuse  road  and  Batchelder’s  Creek. 

Hie  whole  command  behaved  very  well.  The  commanding  officers  of 
giments,  &c.  showed  themselves  energetic  in  the  discharge  of  their 
dies  lo  Colonel  Jones,  of  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania,  I am  in- 
bted  for  much  valuable  information  regarding  the  country,  its  inhab- 
ints,  iSje.  Energetic,  untiring,  and  zealous,  he  has  shown  himself  the 
ill  lor  his  place  as  commandant  of  the  outposts  in  front  of  Kew  Berne 
rvaut^'^  ^ colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

. I.  K.  PALMEE, 

r-  n 1 a Brigadier- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Ko.  2. 

Ileport  of  Col.  George  H.  Peirson,  Fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Udqus.  Piftu  IIeg-t.  Massachusetts  Vol.  Militia 

Fort  Peirson,  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  May  3,  18G3. 

onlers  received,  dated  Core  Creek,  Ajiril  30,  I 
pcctfully  submit  the  iollowing  report  of  the  recoiinaissaiiee  made  by 
on  that  day  : 

tVe  left  camp  about  0 a.  in.  and  moved  on  the  Dover  road,  taking 
s and  gaining,  as  far  as  possible,  information  concerning  that  road, 
Muoss-roads  on  either  side,  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the  couiitrv.  We 
t witJi  no  opposition  until  we  arrived  within  miles  of  the  enemy’s 


348 


NORIH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


^ i- ' .rtoiiori Cross-Roads.  We  wore  tliero  fired  upon 
positiou,  at  what  is  wh^were  driven  into  the  woods.  We 

by  seven  of  the  ® f with  the  different  pickets  on  the 

then  advanced  enemy’s  works,  which  command  the 

road,  until  we  arrived  from  our  camp.  After  re- 

railroad  and  the  Dover  ^ drawing?  their  fire  I found 

connoitering  about  one  and  a ‘ ^pfirod  a^-reeably  to  my  instructions. 

the  eneno:  in  strong 

wdcirfiSed,  which  I hope  will  prove  satisfactory  to  you. 

Itespectfully,  yours,  gEOBGE  H.  PEIKSON, 

Colonel,  Comdg.  Fifth  Begt.  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia. 


a/sL  Ad?  tov  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


)•*•(/.  JA-UJV.  V.  , ~ 

vent  niy  taking  shelter  behind  them. 


No.  3. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Luke  Ly^uan,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry 


Hdous.  Twenty- seventh  Regt.  Mass.  Vols., 
Camp  Potter,  New  Berne,  N.  G.,  May  18  . 

dear  sir:  I have  to  report  the  Py‘ 
battle  at  Wise’s  Oross-Koads  report  with  mv  regimen 

At  12  m of  that  f ^ Vohn 

to  Oolonel  Jone^  ° t^ediSe  r 1 - the  P ftj 

teers,  winch  I did  immeaiateij  When  about  2 miles  out  (/on 

eighth  0“  the  left  of  th 

panics  D and  L T('iftv-ei«’hth  Regiment  on  the  right.  h< 

road  and  two  companies  ot  the  ^ ^ Dickets,  who  retreate 

obstructions  were  met  ^yith  excep  pv^oss-roads.  Here  the  skiriuit>l 
upon  our  approach,  until  reac  enemy  behind  earthworks.  The 

ers  found  about  one  \ .j-i  „ j,  Zq  hour’s  figliting,  averagii) 

engaged  them  promptly,  and  in  _ works  and  drove  them  ou 

20  to  25  rounds  to  a man  f a volley  ^ 

Company  D being  the  first  to  mount  the  themselvi 

they  did  so  from  the  ^^tTcating  en  y ^-peni  immediately  afti 

”«rc'2»iS  «»'j  3 “"s 

”1'™"“.  1.. 

speak  personally  of  the  t^®V'^y°f“ftbe  company 

ir  i^lifiif  l^o^raTiifd^^^^^^^^^^  v^miteerod  to  .say 

me  on  our  return  that  these  companies  behaved  nobly. 

Respectfully  submitted.  LUKE  LYMAIS', 

Lieutenant-Colonel,  Commanding  Regiment 

First  Div.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


349 


SKIRMISH  AT  WISE’s  CROSS-ROADS,  N.  C. 

No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  L.  JTolbroolc,  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Fifautry. 

IlDQRS.  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 

Camp  Rogers^  N.  0.,  May  2,  1803. 

Colonel:  In  accordance  with  orders  received  Wednesday  evening, 
:i9tb  ultimo,  this  regiment  left  tlie  camp  of  tlie  brigade  on  Thursday 
morning  at  6 o’clock  and  marched  about  5 miles  on  the  railroad  toward 
Kinston,  halting  near  where  the  pioneer  corps  was  engaged  in  repair- 
ing the  road.  The  regiment  bivouacked  in  the  woods,  and  returned  to 
the  camp  of  the  brigade  yesterday  moining,  and  at  1 p.  m.  embarked 
in  the  train  and  returned  to  New  Berne.  ♦ 

On  Thursday  scouting  parties  were  sent  out  in  different  directions 
uid  pickets  posted,  and  nothing  of  imx)ortance  transpired  after  leaving 
the  camj)  of  the  brigade.  At  the  suggestion  of  General  Palmer  large 
ares  were  built  in  the  woods  in  and  about  our  camp  on  Thursday  night. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servaint, 

OHAS.  L.  HOLBEOOK, 
Colonel  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 

Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles^R.  Codman^  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Vol.  Militia, 

Camp  Massachusetts,  near  Neiv  Berne,  N.  .0.,  May  1,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : In  compliance  with  orders  from  brigade  headquarters 
[ have*  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  i)art  taken  by  the  troops 
inder  my  command  on  the  expedition  up  the  railroad  on  A])ril  28: 

On  the  evening  of  April  27,  the  brigade  being  then  at  Core  Creek, 
ni  the  railroad,  I received  orders  from  Colonel  Amory,  commanding  the 
irigade,  to  send  two  companies  of  this  regiment,  under  a held  ofhc(‘r,  to 
iroceed  up  the  railroad  the  next  morning  early  and  endeavor  to  ascer- 
tain the  strength  of  the  enemy,  with  orders,  however,  not  to  drive  in  the 
memy’s  pickets  or  to  engage  in  any  action. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  the  com])anies  of  Caj)rains  Minot 
and  Tappan  were  placed  under  the  orders  of  Major  Sturgis,  and  that, 
ohicer  was  directed  to  carry  out  the  above  instructions.  The  companies 
■eft  camp  before  7 o’clock  and  proceeded  upon  their  destination.  At 
ilie  same  time,  in  compliance  with  orders  from  Colonel  Amory,  Caiitain 
Bumstead’s  company  was  directed  to  proceed  to  the  cross-roads  leading 
:o  the  Dover  road,  with  instructions  to  explore  that  road  and  to  commu- 
nicate with  Brigadier-General  Palmer,  whose  column  was  on  the  Dover 
coad. 

At  about  12  o’clock  I received  orders  from  (h)lonel  Amory  to  proceed 
with  the  rest  of  the  regiment  and  the  Seventeenth  Massacliusetts  Vol- 
inteers  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Fellows  commanding)  up  the  railroad  to 
>vertake  Major  Sturgis,  and  to  push  on  to  the  cross-roads  nearest  to  the 
lunction  of  the  Dover  road  with  the  railroad,  with  discretionary  orders 
to  proceed  to  the  junction.  I was  instructed  to  intercept  any  parties 


350 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


of  the  enemy  tliat  might  be  driven  down  this  cross-road  by  General 
Palmer’s  column. 

The  troops  immediately  started  upon  the  expedition,  and  upon  reacli- 
ing  the  cross-roads  I found  Major  Sturgis  who  reported  the  enemy  in 
some  force  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  junction.  That  officer  had  carried 
out  his  instructions  with  the  most  scrupulous  fidelity,  having  carefully 
concealed  his  force  from  the  enemy,  so  as  to  give  them  no  warning  of 
our  approach,  and  thus  preventing  them  from  receiving  re-enforcements, 
the  presence  of  which  at  a later  period  of  the  day  might  have  been  em- 
barrassing. As  his  men  were  much  exhausted  I directed  him  to  leave- 
one  comi)any  at  the  point  at  which  I overtook  him  and  to  order  the 
others  to  follow  the  column  slowly.  The  column  then  proceeded,  driv- 
ing in  the  enemy’s  vedettes  and  pickets.  This  duty  was  performed  by 
Company  B,  Forty-fifth  Eegiment,  Captain  Churchill,  the  pickets  being 
uniformly  posted  behind  log  barricades  and  uniformly  driven  out  by 
fianking  parties  from  Company  B. 

Upon  arriving  at  the  cross-roads  and  learning  that  General  Palmer’s 
column,  under  Colonel  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
was  pushing  up  the  Dover  road,  I determined  to  proceed  to  the  junc- 
tion. Company  F,  Captain  Daland,  was  ordered  to  relieve  Company  B, 
in  the  advance,  and  the  column  then  pushed  forward,  one  company  of 
the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  being  left  at  the  cross-roads. 
As  we  approached  the  junction  Lieutenant-Colonel  Peabody,  in  charge 
of  the  advance,  sent  me  word  that  there  was  an  earthwork  across  the 
railroad.  I immediately  ordered  a halt  and  determined  to  make  no  at- 
tack until  Colonel  Jones  arrived,  not  knowing  what  might  be  the  wisli 
of  the  brigadier-general  commanding.  The  breastwork  had  no  ditch 
in  front,  and  I inferred  that  the  enemy  had  no  artillery,  as  they  migiit 
have  used  it  with  effect  before  this  time  if  they  had  had  any  in  position. 
In  a few  moments  the  enemy  fired  a volley  from  the  breastwork  upon  the 
advance  of  Colonel  Jones,  which  was  immediately  returned,  and  T then 
made  dispositions  for  an  attack.  The  breastwork  was  thrown  ui)  across 
the  track  and  extended  some  distance  to  our  left.  It  also  ran  along  the 
track,  crossing  the  Dover  road.  I immediately  ordered  Captain  Daland 
to  open  fire  with  his  company,  stationed  on  the  railroad  and  deployed 
as  skirmishers  on  the  right  and  left,  which  was  done  very  vigorously. 
I then  deployed  the  companies  of  Captains  Wales  and  Homans  of  the 
Forty-fifth,  and  subsequently  two  companies  of  the  Seventeenth,  as  skir- 
mishers on  the  left  of  the  railroad,  with  orders  to  advance,  firing.  The 
firing  of  these  companies  was  rapid  and  energetic,  and  that  of  the 
enemy,  which  was  sharp  for  a time,  soon  slackened. 

A favorable  opportunity  was  then  presented  for  a charge,  and  as 
'night  Avas  approaching  it  was  necessary  to  decide  the  affair  at  once. 
Company  A,  Captain  Denny,  of  the  Forty-fifth,  having  the  colors  of  the 
regiment,  had  been  held  in  reserve,  and  was  iio^v  ordered  to  fix  bayonets 
and  prepare  to  advance.  It  came  up  gallantly  along  the  railroad  in 
column  of  platoons,  supported  by  a company  of  the  Seventeenth,  ami 
as  it  approached  the  work  the  first  platoon  fired  a volley,  and  then, 
stooping  down,  the  second  fired  over  the  heads  of  the  first.  The  com- 
pany then  rushed  forward  with  the  bayonet,  the  whole  line  of  skir- 
mishers charging  at  the  same  time,  and  the  colors  of  the  regiment  were 
})lanted  upon  the  work,  the  enemy  giving  waj'.  I then  communicated 
with  Colonel  Jones,  and  in  accordance  with  orders  the  w hole  command 
marched  back  to  camp. 

In  this  affair  the  trooi)s  under  my  commaiHrsustained  a loss  of  1 man 
killed,  Brivate  11.  M.  Putney,  of  Comi)any  F,  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts 


iriAP.  XXX.]  SKlRjyjISH  AT  WISE’s  CROSS-ROADS,  N.  C.  351 

shot  tliroug’h  the  head),  and  2 wounded  seriously,  Corpl.  G.  C.  Eich- 
,rds.  Company  E (in  the  thigh),  and  Private  J.  F.  Ames,  Company  K, 
Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia  (in  the  cheek).  One  man 
.orpL  [William  D.]  Leatherby,  Company  K,  of  the  Forty-fifth,  received 
s ight  wound  in  the  thigh,  and  Captain  Murdoch,  also  of  the  Fortv- 
fth,  acting  on  the  staff  of  Colonel  Amory,  received  a contusion  froni  a 
lancing  ball.  P our  of  the  enemy’s  dead  were  found  behind  the  breast- 
'ork.  ihe  number  of  his  wounded  cannot  of  course  be  ascertained, 
ihe  conduct  of  the  troops  throughout  this  affair  was  perfectly  good, 
fhere  all  behaved  well  it  would  be  invidious  to  particularize.  1 will 
lily  say  that  I am  much  indebted  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fellows,  com- 
laiiding  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  for  judicious  advice 
!id  hearty  support. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ^ CHAELES  E.  COEMAN, 

tolonel  Forty-fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia. 
Lieutenant  Parkinson, 

A.  A.  A.  (?.,  First  Frig.^  First  Fiv.^  Fighteenth  Army  Corps. 


E’o.  6. 

Reports  of  Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty -eighth  Fennsylmnia  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-eighth'Eeot.  Pennsylvania  Vols 

Camp  at  Batchelder^s  Creek,  A.  C.,  May  1,  1^13. 
reference  to  the  forward  movement  ordered  on  Tuesday 
nil  vnth  a view  to  strike  any  force  of  the  enemy  on  Sandy  Eid<^e 
d \acinity  on  the  Dover  road,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that^I 
irched  at  the  time  designated  by  you,  with  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsvl- 
ina  Volunteers,  tne  Twenty -seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  one 
npa^>  of  the  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts,  and  two  companies  of  the 
..T  Cavalry  Expecting  to  find,  as  on  all  previous  ocea- 
ns, an  enemj,  on  Sandy  Eidge,  I moved  cautiously,  a line  of  skirmish- 
I;  m the  advance,  composed  of  one  company  of  the  Fifty-eighth  and 
Twenly-seventh,  supported  by  two  other  companies 
the  same  regiment,  the  cavalry  300  yards  in  rear  of  the  first  line  the 
ill  column  400  yards  farther  to  the  rear.  ’ 

Lnding  no  enemy  on  the  Eidge,  which  ends  about  5 J miles  from  Core 
.ek,  I advanced  beyond,  on  the  road  through  the  pocoson.  That 
d luns  principally  through  swamps,  with  an  occasional  oasis  of  dry 
i niffiZn’  covered  with  water  or  very  wet  miid,  is  lieavy 

rnrif  fi  thus  late  before  we  emerged  on  the  drier  country 

d the  railroad  crossing.  When  approaching  that  point  on  the 
•position  that  the  colninii  which  you  had  ordered  to  \nove  on  tlic 

rnrfw'f  ^ ^ 'OHst  be  already  in  posi- 

crossing,  I allowed  my  main  column  to  halt  and  'rest,  iiiid 

vards\vomVl“^  advfinced  line  find  the  cavalry.  When  less  than 
lonene  l r ^ P firc,  converging  on  the  Dover  road, 

k covpr^n  railroad.  My  advanced  line  immediately 

supposing  our  friends 
e„saril;y  at  the  crossing  and  that  it  must  bo  tliem  firing  under  mis- 

re,  so  the  guidon  of  the  cavalry  to  be  brought  forward  and 

cd,  so  as  to  manifest  our  true  cliaracter  beyond  mistake.  The  volley 


352 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


.itu  which  the  guido.  was 

ot  the«-on  us  and  1 n..mc^  lor  my  majn  col- 

oil  tlie  Poud,  who  volunteered  to  act  as  aide,  to  ' 

Uluii,  and  duccted  Laptai  railroad  column;  at  tlie  same  time 

under  cover  of  woods  and  br  s , , g^Q^  as  my  main  body 

*;rd":s«s 

\|„,t  •»  iu>  I~veme.ll  ooii.memrf,  O .a  "lie  1 

same  time  pressed  in  ^ont  by  the  companms  The  tue  char 

Twenty-seventh,  soon  gave  way  appeared.  We  found  sev 

acter  pf  the  enemy’s  position  and  bemuses  11  ^ parallel  witb 

eral  hundred  feet  of  i.fle-pit  b^e^stwo  hs  on  the  rear  M a i 

the  railroad  but  entirely  conceal^  by  low  bushe^ 

flank  faces,  however,  though  fliu  ked  principal  defense 

a kind  of  outwork  about  ™®t  and  embr^  looking  dow. 

a heavy  earthwork  of  oOO  oi  « stroua  fortification,  espe 

It  is  equally  astonishing  that  our  loss^m  companies  of  the  Fifli 

:yiHiandnoLinjur|ofU 

howtwlr!  foTighV dei'lo|d  «bimfehers  :nt\*v5;^;tsTwe?e7eport 

ever  cover  the  ground  aftorded  A®**"  t^^.X^^cunded-sinc  died, 
^luderstancW.U’'l  wouS  was  brought  a prisoner  with  us,  the  oth. 
wounded  having  been  «ayied  ott  by  Those  of  the  Pill 

> -So:S' 

alsS  stated  that  there  was  a brigade,  v ith  a battci> , ar 

Coro  took.  your  obedient  joKKS, 

Colonel  Fiftij-eiyhth  Kegment 
Captain  JUDSON,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


:nAr.  XXX.]  SKIRMISH  AT  WISE^S  CROSS-ROADS,  N.  C.  353 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-eighth  Kegt.  Pennsylvania  Yols., 
Cam])  at  Batchelderh  Creelc,  N.  (7.,  May  1,  isfe. 

Sir  : In  reference  to  the  reconnaissance  ordered  by  General  Palmer 
resterday  on  the  Neuse  road  in  front  of  Core  Creek  I have  the  honor  to 
’eport : 

I proceeded  with  Companies  — and  G,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  com- 
nanded  by  Captain  Pond,  in  the  aggregate  about  90  men,  toward  the 
S’euse,  making  a long  detour  in  order  to  get  into  the  rear  of  and  sur- 
prise the  cavalry  picket  at  Biddle’s,  about  6 miles  beyond  Core  Creek. 
iChe  picket  was  not  there,  having  been  withdrawn  on  Tuesday  evening 
)n  the  news  of  the  fight  on  the  Dover  road.  Being  unsuccessful  in  this 
collateral  affair,  I moved  forward  on  the  Neuse  road  toward  Moseley’s 
3reek.  According  to  the  information  obtained  at  Biddle’s  there  was  a 
)rigade  of  infantry,  with  artillery,  at  Moseley’s  Creek,  but  as  I advanced 
he  number  reported  continually  decreased  until,  about  a mile  this  side, 

was  told  that  the  enemy  had  retired  entirely  after  the  fight  of  Tues- 
lay.  Advancing  cautiously,  with  part  of  the  cavalry  dismounted  and 
leployed  as  skirmishers,  I verified  the  report  and  found  the  position 
ibandoned.  The  position  at  Moseley’s  Creek  is  naturally  strong,  there 
)eing  two  branches  of  the  creek,  about  50  yards  apart,  and  the  works 
vhich  I found  there  are  two  lines  of  breastworks,  one  behind  each 
)ranch.  The  first  line,  about  400  feet  long,  is  in  part  a heavy  earth- 
york  with  an  embrasure,  covering  the  road,  but  principally  a lighter 
ivork,  good  only  against  musketry,  but  with  a deep  rifle-pit  in  the  rearj 
t has  also  flanking  and  enfilading  faces.  The  second  work  is  much 
leavier  j has  two  embrasures ; more  flanking  fire  5 broad  and  deeper 
vater  in  front,  and  is  altogether  a formidable  defense.  In  the  rear  of 
he  works  I found  three  separate  camps,  which  I burned  and  destroyed, 
^rom  the  information  I received  it  seems  that  the  enemy  (a  brigade  of 
nfantry  without  artillery)  retired  precipitately  on  Wednesday  evening, 
^s  iny  apangements  to  return  the  same  day  did  not  allow  me  to  follow 
he  fugitives,  I was  obliged  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  reports  of  the  people 
n the  neighborhood  that  there  were  no  regular  posts  of  the'  enemy 
hort  of  Kinston,  and  that  Kinston  itself  was  7 or  8 miles  distant. 
Yom  the  trepidation  everywhere  apparent  I have  no  doubt  of  my  hav- 
ng  been  able  to  advance  within  sight  of  that  place  without  oppoktion, 
.nd  I would  have  done  so  if  other  circumstances  had  allowed.  On  my 
oute  the  inhabitants  expressed  their  opinion  freely  that  the  Southern 
roops  had  abandoned  them,  and  generally  they  asked  me  for  written 
)rotection. 

Having  accomplished  fully  the  object  of  the  reconnaissance  I re- 
urned  and  reached  the  bivouac,  behind  Core  Creek,  about  9 p.  m. 

The  cavalry  are  entitled  to  great  praise  for  this  arduous  march  of  36 
idles  through  a country  supposed  to  be  filled  with  enemies  and  afford- 
ng  continual  opportunities  for  ambuscade,  and  with  the  prospect  of 
[Itimately  confronting  a brigade.  They  did  their  duty  unflinchingly, 
nd  the  admirable  arrangements  made  by  Captain  Pond  prevented  the 
cattered  guerrillas  whom  we  saw  occasionally  from  using  the  advan- 
ages  of  the  swamps  and  thickets  against  us. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  EICHTEB  JONES, 

Colonel  Fifty -eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Captain  Judson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

23  R R — VOL  XVIII 


354 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


MAY  12-26  1863. — Operations  on  the  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad,  Va., 
and  skirmishes  (15th  and  16th)  near  Carrsville. 

No  1 -Maj.  Gen.  Jolm  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  Virginia. 
No.  2.-Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Suffolk. 

No.  1. 

Bevort  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Bix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Depart- 
^ ment  of  Virginia. 

Fort  Monroe,  May  IG,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 

rnloiiel  Foster  is  covering  our  work,  which  is  in  good  progress  on  the 
raUrtd  near  Cur^^^^  He  has  been  engaged  with  the  enemy  more 

or  leL.  For  two  days  a lively  artillery  fire  has  been  kept  up  on  oi  r 
workmen  Yesterday  the  enemy  advanced  within  canister  range,  but 
was  dri  vmi  back  with  considerible  loss.  On  onr  side  a caisson  was 
riddled,  a horse  killed,  and  9 men  wounded. 

The  iron  is  arriving  in  Norfolk.  When  we  get  on  the  other  road  ue 

shall  probably  have  some  sharp  fighting.  johN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  II.  AV.  Hallecr, 

G finer  al-in- Chief. 


[Addenda.] 

Kvtractfrom  “Record  of  Events”  of  Seventh  Army  Corps. 


May  12  -Forces  under  Col.  11.  S.  Foster  went  to  Carrsville  to  covei 
workhig  parties  employed  in  taking  up  the  rails  on  the  railroad  betweei 

Sur^mi^Ha^^^^^  medical  director,  and  Captain  Stevensoi 
captured  by  the  guerrillas  getting  in  rear  of  the  troops. 


May  26  —The  expedition  commenced  returning  to  tFeir  camp,  t'.'O  o 
ject  of  their  mission  being  entirely  accomplished;  30  miles  ot  railioa 
were  secured. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peeh,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Suffoll 

May  15, 18G3. 

Colonel  Foster  reports  good  progress  up  to  daylight.^  The  ®“®"' 
fired  about  sixty  shot  and  shell  down  * f^d  ^ ' 

no  material  damage.  An  attempt  on  his  I'loket  hne^faded-^^j,^ 

Major-General 

Major-General  Dix. 


* From  Return  for  the  mouth  of  May,  18C3. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CAPTURE  OF  STEAMERS  EMILY  AND  ARROW. 


355 


May  16,  1863. 

The  work  ou  the  road  has  proceeded  slowly  from  the  damage  done 
by  the  rebels ; besides,  Colonel  Foster’s  troops  have  been  engaged  more 
or  less  for  two  days.  The  enemy  has  kept  up  a lively  artillery  fire  on 
the  track  rnost  of  the  time.  Yesterday  they  advanced  upon  his  position 
within  canister  range,  not  suspecting  his  amount  of  artillery,  and  were 
driven  back  with  much  loss.  One  of  Davis’  caissons  is  riddled  with  bul- 
lets; 1 horse  killed,  9 slightly  wounded.  Our  loss  is  very  slight.  Have 
deemed  it  best  to  press  the  work,  making  that  the  object  rather  than 
engaging  the  enemy  at  that  distance.  Colonel  Foster  has  managed  thus 
far  with  great  judgment. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix. 


JOH]^  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


May  18,  1863. 

In  the  skirmish  of  Saturday  General  Jenkins’  loss  was  17  killed  and 
about  30  or  40  wounded ; ours  none,  or  verv  slight. 

JOHN  J.  PECK 


General  Dix. 


Major-  General. 


MAY  15,  1863. — Capture  of  the  Steamers  Emily  and  Arrow. 

REPORTS. 

N"o.  1.— Capt.  Francis  E.  Porter,  Eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Capt.  W.  Dewees  Roberts,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 


Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Capt.  Francis  E.  Porter,  Eighth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

General  : I have  just  learned  that  the  steamers  Emily  and  Arrow 
wera  captured  by  guerrillas,  at  Currituck  Canal,  on  Friday. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

F.  E.  POETEK, 

T.  . ^ Captain,  Commandinq  Post. 

Brig.  Gen.  11.  W.  Wessells.  . 

[Indorsement.] 

District  of  Albemarle, 
PUjmouth,  N.  C.,  May  17,  1863—7  p.  m. 

Kespectfully  referred  to  Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

Iwo  gunboats  from  Captain  Flusser’s  squadron  will  start  in  two 
loiirs  for  Eoanoke  and  Currituck,  using  the  North  Shore  as  a tender, 
ine  hundred  and  fifty  infantry  will  embark  in  the  boats,  to  attempt 
he  recapture  or  destruction  of  the  Arrow  and  Emily.  I am  not  in  pos- 
jession  of  the  details.  The  gunboats  are  the  Commodore  Perry  and 
valley  City. 

. IT.  W.  WESSELLS, 

Brigadier -General  Volunteers,  Commanding. 


356 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


¥o.  2. 


Report  of  Capt.  W,  Bewees  Eoherts,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 


Camden  Court-House  and  Shiloh,  K C., 

May  17,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  from  tbe 
expedition  sent  out  yesterday  afternoon  to  intercept  the  party  supposed 
to  have  captured  the  Emily  and  Arrow. 

The  Pasquotank  Guerrillas  crossed  the  Pasquotank  Eiver  about  o miles 
below  Elizabeth  City  on  Friday  morning,  the  15th  instant. 


About  4 


DeiOW  JlillZajUCLU  uu.  a-  xivAtuj  — 1 1 i.  • 

o’clock  in  the  afternoon  they  captured  one  of  the  above-named  boats  in 
Currituck  Canal,  and  with  her  pushed  out  into 

captured  the  other  boat,  taking  her  crew  prisoners.  They  thra  landed 
thtiT  prisoners,  and,  under  a sufficient  guard,  appear  to  have  taken  then 
across  the  lower  end  of  Camden  County  to  near  Shiloh  and  from  thena 
across  the  Pasquotank  River  to  Elizabeth  City,  where  th(^  arrived  or 
the  morning  of  ;he  16th  instant  (yesterday).  Hearing  of  a Federal  force 
in  the  vicinity,  under  Lieutenant  Titus,  they  again  went  down  tbe  rivei 
and  landed  on  the  south  side  of  the  Pasquotank.  The  captured  boat; 
seem  to  have  been  taken  down  the  Albemarle  Sound  and  up  the  Chowai 
River.  The  rebel  crew  declared  their  intention  of  so  doing,  but  it  o\ei 
taken  by  our  forces  they  would  then  destroy  the  boats.  . 

The  party  capturing  these  boats  seem  to  have  been  about  40  of  tlr 
Pasouotank  Guerrillas,  Captain  Elliott  commanding,  and  were  guulei 
by  Captain  Sanderlin,  of  the  Camden  Guerrillas.  None  of  the  Camden 
company,  except  the  captain,  were  engaged  in  the  capture. 

I have  received  this  information  from  several  ^ 

vicinity  of  Currituck  Bridge,  and  the  statements  ot  all  being  the  sani 
I deeni  it  entirely  reliable.  , 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  i^oBERTS, 

Captain,  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

Maj.  E.  A.  Stratton, 

Commanding  at  South  Mills,  N . C. 


[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters,  South  Mills,  N.  C.,  May  17, 1803. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  Brigadier-General  Viele. 

Captain  Roberts  was  sent  with  one  company  of  cavalrj  and  a ho  v 
zer  to  intercept  the  captors  of  the  Emily  * 

the  receipt  of  General  Viele’s  dispatch  on  yesterday, 
not  soon  enough  to  enable  my  party  to  intercept  the  rebels 
Titus  and  one  company  was  also  out  in  the  vicinity  of  Elizabet  i 
where  the  rebels  landed,  but  hearing  of  his  presence  there  they  re-ci 
barked  and  escaped,  probably  tl>rou^g^^he^Soun^l. 

Major,  llth  Pa.  Cav.,  Comdg.  Betachment  at  South  3lills,  A.  C. 


Headquarters,  JVorfolh,  Va.,  May  18, 1863. 
Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  major-general  coi 

'"Tsenfa^dfspS  to  Major  Stratton,  at  South  Mills,  as  soon  as  I learn 
that  the  Emily  and  Arrow  had  been  ^ERT  L VIELE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding 


Chap  XXX.]  J^OKFOLK  AND  PETERSBURG  R.  R.,  ETC.  357 

MAY  15, 1863. — Expedition  from  West  Point  to  Eobinson’s  Plantation,  King 

and  Queen  County,  Va. 

Report  of  Bruj.  Gen.  George  11.  Gordon^  U.  >9.  Army. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

West  Point,  Va.,  May  16,  1863. 

General  : Last  night  I sent  out  a small  expedition  to  capture  if  pos- 
sible— if  not,  destroy — nany  hundred  bushels  of  grain  which  a negro 
iT.ported  to  be  in  a barn.  Kunning  up  the  left  bank  of  the  Y^ork  Eiver, 
about  2 miles  below  the  month  of  the  Mattapony,  Captain  Babcock,  of 
the  gunboat  IMorse,  carried  my  infantry  to  its  destination  and  co-oper- 
ated with  his  men  and  boats.  The  grain  was  found  stored  in  a large 
granary  ; it  was  in  bulk.  The  distance  inland  was  about  1 mile.  It  was 
found  impossible  to  carry  the  grain  away  j therefore  the  building,  with 
'its  contents,  was  destroyed.  Captain  Motley,  of  my  staff,  who  accom- 
panied the  ex])edition,  estimates  the  amount  of  grain  destroyed  at  over 
'JOO  bushels.  The  barn  was  very  large  and  a very  fine  one,  securely 
locked  and  barred.  The  negro,  who  proved  a faithful  guide,  says  the 
proprietor,  Mr.  Eobinson,  has  been  in  the  habit  of  shipping  grain  to 
Richmond  ; that  he  sent  a schooner  load  just  before  my  arrival. 

I am  satisfied  that  the  occupation  of  this  Point  by  our  forces  and  the 
•iver  by  the  gunboats  will  compel  rebels  to  resort  to  land  travel,  if  that 
36  possible,  to  transport  the  large  amounts  of  grain  now  on  the  river 
lank  awaiting  transportation  to  Eichmond. 

i The  company  of  infantry  I sent  out  was  Captain  Wheeler’s,  of  the  One 
lundred  and  forty-second  Eegiment  Eew  York  Volunteers,  Colonel 
Curtis. 

I am  indebted  to  Captain  Babcock,  of  the  Morse,  for  information  that 
ed  to  the  capture  of  this  grain. 

I am,  general,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  n.  GOEDOll, 

Brigadier-General,  Comdg.  U.  S.  Forces,  West  Point,  Va. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya. 


HAY  15-28,  1863.— Operations  on  the  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad  and 
skirmishes  (17th)  near  Providence  Church  and  (23d)  at  Antioch  Church 
and  Barber’s  Cross-Roads,  Va. 

E-EFORXS. 

Jo.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  Virginia. 

<^0.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  tj.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Snffolk. 

To.  3.— Itinerary  of  the  Reserve  Brigade,  Department  of  Virginia,  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  J. 

AVistar,  U.  S.  Array,  commanding.  May  15-28. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj,  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  the  Bepart- 
^ ment  of  Virginia. 

I^'ORT  Monroe,  Va.,  May  24, 1863. 

J.’be  enemy,  with  two  regiments  of  infantry  and  two  field  pieces,  at- 

^ked  a detachment  of  our  forces  under  General  Dodge,  on  tho  Peters- 


358 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


burg  Railroad,  5 miles  this  side  of  Zimi,  yesterday,  and  was  promptly 
and  handsomely  repulsed.  The  rails  we  are  removing  are  very  heavy, 
but  they  will  all  be  at  Suffolk  by  Thursday. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Pechj  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  at  Suffolk. 

May  17, 1863. 

General  Dodge  does  not  think  there  is  any  large  force  about  Smith- 
field.  Major  Patton  had  taken  5 men  and  6 horses ; when  returning,  his 
rear  guard  was  surprised  and  driven  on  the  command,  and  in  the  fight 
a bridge  broke,  letting  down  about  22  of  his  party,  making  confusion. 
The  prisoners  escaped. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Dix. 


May  18,  1863. 

General  Dodge  went  out  with  all  the  force  of  cavalry,  about  140,  tc 
Smithfield.  On  the  return  of  the  party.  Major  Patton  was  attacked  bj 
about  300  in  a swamp  and  had  a heroic  fight.  He  was  wounded  ii 
three  places  and  his  horse  wounded  several  times.  His  men  did  well. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

General  Dix. 


May  18,  1863. 

I sent  General  Dodge  to  Scott’s  Mill  and  he  made  a very  bold  recon 
naissance  with  only  about  140  men.  It  was  on  the  return  that  the  at 
tack  was  made  on  the  Cypress  Mill  road,  3 miles  from  Providenc( 
Church — not  on  our  maps.  Major  Patton  fought  well.  His  move  waf 
signaled  and  they  were  ready  for  him. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

General  Dix. 


May  20,  1863. 

Major  Stratton  reports  the  affair  at  Newby’s  Bridge  as  highly  credit 
able  on  the  part  of  Lieutenant  Titus  and  his  small  detachment.  Lieu 
tenant  Beatty,  so  severely  wounded  and  left,  has  been  brought  in  andi 
doing  well.  They  had  5 killed  and  a number  wounded,  while  our  los 
was  4 wounded. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- Ge7iC7'al. 


Major-General  Dix. 


EXPEDITION  FROM  GLOUCESTER  POINT. 


359 


;:HAr.  XXX.  1 


May  24,  1863. 

At  the  same  moment  of  attacking  the  advance  at  Antioch  Church  a 
iemoustration  was  made  at  Barber’s  Cross-Koads,  where  a regiment 
s watching  the  approaches  centering  there.  Both  failed,  and  the  en- 
^my  was  repulsed  with  considerable  loss.  At  the  church  we  lost  1 cap- 
tured and  3 wounded,  and  captured  a few  prisoners. 

. Every  rail  beyond  Windsor  is  removed. 


Major-General  Dix. 


JOHISr  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


No.  3. 

[tineraryof  the  I\meriw  Brigade^  Department  of  Virginia,  Brig.  Geyi.  Isaac 
J . Wistar,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding.  May  15-28.* 

May  15. — By  direction  of  Major-General  Peck,  Colonel  Wardrop  was 
.ent,  with  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers  and  Nineteenth  Wis- 
iionsiu  Volunteers,  to  assist  in  protecting  working  parties  engaged  in 
eariug  up  the  tracks  of  the  railroad  between  Suffolk  and  the  Black- 
rater. 

May  20. — The  Ninth  Vermont  Volunteers  and  the  One  hundred  and 
igliteenth  New  York  Volunteers  were  sent,  by  order  of  Major-General 
Yck,  on  the  same  duty,  under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Dodge. 

May  26. — The  Nineteenth  Wisconsin  Volunteers  returned,  and  May  27 
he  other  regiments;  but  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers  were 
(•rdered  out  again  immediately. 

May  28. — The  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Volunteers  returned  to  camp. 


lAY  10-22,  1863. — Expedition  from  Gloucester  Point  into  Matthews 

County,  Va. 

0.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps, 
o.  2.— Col.  Judson  Kilpatrick,  Second  New  York  Cavalry,  commanding  Cavalry 
Brigade. 

o.  3. — Lieut.  James  H.  Gillis,  U.  S.  Navy. 

No.  1. 

lepori  of  Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  Fourth 

Army  Corps. 

IIeadquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Fort  Yorktown,  Va.,  May  23,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a combined  expedition  left 
Gloucester  Point  on  the  night  of  the  19th  instant  and  returned  yester- 
ay  morning  under  the  following  instructions  : 

A combined  ex])cdition  will  set  out  to-niglit  lor  Matthews  County.  The  cavalry 
Qd  a section  of  artillery,  supported  l)y  200  iufantry,  to  leave  Gloucester  Point  at  10 

* From  Return  for  May,  1863. 


360 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


m.  will  be  uuder  the  immediate  orders  of  Col.  J.  Kilpatrick  commanding  cavalry  ^ 
brir>-ade.  The  gunboats  and  ferry-boat,  under  the  comman^  of  Lieutenant-Com- 
mander Gill!  s U.  S.  Navy,  will  have  onboard  200  infantry  subject  to  the  orders  of 
cfeut  Col  C C Suydam,  of  my  staff.  A small  supply  of  intrenching  tools  will  be 
o^bL  d witii  some  extra  ammunition  for  the  field  artillery.  The  infantry  will  carry 
100  rounds  of  ammunition  per  man,  and  all  the  troops  will  have  two  days’  cooked 

""""cZnel  Kilpatrick  will  consult  with  Lieutenant-Commander  Gillis  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Suydam  in  regard  to  the  movement  necessary  to  insure  prompt  and  effective 
co-oneration  Besides  inflicting  as  much  injury  as  possible  on  armed  enemies  the 
detachments  of  the  expedition  will  capture  and  bring  m all  animals  and  supplies 
needful  to  our  troops  that  may  be  found,  but  will  not  wantonly  ourn  or  pillage 

anywhere.  p KEYES, 

Major-General^  Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps. 


The  cavalry  was  from  the  New  York  Harris  Light  and  Ti^lfth  Illi- 
nois. The  artillery  was  commanded  by  Oapta;in  Mink,  of  the  First  New 
York  Yolnnteer  Artillery,  and  the  two  battalions  of  infantry  were  from 
the  One  hundred  and  Sixty-ninth  Pennsylvania  Drafted  Militia  and  the 
Fourth  Delaware,  commanded,  respectively,  by  Majors  Smyth  and  La 

^^The  expedition  was  conducted  with  spirit  by  the  officers,  and  the  men 
behaved  well.  Only  some  straggling  parties  of  the  enemy  seen. 
One  guerrilla  was  killed  and  2 of  our  men  were  wounded.  About  300 
horses  and  mules  were  captured,  besides  about  loO  head  of  hornet  cattle 
and  the  same  number  of  sheep.  A small  amount  ot 
in,  and  a large  amount  of  grain  and  forage  collected  for  the  rebel  Gov- 
ernment was  destroyed.  Five  mills  stored  with  gram  and  flour  were 

burnecL  obedient 

E.  D.  EEYES, 

Major-General.,  Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corjys. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Judson  KilpatricTc,  Second  New  YorJc  Cavalry,  commandint 

Cavalry  Brigade. 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Fort  Yorlctown,  Va.,  May  22,  18G3. 


General  : I have  the  lionor  to  report  the  entire  success  of  the  expe- 
dition under  my  command  sent  out  by  you  on  the  morning  oi  the  - 


I left  Gloucester  Point  at  1 a.  m.;  reached  Gloucester  Court-Hous 
at  daylight;  passed  down  into  Matthews  County,  and  commumca 
with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Suydam,  in  command  of  the  forces  sent  , 

water,  at  9 a.  tn.,  at  the  head  of  North  Kiver.  . T^inni- 

Having  posted  pickets  across  the  neck  from  North  River  to  i laiiiu 
tank,  I proceeded  to  Matthews  Court-House  without  opposition,  «aD 
again  communicated  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Suydam.  I returne 


Chap.  XXX.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  GLOUCESTER  POINT. 


361 


Gloucester  Court-House  ou  the  ev'euiug  of  the  21st,  having  scouted  the 
whole  of  Matthews  and  a portion  of  Gloucester  Counties,  finding  only 
straggling  ])arties  of  the  enemy. 

The  entire  expedition  returned  at  8 a.  m.  this  morning,  without  the 
loss  of  a man.  Two  men  of  the  Second  l^ew  York  were  wounded  by  a 
guerrilla ; the  guerrilla  was  killed.  We  captured  and  brought  with  us 
m horses  and  mules,  150  head  of  beef  cattle,  and  the  same  of  sheep. 
Large  quantities  of  grain  and  forage  collected  for  the  rebel  Goyernment 
were  destroyed. 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  command  deserye  great  credit  for  the 
prompt  and  soldierly  manner  in  which  eyery  order  was  obeyed  and  duty 
performed. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  KILPATRICK, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps. 


Ko.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  James  H.  Gillis,  V.  S.  Navy. 

U.  S.  Gunboat  Commodore  Morris, 

Off  YorUown,  Va.,  May  22,  1863. 

Sir  : I haye  to  report  that  at  the  request  of  Major-General  Keyes  I 
lave  acted  m conjunctLon  with  Brigadier-General  Kilpatrick,  by  coy^r- 
ug  his  operations  in  Matthews  County.  The  object  of  the  expedition 
vas  to  mount  all  the  dismounted  men  under  his  command. 

^ On  the  morning  of  the  20th  instant  I took  on  board  100  inen  from  the 
fourth  Delaware  Volunteers,  under  Major  La  Motte,  and  with  the 
Ymnisimmet  in  company,  she  haying  on  board  100  of  the  same  reffi- 
iieut,  proceeded  to  North  Riyer,  where  we  arriyed  at  5.30  a.  m.  I re- 
uained  at  this  place  until  communication  was  had  with  General  Kil- 
)atiick,  and  in  the  evening  I went  into  East  River  to  cover  his  opera- 
lous  there.  I remaiDed  at  this  place  until  about  9 o’clock  the  next 
noniing  and  then  started  for  the  rendezvous  on  North  River.  After  I 
•rnved  some  horses  were  brought  on  board  the  Winnisimmet  and  we 
ay  quiet  all  day  waiting  to  hear  from  the  different  squads  that  had 

^ ^ departure,  I took  on 

i>oard  200  of  the  Fourth  Delaware  and  started  for  Yorktown,  where  I 
rnved  at  12.30  last  night. 

^ number  of  sheep 

l^ere  captured  by  the  land  forces  in  their  march  across  the  country. 

General  Kilpatrick  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Suydam,  in  obedience  to 

seful  toTheM^behf  property  which  they  considered 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  GILLIS, 

B.  C.  Chetwood,  J^ieutenant,  Commanding. 

JAeut.  Col,  and  Inspector  General^  Fourth  Army  Corps. 


362 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  IChap.  XXX. 


MAY  20-23.  1863. — Demonstration  upon  Kinston,  K.  C.,  and  skirmishes 
(22d)  at  Gum  Swamp  and  (23d)  at  Batchelder’s  Creek. 


No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Joliu  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the  Department  of  North 

Carolina.  ~ 

No.  2.-C0I.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  of  skirmish  at  Gum 

Swamp.  T . 

No.  3.-Itinerary  of  the  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Brig.  Gen.  Iiims 

N.  Palmer  commanding.  May  20-23. 

No.  4.— Col.  George  H.  Peirson,  Fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No  5 —Col.  Josiah  Pickett,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  C.-Col.  Silas  P.  Richmond,  Third  Massachusetts  Infantry,  Second  Brigade,  I illii 
Division,  of  operations  May  23. 


Ko.  1. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  .Join  O.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commandintj  the  Depart- 
mcnt  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne.)  N.  0.,  May  22,  1803. 

General  ; I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  finding  the  enemy’s  troops 
were  constantly  being  drained  from  this  department  tor  Virginia,  and 
finding  that  I could  safely  make  a demonstration  toward  Kinston  and 
capture  the  enemy’s  picket  regiment,  I ordered  Col.  J.  Kichter  Jones, 
commanding  outpost  (Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania 
deavor  to  surround  the  enemy  at  Gum  Swamp,  if  capturiUj,  it,  t 
m'ako  a demonstration  as  if  attacking  in  force, 

and  sure  retreat.  I re-enforced  him  with  four  regiments,  tour  pieces  o 
artillerv,  and  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  I am  happy  to  f 
so  far  the  plan  has  been  successfully  carried  out.  F^tonel  Jones  sui 
rounded  the  Fifty-eighth  North  Carolina,  attacking  them  on  toui  sides, 
and  succeeded  in  capturing  between  200  and  300  Prisoners. 

1 forward  this  meager  account  by  this  opportunity,  and  \\ill  ha\o  tli 
honor  to  send  the  further  details  as  soon  as  they  are  ascertained. 

Colonel  Jones  is  some  7 miles  from  Kinston,  threatening  that  pl.iee 
His  retreat,  should  he  be  forced  to  fall  back,  is  perfectly  secure. 

In  my  previous  letters  I omitted  to  mention,  owing  to  the  press  o 
business  and  the  tact  that  I was  just  going  oil  a tour  ! 

very  successful  little  affair  of  four  companies  f V 

under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis,  about  the  itli  of  I*'  • 

were  ordered  to  make  a circuit  Iroiu  New  l.eriie  to  the  ^Xtoto  Oak  Kiiei 
via  Pollocksville  and  Young’s  Cross-Koads  and  return  by  the  m ay  o 
Newport.  Colonel  Lewis,  learning  where  a company  of  the  eneiuj . 
cavalry  were,  which  had  gone  from  Kinston  to  endeavor  to  cut  the  ra 
road  (mmmunication  between  this  point  and  Beaufort,  chai  go  • yj'Ji*  ,, 
succeeded  in  killing  2,  capturing  14,  and  taking  JG  horses,  and  witlioii 

the  loss  of  a man  killed  or  wounded  on  our  side. 

I have  the  lionor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  '’ 

Ma jor- Genera  ?,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  W.  Ualleck,  ^ 

General-in-Chief  XJ.  8.  Army)  ashington)  D.  C. 


' Reference  ijrobably  to  skirmiBb  at  Peletier’s  Mill,  May  5. 


Chap.  XXX.]  DEMONSTRATION  UPON  KINSTON,  N.  C.  363 

! Headquarters  Eiohteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  June  2,  1863. 

General  ; Eeferring  to  my  brief  report  of  May  22, 1 have  the  honor 
to  report  that,  Jearning  from  Col.  J.  Eichter  Jones,  commanding  outpost, 
that  he  deemed  it  possible  to  capture  the  enemy^s  outpost  regiments  at 
Gum  Swamp,  8 miles  from  Kinston,  I ordered  Colonel  Lee^s  brigade,  con- 
sisting of  the  Fifth,  Twenty-fifth,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Forty-sixth 
Massachusetts  Eegimeuts,  three  pieces  of  Eiggs’  battery,  and  a bat- 
talion of  cavalry,  to  report  to  him. 

Colonel  Jones  ordered  the  Fifth,  Twenty-fifth,  and  Forty-sixth,  with 
the  artillery  and  cavalry,  under  command  of  Colonel  Peirson,  Fiftli 
Massachusetts,  to  advance  up  the  railroad  and  Dover  roads  to  attack 
the  enemy’s  works  in  the  front,  while  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers  and  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  under 
the  immediate  command  of  Colonel  Jones,  took  a path  through  the 
swamp  to  reach  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  position. 

The  main  column,  under  Colonel  Peirson,  met  the  enemy’s  pickets  at 
daylight  of  the  22d,  and,  driving  them  in,  commenced  an  ktack  on  the 
front.  Colonel  Jones,  with  his  command,  owing  to  the  character  of  the 
road  they  had  taken  (the  men  having  to  go  by  single  file),  did  not  arrive 
at  the  desired  place  until  9 a.  m.  On  arriving  in  rear  of  the  enemy’s 
position  Colonel  Jones  deployed  such  portions  of  his  command  as  could 
be  used  to  advantage,  opened  fire,  and  advanced.  The  enemy  fired  a 
few  desultory  volleys,  then  broke  and  fled  in  great  confusion,  taking  to 
the  swamps,  and  escaping  by  paths  known  only  to  themselves.  On 
hearing  the  firing  of  Colonel  Jones’  command  Colonel  Peirson  advanced 
his  command  and  entered  the  works  in  front.  After  securing  the  pris- 
oners (165)  and  spoils,  demolishing  the  enemy’s  works  and  resting  his 
iien.  Colonel  Jones  made  a demonstration  and  show  of  advance  on  Kin- 
don.  At  dusk  the  same  evening  his  pickets  were  driven  in  and  he 
oiind  himself  attacked  by  the  enemy  in  force  and  with  artillery.  He, 
n obedience  to  orders,  at  once  retired,  followed  by  the  enemy,  and 
‘cached  our  outpost  line  without  loss.  Colonel  Fee’s  brigade  was  put 
)n  cars  in  waiting  and  returned  to  their  camps. 

The  enemy,  mortified  at  the  success  of  Colonel  Jones,  and  being 
strongly  re-enforced  from  Goldsborough,  attacked  pur  outpost  line  on 
he  p.  m*  of  the  23d.  I sent  out  a supporting  force  to  Colonel  Jones  and 
,he  enemy  were  repulsed  at  every  point,  but  with  great  loss  to  us  and 
ihe  service  in  the  death  of  Colonel  Jones,  who  was  shot  through  the 
leart  as  he  was  leading  on  two  companies  of  his  regiment  to  dislodge  the 
hnemy  from  a position  he  had  taken  up.  By  the  death  of  Colonel  Jones 
[b  most  brave,  zealous,  and  able  ofiicer  has  been  lost  to  the  service  and 
0 this  department. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a list  of  casualties  and  a list  of  prisoners 
imd  articles  captured. 

I have  tlie  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

^ Major-General,  Gommandinq. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  8.  Armxj,  Washington,  D.  C. 

[In  closure.] 

ailed « 

V^ounded r 

lissing J 

Total 


8 


364 


NORTH  CAROLINA.  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  1 


Prisoners 

Horses 

Ambulances  and  teams 

Baggage  wagons 

Muskets  and  equipments  

12-pounder  howitzer  with  limber 
Rounds  of  ammunition 


lt)5 

28 

3 

2 •» 
80 
1 

11, 000 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  Richter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  of 
slcirmish  at  Gum  Swamjp. 

Camp  at  Gum  Swamp,  Eight  Miles  from  Kinston, 

' May  22,  1863—12  m. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  my  attempt  to  cut  off  the  en- 
emy’s troops  at  Gum  Swamp  has  partially  succeeded. 

1 made  the  detour  successfully  with  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania 
and  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  and  attacked  the  enemy  in  the  rear; 
but,  owiug*^  to  my  defective  knowledge  of  the  ground,  he  was  able  to  de- 
fend himself  some  time  under  cover  of  a swamp,  and  when  hnally  broken 

his  men  mostly  escaped.  ^ 

However,  we  captured  165  firisoners,  and  almost  took  General  Han- 
som himself,  who  was  accidentally  at  the  post.  T|ie  enemy’s  regiments 
engaged  were  the  Fifty-sixth  North  Carolina  and  Twenty-fifth  North 
Carolina,  and  on  our  part  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  and  -Cwerdy- 
seventh  Massachusetts.  Our  loss  is  small — 2 wounded,  oi  the  hitty- 
eighth.  Of  the  enemy,  I have  6 wounded  reported  to  me. 

Our  [II  propose  recounoitering  Wise’s  Cross-E-oads  this  afternoon, 
and  to-morrow  returning  to  our  old  lines.  A particular  report  here- 
after. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  se-an*- 

Commanding  Outposts. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  3. 

Itinerary  of  the  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Prig.  Gen.  Innis 
AT.  Palmer  commanding,  May  20-23.* 

May  20.— The  Twenty-fifth  and  Forty-sixth  Regiments,  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  which  were  commanded  by  Colonel  Peirson,  of  the  ^ffth  JVlas 
sachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  in  accordance  with  orders  from  Headquar 
ters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  moved  at  midnight  to  Batchelder  s Cree 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  detachment  reporting  to  Col.  J.  R.  Jones 
of  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania,  commanding  outpost. 

May  21.— The  remainder  of  the  Second  Brigade  (accompanied  oy 
tenant  Horton,  acting  commissary  of  musters,  and  Lieutenant  Allen 
aide-de-camp  on  the  division  staff’),  consisting  of  the  Twenty-sevcnt 


Froui  Return  for  May,  1863. 


CflAP.XXX.l  DEMONSTRATION  UPON  KINSTON,  N.  C.  365 

Massacliusetts  Volunteers  and  the  FiftJi  Massachusetts  Volunteer 
Militia,  was  transported  by  railroad  to  White’s  house,  about  1 mile  frbm 
Core  Creek,  where  they  were  afterward  joined  by  the  remainder  pf  the 
brigade  and  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania,  with  some  cavalry  and  ar- 
tillery. At  dusk  the  Twenty- seventh  was  sent,  with  the  Fifty-eighth 
Pennsylvania,  both  under  the  immediate  command  of  Colonel  Jones,  of 
the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania,  by  an  unfrequented  path  to  the  rear  of 
the  enemy’s  outpost,  at  Gum  Swamp,  some  8 miles  from  Kinston,  K.  0. 
At  midnight  the  remainder  of  the  column  moved  up  the  Dover  road  (to 
which  they  had  previously  marched  from  the  railroad)  to  attack  the 
enemy  in  front. 

May  22.— At  daybreak  the  advance  of  the  United  States  troops  on  the 
Dover  road  encountered  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  drove  them  in.  The 
main  body  then  came  up  and  annoyed  the  enemy  with  desultory  skir- 
mish firing  until  about  10  a.  m.,  when  Colonel  Jones  (who  had  succeeded 
in  reaching  the  enemy’s  rear)  made  a dash  upon  their  position,  and,  in 
conjunction  with  the  troops  in  front,  succeeded  in  capturing  165  prison- 
( rs.  Our  column  now  slowly  retired,  closely  follow^ed  by  the'enemy  with 
cavalry  and  artillery.  He  shelled  our  rear  for  some  time,  but  without 
eliect,  and  about  9 p.  m.  our  troops  bivouacked  behind  Core  Creek. 

May  23.— At  daylight  our  pickets  were  attacked,  but  the  enemy’s  ad- 
vance was  driven  back  by  a few  well-directed  shell.  A move  was  then 
made  toward  the  railroad,  but  it  was  soon  discovered  that  the  enemy 
had  crossed  Core  Creek,  on  the  line  of  the  railroad,  and  were  reoccu- 
pying in  force.  Accordingly  Colonel  Jones,  wishing  to  avoid  another 
action,  made  his  way  through  a dense  swamp,  striking  the  railroad 
several  miles  below  White’s  house,  and,  taking  the  cars  awaiting  there, 
returned  to  Kew  Berne  about  5 p.  m.  The  prisoners  on  their  arrival 
were  paroled  by  the  following  staff  officers  of  this  division : Captain 
Judson,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Lieutenant  Horton,  acting  commis- 
sary of  musters;  Lieutenant  Allen,  acting  aide-de-camp.  The  pickets 
at  Batchelder’s  Creek  were  shortly  after  attacked,  and  the  Forty-fifth 
Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  of  the  First  Brigade,  was 
sent  out.  ’ 


Ko.  4. 

Beiiort  of  Col.  George  H.  Peirson,  Fifth  Massacliusetts  Infantry^  com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

IlDQRs.  Second  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Eighteenth  A.  C., 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  May  27,  1863. 

' By  reason  of  the  lamented  death  of  Col.  J.  Eichter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth 
I’eiiDsylvania  Volunteers,  a most  gallant,  earnest,  devoted,  andloyal- 
Jearted  soldier  and  patriot,  and  the  commander  of  the  late  expedition 
0 the  enemy’s  outpost,  known  as  Gum  Swamp,  it  deyolyes  upon  the 
mdersigned,  being  the  senior  officer  present,  to  make  as  complete  a re- 
port thereof  as  possible  for  the  information  of  the  commanding  general. 
Ihe  torces  comprising  the  expedition  consisted  of  Lee’s  brigade  (Twen- 
y litth.  Twenty-seventh,  Fifth,  and  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Kegi- 
neiits),  under  the  immediate  command  of  the  undersigned;  the  Fifty- 
eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Jiirtiss;  three  pieces  of  Battery  H,  Third  Kew  York  Artillery,  under 


366 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.XXX.  I 


command  of  Lieut.  John  13.  Clark;  and  four  companies  of  the  Third 
I^^ew  York  Cavalry  and  Allis’  battery,  under  command  of  Captain  ! 
Jacobs. 

The  Twenty-fifth  and  Forty-sixth  Eegimeiits,  with  the  artillery,  left 
New  Berne  al  midnight  of  the  20th  instant  and  arrived  at  Batchelder’s  ' 
Creek  at  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  the  21st. 

The  Twenty-seventh  and  Fifth  Eegiments  arrived  at  Batchelder’s 
Creek  by  rail  at  8 o’clock  on  the  21st,  and  soon  after  the  cavalry  re- 
ported near  the  creek,  on  the  Neuse  road.  Colonel  Jones  then  took 
command,  sent  forward  by  rail  the  Twenty-seventh  and  Fifth  Eegiments 
to  White’s  house,  in  the  vicinity  of  a mile  from  Core  Creek  ; the  cav- 
alry and  artillery  by  the  Dover  road,  and  subsequently,  on  the  return  of 
the  train,  transported  the  remaining  infantry  to  White’s  house.  From 
there,  about  5 o’clock,  the  Twenty-seventh  Eegiment  was  sent  up  the 
railroad  to  a depot  on  Core  Creek,  there  to  halt  and  await  further  or- 
ders. The  remaining  regiments  marched  to  Core  Creek,  on  the  Dover 
road,  where  we  joined  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania,  previously  sent 
forward  by  Colonel  Jones. 

The  object  of  the  expedition  was  to  surround  and  capture  a rebel 
regiment  at  Gum  Swamp,  the  outpost  of  the  enemy,  8 miles  from  Kins- 
ton. I have  now  the  honor  to  state  in  detail,  so  far  as  I am  able,  the 
means  taken  to  accomplish  it. 

It  was  decided  to  send  two  regiments  by  an  unfrequented  and  cir- 
cuitous path  to  the  enemy’s  rear,  while  the  main  column  moved  up  and 
occupied  the  enemy’s  attention  and  prevented  his  escape  in  front;  both 
columns  were  to  arrive  at  the  enemy’s  intreuchments  as  near  daybreak 
as  possible  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  and  thus  .make  a joint  attack 
front  and  rear.  Accordingly,  at  dusk  on  the  21st,  Colonel  Jones 
moved  at  the  head  of  his  column,  consisting  of  the  Fifty-eighth  Penn- 
sylvania and  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  which  he  subsequently 
joined  at  the  depot,  and  stealthily  proceeded,  under  cover  of  tbe  night 
and  by  direction  of  a faithful  guide,  to  gain  the  enemy’s  rear. 

Not  being  able  to  state  from  personal  knowledge  the  movements  and 
doings  of  this  column  I quote  so  much  of  the  reports  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonels  Lyman  and  Curtiss  as  appertains  to  this: 


niOM  THE  REPORT  OF  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL  LYMAN. 

At  8 o’clock  Colonel  Jones,  witli  Ins  regiment,  joined  ns,  wlien  the  march  com- 
menced. We  left  the  railroad  to  onr  right  and  took  a path  throngh  the  M oods  and 
swamp  rnnning,  in  its  general  direction,  parallel  with  the  railroad  and  1 shonld  jiulfic 
from  1 to  :3  miles  from  it.  The  path  was  almost  impenetrable  for  a large  part  of  the 
way,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  we  succeeded  in  getting  throngh.  The  guide 
is  deserving  of  great  praise  for  bringing  ns  ont  at  the  point  indicated,  showing  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  country.  We  arrived  at  a point  about  1 mile  in  rear  of 
the  enemy’s  works  at  7 o’clock  in  the  morning,  only  halting  during  the  night  to  clear 
onr  way.  The  march  was  necessarily  slow  and  very  tedions;  the  distance  was  said 
to  be  14  miles;  in  my  opinion  it  was  much  farther.  Here  the  men  were  allowed  to  rest 
for  a half  hour  to  eat  their  breakfast.  Moving  on  to  within  a short  distance  of  the 
breastwork  Colonel  Jones  ordered  me  to  send" four  comiianies  to  hold  tiie  Dover  road 
to  prevent  an  attack  upon  onr  rear  by  the  enemy  coming  from  Kinston.  I detailed 
Companies  13,  C,  G,  and  K,  under  command  of  Captain  Caswell,  and  sent  them  a- 
directed  ; three  more  companies  of  the  regiment  were  ordered  to  advance  and  talo' 
])Ossession  of  the  railroad  at  a point  above  the  works.  Companies  H,  I,  and  D were 
sent  forward  under  command  of  Captain  Sanford.  The  remaining  com])anies  of  the 
regiment  were  held  in  reserve  for  the  support  of  Captain  Sanford  under  my  own  orders. 
Captain  Sanford  came  upon  the  enemy  almost  immediately,  directly  in  front  ot  his 
ailvance  ; they  having  retreated  from  their  works  and  taken  position  behind  the  rail- 
road embankment,  he  attacked  them  immediately.  A brisk  musketry  tire  was  kept  u]' 
for  a short  time  on  both  sides,  when  Captain  Sanford  ordered  a charge  with  the  h.ay- 
onet,  which  was  done  in  splendid  style,  the  enemy  retreating  to  the  woods,  our  met 


Chap,  jrxx.]  DEMONSTRATION  UPON  KINSTON,  N.  C. 


367 


the  resole  i;at|CT‘lo  Or]"Trso1i/trcut  off  thl“‘’n"n?y4\otT"S''  nii’on'tLo  o'ilroad 

FROM  IHE  REPORT  OF  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL  CURTISS. 

The  two  regiments  turned  off  to  the  left  of  the  railroad  into  a kind  of  nath  whieh 
wasnot  often  traveled  We  pursued  the  wanderings  of  th^s  path  stfaX 

ales,  and  ditches,  wdiere  it  seemed  impossi  ble  for  man  to  pass.  The  great  difficultv 

lield  near  the  railroad  and  within  plain  view  of  the  enemy’s  works.  Both  comnanies 
luickly  opened  hre  iind  then  under  a double-quick  chargil  upon  the  enemy  ^antuf 
iig  one  piece  of  artillery  while  the  officer  in  charge  was  tndeivoring  trcShZe  B 
ipon  iis.  Company  I,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Wells,  arrived  at  t^e  niece  havfn^ 
(listauce  to  go,  a little  in  advance  of  Companv  K,  which\vas’ making 
\ith  all  possible  speed  to  capture  the  piece.  The  enemy  tied  terror-stricken  after 
hscharging  their  pieces,  in  all  directions  into  the  adjacent  swamps  except  the^ebel 
leiitenant  commanding  the  artillery,  who  was  vainly  endeavorin^'^p  disep™^^^ 

)iece  upon  our  advancing  column,  but  which  was  wrested  from  him  and  eSred 

with  thoii’ 

The  Other  e.olumn,  under  my  own  immediate  command,  moved  from 
.ore  Creek  at  midnight  on  the  21st,  and  at  daybreak  encountered  the 

i'wmmf  f ^ j«t>’e“cl>ed  position  at  Gum 

namp.  The  column  moved  up  steadily  to  within  500  or  GOO  yards  of 
he  111  trenchments  imd  were  there  deployed— the  Twenty-fifth  on  the 
xtrenie  nght,  the  Fifth  on  the  extreme  left,  and  the  Forty-sixth  in 
iippoit  of  the  artillery  111  the  center;  the  cavalry  were  placed  within 

ttmd'ion’o/th^*°*^®  '^Ifiect  was  simply  to  attract  the 

Uention  of  the  enemy  and  as  far  as  possible  to  keep  them  in  ignorance 

Accordingly  1 ordered  each  regiment  to  sendfor- 
ai  d skirmishers  and  draw  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  keeping  themselves 
rotected  as  much  as  possible.  Desultory  firing  was  thus  kept  up  for 
-veral  hours,  with  trifling  damage  to  ourselves  and  probaWy  to  the 
aemj.  About  half  past  9 or  10  rapid  firing  was  heard  in  the^rear  of 
e enemy.  Judging  that  Colonel  Jones  had  succeeded  in  reachin-v  the 
esired  position,  I moved  forward  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  on  the 
gilt  and  the  Fifth  Massachusetts  on  the  left,  and  ordered  them  to  be 
cccssary,  to  charge  the  intrenchments.  The  Forty-sixth 
assachusetts  were  ordered  to  support  the  Twenty-fifth  advancino- 
^+4°  r front ; Colonel  Pickett,  commanding  Twenty-fifth  prif 

u eil  *'t?  A ®’5'™is>^ers  to  ascertain  if  the  works^ were  aUin- 

. The  skirmishers  reporting  that  the  enemy  had  left  their  first 
Ml  I ordered  forward  the  regiments  rapidly  to  gather  up  the  fruited 

Ver  f ■ ^'i  f'JC  "^ork  WO  met  detachments  of  tlio  Tweiity- 

uiifh  Massiichusetts  and  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  bringing  in  pril- 

net  .47"^  captured  by  brilliantly  charging  them 

Uetached  squads  were  sent  into  the  swamps  to  hunt  out  and  Pai.ture 

' nem-lT'*!  ^coin  the  information  received  from  iirisoners 

Ptais  to  have  been  between  GOO  and  700.  The  escaneof  so  nmnv  wss 
hncipally  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  detachment  of  the  l<hftySoi.?," 
insylvania  sent  down  the  Dover  road  to  attack  directly  intlie  rear 


368 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


routed  tlie  enemy  before  another  detachment  of  the  Twenty -seventh 
Massachusetts  had  reached  the  railroad  on  the  left. 

Colonel  Jones,  as  soon  as  he  could  communicate  with  our  column,  or- 
dered forward  the  cavalry,  but  the  enemy,  before  the  cavalry  could 
overtake  them,  had  proceeded  too  far  to  be  cut  off. 

The  whole  force  remained  at  and  near  these  works  until  after  5 o^clock 
p.  m.,  many  of  the  men  employed  in  demolishing  the  works,  the  others 
being  allowed  to  rest.  At  this  time  our  pickets  were  attacked  by  artil- 
lery and  infan trj^  and  driven  in.  The  Twenty- seventh  and  Fifty-eighth, 
then  in  bivouac  on  the  other  side  of  the  creek,  joined  the  main  column, 
and  a disposition  was  made  of  the  whole  force  to  resist  an  attack.  After 
opening  with  artillery  upon  the  enemy,  who  were  in  considerable  force 
on  the  railroad,  the  column  slowly  retired,  one  piece  of  Battery  n being 
in  1 he  rear  of  the  infantry  and  one  company  of  cavalry,  under  commanci 
of  Captain  Vfillson,  covering  the  rear  of  the  column.  The  enemy  closely 
followed  and  opened  with  artillery  upon  our  column,  fortunately  doing 
no  harm,  to  which  Lieutenant  Clark  replied  with  a few  shots.  Another 
column,  apparently  of  considerable  strength,  moved  down  the  railroad 
on  the  right.  At  10  o’clock  p.  m.  we  crossed  Core  Creek  and  encamped 
for  the  night,  being  undisturbed  by  the  enemy.  A little  after  daybreak 
on  the  morning  of  the  23d  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  engaged  ours  at  the 
creek,  but  a few  shell  from  our  artillery  silenced  their  skirmish  firing 
altogether. 

Colonel  Jones  had  previously  determined  to  move  his  command  i*ii 
two  columns  from  Core  Creek,  the  one  on  the  Dover  road  to  Batchel- 
der’s  Creek  and  the  other  by  the  cross-roads  to  the  railroad  and  thence 
by  cars  to  hTew  Berne.  In  the  opinion  of  Colonel  Jones  the  enemy  were 
not  posted  in  any  very  considerable  strength  at  this  creek,  and  hence 
he  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  vary  from  his  previous  plans.  Accord- 
ingly Colonel  Jones,  with  the  artillery,  cavalry,  and  Fifty-eighth  Penn- 
sylvania, guarding  the  prisoners  and  baggage  train,  moved  leisurely 
down  the  Dover  road  to  Batchelder’s  Creek  without  the  least  molesta- 
tion from  the  enemy.  The  main  column  (Lee’s  brigade),  under  my  im- 
mediate command,  took  the  cross-road  leading  to  the  railroad,  distant 
some  3 miles.  Colonel  Pickett,  being  at  the  head,  sent  forward  one 
company  as  an  advance  guard,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  the  railroad 
and  report  the  condition  of  things  there.  In  a few  moments  messengers 
came  back  from  Lieutenant  Hunt,  Twenty- seventh  Eegiment,  who  had 
been  left  with  20  men  at  the  Core  Creek  railroad  bridge,  with  the  in- 
formation that  the  enemy  had  driven  in  his  pickets  and  that  three  reg 
iments  were  coming  down  the  railroad  track  with  the  very  evident 
intention  of  commanding  the  road,  or,  at  all  events,  of  attacking  our  left 
and  rear  before  we  could  reach  the  cars.  Judging  that  it  was  most 
wise  under  the  circumstances  to  avoid  a collision  with  the  enem5^  inas 
much  as  a victory  even  would  have  been  a sacrifice  of  men  and  barrel 
of  any  substantial  benefits,  and  the  more  certainly  to  prevent  theii 
getting  between  our  column  and  the  cars,  then  in  waiting  in  the  vicinity 
of  White’s  house,  on  consultation  with  Colonel  Pickett,  Twenty-fiffl 
Massachusetts,  and  my  staff  officers.  Captain  Bartlett  and  Lieutenani 
Myrick,  I determined  to  strike  in  a diagonal  direction  through  tin 
woods  to  the  left  and  thus  reach  the  cars  in  the  shortest  time.  Uiifor 
tunately  we  were  obliged  to  pass  through  a dense,  briery-tangled,  am 
dismal  swamp,  so  common  in  the  low  marshy  lands  in  this  part  of  tin 
country.  Our  progress  was  thus  somewhat  delayed,  but  in  due  tinn 
the  whole  column  safely  crossed  and  took  the  cars  for  Xew  Berne. 

The  subsequent  attack  by  the  enemy  at  Batchelder’s  Creek  on 


CIIAI‘.  XXX.] 


DEMONSTRATION  UPON  KINSTON,  N.  C. 


369 


afteruoou  of  the  pi,  wiiich  resulted  iu  the  death  of  Colonel  Jones,  not 
being  With m the  limits  or  against  the  forces  of  my  command,  I have  no 
report  concerning-  this  to  make.  Most  of  the  commanders  who  have 
made  their  reports  to  me  unite  with  their  commands  in  deploring  the 
loss  the  department  and  the  service  have  sustained  in  his  death  As 
a soldier  he  was  brave,  stout  hearted,  and  untiring  iu  his  eflbrts-  as  a 
man,  earnest,  magnanimous,  honorable,  and  devoted  to  his  duty.  He 
was  never  appalled  by  danger  or  overcome  by  incapacitating  fear,  but 
ills  country”^*  heavy  and  sturdy  blows  against  the  enemies  of 

° f®™s  the  forces  under  my  command, 

fnr^tih^  Eegiments  are  deserving  of  praise 

iTa*ti  they  bore  the  fatigues  of  the  night  march 

and  the  gallant  manner  in  which  they  charged  upon  and  captured  so 
.nany  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyman  speaks  in  approving 
lerms  ot  his  othcers  and  men.  Lieutenant. Colonel  Curtiss  specially 
nentions  Captain  Clay,  Company  K,  and  Lieutenant  Wells,  Company 
r,  lor  their  eprgy.pill,  pd  gallantry.  I commend  the  TwentydSfth 
Massachusetts  tor  their  high  state  of  discipline  and  for  the  promptness 
iiid  zeal  which  they  displayed  on  all  occasions.  The  Fifth  and  Forty- 
uxth  Massachusetts  manifested  great  enthusiasm  to  distinguish  theim 
.elves  and  add  to  their  character  as  regiments;  had  serious  work  been 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  number  of  prisoners  and  the 
ollowiiig  list  of  captured  property  as  the  fruits  of  the  expedition : One 
II  wired  and  sixty-tive  prisoners,  28  horses,  10  mules,  2 baggage  wagons, 
ambulances,  10  sets  single  harness,  6 artillery  harness  (complete),  11 

bridles,  80  muskets,  80  sets  of  equip- 
lents,  11,000  rounds  of  ammunition,  1 12-pounder  howitzer  with  limber. 

1 have  the  honor  also  to  state  the  casualties  in  tabular  form : 


til  Ma8sacliu.sett.s. 
Ill  Massachusetts. 

th  Massachusetts. 


ii  Ma.ssachusetts 

I New  York  Cavalry 

u York  Artillery  (Battery  H). 
h Pennsylvania ' 


Total . 


Eemarks. 


Slightly  wounded.  Missing  man  last 
seen  at  Core  Creek. 

1 killed,  lett  in  hands  of  enemy;  1 
died  of  wounds.  May  29  ; 1 slightly 
wounded  in  leg. 

Slightly  wounded. 


transmit  an  elegant  and  accurate  map  of  the  de- 
hses  at  Gum  Swamp,  drawn  by  Sergt.  Charles  Brigham,  Company  K, 
fth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  t ' 

1 am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

GEORGE  H.  PEIRSOi^, 

^ Colonel^  Commanding, 

bieiit^ol.^ouTHARD  Hoffman,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

^Ot  foniHl. 


24  R R. 


-VOL  xvni 


370 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

I 

No.  5. 


[CiiAr.  XXX 


Report  of  Col.  Josiah  Piclcett,  Twenty-fifth  Massaehusetts  Infantry. 


llDQRS.  Twenty-fifth  Kegt.  MAssACHUSEp.'S  Vols., 

’ CamiJ  Oliver,  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  May  2o,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  ot  the  part  taker 
by  the  Twenty-fifth  Eegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  in  the  late  ex 

city  .t  12.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  th 
^ilst  My  orders  were  to  iiroceed  to  Batchelder’s  Creek  and  report  fo 
orders  to^Colonel  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Eegiment  ^ 
teers  I reached  Batchelder’s  Creek  a little  after  daylight  and  imme 
diatelv  reported.  Having  some  hours  in  which  to  rest  my  men,  I placer 
“‘in  the  woods  on  the^•ight  of  the  road  leading  to 
Fifty-eighth  Kegiment^iynnsylvai^ 


placed' my*regiment  aboard  a train  of  cars  in  waiting  and  moved  u 
fi..^  voiPntiil  nhniit  ,S  miles  in  the  direction  of  Core  Cr( 


the  railroad  about  8 miles  in  the  direction  of  Core  Creek.  There  w 
disembarked  and  joined  the  other  regiments  of  the  Second  Brigade,  th 
Twentv-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  the  Fifth  Massachusett 
Volunteer  Militia.  We  then  marched  to  Core  Creek  and  bivouacke 

'"^^t  12  o’clock  we  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  Gum  Creek,  my  reg 
ment  in  the  advance.  After  crossing  the  bridge  at  Core  Creek  I thre- 
forward  Company  K,  Capt.  J.  Waldo  Denny  commanding,  as  an  at 
vanco  <'uard.  ^ AVe  moved  on  quietly,  meeting  no  opposition  from  c 
seeing  any  signs  of  the  enemy  until  about  i o’clock  in  the  morning  ( 
the  22d,  when  our  advance  guard  met  the  enemy’s  pickets,  exchan 
shots  with  them,  and  drove  them  in.  Advancing 
soon  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  enemy’s  camp.  By  order  of  Colon' 
Feirson  I filed  my  regiment  into  the  field  to  the  of  the  road  . 

took  position  on  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy,  forming  line  of  hattle. 
sent  dut  Company  K,  Capt.  J.  AValdo  Denny,  and  Company  F Cap 
Thomas  O’ileil,  as  skirmishers  and  to  discover  and  report  t^e  positio 
of  the  enemy.  Captains  Denny  and  O’Neil  soon  sent  word  that  to 
were  within\iglit  of  a long  line  of  earthworks  and  had 
with  the  enemy.  I instructed  them  to  engage  him  closely , so  as  to  dra 
if  possible  his  attention  from  his  flanks  and  rear.  ® 

in  doiiK"-  admirably.  Our  skirmishers  exchanged  their  first  shots  nil 
theeueniyat  his  earthworks  at  about  G..30  o’clock.  At  10  o clock  v 
hlard  tiring  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  which  indicated  the  approach. 
Colonel  Jones  in  that  direction.  I immediately  y''®"8tlie'ied  i y 
of  skirmishers  by  throwing  fopard  CompanpC,  Captain  Gwt^  , 
moved  forward  my  regiment  in  line  of  battle.  C®'npany  A was  s 
over  the  earthworks.  The  enemy,  outflanked  and  attacked  m the  m 
had  fled  precipitately  to  the  woods  and  swamps,  and  I had  the  pie 
in  alow  moments  of  seeing  my  regimental  colors 
trenchments.  At  5 p.  m.  the  enemy,  no  doubt  re  enforced  from  Kinsto 
moved  down  the  railroad  and  commenced  shelling  C'e  ^oiids. 

The  object  of  the  expedition  having 
artillery  had  thrown  a few  shells  at  them,  we  “P  yoi 

for  Core  Creek : my  regiment,  with  Company  — , of  the  Third  ^e 
Cavalry,  and  one  piece  of  artillery  from  Battery -,  Third  New  To 
Artillery,  formed  the  rear  guard.  The  enemy  followed  us,  . 

shelling  the  woods.  They,  however,  did  us  no  damage,  and  we  ar 


CifAV.  XXX.] 


DEMONSTRATION  UPON  KINSTON,  N.  C.  371 

safely  at  Core  Creek  at  about  10.30  that  uight.  We  bivouacked  here 
without  fires  for  the  night. 

At  6.30  o’clock  on  the  luoruiug  of  the  23d  we  took  up  the  line  of  march 
for  the  railroad,  there  to  take  the  cars  for  Batchelder’s  Creek.  The  col- 
umn had  been  in  motion  but  a few  moments  when  the  enemy’s  advance 
guard  fired  upon  our  troops  from  the  other  side  of  the  creek.  Our  artil- 
lery soon  dispersed  them,  and,  being  in  the  advance,  I threw  forward 
one  company  as  advance  guard,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  the  railroad 
and  report  the  condition  of  things  there.  In  a few  moments  messen<^ers 
came  in  with  information  that  the  enemy  had  driven  in  the  picket's  of 
the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  who  were  stationed  upon  the 
railroad,  and  that  they  were  moving  down  in  force  (three  regiments) 
with  the  very  evident  intention  of  striking  our  left  flank  and  rear  before 
we  could  reach  the  cars.  In  order  to  prevent  this  movement,  which 
would  have  proved  very  disastrous  to  us,  by  order  of  Colonel  Peirson 
I filed  the  head  of  the  column  to  the  left  into  the  woods,  intendino-  to 
run  parallel  with  the  railroad  for  some  distance  and  then  to  strilfe  it 
lar  enough  down  as  to  enable  us  to  bring  our  whole  force  into  position 
and  pve  them  battle.  The  head  of  the  column  struck  into  a swamp, 
which  at  first  seemed  but  little  likely  to  impede  our  march,  but  ere  long 
It  became  almost  impenetrable  and  seemed  interminable:  without  guides 
and  in  endeavoring  to  reach  the  railroad,  we  lost  our  way.  Finally  a 
liocket-compass  was  obtained,  and  in  a short  time  we  struck  the  rail- 
road some  distance  below  where  we  intended  to  and  about  2 miles  above 
inscarora  Depot.  Here  we  met  the  cars,  and  the  men  were  picked  ui) 
p they  came  out  of  the  woods,  and  without  any  further  occurrence  of 
importance  were  conveyed  to  New  Berne.  I reached  my  camp  between 
3 and  4 p.  m.  Saturday,  the  23d.=^ 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  yours, 

^ ^ JOSIAH  PICKETT, 

Colonel,  Comdg,  Twenty-fifth  Eegt  Massachusetts  Vols. 

Capt.  George  W.  Bartlett, 

A.  A,  A,  G.,  Second  Brig.,  First  Biv.,  Eighteenth  A.  G. 


No.  6. 


Report  of  Col.  Silas  P.  Richmond,  Third  Massachusetts  Infantry,  Second 
Brigade,  Fifth  Division,  of  operations  May  23. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia 
Camp  Jour  dan,  near  Few  Berne,  F.  G.,  May  25,  1863. 
Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
oovement  of  my  command  during  the  late  disturbance  at  the  outposts: 

At  4 p.  m.  on  the  23d  instant  I received  orders  to  have  my  command 
Itioii  march  at  a moment’s  notice  with  GO  rounds  of  ammu- 


At  7 p.  m.  about  200  rebel  prisoners  were  committed  to  my  charge 
ml  at  the  same  time  news  came  that  Colonel  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Peiin- 
ylyania,  was  killed  at  Batchelder’s  Creek,  and  that  his  regiment,  to- 
ether  with  Lee  s brigade,  had  been  driven  in  with  some  loss. 

At  8 1).  m.  I received  orders  to  march  immediately.  I did  so,  having 
ntten  iiistructions  to  gyivern  my  movements.  Being  obliged  to  leave 

*Nomiual  list  ol  casualties  shows  men  wouuded  and  1 missing. 


372 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCiiAi*.  XXX 


a strong  guard  over  the  rebel  prisoners,  I had  with  me  only  25  officer!; 
and  453  men.  I took  the  Neuse  road  and  proceeded  to  a point  beyoiu 
its  intersection  with  the  railroad,  and  halted  in  a convenient  positioi 
for  communication  with  our  force 'on  the  Keuse  road,  near  Batchelder’ii 
Creek,  and  also  with  our  force  on  the  railroad  near  the  same  creek, 
We  there  rested  on  our  arms  during  the  remainder  of  the  night. 

Just  after  daylight  on  the  24th,  by  order  of  General  Palmer,  I seni 
Company  A,  of  my  command,  forward  to  the  junction  of  the  Neuse  anc 
Washington  roads  to  support  a section  of  Howell’s  battery.  ■ 

At  9.30  a.  m.,  report  having  been  received  from  the  outposts  that  th( 
enemy  had  retired,  I received  orders  to  return  with  my  command  tt 
camp  at  New  Berne,  leaving  the  outposts  as  they  were.  The  day  wa;, 
extremely  hot  and  the  roads  very  dusty,  therefore  we  marched  vei\^ 
slowly.  Eeaehed  camp  about  noon.  No  severe  casualties. 

Bespectl’ully  submitted. 

S.  P.  EICHMOND, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment. 

Col.  J.  JOURDAN, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Fifth  Biv.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


MAY  31-JUNE  1,  1863. — Evacuation  of  West  Point,  Va. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon,  U.  S.  Army,  ivith  itinerary  of  hi 
division,  May  4,-Jiine  1. 


Yorktown,  Va.,  June  1,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  successful  removal  of  tlr 
force  under  my  command  from  West  Point,  without  the  loss  of  a sing! 
man  or  the  abandonment  of  a single  dollar’s  worth  of  Governmeii 
l^roperty.  About  7 p.  m.  this  evening,  just  twenty-four  hours  after  tb* 
movement  commenced,  I removed  the  planking  of  the  wharf  and  sailec 
from  the  post. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  truly, 

GEO.  H.  GORDON, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Major-General  Dix. 


Itinerary  of  the  Second  Division,  Fourth  Army  Corps,  May  4.-0 une  1.* 

May  4. — At  Suffolk,  Ya.,  Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon  assumed  com 
mand  of  the  division  [formerly  Abercrombie’s]. 

May  5. — Broke  up  camp  and  moved  by  rail  to  Norfolk  the  sanx 
night. 

May  G. — Embarked  on  transports  for  Port  Monroe. 

May  7. — Sailed  for  West  Point,  and  on  arriving  there  immediatcl.' 
commenced  throwing  up  fortifications  for  defense,  consisting  of  a line  o 
intrenchment  extending  from  the  Mattapony  to  the  Pamunkey.  Tlx 
Fortieth  Massachusetts  was  thrown  out  to  the  front  on  picket  wliib 
the  rest  of  the  division  worked  constantly  and  well  on  the  intrencb 
ments.  Six  earthworks,  mounting  fifteen  guns,  and  having  embrasure: 


* I'Toin  Record  of  Events  *’  on  Return  for  May,  1803. 


CirAi-.XXX.l  CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. UNION.  373 

for  tweiity-sixj  and  making  a complete  circle  of  fire,  were  thrown  up  and 
made  very  strong  by  ditches  and  abatis.  Parties  were  sent  out  into 
the  surrounding  country,  who  destroyed  or  brought  away  large  quanti- 
ties  of  grain,  seized  horses,  mules,  bacon,  &c.,  and  great  numbers  of 
negroes  were  brought  in. 

May  31,  -Simdat/.— Commenced  to  embark  for  Torktown,  which  was 
continued  without  interruption  from  the  enemy  until  everything  was 
safely  on  board  of  the  transports  and  taken  to  Yorktown. 


./ORBESPOiN  DEVICE,  OEPEKS,  AKD  EETURNS  EELATINCr 
SPECIALLY  TO  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND 
SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA  EROM  AUGUST  20  1862  TO 
JUjSE  3,  1803.  * ’ 


CORTJESlPOISrDENrCE:,  ETC. 


Fort  Monroe,  August  20,  1862—10  a.  m. 

daj.  Geii.  E.  D.  'Keyes, 

Commanding  Fourth  Corps,  Yorktown,  Va.  : 

Your  corps  is  to  halt  at  Yorktown  until  further  orders.  If  you  have 
•assed  beyond  the  vicinity  of  that  place  when  this  reaches  you,  you  will 
t once  return  to  Yorktown  and  there  await  further  orders,  which  may 
ot  reach  you  for  some  days. 

GEO.  B.  McOLELLAK, 

■ Major-General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac 
cueral  E.  I).  Keyes, 

Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps,  Torlctown  : 

The  commanding  general  directs  that  you  remain  with  your  corps  in 
m immediate  vicinity  of  Yorktown  until  further  orders.  Yon  will 
robalily  remain  for  several  days. 

Geueriil  Ueiiitzelman  waS  directed  to  send  one  or  two  regiments  to 

irhiimkl'^n  m J^eintzelman’s  corps  is  about  em- 

r king  joii  xMll  please  hold  that  Point  with  one  or  two  regiments  from 
an  command  untd  you  embark. 

P.  B.  MAROY, 

Chief  of  Staff. 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac 

, Fortress  Monroe,  August  21,  1802. 
Gen.  E.  I).  Keyes,  Yorktown: 

necessary  character  for  the  troops  can  bo  obtained 
I^urol  robtain  any  officers  to  visit  Portress 

commanding  directs  tliat  you  confer  with'  Lieut.  Col.  B 
iriw  li’om  your  command  the  necessary  details  of 

g parties  to  carry  out  his  views  with  regard  to  the  clefepse  of 


374 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


I Chap.  XXX. 


YorktowD.  The  general  coin maiidiag  furtber  directs  that  you  send  a 
brigade  to  Williamsburg  for  a few  days  to  cover  this  work.  The  gen- 
eral desires  you  to  take  the  general  command  and  control  of  the  opera- 
tions. 

Exhibit  this  to  General  Van  Alen. 

11.  B.  MAKGY, 

Chief  of  Staff, 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  August  21,  1862 — 10.30  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  T>,  Keyes, 

Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corj)s,  Yorlctown,  Va. : 

1 am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  say  that,  owing  to  the 
great  emergency  which  exists  at  this  time,  it  is  necessary  that  you  should 
furnish  working  parties  for  the  defenses  of  Yorktown  at  the  earliest 
moment  that  tools  can  be  obtained. 

The  engineer  officer  in  charge  will  call  upon  you  when  the  details  are 
required. 

E.  B.  MAEOY, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Fort  Monroe,  August  22,  1862 — 3 i).  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  1).  Keyes,  Yorhtown,  Va, : 

As  a temporary  measure,  jilease  iilace  one  of  your  field'  batteries  in 
the  work  at  Gloucester  Point. 

Please  push  the  work  laid  out  by  the  engineer  officers  with  the  utmost 
rapidity.  1 hope  to  have  new  troops  to  relieve  your  men  by  the  time 
transports  are  ready  for  your  corps.  Please  detail  some  of  your  artil- 
lery officers  and  non-commissioned  officers  to  instruct  the  garrison  you 
found  under  General  Van  Alen  in  the  use  of  heavy  guns,  and  have  them 
prepare  tables  of  ranges,  &c.,  for  them.  1 trust  to  your  zeal  and  activity 
in  tliis  very  trying  moment. 

They  are  fighting  now  on  the  Eappahannock.  A general  engage- 
ment IS  probably  going  on  now. 

GEO.  B.  McOLELLAK, 

Major- Oeneral. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

August  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Commanding  Fourth  Army  Corps  : 

The  duty  intrusted  to  your  corps,  while  it  is  no  doubt  disagreeable, 
is  of  the  utmost  importance.  1 fully  realize  how  severe  a tax  it  is  upon 
men  who  have  fought  so  gallantly  and  worked  so  hard  as  your  corps  to 
require  them  now  to  go  upon  fatigue  duty.  1 feel  sure,  however,  tuat 
if  they  know  that  the  work  1 now  call  upon  them  to  perform  is  neces 
sary  they  will  perform  it  cheerfully.  You  will  please  detail  as  large 


CiiAi’.  XXX.J 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


375 


working  i^arties  as  tlie  tools  available  will  permit  to  perform  the  work 
laid  out  by  the  engineer  officers. 

It  is  a matter  of  vital  importance  that  the  details  should  be  furnished 
and  the  work  done  in  the  shortest  possible  time. 

I have  taken  all  the  necessary  steps  to  have  your  command  relieved 
by  new  troops  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment. 

It  is  imperatively  necessary  that  the  work  required  should  be  pushed 
with  the  utmost  vigor.  You  will  be  held  responsible  that  this  work 
is  pushed  with  all  the  rapidity  possible  with  the  means  at  your  com- 
mand, and  hold  your  command  in  readiness  to  move  at  the  shortest 
notice. 

If  you  judge  it  necessary,  send  two  regiments  or  an  entire  brigade  of 
infantry  to  Williamsburg  to  cover  your  operations. 

Please  push  as  far  as  possible  the  instruction  of  the  old  garrison  in 
heavy  artillery  practice,  and  give  me  in  full  your  views  as  to  the  best 
method  of  holding  Williamsburg  and  the  force  necessary  for  that  pur- 
pose. 

Send  a couple  of  squadrons  of  cavalry  to  Goucester  to  patrol  and  ex- 
amine the  country  on  the  left  bank  of  the  York. 

If  you  think  it  advisable,  send  a much  larger  force  of  cavalry  there 
for  temporary  duty.  While  we  have  a large  cavalry  force  compara- 
tively idle  it  may  be  well  to  occupy  a large  i)ortion  of  it  in  clearing  out 
the  country  on  that  side  of  the  York  Eiver. 

If  you  think  it  best  to  occupy  a point  near  Williamsburg  by  infantry, 
hold  Port  Magruder  and  destroy  the  adjacent  works. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  B.  McClellan, 

Major- General^  Commandinr/. 


iMaj or- General  IIalleck  : 


Falmouth,  August  26,  1862. 

(Eeceived  2.40  i).  m.) 


Please  inform  me  when  ^you  can  send  say  5,000  new  troops  to  York- 
town.  If  they  can  be  supplied  within  three  days  can  order  forward 
Couches  division,  now  at  Yorktown,  witli  the  means  of  transportation 
at  our  disposal.  Your  reply  involves  the  question  of  retaining  or  dis- 
charging several  large  transports,  for  which  we  are  paying  a high  price. 
I shall  be  glad  to  have  your  answer  at  once,  as  I propose  returning 
shortly  to  Aquia  Creek,  to  proceed  thence  to  Alexandria. 


GEO.  B.  McClellan, 

Major- General. 


Washington,  August  26, 1862. 
Mjjjor-General  McClellan,  Falmouth  : 

Five  thousand  new  troops  can  be  sent  to  Yorktown  as  soon  as  you 
can  spare  transports  for  that  pur])ose.  They  can  be  embarked  at  Alex- 
andria. 


H.  W.  IIALLECK, 

Genera  l-in-  Chief . 


376 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Navy  Department, 

August  29,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  W ar  : 

Sir  : The  large  naval  force  in  the  James  Eiver  being  no  longer  re- 
quired there,  directions  are  about  being  given  to  send  the  vessels  to 
other  points,  where  their  presence  is  most  essential. 

If  Newport  News  is  to  be  held  by  the  Army  I respectfully  suggest 
that  half  a dozen  200-pounder  rifled  Parrott  guns  be  mounted  there  as 
a means  to  assist  in  keeping  blockaded  the  iron-clad  vessels  now  build- 
ing at  Richmond. 

Very  respectfully, 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Beturn  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  (Seventh  Army  Corps), 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding,  for  the  month  of  August,  1862  (headquarters 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.). 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent  last 

monthly  return. 

i Pieces  of  field  artil- 

I lery.  1 

Officers. 

§ 

Department  Headquarters,  Maj.  Gen.  Jolin  A.  Dix 

17 

2 

19 

19 

19 

Fort  Monroe,  Maj.  Joseph  Roberts 

14 

455 

493' 

506 

10 

Camp  Hamilton,  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells 

109 

1,895 

2, 227 

3,  916 

964 

c 

"Mp.wport  T'J’ftws  IVTi!.].  T?.p,nbpn  "V.  ICiTio" 

31 

529 

598 

782 

81 

Norfolk,  Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele 

86 

1,  639 

2,061 

2,  261 

2,  308 

6 

Suffolk,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  K.  F.  Mansfield 

228 

4,  861 

5,  792 

7, 178 

4,  597 

6 

Total 

468 

9,  224 

11, 133 

14,  630 

8,456 

28 

Fourth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Eeyes 

7 

7 

10 

\V illiamsburg,  Va ..... 

56 

1,  041 

1,  256 

1,  527 

20 

Williamsburg,  Va 

1,  237 

"Vorktown,  Va. 

147 

2,  624 

3,  222 

5, 499 

VnrktowTi,  Va.  . . 

23 

’ 630 

751 

806 

1,  795 

Gloucester  Point,  Va 

4 

104 

110 

152 

4 

Total 

237 

4,  399 

5,  346 

7,  994 

3, 032 

24 

Fort  Wool,  Capt.  Ira  Winans,  detachment  Ninety-ninth 

P 

65 

70 

86 

166 

New  York  Volunteers. 

Sewell’s  Point,  Capt.  John  C.  Lee,  detachment  Ninety- 

1 

70 

80 

92 

95 

ninth  New  York  Volunteers. 

Grand  total 

726 

13, 760 

16,648 

22, 821 

11, 768 

CllAl'.  XXX. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


377 


Troops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia,  eommanded  hyMaj.  Gen.  John  A. 
IHx^  August  31,  18G2. 


FORT  MONROE,  VA. 

Maj.-JosEPH  Roberts,  Fourtli  U.  S.  Artil- 
lery, commaiKling-. 

Detachment  Regulars. 

Detachment  99th  New  York  Infantry. 
Batteries  Wis.  Light  Artillery  (2d  and  4th). 

CAMP  HAMILTON,  VA. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells  com- 
manding. 

FOURTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

92d  New  York. 

9Gth  New  York. 

)^5th  Pennsylvania. 

■Olst  Pennsylvania. 

03d  Pennsylvania. 

SEVENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Ith  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Companv  C. 
5th  Maryland.  ^ ^ 

7th  Battery  New  York  Light  Artillery. 

NEWPORT  NEWS,  VA. 

laj.  Reuben  V.  King,  Eighty-tifth  New 
York,  eoramanding. 

5th  New  York. 

Ith  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  M. 
NORFOLK,  VA. 

lig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele  eommanding. 

'etachmeut  1st  New  York  Mounted  Rifles, 
ah  J^cAv  York  (G  companies). 
jtJi  Pennsylvania. 

)th  Wisconsin. 

Ith  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  D. 


SUFFOLK,  VA. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  K.  F.  Mansfield  com- 
manding. 

SEVENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Brig.  Gen.  Max  Weber. 

1st  Delaware. 

3d  New^  York. 

4th  New  York. 

13th  New  York. 

25th  New  York. 

seventh  army  corps. 

Ist  New  York  Mounted  Rifles. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  L. 

FOURTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Brig.  Gen.  Orris  S.  Ferry. 

39th  Illinois. 

13th  Indiana. 

62d  Ohio. 

67th  Ohio. 


FORT  WOOL. 

Capt.  Ira  Winans  commanding. 
Detachment  99th  New  York. 


SEWELKS  POINT. 

Capt.  John  C.  Lee  commanding. 
Detachment  99th  New-  York. 

FOURTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes  commandin'^. 


VORKTOWN,  VA. 
fourth  army  corps. 

Second  Division. 

^aj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck  commanding. 

SEVENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

’rig.  Gen.  James  II.  Van  Alen  comdg. 

Battalion  New  York  Vols. 
iBatS^^Vf^^^  Bennsylvania  Cavalry. 

I Battery  MassachusettsLightArtillerv 

tachment  1st  New  York  Artillerv.  ^ 


WILLIAMSBURG,  VA. 

3d  Battalion  6th  New  York  Cavalry. 

5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Reserved  artillery. 

GLOUCESTER  POINT,  VA. 

Maj.  J.  Watts  De  Peyster  command- 
ing. 

Bjittcry  Now  York  Artillery  (Fourth  Army 


378 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAi’.  XXX. 


Attract  from  Monihhj  Return  of  the  Department  »f Carolina,  Muj.  Gen.  John  (!. 

^ Foster  commanding,  for  the  month  of  August,  lobel. 


Command. 


Present  for 
duty. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amoky. 

nth  Massachusetts  Vol unt eers,  Lieuten ant-Col onel Pellowi 

2:5(1  M assachusetts  V olunteors,  Col.  John  Kin  tz 

2r)th  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Maj.  Jo.siah  Pickett 

27th  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Col.  H.  C.  Cee 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  G.  Stevenson. 


loth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  Lieut.  Col  B.  ' : ' ' ' ’ 

24th  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Lmit.  Col.  1' . A.  Osboin. . . 


"oth  New  Jersey  Volunteer.s,  Col.  C.  A.  Heckman. 
5th  llhode  Island  Volunteers,  Capt.  Job  Arnold. 


Grand  total. 


92 


40 


2,  545 


1, 186 


3,  477 


1,  555 


132  I 3,731  5,032 


fc/a-3 

fcC 


i. 

® 


S 

-<1 


3,  836 


1,792  1,785 


5,628  5,423 


Washington,  D.  C.,  September  2, 1802. 


Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 


The  areat  danger  of  WasMngton  renders  it  necessary  that  tlie  tg 
mainder  of  Keyes’  corps  be  sent  here  as  rapidly  as  possible  j at  least  all 


of  It  that  yon  can  spare. 

The  entire  army  of  the  enemy  is  betore  ns, 
dailv  for  a week  with  varying  resnlts. 


and  the  lighting  has  beci 

II.  W.  IIALLECK, 

Genera  l-in-  Chief . 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Yorlctoivn,  Ya.,  September  3,  1802. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  AVilliams, 

Adjutant-  General^  Army  of  the  1 oiomac : 

SiE : I have  tbo  boiior  to  iuclose  herewith  the  ijroceeciings  of 
of  oiB(;ers  convened  at  this  place  by  my  orders  to  examine  an*!  reP"' 
upon  the  condition  of  the  defenses  of  Yorktowu  and  what  is  ncctssa 

“STetsr;.”'!.:  .t.  »„». tj.  b.»<i 

nrettv  nearly  with  my  letter  of  27th  ultimo*  on  the  same  subject.  1 
Ivould  be  w Jl  to  placi  three  gunboats  in  York  Kiver ; one^  two  shoul 
be  kept  moving  continually,  otherwise  this  fine  i iv  er  will  b j, 
used  Ibr  the  comfort  of  the  enemy,  and  perhaps  for  onr  annoymiice. 

I remain,  respectfully,  yonr  most  ^^^edient  servant, 

E.  1).  JvrjXJ'jo, 

Major-General,  Commanding  Fourth  Corps. 


Not  found, 


JlIAP.  XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

[Inclosure.] 


379 


Orders,  ) . Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

> Yorktown,  August  29,  1862. 

A board  of  officers,  to  be  comijosed  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  Brijr.  Gen  William 
i'v  C.  Dodge,  Fifty-second  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  will  convene 

t Yorktown  to-morrow  morning  at  10  o’clock.  ’ 

The  board  will  examine  and  report  upon  the  present  armament  of  Yorktown  its 
ondition,  and  the  amount  and  condition  of  the  ammunition  on  hand : the  present  state 
1 the  ramparts,  magazines,  and  other  appliances.  The  board  will  also  give  an  opinion 
8 to  what  IS  necessary  m addition  to  the  means  on  hand,  to  place  YorktoA  in  a 
uitable  condition  for  defense.  ’ lu.  u, 

By  order  of  Major-General  Keyes: 

OSWALD  JACKSON, 

Aide-de-Camj). 


Yorktown,  Ya.,  August  30, 1862. 
The  board  met  pursuant  to  the  foregoing  order,  all  the  members 
ained  being  present,  and  adjourned  to  make  the  examination  prelimi- 
ary  to  the  following  report : 


Yorktown,  Ya.,  August  31,  1862. 
The  board  report  the  condition  of  the  armament  is  as  follows  • 

There  are  forty-two  garrison  pieces  of  various  caliber  in  position  at 
orktown  ; none  at  Gloucester  Point.  Most  of  these  pieces  are  out  of 
djustment  Irom  the  settling  of  the  earth  and  warping  of  the  platforms 
Qd  other  wood-work  connected  with  the  mounting  of  the  pieces,  so  as 
) make  it  difficult  and  in  some  cases  wholly  impracticable  to  work 
lem. 

Of  the  ammunition. 

Inclosed  is  a list  of  the  ammunition,  which  is  wholly  insufficient  and 
)t  well  assorted. 


The  present  state  of  the  ramparts  at  Yorktown. 


Tlic  extent  of  the  covering  line,  independent  of  the  shore  line,  is  about 
mile  The  interior  revetment  is  good.  The  exterior  ditch  and  ex- 
nor  lace  of  the  work  is  in  many  jilaces  so  much  washed  awa^^  and  de- 
ced  as  to  lorm  but  little  impediment  to  an  assaulting  column.  The 
Uole  ditch  and  the  ram^iarts,  exterior  and  interior,  and  a considerable 
irtion  ot  the  inclosure  of  the  work  is  overgrown  with  noxious  weeds 
Id  the  earth  is  saturated  with  human  fieces  and  decaying  animal 

The  condition  of  the  magazines. 

All  except  two  are  damp  and  unlit  for  use. 


The  exterior  lines  and  approaches. 

Two  divisions.  Peck’s  and  Couch’s,  were  left  here  to  level  the  ap- 
oaclies  and  exterior  works  commanding  this  fort  and  cut  down  the 
rest  Lelore  doing  anything  of  any  consequence  (working  a thousand 
^ two  brigades  of  Peck’s  division 

■ o me  whole  ot  Couch’s  division  Avere  ordered  away,  and  the  mass  of 
e work  yet  to  be  done  in  the  removal  of  these  obstacles  to  a proper 
1 be  better  described  than  by  stating  the 

ei  ot  days  labor  it  would  take.  The  number  of  troops  here  is  as 


380 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAI*.  XXX. 


follows  : Five  regiments,  First  Brigade,  Second  Division,  1,900  ; Inde- 
pendent Battalion,  500  ; and  there  are  250  negro  laborers.  From  this 
force  must  necessarily  be  deducted  the  old  and  new  guards,  250  men,  and 
the  regiment  detailed  to  man  the  guns,  370  men,  leaving  a total  of  2,000 
men  to  work,  if  unmolested  by  the  enemj’ ; and  it  is  estimated  that  it 
will  take  this  force  thirty  days  to  accomplish  the  work  of  destroying 
the  approaches  and  restoring  the  slopes  and  ditches  of  the  work  itselt. 
These  estimates  are  independent  of  the  work  at  Gloucester  Point,  where 
two  regiments  of  the  First  Brigade  are  stationed  and  where  the  picket 
and  fatigue  duty  is  sufficient  to  occupy  their  attention. 


Of  what  is  necessary. 

The  plan  of  the  board  of  engineers,  a copy  of  which  is  in  possession 
of  Major-General  Peck,  a member  of  this  board,  and  which  has  been 
approved  by  General  McClellan  and  herewith  submitted,  contains,  in 
the  opinion  of  the  board,  all  the  suggestions  necessary  to  place  York- 
town  in  a state  of  defense.  But  in  the  opinion  of  the  board  the  force 
now  left  here  is  wholly  inadequate  to  accomplish  this  work  within  the 
time  when  the  enemy  is  likely  to  attack  this  work,  it  it  is  attacked  at 
all ; and  of  the  armament  suggested  in  that  plan  of  defense,  none  has 
been  sent. 

The  board  recommend  that  armament  be  at  once  sent,  and  urgently 
recommend  that  an  ordnance  officer  be  sent  to  mount  that  armament 
and  direct  the  readjustment  of  the  pieces  now  here. 

The  board  is  of  the  opinion  that  when  the  work  is  in  a state  of  defense 
contemplated  by  the  engineers,  the  garrison  necessary  to  hold  it  and  the 
approaches  should  consist  of  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  one  regiment  of 
artillery,  and  4,000  infantry,  if  of  old  troops ; if  of  new  levies,  from  6,000 

to  8,000  infantry.  ; . 

There  is  at  present  but  one  gunboat  at  this  place,  in  the  opinion  ot 
the  board  two  more  are  necessary — one  on  each  of  the  flanks  of  the  work, 
and  the  third  to  pass  up  and  down  the  river  and  break  up  the  trade  be- 
tween Bichmond  and  the  rich  counties  of  Gloucester  and  Matthews,  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  river.  , . , . , 

In  this  connection  it  is  proper  to  state  that  the  height  and  abruptness 
of  the  bank  of  the  river  at  Yorktown  will  diminish  the  aid  that  might 
otherwise  be  expected  from  their  co-operation  in  the  defense  of  the 

There  is  with  the  garrison  at  Gloucester  Point  a field  battery  of  four 
pieces,  and  in  this  fort  two  field  batteries  of  four  guns  each,  but  it  is  not 
known  whether  the  two  batteries  at  this  place  are  a part  of  the  garrison. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

W.  H.  EMOBY, 

Brigadier- General. 

JOHN  C.  DODGE,  jR., 
Colonel  Fifty-second  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Yorktown,  September  3,  1862. 

The  proceedings  of  the  board  of  which  Major-General  Peck  is  iiresi 
dent  are  approved.  The  board  is  dissolved. 

E.  D.  ii-EiTvo, 

Major-General,  Commanding  Fourth  Corgs. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


381 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — ^UNION. 


[Indorsement.] 

Tlie  report  of  the  board  of  ofiScers  seems  to  be  based  upon  the  idea 
that  lorktowii  may  bo  attacked  by  a very  large  force,  and  couseouently 
reconimeuds  additional  armament  and  much  engineering  work 
\\itli  my  limited  knowledge  of  Yorktown  I of  course  do  not  know 
exactly  what  is  most  expedient  to  be  done ; but  it  strikes  me  that  the 
iorty-two  pieces  ot  artillery  now  there,  and  a garrison  increased  bv new 
troops  to  bring  it  up  to  one  regiment  of  artillery,  one  reuiment  of  cav- 

.miy  VrlaSrattack  """  «'ll-sufflcient  for 

All  ordnance  ofBcer  should  be  sent  to  Yorktown  to  niispike  guns 
adjust  platiorms,  and  overhaul  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores,  and  Gen! 
hwf  iSf  should  be  directed  to  apply  his  whole  available  force  to 
leveling  the  exterior  works  and  approaches  and  repairing  the  defenses 
,js  suggested  by  the  board  of  engineers  which  examined  the  works 
An  additional  gunboat  for  patroling  York  Eiver,  and  in  case  of  at- 
tack in  co  operating  in  the  detense  of  Yorktown,  would  be  desirable 

g:  w.  cullum, 

Brigadier- General,  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Sub-inclosure.] 


Memorandum  of  guns  and  ammunition  at  TorJctoivn,  Fa. 

8- iucli  columkiads 

32-pouiider  guns * 

42-pouEder  gun '.*.*.*.*  *.*.]' 

l’4-pounder  guns .*.*.*.*. V.V 

9- incli  Dalilgren  Navy  guns 

7- incli  Navy  howitzers 

8- i  n ch  siege  howitzer 

8-inch  mortar  (spiked) 

68-pounder  rifle  gun  (spiked)  

10-inch  gun 

Ammunition. 

knvder  (barrels) 

8- inch  cartridges 

.‘12-pounder  cartridges 

24-pouuder  cartridges _['* 

42-pouuder  cartridges 

8-inch  shells  filled,  in  mairazine.  " 

8-inch  shells,  to  he  filled  . 

^-mch  shells,  had  

l^inch  shells,  had 

10-inch  shells,  good  

'5*2-pounder  shells,  had.. 

42-pounder  .shells,  had ] 

0-inch  Dahlgren,  good..  

f4-pounder  sheiks,  had..  

1^-pounder  shells,  had . . 

' JO-pouuder  rifle  shells,  had  . 

'4-pounder  grape 

12-pounder  grape ” 

|2-pounder  canister 

'2- pounder  shot  

Q-inch  shot 

8-inch  grape 

'-inch  shot....  

;4-pounder  shot 

.■^-pounder  canister 


17 

8 

1 

4 

4 

4 

1 

1 

1 

1 


100 

400 

250 

150 

150 

300 

200 

681 

35 

75 

125 

22 

60 

300 

20 

24 

20 

70 

100 

121 

242 

218 

15 

125 

8 


382 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XXX' 


War  Department, 
Washington^  September  3, 

Maj.  Geu.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

If  last  division  of  General  Keyes’ corps  lias  not  commenced  to  ein 
bark  suspend  the  order  till  I can  send  new  troops  to  replace  them. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

, General-in-Chief. 


, ■ Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

September  3,  1862 — 2 p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

Averell’s  brigade  of  cavalry  was  embarking  when  I received  you 
dispatch  of  last  evening.  The  embarkation  will  be  completed  to-da^ 
and  to-morrow.  I will  send  you  a detailed  account  of  the  entire  forct 
on  the  Peninsula  and  at  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  to-morrow.  Your  dispatcl 
of  tliis  morning  is  received. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  September  3,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

As  the  embarkation  has  commenced,  my  dispatch  of  this  morning 
will  be  of  no  effect.  I will  send  you  fresh  troops  as  soon  as  possible  t< 
replace  those  sent  up  here.  ; 

• H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  4,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Immediately  after  I was  placed  in  command  of  the  troops  a 
this  post  and  in  the  vicinity  I called  the  attention  of  the  GovernmcTi 
to  the  destitute  condition  of  the.20,000  people  of  Norfolk,  arising  Iron 
the  interruption  of  their  commercial  intercourse  while  the  rebels  wta* 
in  possession  of  the  city,  and  the  system  of  exclusion  which  was  adopw 
after  it  was  captured  by  us  and  which  I found  in  force.  I recoin 
mended  a total  change  of  regimen  on  grounds  of  humanity  Js  well  a 
policy.  I thought  it  due  to  ourselves  as  generous  conquerors  to  pn 
an  end  to  the  restrictions,  which  under  the  insurgents  were  a matter o 
constraint  but  which  we  continued  as  a matter  of  choice,  and  to  affon 
a free  ingress  to  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  life  of  which  the  in 
habitants  were  in  extreme  need.  My  recommendations  were  adopte< 
only  to  a limited  extent.  Eight  vessels  were  permitted  by  the  Secretar; 
of  the  Treasury  to  proceed  there  with  cargoes.  Nearly  three  montu 
have  elapsed,  and  the  people  are  even  more  destitute  than  they  wer 
when  they  came  under  our  dominion.  The  suspension  of  business  to  ; 
great  extmit  necessarily  com])els  them  to  live  on  what  they  have  savci 
instead  of  their  daily  earnings,  which  are  for  the  mostiiart  cut  off,  am 
they  are  constantly  becoming  by  the  consumption  of  their  savings  les 


CiiAr.  rxX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


383 


able  to  pay  liigli  prices.  Besides,  the  nou-iutercourse  we  are  keeping 
up  bas,  by  exeliidiiig  supplies,  reudered  the  city  entirely  destitute  of 
many  of  the  essential  articles  of  subsistence } they  are  not  to  be  had 
at  any  price.  This  infliction,  and  it  is  a serious  one,  falls  on  the  loyal 
as  well  as  the  disloyal,  and  it  is  certainly  not  calculated  to  add  to  the 
number  of  our  friends  or  diminish  the  number  of  our  enemies.  I ad- 
vised a liberal  treatment  for  all,  punishing  where  any  open  hostility  to 
the  Government  was  -shown. 

• I do  not  understand  that  this  view  of  the  subject  was  disapproved  by 
the  Government;  but  from  a communication  recently  received  from  the 
Treasury  Department  a difficulty  is  supposed  to  exist  in  the  fact  that 
Norfolk  is  within  the  section  of  the  country  affected  by  the  blockade. 

It  is  respectfully  suggested  that  ^ince  the  capture  and  occupation  of 
Norfolk  by  the  military  forces  of  the  United  States  the  principles  of 
public  law  applicable  to  blockaded  2)orts  are  no  longer  in  force  there. 
It  is  not  a case  of  complete  conquest,  in  which  we  must  look  to  our 
Constitution  and  laws  for  the  authority  which  we  exercise,  but  it  is  a 
case  in  which  the  iflace  is  held  by  the  right  of  military  occupation,  in 
which  we  are  exercising  the  powers  given  by  the  laws  of  war,  and  in 
which  we  may  further  accord  to  the  inhabitants  privileges  not  strictly 
conferred  by  those  laws.  Bear- Admiral  Goldsborough,  who  lies  in  the 
harbor  in  the  Minnesota,  is  not  there  to  enforce  the  blockade,  but  to 
enforce  the  military  occupation. 

That  this  is  the  view  taken  by  the  Government  I cannot  doubt,  for 
certainly  the  right  to  grant  the  permits  given  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  to  introduce  eight  cargoes  of  merchandise  for  general  traffic 
is  not  to  be  found  in  the  laws  of  blockade,  which  imply  a naval  force 
on  the  part  of  one  belligerent  and  a closed  port  on  the  part  of  another. 

I do  not  overlook  the  fact  that  Norfolk  is  a recovered  possession,  and 
that  we  hold  it  theoretically  to  be  now,  and  alwmys  to  have  been,  a part 
ot  the  United  States.  But  we  do  not  act  on  this  assumption,  for  if  we 
did  we  should  extend  our  civil  jurisdiction  over  it  and  set  in  motion 
the  customary  machinery  of  administration.  On  the  contrary,  we  gov- 
ern it  by  military  force  and  treat  it  for  all  practical  purposes  as  a 
conquest. 

Under  the  rule  of  military  occupation,  therefore,  we  may,  without  being 
questioned  by  neutrals,  admit  any  intercourse  with  our  own  citizens,  or 
any  portion  of  them,  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  our  authoritv  or 
to  the  preservation  and  comfortable  support  of  those  whom  we  have 
subjected  by  our  power.  It  is  on  this  principle,  I suppose,  that  the 
limited  right  to  trade  has  been  conferred  in  a ffiw  instances  on  partic- 
ular individuals. 

I beg  leave  further  to  suggest  whether  permits  of  this  description, 
gianted'to  afford  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  or  district  thus  sub- 
Ijected  and  held  by  force  the  means  of  subsistence,  should  not  be  given 
h.v  the  military  commander;  whether  they  can  with  propriety  come 
uom  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  who  is  at  the  head  of  a civil  de- 
liaitment  and  whose  functions  in  respect  to  revenue  and  commerce  are 
wholly  inap])licable  to  conquerednerritories  governed  by  the  laws  of 
war.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  other  function  is  incident  to  the  right  of 
aiilitarv  occujiation  and  not  to  be  defended  on  anv  other  grounds. 

^ IShould  this  view  of  the  subject  be  concurred  in  I respectfully  request 
aat  1 may  be  authorized  to  grant  permits  to  vessels  to  go  to  Norfolk 
Aith  such  supplies  as  I deem  indispensable  to  save  the  inhabitants  from 
uitienug  by  hunger  and  cold,  and  that  Bear- Admiral  Goldsborough  be 
nrected  to  respect  the  permits  thus  granted  by  me. 


384  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Cii^p.  XXX. 

Id  regard  to  tbe  justice  of  this  measure  there  are  consideratious, . 
already  briefly  alluded  to,  which  address  themselves  to  us  with  great 
force.  The  people  of  Norfolk  are  cut  off  by  our  occupation  of  the  place 
from  their  former  sources  of  supplies.  We  have  surrounded  them  by  a 
chain  of  sentinels  and  have  interdicted  trade  with  the  insurgent  States 
from  which  they  could  always  draw  at  some  price  the  necessaries  they 
needed.  They  are  in  worse  condition  in  this  respect  now  than  they  v^ere 
under  the  Confederates ; and  it  is  submitted  whether,  on  every  prin- 
ciple of  justice  to  them  and  to  ourselves,  we  should  not  allow  theiii  th*e 
privilege  of  obtaining  what  they  need  from  the  loyal  portions  of  the 
Union.  It  seems  to  me  that  we  are  bound  to  do  this  or  to  let  them  pass 
through  our  lines  into  the  insurgent  States. 

The  inclosed  letter  from  Brigadier-General  Yiele,  the  military  gov- 
ernor of  Norfolk,  states  the  case  with  great  brevity  and  force,  and  I 
commend  it  to  the  attention  of  the  Government. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Norfolk,  Ya.,  September  2, 18G2.  ! 
Major-General  Dix,  | 

Commanding^  cfc.,  Fort  Monroe  : j 

General  : There  are  two  questions  connected  with  the  administray 
tion  of  affairs  in  this  city  and  Portsmouth  which  have  become  a source 
of  embarrassment  to  me.  The  one  is  the  procurement  ot  supplies  foi 
those  who  have  the  means,  and  the  other  the  supplying  of  those  wlio' 
have  not  the  means.  | 

We  are,  in  point  of  fact,  holding  here  in  custody  about  20,000  people: 
we  must  either  let  them  feed  themselves  or  we  must  feed  them.  [ 

The  opening  of  the  port  for  a restricted  trade  seems  to  me  to  be  a 
measure  of  necessity  to  save  the  Government  from  great  annoyance' 
Food  must  be  allowed  to  come  in  or  the  people  will  starve.  If  food  is 
allowed  to  come  in  the  products  of  the  surrounding  country  must  he, 
allowed  to  go  out  to  pay  for  it.  Again,  there  is  a large  class  of  persoiiH 
here  who  have  no  means  whatever  to  purchase  food  if  it  were  herc:'i 
these  are  mostly  willing  to  go  away  to  the  neighboring  counties  and  tc  . 
North  Carolina  if  allowed  to  do  so.  They  are  helpless  women  aiub 
children,  who  are  begging  daily  at  my  headquarters  for  food.  ThosC 
who  are  too  poor  to  go  or  who  have  no  friends  may  be  supported  hv 
levying  contributions  upon  those  who  have  the  means. 

1 have  always  considered  that  the  only’  point  to  be  attained  here  wiiL 
])erfect  tranquillity.  This  has  been  secured  so  far;  in  order  to  contimiM 
it  the  steps  I have  referred  to  appear  to  be  necessary. 

Yery  respectfully’,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

^ EGBERT  L.  YIELE,  1 

Brigadier -General.  ji 

— • — 1 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  i 
September  5,  18G2 — 2 p.  m. 

i\lnj.  Gen.  U.  W.  IIalleck  : 

The  whole  efficient  force  in  the  Department  of  \irginia  is  ahou 
18,000,  flistributed  as  follows:  Suffolk,  5,300;  Norfolk,  2,300; 

News,  100;  Bampton,  2,300 ; Camp  Hamilton,  000 ; Fort  Monroe,  000 
Yorktown,  5,100;  Williamsburg,  1,300.  The  different  corps  ol  wind 


Chap.  XXX.] 


385 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

this  force  is  composed  have  about  3,000  absent.  Sick  uot  included  iu 
the  above  statement.  A small  regiment  has  been  transferred  to  ^I’ew- 
port  News  from  Hampton,  not  affecting  the  aggregate. 

A.  HIX, 
Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  September  5,  1862—4  p.  m. 
Major-General  Halle CK : 

Major-General  Keyes  is  very  desirous  of  leaving  Yorktown  with  his 
reserve  artillery  to  resume  the  command  of  CoucKs  division,  and  is 
villing  to  take  and  train  another  division  from  the  new  forces  now 
coming  into  the  field.  I should  be  very  glad  to  retain  him,  but  cheer- 
fully consent  to  the  arrangement  if  it  meets  with  your  approval,  as  it 
will  obviate  the  necessity  of  sending  new  troops  here  and  enable  me  to 
retain  Major-General  Peck,  a very  good  officer,  and  his  division,  which 
IS  well  trained,  and  of  which  two  brigades,  Neirfs  and  Wessells’,  have 
been  already  incorporated  with  the  forces  here  and  at  Suffolk.  General 
Keyes  informs  me  that  he  trained  Couch’s  division  and  is  quite  willino' 
to  train  another.  His  reserve  artillery  can  be  spared  if  I can  keen 
Peck’s  division.  ^ 

JOHX  A.  HIX, 

'ISlajor- General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  September  5,  1862. 


Private.] 

Major-General  Halle CK, 

Commanding  Army,  Washington  City  : 

, - A on  whom  I can  rely,  says  there  are  but  about 

lo,000  men  at  Richmond.  The  brigades  of  Generals  Ransom  and  Martin 
are  stationed  below  Richmond,  opposite  Fort  Darling. 

There  is  a brigade  at  Petersburg.  The  Merrimac  Xo.  2 (Richmond) 
IS  ab(mt  finished  and  has  her  bow  gun  in.  She  is  commanded  by  Cap- 
tain Pegram,  and  her  crew  are  from  the  old  Merrimac.  She  draws 
11  leet  of  water,  and  has  a double  sheathing  of.  iron,  separated  by  a 
course  of  timber.  The  iron  is  reported  to  be  thicker  than  that  of  the 
old  Merrimac. 

I have  thought  the  above  information  might  be  of  some  service  to 
you.  I have  already  written  the  Secretary  of  the  Xavy  to  the  same 
enect  as  to  the  Merrimac. 

, The  inan  also  stated  that  all  the  troops  of  Stonewall  Jackson  amounted 
to  about  200,000.  He  left  Richmond  about  a week  since,  and  says  that 
Generals  Lee  Ewell,  Mahone,  Colston,  Armistead,  Wright,  Longstreet, 
and  tJie  two  Hills  are  with  Jackson. 

I The  enemy  will  never  attack  this  place,  wliich  is  naturally  strouc-,  so 
i^oiig  as  pressed  on  the  side  of  Richmond.  I repeat,  there  are  three  old 
regmients  here— the  First  Delaware  and  Third  and  Fourth  Xew  York 
V 0 unteers— well  drilled,  and  been  in  service  for  about  fourteen  months 
(1  have  never  fired  a gun  at  the  enemy.  They  will  average  800  men, 
lid  many  men  and  officers  have  been  in  the  Mexican  war.  Three 
sreen  regiments  could  readily  take  their  places  here,  and  these  could, 
return  boats,  proceed  up  the  Potomac  to  the  Army  of  Virginia. 

times  myself  to  take  any  command  you  will  think  it 
0 the  interest  of  the  country  to  give  me,  and  believe  I can  do  more 
nan  i can  here. 

25  R R — VOL  XVIII 


386 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


You  will  excuse  this  private  letter ; an  official  one  ou  this  subject 
might  by  some  be  thought  out  of  place. 

Very  truly  and  sincerely,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  K.  F.  MANSFIELD. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  7,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  O.  S.  Ferry, 

Commanding  at  Suffollc,  Va. : 

I wish  to  complete  a reconnaissance  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Dismal 
Swamp.  It  will  be  under  the  direction  of  Oapt.  William  Heine,  who  is 
engaged  in  constructing  military  maps  of  the  district  south  and  west  of 
Suffolk.  It  will  be  necessary  to  send  with  him  two  companies  of  infantry, 
a company  of  cavalry  or  mounted  riflemen,  and  a section  of  artillery, 
with  two  mountain  howitzers,  under  a discreet  and  efficient  field  officer. 
It  will  probably  be  necessary  to  pass  around  the  Dismal  Swamp,  return- 
ing on  the  east  side.  The  men  must  have  rations  for  eight  days,  and 
they  must  take  with  them  their  tents  and  the  smallest  practicable  amount 
of  camp  equipage.  During  the  first  two  or  three  days  it  will  be  well  to 
send  two  or  three  companies  of  cavalry  out  on  the  road  nearest  to  the 
Black  water,  in  the  direction  of  Somerton  and  Winton,  as  a cover  to  the 
movement.  A ijumber  of  wagons,  sufficient  to  carry  the  provisions, 
forage,  and  tents,  will  be  sent  with  them,  and  an  ambulance  for  the  use 
of  the  engineers.  At  this  season  the  men  should  be  covered  at  night, 
and  if  possible  their  tents  should  be  pitched  under  the  shelter  of  trees 
and  their  march  should  be  suspended  during  the  heat. 

The  movement  will  conform  to  the  requirements  of  Captain  Heine, 
who  is  charged  with  the  reconnaissance ; but  the  command  of  the  escort, 
and  all  that  relates  to  the  control  of  the  men,  will  be  under  the  direction 
of  the  senior  officer,  who  will  be  enjoined  to  enforce  the  strictest  disci- 
pline. The  inhabitants  of  the  country  will  be  protected  against  all  dis- 
turbance, and  the  least  violation  of  their  property  will  be  visited  with 
the  most  extreme  rigor  of  the  law.  Should  it  be  necessary  to  procure 
supplies  from  the  district  through  which  the  movement  is  made  the  com- 
manding officer  will  endeavor  to  obtain  them  by  agreement  with  the 
parties,  or,  if  compelled  to  take  them,  he  will  give  receipts  on  public 
account  and  render  a return  to  me  of  the  articles  taken,  with  the  names 
of  the  owners. 

Everything  will  be  in  readiness  on  Monday,  so  that  the  party  will 
move  early  on  Tuesday  morning,  and  I trust  to  you  to  make  such  ar- 
rangements as  to  insure  the  object  of  the  expedition,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  carry  out  my  wishes,  which  will  be  creditable  to  those  who  are 
engaged  in  it. 

If  you  have  not  mountain  howitzers  we  can  send  them  from  here. 

Answer  immediately. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Derartment, 
Washington,  September  7,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

Send  to  AVashington  as  promptly  as  possible  the  First  Delaware  and 
the  Third  and  Fourth  New  Y^ork  Begiments,  now  at  Suffolk. 

H.  AV.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Chap,  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


387 


^ ^ Monroe,  Ya.,  September  8,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

I sliall  send  your  order  for  the  First  Delaware  and  Third  and  Fourth 
New  York  to  Suffolk.  You  are  perhaps  not  aware  that  these  regiments 
are  the  Rower  of  command,  and  my  main  reliance  if  Suffolk  is  to  be 
defended.  I should  be  glad,  at  all  events,  to  be  allowed  to  send  the 
Fifth  Maryland  instead  ot  the  Third  NTew  York.  I want  the  latter  here 
it  I cannot  have  Gibson’s  artillery. 

JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Major-  General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  September  8,  1862. 
\laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

Make  the  change  of  regiments  you  proposed.  Bring  away  from  Suf- 
olk  all  extra  arms. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 


i)PEC^L  Orders,  ^ Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

^ , ^Yashington,  September  8,  1862. 

* * * * # * * 

IV.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  K.  B.  Mansfield,  U.  8.  Volunteers,  is  relieved  from 
'■  l\l  Cnr  of  Virginia,  and  will  report  in  person  to  Major-Gen- 


By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 


E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


. „ Fort  Monroe,  September  9,  1862. 

ajor-General  Halleck  : . x , 

' The  Fourth  New  York,  First  Delaware,  and  Fifth  Marvland  have  left 
ae  tor  Washington  in  the  steamers  Louisiana,  J.  A.  Warner,  and 
cate  ot  Maine.  ’ 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


TJ.  S.  Flag-Siiip  Minnesota, 

n 1-,^  September 

ajor-General  Dix : ’ 

Genkeal  : The  naval  force  Eero  has  recently  been  so  greatly  reduced 
at  I Jiavo  no  additional  gunboat  to  spare  for  York  Biver.  " 

8.  B.  LEE, 

Acting  Fear-Admiral. 

rtn  V Tir  ^^^>nroe,  September  9,  1862. 

on.  1^^.  8t ANTON,  ’ 

Secretary  of  War : 

Enelivr'wU  ^f^  Alexandria 

icaeliiticd  at  Aiken’s  Landing  and  004  of  ours  returned.  They 


;88 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


nn  hotli  sides  I Sent  the  latter  last  evening  to  Washing- 
?ou  Ml  OuM  makes  an  earnest  request  that  General  Thornas  will 
l^ve  him  an  interview.  There  are  5,000  of  our  prisoners  at  Richmond,, 
^ , H.pv  wish  us  to  take.  Every  steamboat  here  is  employed  in 
moVfng  ^eXee  reg?ments%rom  Suffolk  to  Washington,  called  for 

^Thave  iiist  received  a dispatch  from  General  Keyes,  at  Yorktown, 
informing  me  that  our  pickets  have  been  driven  in  at  Williamsburg. 
I f^ar  cSirel  Campbell  has  been  compelled  to  retire,  as  the  rebel^ 
ire  in  nossession  of  the  telegraph  station  at  William shnrg.  I am  ju^l 
Kavbio  to  Cktown  to  be*  back  to-night.  I do  not  think  it  siffe  ti 
fihe  a'liv  more  troops  from  this  quarter  unless  tve  retire  from  York 
town  and  Suffolk.  I cannot  even  get  another  gunboat  for  YorktoTj^i 
fm^n  Admff al  Lee.  I earnestly  request  that  one  or  two  more  may  h< 

sent  from  the  Potomac.  JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  September  10, 18G2. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  N ainj  : ^ r-i  • .p 

Sir  • General  Dix  telegraphs  that  the  withdrawal  of  most  of  fom 
to  Washington  leaves  Yorktown  too  weak,  ^id  earnestly  requests  tin 
one  or  two  more  gunboats  be  sent  from  the  Potomac. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  HALLEGK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  10, 1802. 

(Received  10.30  a.  m.) 

Mai.  Gen.  H.  AV.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : 

1 have  iiist  returned  from  Yorktown,  and  Ato  a dispatch  from  Ge 
eral  E E.'^Keves,  received  since  I left,  saying  that  he  'y®Auiied  to 
bo  Vpeck’s  dh-i^on  for  Alexandria.  This  leaves  my  force  so  reduc 
t^hat  it  is  impossible  to  hold  Suffolk  or  Yorktown  and  protect  the  qO' 
«ie1  be  -e  'Zl  in  the  vicinity.  To  retain  them  would  be  to  invite  attai. 
riposethltoore  to  fall  bAck  from  Suffolk  to  l^orto'G  « Aesff 
the  guns  at  Yorktown  and  abandon  it.  I shall  not  have  any  infant 
at  Suffolk,  and  at  Yorktown  only  800  men.  jqjjn  A.  DIX, 

Major-General 


AVAR  Department, 
Washington,  September  10,  18G2 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. 

AVhen  General  AIcGlellaii  asked  for 


Peekes  division  he  was  to  sc 


AVhen  General  ivicL'ieiiaii 

you  5,000  new  troops  to  take  their  place.  This  he  Jl- 


Tentod  from  doing  by  General  Wool  stopping  troops  to  gimiff  ^ 
roads.  General  Mansfield  thinks  the  forces  left  at  Suffolk  siimc  ^ 
AVe  must  not  at  present  abandon  either  Yorktown  or  Su  o , 
niiist  retain  troops  sufficient  to  hold  them  till  others  arrive.  P 


"hap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  389 

new  troops  coming  from  the  Nort’l).  It  is  uudorstood  that  several  ron^i- 
inents  are  coming  by  water  from  New  York.  The  Boston  troops  should 
be  at  Fort  Monroe  to-day.  It  is  believed  that  the  entire  force  of  the 
nierny  is  before  us  here,  and  that  not  more  than  10,000  or  15,000  Home 
uuards  were  left  at  Eichmond.  If  you  have  reliable  information  differ- 
ent you  must  retain  more  troops. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  Septemher  10,  1802. 
dajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Va.  : 

The  Merrimac,  with  two  regiments  from  Boston,  is  bound  to  this 
)lace.  If  j/ou  can  stop  her  at  Fort  Monroe  keep  those  reaiments  for 
our  command. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-.Ghief. 


laj.  Gen.  H.  W. 


Halleck, 
General-in-  Chief : 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
September  10,  1802 — 4 p.  m. 


fort  and  Eichmond,  and 


When  General  McClellan  was  between  this  c^xx^i 
■efore  the  occupation  of  Suffolk,  General  Wool  had  14,978  men  of 
, ’horn  12,847  were  effective,  for  the  defense  of  the  fort,  Newport  News 
pd  the  immediate  district  of  conntry,  exclusive  of  General  Peck’s 
ivision  My  force  is  but  5,326  men,  of  whom  only  4,108  are  effective, 

“ T r district  which  General  Wool 

ad,  but  FTorfolk,  Suffolk,  and  Yorktown  in  addition. 

I have  reliable  information  that  an  attack  on  Suffolk  is  meditated 
. brigade  went  down  from  Petersburg  to  defend  it  a few  days  ago,  and 
om  that  point  the  railroad  communication  is  open  to  the  Blackwater 
t franklin,  or  Oarrsville,  20  miles  from  Suffolk.  I have  .at  Suffolk  to- 
ay  only  2,900  effective  men.  When  General  Mansfield  had  a much 
irger  force,  and  McClellan  was  between  us  and  Eichmond,  he  iiressed 
:ic  tor  re-enforcements.  He  certainly  cannot  know  that  the  Third  and 
|our  i Kew  York  and  the  First  Delaware,  the  best  regiments,  have 
■een  withdrawn.  They  numbered  over  2,300  men. 

General  Keyes  advises  me  this  morning  that  he  has  information  from 
arious  sources  establishing  the  fact  that  the  rebels  are  in  considerable 
|irco  ot  Mtillery  cavalry,  and  infantry  at  Barhamsville,  18  miles  from 
I'  niiamsburg.  There  are  numerous  evidences  of  activity  on  his  part  in 
anons  directions,  and  if  we  hold  Suffolk  and  Yorktown  I certainly 

enoroLr^n?  Smallest  number  thought  by 

. eneral  McClellan  to  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose. 

sick,  except  those  belonging  to  regiments 
North.  September  is  the  worst  season,  and  the  now 
ospitals  are  so  miserably  constructed  as  to  bo  unfit  for  convalescents 
storms,  which  are  frequent  at  this  season.  But  the  great  objection 
n mvmg  so  large  a number  of  sick  in  a district  exposed  to  attack 
Id  not  covered  by  defensive  works. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


S90 


liOETIi  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


IlEADQUAliTa^llS, 

Washington,  JSf.  C.,  September  10,  18G2. 


Capt.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Dear  Hoffman  : Captain  Jocknick  made  a reconnaissance  yester- 
day to  Tranter’s  Creek.  Upon  reaching  the  bridge  he  discovered  that 
it  was  undergoing  repairs,  and  going  on  it  to  examine  more  close  y 
was  fired  on  by  a concealed  force.  Only  two  of  his  men  were  slightly 
wounded.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  are  collected 
. in  considerable  numbers,  and  that  they  are  repairing  the  bridge  lor  a 
speedy  attack  on  this  place.  Their  force,  according  to  negro  and  se- 
cesh”  authority,  is  set  down  at  from  2,000  to  G,000.  I have  4o  of  the 
Marine  Artillery  in  the  fort  and  Captain  Wall’s  company  of  the  iliiid, 
New  York,  some  30  men.  The  block-house  at  the  east  end  of  the  town 
is  finished  but  there  is  no  gun  for  it.  The  one  on  the  Greenville  road  is 
going  up  rapidly.  Two  guns  are  immediately  needed  for  these  hoiises< 

Please  send  them  at  once.  i i . 

Private  Hahn,  of  Captain  Jocknick’s  company  of  cavalry,  o^^ored  to 
New  Belne,  was  detailed  by  General  Poster  to  act  as  editor  of  the  JNew 
Era.  Colonel  Mix’s  order  is  for  Captain  Jocknick  to  take  all  his  men 
detached  or  otherwise;  so  Hahn  will  go.  I told  him  he  would  have  t( 
make  application  to  you  or  the  general  if  he  is  to  return  here. 

Lieutenant  McLane,  of  the  First  North  Carolina,  went  to  New  Beru(| 
on  sick  leave.  His  brother  writes  that  he  is  just  recovering  and  tha^ 
the  surgeon  says  that  a short  visit  to  a Northern  climate  is  necessan 
for  his  recovery.  I mention  the  case  for  the  general’s  consideration. 

Yours,  very  truly,  eDWAED  E.  POTTEE, 

Commanding  Post 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  September  11, 18G2. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-Chief : 

Colonel  Williams’  regiment  of  cavalry  was  ordered  here  at  mj^specia 
request  for  service  under  my  command.  On  its  arrival  General  McCle 
Ian  ordered  it,  without  landing,  to  Aqiiia  Creek,  promising  me  anotiie 
regiment.  I have  not  been  furnished  with  one,  and,  moreover,  five  con 
panies  of  the  Fourth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  on  duty  here,  ha^  e bee 
taken  away.  I have  only  500  cavalry  at  Williamsburg.  Another  re^: 
iment  is  indispensable. 

JOHJN  A.  UlJv, 

Maior-Gener(d. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  September  12,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-Chief: 

A court,  for  tlie  trial  of  Major  Wilson,  was  ordered  bclore  your  di 
patches  were  received.*  It  will  meet  on  Monday  nc.xt. 

I have  had  a steamer  out  for  two  days  watching  lor  the.  aMerrimac  < 
other  transports,  with  troops  from  Boston  and  other  Northern  citie 
but  none  have  been  found,  and  tlie  newspapers  announce^that  tliej>u 

* Sec  p.  11. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


391 


rimac  has  reached  Alexandria.  I cannot  hold  Williamsburg  with  500 
cavalry.  I have  kept  them  there  the  last  four  days  with  the  hope  that 
they  might  do  something  to  retrieve  the  character  of  the  regiment.  I 
will  withdraw  them  to  Yorktown.  In  abandoning  Williamsburg  we 
leave  to  the  mercy  of  the  insurgents  some  good  Union  men,  whom  we 
induced,  by  assurances  of  protection,  to  come  out  for  us.  I fear  I shall 
get  no  troops  here  unless  you  send  them  direct  from  the  Ilorth  to  report 
to  me. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag- ship  Minnesota, 

NorfolJc,  Fh.,  September  12,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  in  order  to  strengthen 
our  position  at  Yorktown  I have  diverted  the  gunboat  Yalley  City, 
now  undergoing  repairs  at  Fortress  Monroe,  from  her  intended  destina- 
tion on  the  blockade  off  Wilmington,  where  her  services  are  much 
needed,  and  to-morrow,  when  her  repairs  will  probably  be  finished,  she 
will  proceed  to  assist  the  United  States  gunboat  Chocura  in  her  present 
operations  in  York  Eiver. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Aeting  Rear-Admiral. 


IlEADQUARTERS  SEVENTH  ARMY  OoRPS, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  13,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  ? ? ^ ? 

Seeretary  of  War : 


Sir:  The  contraband  negroes  who  have  been  permitted  to  collect  in 
great  numbers  at  this  fort  and  in  this  vicinity  have  always  been  and  are 
now  a very  great  source  of  embarrassment  to  the  troops  in  this  garrison 
and  in  the  camps  hereabouts  and  to  the  wLite  population  in  this  neigh- 
borhood. In  case  the  fort  should  be  invested  or  approached  by  the 
enemy^s  forces  I should  feel  obliged  to  ship  them  all  to  the  Xorth. 

This  disposition,  it  seems  to  me,  ought  to  be  made  of  them  without 
needless  delay,  and,  if  possible,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  authorities 
of  the  State  or  States  to  which  they  may  be  sent.  To  this  end  I respect- 
fully ask  permission  and  authority  from  the  War  Department  to  com- 
municate and  make  arrangements  with  the  Governors  of  Massachusetts 
and  other  Northern  States  with  a view  to  the  transfer  to  those  States 
of  all  colored  men,  women,  and  children  now  under  the  superintendence 
ot  Mr.  0. 13.  Wilder,  at  Old  Point  Comfort  and  its  vicinity,  amounting' 
to  about  2,000.  ^ 

! I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  yours, 

I jonx  A.  DIX, 

I Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen.  n.  W.  Halleck, 


Yorktown,  Ya.,  September  32,  1862. 


General-in- Chief : 

Having  been  placed  in  charge  of  the  engineering  operations  at  thiK 


392 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E,  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


place  and  Gloucester  by  General  McClellan  I deem  it  my  duty  to  report ' 
that  the  armament  directed  by  him  is  held  at  Fort  Monroe  for  orders 
from  Washington  * They  are  needed. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  September  12,  18G2. 

Major-General  Bix,  Fort  Ilonroe^  Va.: 

General  Casey  was  directed  some  days  agot  to  send  you  four  new 
regiments  from  this  place.  A part  has  already  gone.  If  with  these 
and  the  troops  coming  by  water  you  cannot  hold  Suffolk,  of  course  it 
must  be  given  up.  Yorktown  ought  certainly  to  be  held*  General  Peck 
telegraphs  here  for  armament  from  Port  Monroe.  All  such  matters  are 
under  your  direction. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  13, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

The  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  New  York  has  just  arrived  and  will 
go  to  Suffolk.  It  is  very  raw,  not  even  knowing  the  manual  of  arms. 
The  rebels  had  1,500  men  repairing  the  Petersburg  Kailroad  to  the 
Blackwater,  and  I have  no  doubt  contemplate  an  early  movement  ou 
Suffolk.  The  loss  of  my  three  best  regiments  at  that  point  is  unfortu- 
nate at  this  moment.  No  effort  will  be  spared  to  maintain  our  position 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  September  14,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Va. : 

Issue  such  ordnance  stores  as  you  deem  necessary  for  the  good  of  the 
service,  either  for  Yorktown  or  elsewhere.  This  is  not  a time  to  delay 

for  formalities,  j:  ^ ^ . -r  t 

n.  W.  HALLECK, 

Genera  I in-  Chief . 


War  Department, 
Washington^  September  15,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Ya. : 

Four  new  full  regiments  have  been  sent  to  you  from  here.  NothiniJ 
is  yet  heard  of  the  Merrimac.  General  Wool  has  been  directed  not  U 
issue  any  more  passes  to  cross  our  lines.  You  will  exercise  your  dis 


* See  Halleck  to  Dix,  September  14. 
t Ou  September  10. 

X See  Peck  to  Halleck,  September  12,  p.  391. 


CtiAP.XXX.] 


correspondekce,  etc.— Union. 


393 


cretiou  in  the  case  you  report,  but  I am  decidedly  of  oi)inion  that  at  the 
present  time  persons  from  Baltimore  should  not  be  permitted  to  go  into 
Virginia. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


General  Dix: 


September  17, 18G2. 


The  Morse,  our  lightest  draught,  is  ordered  uj^  the  Nansemond. 

S.  P.  LEE, 
Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Norfolk^  Fu.,  September  17,  18G2. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Uix,  Commanding^  Ac. : 

General  : When  the  rebels  evacuated  I7orfolk  they  left  a steam  gun- 
)oat  on  the  stocks  in  this  city  and  the  necessary  material  provided  for 
jer,  part  of  which  came  from  the  navy-yard.  Admiral  Goldsborough 
irranged  with  General  Viele,  now  absent,  to  have  the  hull  so  far  com- 
peted as  to  allow  of  launching  the  gunboat,  with  the  view  of  towing  it 
o the  Washington  Navy-Yard,  there  to  be  finished  and  equipped.  The 
)nly  expense  to  be  incurred  here  would  be  for  the  labor,  which  the  ad- 
niral  assumed  to  defray.  It  is  desirable  to  have  this  object  carried  out 
IS  speedily  as  possible.  I have  therefore  to  request  that  you  will  be  so 
jood  as  to  cause  the  quartermaster  who  has  control  both  of  Mr.  Bur- 
oughs  and  the  building  yard  to  require  Mr.  Burroughs  to  hasten  the 
aunching  of  this  gunboat,  which  can  be  done,  I am  informed,  in  eight 
>r  ten  days. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


Washington,  September  18,  18G2. 

lajor-General  Dix: 

The  two  regiments  at  the  Patuxent  are  subject  to  your  orders.  Gen- 
ial Banks  thinks  that  one  can  be  spared. 

n.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

, . ^ Norfolk.,  Fa.,  September  18,  18G2. 

laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Uix, 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Fa.  : 

General:  The  president  of  the  Norfolk  Gas  Company  recently  ap- 
■hed  to  me,  through  General  Viele,  to  send  a quantity  of  shingles  to  the 
'ortli.  This  application  was  promptly  referred  to  the  Navy  Depart- 
lOTit,  and  in  reidy  I am  instructed  that  “no  traffic  in  shingles,  cotton, 
pbacco,  or  other  articles  can  be  permitted  in  the  region  blockaded.^^ 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  vours, 

S.  P^  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


394 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Norfolk^  Va.,  September  18,  18G2. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  T a. : 

General  : The  instructions  from  the  Navy  Department,  of  wliich  1 
informed  you  to-day,  make  it  necessary  that  I immediately  direct  the 
naval  vessels  on  guard  duty  not  to  allow  any  steamer  or  sailing  vessel 
to  pass  in  or  out  of  this  harbor  and  these  waters  unless  she  is  in  the 
service  of  the  Army  or  the  Navy,  and  has  nothing  on  board  except  the 
United  States  mail  or  United  States  troops  and  public  property,  viz. 
Army  or  Navy  stores  and  supplies. 

In  respect  to  all  Army  transports  I respectfully  request  that  you  will 
cause  each  to  be  supplied  with  an  official  certificate  stating  the  name  ot 
the  transport:  that  she  is  in  the  service  of  the  Army,  and  that  she  has 
nothing  on  board  for  traffic.  Such  a certificate  should  be  left  with  the 
officer  of  the  Navy  guard  vessel  by  every  steamer  or  vessel  passing 

either  way.  , i -x- 

I further  request  to  be  informed  of  the  name  and  official  position  ot 
the  officer  at  Norfolk  and  at  Fort  Monroe  whom  you  may  authorize  to 
issue  these  certificates.  All  vessels  without  such  certificate  will  be 

liable  to  detention.  . xn  tx  t i 

Whilst  I desire  to  carry  out  my  instructions  with  fidelity  i need  not 
assure  you  of  my  further  wish  to  do  so  in  accordance  with  your  ofiicial 
convenience. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEF, 

Acfg: Rear- Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atla7itiG  Blockading  Sguadron. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va,,  Septe^nber  19,  18G2. 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  Forth  Atlantic  Blockading  Sguadro7i : 

Admiral  ; I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  two 
communications  of  the  18th  instant.  I have  directed  the  provost-mar 
shal,  Capt.  William  E.  Blake,  to  give  the  certificates  .you  require,  i 
shall,  however,  call  the  attention  of  the  Government  to  the  instruction.v 
you  have  received  from  the  Navy  Department  and  ask  that  some  action 
may  be  had  on  my  communication  of  the  4th  instant  to  the  Secretar\ 
of  War,  of  which  I inclose  a copy.  You  may  be  assured  that  until  soim 
proper  system  of  intercourse  with  Norfolk  is  established,  so  that  tut 
people  may  receive  what  they  need  for  their  subsistence  and  comtort, 
shall  interpose  no  obstacle  to  the  execution  of  those  instructions ; but 
on  the  contrary,  shall  do  all  in  my  power  to  aid  you  in  carrying  them  out 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- Ge7ieral 


IlEADOUARTERS  SEVENTH  ARMY  CORPS, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  10,  1802. 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Co7n7na7iding  Fo7'th  AtUuitic  Blockading  Sq7iadro7i : 

Admiral:  Since  writing  to  you  this  moniing  I have  received  tli 
r<  -pilations  concerning  internal  and  coastwise  intercourse,  ot  wliicu 


CnAF.  XXX:.] 


CORRESPONDEHCJE,  ETC. — UNION. 


395 


inclose  a cop^V'^  and  under  wliicli  I think  we  may  accomplish  the  object 
I had  in  view  in  my  communication  of  the  4th  instant  to  the  Secretary 
of  War,  though  1 should  have  preferred  the  arrangement  I suggested. 
1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN^  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  September  19, 18G2. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  ' 

Co7nmanding  at  Fort  Monroe , Va. : 


General  : The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  re- 
ceipt of  your  communication  of  the  12th  instant,  in  which  you  state  that 
the  contraband  negroes  which  liave  been  permitted  to  collect  at  Fort 
Monroe  and  in  its  vicinity  have  been  and  now  are  a very  great  source 
of  embarrassment  to  the  troops  in  the  garrison  and  neighboring  camps, 
and  that  in  the  ,event  that  the  fort  should  be  invested  or  approached 
by  the  enemy’s  forces  you  should  be  obliged  to  ship  them  all  North. 
In  view  of  these  circumstances  you  request  permission  and  authority  to 
communicate  and  make  arrangements  with  the  Governors  of  Massachu- 
setts and  other  Northern  States  with  a view  to  a transfer  to  those 
States  of  all  colored  men,  women,  and  children  now  under  the  superin- 
tendence of  Mr.  0.  B.  Wilder  at  Old  Point  Comfort  and  its  vicinity 
amounting  to  about  2,000.  ’ 

In  reply  the  Seeretary  instructs  me  to  say  that  the  permission  to  enter 
into  a correspondence  and  the  authority  to  make-  arrangements  with 
thesexecutives  of  the  several  Northern  States  for  the  purpose  indieated 
is  granted  and  conferred  upon  you  agreeably  to  your  request. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 

: Washington^  September  19,  1862. 

‘ Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Ya. : 

Send  up  all  of  Peck’s  division,  which  you  can  replace  with  the  new 
troops.  Ills  div’ision  will  be  fdled  up  here. 

H.  W.  IJALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  20,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  IT.  W.  Dalle CK, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I was  all  day  at  Suffolk  yesterday,  expeeting  an  advance  from  the 
blackwater,  where  the  rebels  had  sent  down  a considerable  force  from 
1 etersburg.  I have  two  of  Peck’s  brigades  there  and  three  of  the  new 
mgiinents— perfectly  raw.  One  never  had  had  arms  in  their  liands  till 
i-bcy  reached  there  yesterday.  At  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  I have  only 
Fmory’s  brigade;  here  only  one  regiment;  at  Camp  Hamilton  one 
figiment,  and  at  Newport  News  only  500  men.  It  would  be  very  un- 
pMe  to  withdraw  any  of  Peck’s  division  at  this  moment.  I have  at  Suf- 

: ^ Not  foviiid. 


396 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


i] 


folk  tlie  great  bulk  of  my  force.  The  rebels  Lave  liuisbed  tbo  railroad 
tom  tue  g e Blackwater.  The  secessionists  were  cooking 


for'them^t  Su&lk  night  before  last  with  the  assurance  that  they  were 
to  be  there  yesterday.  I beg  you  to  let  Peck’s  division  remain  at  pres- 
ent. He  is  superintending  the  armament  of  Yorktown.  I have  no  , a 
single  artillery,  ordnance,  or  engineer  ofLcer  for  th^  po^. 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  Sepemoer  20,  IbbZ. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

General:  I requested  by  telegraph  that  General  Peck’s  division 
might  not  be  taken  away  from  me  at  present,  assigning,  briefly,  the 

reasons.  I do  so  now  more  in  detail.  . . , , n . 

My  aggregate  force  present  on  the  10th  instant  was  as  follows . 

520 

Fort  Monroe 3 33O 

Camp  Hamilton 5^3 

Newport  News 2 021 

Norfolk *■_]  3’ 454 

Suffolk - 3^868 

Yorktown  and  Gloucester - 

Williamsburg 14, 528 

1, 384 

Deduct  sick 

. 

, , . 3,400 

Add  four  new  regiments,  about __ 

16,544 

Total 

Since  the  10th  I have,  in  order  to  meet  a threatened  moveniM 

Sulfolk,  augmented  my  force  there  to  about  8,600,  and  left  at  oamii 

Hamilton  only  one  regiment.  . Tlir 

Suifolh.— This  is  at  the  moment  my  most  important  portion.  l 

eneniv  bas  iiist  finished  the  railroad  from  Petersburg  to  the  Blackwatei. 
fo  milesIrC  Suffolk,  and  on  Tuesday  and  Wednesday 
siderable  body  of  infantry  to  that  point  There  was  a loree  ot  caval 
and  artillery  in  the  vicinity  before.  On  Thursday  I went  to  Sutto  i 
with  reasonable  assurance  that  there  would  be  ^ ’ 

examined  the  preparations  made  for  defense  ,i  .j,, 

The  gauge  of  the  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad 
gauge  of  the  Norfolk  and  Weldon,  or  Seaboard,  f f®®^ 
ing  no  locomotives  for  the  former  we  altered  the  • 

inShes  from  Norfolk  to  Suffolk,  connecting  the  Wo  roads  at  the  latte 
point  by  a Y,  so  as  to  use  the  equipment  on  either  road  at  pleas 
Since  the  enemy  have  completed  their  road 

Blackwater  I have  been  altering  the  gauge  from  f®,?  ‘ ,, 

so  as  to  render  it  useless  to  them  and  f® 

throw  a force  clown  from  Suflolk,  thus  enabling  us  to  i 

miinication  as  far  as  the  Blackwater  ^e  are  out  some  C miles^  m^^^^^^^ 
altering  3 miles  a day.  When  you  decided  to  hold  Suffolk  1 dtteriiim 
to  make  it  as  effective  as  possible,  and  this  change  ®f 
great  importance  if  we  are  in  force  again  in  this  J,er 

Carolina!  To  effect  this  object  I nuist  have  t^ops,  a id  tl  e numbm 
now  have  there  may  be  indispensable  to  enable  mo  to  hold  t I 


Chap.  XXX.]  COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  397 

against  attack.  I have  ordered  a reconnaissance  in  force  to  be  made 
to-day  in  the  direction  of  the  Blackwater. 

Yorlitown. — The  armament  is  now  in  progress.  General  Peck  is  super- 
intending it.  I have  no  one  who  can  do  it  so  well.  Indeed,  I have  for 
duty  but  one  engineer  under  my  command;  only  one  ordnance  officer, 
who  has  charge  of  the  arsenal  here,  and  only  one  artillery  officer,  who 
has  been  until  recently  the  commanding  officer  of  this  post.  The  scien- 
tific corps  of  the  army  have  been  absorbed  by  other  commands.  I may 
be  obliged  to  send  General  Peck  to  Suffolk  if  an  advance  is  made  by  the 
enemy. 

The  intrenchments  constructed  by  the  Confederates  at  Yorktown  are 
very  strong,  but  were  intended  for  a large  force.  It  is  not  proposed  to 
bold  the  place  with  more  than  4,000  men,  and  therefore  some  out- works 
not  intended  to  be  occupied  are  in  progress  of  demolition.  The  arma- 
ment will  be  completed  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  with  the  present 
force  and  the  guns  already  in  position  the  place  could  hold  out  against 
greatly  superior  numbers. 

Gloucester,— McClellan,  before  he  left  here,  ordered  Glouces- 
ter to  be  armed.  I do  not  propose  to  execute  the  order  until  we  have 
completed  the  armament  of  Yorktown  and  until  I have  20,000  effective 
men,  for  I do  not  think  a smaller  number  sufficient  to  protect  my  ex- 
tended lines. 

This  position  is  auxiliary  to  Yorktown  in  controlling  the  navigation  of 
the  York  Eiver.  It  is  commanded  by  Yorktown  Heights,  but  it  might, 
nevertheless,  in  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  be  a source  of  annoyance. 

Neicport  Yexcs.— This  post  was  abandoned  in  June  last  by  order  of 
General  McClellan.  Everything  was  removed  except  the  sick  and  a 
company  of  cavalry,  as  a guard.  Since  then  the  sick  have  been  increased 
and  I have  added  a very  small  regiment  of  infantry. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Yavy  requested  that  we  would  mount  two  or 
three  200-pounder  guns  to  aid  the  gunboats  in  defending  themselves 
against  the  new  Merrimac,  but  we  have  no  200-pounders,  and  unless  I 
have  a competent  force  there  the  enemy  might,  if  we  were  to  obtain 
them,  use  them  against  us.  There  are  some  earthworks,  a good  deal 
dilapidated,  for  defense  against  an  inland  attack,  but  they  require  about 
3,000  men  to  man  them.  All  the  guns  were  removed. 

Yewport  Yews  as  a station  defends  nothing.  The  channel  of  the 
James  Eiver  is  wide.  A vessel  drawing  from  17  to  18  feet  can  pass 
out  at  a distance  of  IJ  miles,  although  the  deeper  part  of  the  channel 
IS  near  the  land.  Its  occupation  as  a post  was  always  of  questionable 
utility. 

Williamshurg  I consider  of  no  importance,  except  as  an  advance  post 
or  watching  a movement  of  the  enemy  from  the  Chickahominy.  By 
holding  it  we  are  able  to  push  our  vedettes  farther  out.  It  is  too  dis- 
tant from  Yorktown  (13  miles),  but  I have  only  a small  cavalry  force 
there.  It  is  under  a brave  and  vigilant  officer,  who  I think  will  take 
wire  of  himself.  I need  for — 


I'ort  Moiiroe 

Camp  Hamilton 

Yorktown 

uloncester  

'VVilliamsburff 

N^orfolk ? , 

Viewport  News 

Suffolk  (at  present) 


Men. 
1,  000 
2,  000 

4.000 

1.000 
800 
000 
500 

8, 000 


Total 


20, 300 


398 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


If  we  fall  back  from  Suffolk  we  must  have  a larger  force  at  Norfolk. 

With  no  other  force  in  the  Department  of  Virginia  I think  the  above 
estimate  the  lowest  number  by  which  the  several  places  occupied  by 
us  can  be  held  against  the  forces  which  the  enemy  can  easily  seud 

Peck’s  division  is  taken  from  me  I shall  have  but  9,000  effective 
men  left,  and  of  these  more  than  one-third  are  entirely  raw— for  the 
most  part  unacquainted  even  with  the  manual  of  arms. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ^ DIX 

Maior- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  Septcmher  20,  1802. 


Maj.  Gen.  II.  W.  Halleok, 

General-in-Chief: 


I have  just  received  a dispatch  from  Captain  Dodgers,  of  the  Galena, 
informing  me  that  2,000  troops  came  from  Petersburg  the  day  before 
yesterday  and  3,000  yesterday  to  the  Blackwater;  that  from  8,000  to 
10,000  are  assembled  now,  and  that  15,000,  recently  arrived,  are  on  the 
south  side  of  the  James  Diver,  in  the  vicinity  of  Dichmond.  This  accords 


with  my  information  from  other  sources. 


JOHN  xA.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe.,  Va.,  September  21,  1802. 

Hon.  Salmon  P.  Chase, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury : * 

Sir:  Captain  Slicer,  of  the  revenue  service,  has  written  to  you  in 
re«-ard  to  some  shipments  by  the  schooner  Geranium  from  Baltimore  to 
tins  post,  under  a regular  clearance  from  the  custom-house.  I gave  a 
permit  to  the  shippers  to  bring  certain  enumerated  articles  for  the  peo- 
ple at  Back  Diver  and  the  vicinity.  But  a quantity  of  other  articles 
not  embraced  in  my  permit  were  allowed  to  be  shipped  by  the  collector; 
among  them  are  3,000  percussion  caps.  These  articles  were  intended 
for  a neighborhood  where  there  is  at  this  season  a good  deal  of  game, 
and  the  inhabitants  ought  not  to  be  deprived  of  the  privilege  of  shoot- 
ing. I propose  to  detain  them  to  be  sold  here  to  individuals,  for  their 
personal  use,  under  special  permits  and  in  such  small  quantities  as  to 
make  it  clear  that  thej^  are  not  intended  for  traffic.  Back  Diver  is  about 
7 miles  from  the  fort. 

There  are  also,  not  embraced  in  my  permit,  84  gross  of  inatches— 
12,096  boxes.  In  Baltimore  they  may  have  cost  875.  In  Dichmond 
they  would  bring  75  cents  a box— $9,072.  Such  a quantity  imported 
for  a small  neighborhood,  taken  in  connection  with  the  difference  of 
price,  shows  that  they  were  intended  for  sale  vrhere  the  enormous  profit 
is  to  be  obtained.  These  I propose  also  to  detain. 

As  the  custom-house  officers  liave  cleared  these  articles,  and  as  there 
is  no  irregularity,  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  holding  the  vessel  or 
the  residue  of  the  cargo.  She  has  been  detained  by  Caiitain  Sheer,  and 
the  only  question  is  whether  the  articles  referred  to  shall  be  stopped 
here.  This  question  I suppose  need  not  embarrass  me,  as  the  clearance 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


399 


was  for  this  post,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  the  articles  not  included 
in  my  permit  should  be  allowed  to  go  farther. 

I think  it  very  important  that  the  trade  with  NTorfolk  and  Portsmouth 
and  the  district  immediately  adjoining  my  command  should  be  regulated 
by  permits  given  by  me  as  the  commander  of  the  military  department 
Through  my  provost-marshals  and  other  subordinates  I can  ascertain 
the  wants  of  every  neighborhood,  and  indeed  of  every  family,  and  thus 
be  able  to  limit  the  supply  to  their  reasonable  wants.  Collectors  at  a 
distance  have  no  such  knowledge,  and  a privilege  intended  to  meet 
rea  necessities  may  be  perverted,  as  it  often  is,  to  purposes  of  traffic 
with  disloyal  districts  and  individuals. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOW  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  September  21,  1862. 
Vlajor-General  Pix,  Fort  Monroe : 

The  ordering  up  of  Peck’s  division  was  atGeneralMcOIellau’s  uro-ent 
•cquest.  In  the  advance  of  the  enemy’s  army  against  this  place  and 
Maryland  he  did  not  deem  it  necessary  on  the  Peninsula.  If  vou  re- 
[uire  it,  keep  it  and  discharge  the  transports. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-CUef. 


r . SuPFOLK,  September  21,  1862. 

lajor-General  Dix:  ’ 

1 have  reason  to  believe  that  the  infantry  and  artillery  of  the  enemv 
ave  gone  to  Franklin,  and  that  a bridge  is  constructed  there.  Their 
umbers  are  reported  at  8,000  to  10,000,  besides  those  heretofore  at 
rankliii.  Five  hundred  of  their  cavalry  are  reported  on  this  side 
lere. 

O.  S.  FERRY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Netcport  News,  Va.,  September  23,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Pix, 

Gomdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  for  your  iuforma^ 
jnstructions  to  officers  on  guard  duty,  enforcing  the 
ockadc  of  Norfolk  and  of  these  waters ; also  a number  of  printedcer- 
cates  for  vessels  (other  than  the  mail  or  troop  steamers? passing  in 

e Z:  Zr.  If  f ® f certificate  is  preparecf  on 

tiff  H signature  of  Captain  Blake,  as  arranged  with  you,  and 

oi.,f  f siSn-'ituro  of  the  master  ofThe  vessel : the  first 

ti'iHnf ‘tf  r? ® ,s®Vjce  of  the  army  exclusively,  and  botn 

i)'oartf  ^ i^rticle  but  only  proper  supplies  for  the  army 

'Hie  mail  boats  from  Baltimore  and  Norfolk  and  troop  transports  will 


400 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


not  be  required  to  stop  for  inspection,  as  they  are  understood  to  bare  ai 
responsible  army  police  on  board  and  will  not  be  allowed  by  you  to  vio- 

will  thank  you  to  inform  me  what  steps  you  have  taken  or  may  take 
to  insure  tliis  result. 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  general,  respectfully, 

b.  L . Lliiil/, 

Act//.  Ucar-Admiral,  Comd/j.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Sq/tadron. 


[Inclosure.] 


Instructions  for  officers  on  guard  duty. 

No  vessel  must  be  allowed  to  pass  inward  except  the  mad  steamc 
and  transports  with  troops  without  stopping  the  guard  vessel  am 
delivering  a certificate  signed  by  Capt.  W.  E.  Blake,  inovost-maishal 
at  Port  Monroe,  that  the  vessel  is  in  the  employ  of  the  AVar  Depai  tmen 
and  has  supplies  for  the  army  only  on  board.  Vessels  without  such  cei 
tificates  must  be  taken  charge  of  and  the  circumstances  immedi.itel 
renorted  to  the  admiral  or  senior  officer  present. 

Outward-bound  vessels,  other  than  those  before  excepted  (mail  steau 
ers  &c.),  must  stop  at  the  guard  vessel  and  leave  a certihcate  signe 
^ stating  the  vessel  to  be  empty  (in  ballast)  or  has  supplies  t 

^•Yes^fs Attempting  to  pass  without  such  certificate  must  betake 
charade  of  and  reported  as  before  directed. 

A boarding-book  must  be  kept,  and  the  names  ot  all  \’;essels 
the  guard  vessels  in  or  out  be  entered  therein,  with  the  date,  by  wl  a 
ownSd,  name  of  master,  tonnage,  and  cargo.  A weekly  return,  showm 
the  foregoing,  must  be  made  to  the  admiral  or  senior  oflmer^iuesuit. 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral j Comdg.N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Sguadion. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  Septemher  23, 18G2. 

Mai.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chiej : 

The  enemy  have  completed  their  bridge  at  Cawsville,  on  the  Norfo 
and  Seaboard  Eailroad,  and  have  crossed  a d i 

Cst  have  on  the  Blackwater  12,000  men,  and  tor  t'^oXintchfi' 
they  have  been  concentrating  them  a*  Oarrsville,  one  day  s ^ 
us.  A column  has  left  Richmond  in  the  direction  ot 
I can  net  no  definite  information  as  to  its  numbers.  Ihe  new  Mcrriu 
[s  “pected  down  the  river  in  ten  days.  There  is  nothing  to  cope  w, 
her  but  the  Monitor.  The  Galena  is  no  better  than  a wooden  •. 
If  anything  befalls  the  Monitor  everytliing  about  us  may  be  smas 
up,  OOT  12,000  men  at  Norfolk  and  Siittolk  cut  oft  s 

niuuication  with  Washington  and  Baltimore  c osed.  jlyy  o/m* 
here  but  has  been  withdrawn.  There  certainly  ought  to  bo  anoth 
efficient  armor-clad  steamer  sent  here  ^ yiX. 

Major- Gcncnd 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


401 


Suffolk,  ISe^nemher  23, 1862. 

Major-Geueral  Bix: 

Arrived  in  good  season.  Have  been  over  most  of  the  approaches. 
The  work  is  being  pushed.  IS^o  report  as  yet  from  Colonel  Spear’s  re- 
connaissance. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  Bix : 


Suffolk,  iSeptember  23,  1862. 


I have  received  a report  from  Colonel  Spear,  commanding  reconnais- 
sance, to  this  effect : He  found  first  picket  of  enemy  3 miles  this  side 
Franklin ; drove  thorn.  Proceeded  a mile  farther  and  met  the  enemy 
in  some  force  at  junction  of  South  Quay  and  Franklin  roads : enemy 
fell  back.  One  mile  from  Franklin,  cavalry  and  infantry  picket ; drove 
that  and  proceeded  half  mile  farther.  Enemy  opened  with  artillery  • 
reconnaissance  halted  and  reconnoitered  vicinity.  Five  thousand  in- 
fantry at  Franklin  on  both  sides  river  j 2,000  at  South  Quay;  1,200  at 
I reston  s F erry.  Floating  bridge  across  Blackwater;  rcanl  cross  cars 
or  artdlery.  Strict  guard  kept. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  G&neral. 


Washington,  B.  C.,  September  24, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Fort  Monroe : 

The  defense  of  the  points  occupied  by  you  is  necessarily  left  to  your 
hscretion.  You  will  retain  Peck's  division  and  I will  send  you  as  soon 
IS  possible  four  more  new  regiments.  The  calls  of  General  McClellan 

^^4  the  tardy  movements  of  new  troops  render  it 
hmcult  to  satisfy  all  demands. 

I do  not  insist  upon  your  holding  all  points  now  in  your  possession, 
n that  matter  you  must  be  guided  by  the  best  interests  of  the  country. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Headquarters  Bepartment  of  North  Carolina, 

Neiu  Berne,  F.  V.,  September  24,  1862. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  JD.  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  say  that  some  time  since  I made  a 
irmal  application  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  for  more  trooiis 
ir  this  department.  This  application  was  made  previous  to  the  great 
nswer  made  by  the  loyal  States  to  the  President’s  call  for  troops. 

earn  now  that  large  numbers  of  new  regiments  are  pouring  into 
as  ington,  and  beg  your  attention,  therefore,  to  my  request  for  more 
'^ops,  and  in  this  connection  I beg  leave  to  say  that,  seeing  the  turn 
aairs  are  taking  in  Virginia  and  Maryland,  the  occupational!  force  of 
( epartment  may  be  most  advantageous  to  the  campaign.  The 
26  R R~VOL  xviii 


402 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


advantages  of  this  post  for  drilling  and  perlecting  new  regiments  are 
verv  "reat.  The  place  is  healthy  now,  wood  is  in  great  abundance, 
wato’sufficieut,  and  subsistence  and  quartermaster^ 
obtained  frmn  New  York,  both  to  this  point  and  to  Beaufort,  from  which 

tlip  railroad  is  in  good  order  and  runnmg.  t i i 

I ha4  soL  eiglit  regiments  of  infantry  here  of  old  troops,  dnnded 
into  two  brigades,  commanded  by  most  excellent  officers  (acting  briga- 
dier Minerals),  Colonels  Amory  and  Stevenson,  and  wdh  other  excellen 
mloneir^onhi  readily  drill  any  nnmber  of  new  ^ regiments  yon  might, 
soiffi  Mv  artillery  force  (Third  Isfow  York  Artillery)  is  good.  The> 
number  five  light  batteries,  with  twenty-eight  pieces;  Ehode  Island 
Zttwv  wk  six  pieces;  Rocket  Battalion,  with  eight  pieces  Uj 
s ;“e  trkirready  for  transportation,  though  at  present  on  shipboard, 
w?fh  suimlv  ^ammunition,  consists  of  four  30-pouuder  Parrott  guns; 
in  additioif  to  which  I can  land  for  the  investment  of  any  sea-coas 
l»El,  o„  My  cav.lr,  fore  ..  on.  s<«0 

nnd  officient  regiment,  Third  Kew  York  Cavalry. 

VIv  knowledge  of  the  country  in  this  region,  derived  from  being  sta^ 
tinned  heie  as  engineer  officer  in  charge  and  more  lately  in  command 
of  this  departmLt,  enables  me  to  use  the  small  force  at  my  disposal 
advantage,  which  advantages  would  of  course  be  greatly  mcieased  bj 

to.....,!  n.n,  w™  0™' 

respect,  yoiir  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ FOSTEE, 

Major-  General. 


ELAa-SHiP  Minnesota, 
Ncivport  News,  September  24,  1862. 

Map  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

, Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  ffic. . 

(General  • The  schooner  A.  S.  Pearcy,  recently  attempting  to  Icav 

oermits  from  any  officer,  except  the  Secretaries  of  the  War,  -Lreasur 

morchaiidise  from  Norfolk  Baltimore,  must  not  be  aU^ 

tint  there  must  be  no  favoritism  or  license  for  tiade  gi\en  to  aii}  c 
or  more  of  onr  own  countrymen  within  the 

port  or  to  export  merchandise,  n^th^  Am 

evasive  of  the  blockade  and  in  bad  ffiitli;  no  officei 

or  Navy  is  authorized  to  grant  permits,  and  that  p 

illegal  traffic  must  be  seized;  that  such  as  under  t / -.•  J p 

War  or  Navy  Departments  may  be  ®“S‘T«ed  fo  car^ 

Army  or  Navy  will  take  no  return  cargo;  tl'^t  the  blockade  is  i ^^ 

to  interdict  all  trade  whatever  with  the  country  blockaded  dun  ^ 
continuance  and  should  be  rigidly  enforced.  , „,.i.,|o,vled 

In  communicating  to  you  the  ioregoing  I am  happi  to  acknowie 


CnAi\  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


403 


your  assurauce  of  your  disposition  to  aid  me,  as  you  essentially  may, 
in  giving  effect  to  the  policy  of  the  Department,  although  you  entertain 
a different  view  of  the  subject. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.,  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 

1 • Commodore  Livingston  can  give  return  freiglits  of  Govern- 
ment i)roperty  from  the  ^Norfolk  navy-yard  to  Northern  navy-yards  to 
(piite  a number  of  the  vessels  bringing  army  supplies  here.  It  will  be 
cld^  antugeous  to  them  and  to  the  Government  interests  if  you  will  be 
so  good  as  to  have  them  so  informed. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  Fa.,  Reptemher  24,  18G2. 
Lieut.  Com.  C.  W.  P'eusser,  IJ.  S.  K.  : 

Sir  : The  accompanying  letter  from  [to]  Acting  Pear- Admiral  Lee  will 
‘xplaiu  to  you  the  earnest  desire  I feel  to  have  two  or  three  gunboats 
;ent  up  the  Chowan  and  Blackwater  Elvers  as  far  as  Franklin,  wliere 
ke  enemy  has  concentrated  a considerable  force  for  the  purpose  of  at- 
acking  Suftolk.  I have  at  the  latter  place  a sufficient  force  to  co-operate 
\ith  }ou  in  the  attack  on  Franklin  in  driving  the  enemy  away  and  de- 
.troying  the  bridge  which  he  has  recently  constructed  over  the  Bhtck- 
vater  at  that  place,  which  is  the  crossing  of  the  Seaboard  Eailroad. 
Lhere  is  deep  water  as  high  as  Franklin,  but  I do  not  know  the  charac- 
er  ot  the  Blackwater  above  its  junction  with  the  Chowan.  I consider 
he  expedition  a very  important  one,  and  trust  there  may  be  no  obstacle 
0 its  accomidishment. 

^ If  the  gunboats  can  go  up,  please  let  me  know  when  they  will  freach] 
'ranklin  and  I Avill  have  my  force  there. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

3Iajor-  Ge7ieral. 

Ilnclosuro.j 

Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Fa.,  ScptcmJjer  24,  1802. 
k-ctg.  Eear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  : 

^ Admiral:  1 had  last  evening  an  earnest  request  from  Major-General 
cck,  commanding  jit  Suftolk,  that  two  or  three  gunboats  should  be 
nit  uj)  tlie  Chowan  and  Blackwater  Eivers  as  far  as  Franklin,  where 
le  enemy  have  a force  of  from  10,000  to  12,000  men.  If  this  can  be 
one  I tliink  we  shall  be  able  to  disperse  this  force  and  destrov  the 
iHlge  at  that  place. 

1 luivo  scut  any  iii.le,  Major  Mix,  witli  this  ilispatcli,  and  will  bo  glad 
> receive  your  answer  by  him. 

I have  received  your  communication  of  yesterday  and  will  give  it  mv 
irly  attention. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major -Gerieral. 


404 


NOKTH  CAEOLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  ' 


Headquahters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  25,  1862.  s 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron  : 

Admiral:  I have  sent  the  passes  designed  for  Norfolk  to  Capt.  J. 
H.  Liebenan,  provost-marshal,  who  will  sign  them  for  vessels  coming 
from  that  port.  Captain  Blake  will  sign  passes  for  vessels  going  from 

this  post.  . . 

The  mail  and  transport  vessels  are  subjected  to  a strict  examination, 
and  nothing  is  permitted' to  go  in  them  except  supplies  for  the  army  or 
articles  belonging  to  individuals  not  designed  for  traffic.  An  account 
of  ever^^thing  carried  in  these  vessels  is  kept  by  the  captain  of  the  port. 
By  these  precautions  there  can  be  no  traffic  with  Norfolk  except  such 
as  is  carried  on  under  the  regulations  which  I sent  to  you. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Alaior- General. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  2^,  1862. 


Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron  : 

Admiral:  I have  deferred  answering  your  communication  of  the 
17th  instant  in  order  to  obtain  all  the  facts  in  regard  to  the  steam  gun- 
boat on  the  stocks  in  Norfolk.  General  Yiele,  on  a reference  of  the 
matter  to  him,  says  : 


Admiral  Lee  is  laboring  [under]  a misapprebension.  The  private  ship-yard  of  one 
Nash  was  seized  by  my  order  for  Government  purposes,  and  it  has  been  and  now  it 
used  bv  the  quartermaster  for  repairiug  vessels  used  by  the  army  for  transportation. 
Jntho  yard  and  on  the  stocks  is  a vessel  completed,  intended  tor  the  insurgents  by  tint 
man  Nash.  I directed  the  quartermaster  to  complete  the  vessel  sufficient  for  launcii 

“'on  mentioning  the  fact  to  Admiral  (then  Commodore)  Goldsborough  heoffered  tL( 
use  of  a gunboat  to  tow  the  vessel  to  Washington.  That  is  all  the  iiuderstandiiq' 
there  was  in  the  matter. 


This  subject  was  brought  to  my  attention  in  the  month  of  August 
I was  not  aware  that  General  Yiele  had  done  anything  in  regard  to  it 
and  on  a statement  of  facts  by  Captain  Ludlow,  the  quartermaster  a 
Norfolk,  I ordered  him  to  have  the  vessel  planked  up  so  that  she  couh 
be  launched  and  towed  to  Baltimore,  where  I proposed,  with  the  con 
sent  of  the  War  Department,  to  have  her  finished.  I inclose  a copy  o 
Captain  Ludlow’s  report  to  me,  stating  the  facts  at  my  request.''  Hi' 
work  has  been  done  bv  my  order ; and  I directed  him  further  to  place n 
her,  if  it  should  be  found  suitable,  a boiler  left  by  the  insurgents. 

_I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Plag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  Va.,  September  25,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  la.: 

General:  The  Navy  Department  informs  me  that  timely  noffi 

* Not  found. 


CiTAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


405 


should  be  given  to  the  inhabitants  of  Norfolk,  &c.,  in  order  that  those 
® should  avoid  personal  exposure  to  our  fire, 
whilst  defending  the  place  if  attacked  by  the  rebel  forces. 

I submit  to  you  that  in  order  to  avoid  all  embarrassments  to  an  effi- 
went  defense  arising  from  delay  in  giving  this  notice,  wo  should,  as 

iiilnbhonts  of  Wnrf  "«tice  to  the 

inhabitants  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,  to  foreign  consuls  and  their 

families  therein  residing,  as  may  be  proper. 

Tifu'tTm  co-operation  in  the  premises  and  submit  here- 

.vith  the  within  for  your  consideration  and  amendment.  I think  the 
uatter  demands  our  immediate  attentiou. 

I have  the  honor  to  be^  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

S U LEE 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral,  Gomdg.N.  Atlantic  Blocl-adin'g  Squadron. 


[Inclo.snre.] 

hereby  given  to  all  non-combatants,  foreign  consuls, 
uC.,  that  the  present  threatened  attack  by  the  rebel  forces  on  Snffoll’^ 
11  outpost  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,  Va.,  in^kes  it  necessarv  toi  o’ 
y all  continue  to  reside  in  these  towns  tLv  will 

orthe  exnnsl“p^fT  ’ consequences  that  mav  ensue 

nTpili  exposure  they  will  encounter  during  the  defense  of  Norfolk 
nd  Portsmouth  by  the  military  and  naval  forces  of  the  United  States. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  Genera  1. 

Actg.  Rear-Achmral,  Comdg.  N,  Atlantic  Bloclmding  Squadron. 

To  be  communicated  through  General  Viele  to  the  authorities  and 
habitants  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,  to  each  foreign  consul  and  to 
J published  in  the  Norfolk  Union  newspapers.  ’ 


ctg.  Eear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 


Headquarters  SEyENTii  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe.,  Va.,  September  25,  1862. 


Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron: 

E ^ liad  the  honor  to  receive  your  communication  of 

ie  ZeS  PI  ^ threatened  attack  of  the  rebels  on  Suffolk, 

question  of  giving  the  notice  of  which  you  inclose  a drauHit  is  a 
delicate  one  and  I desire  time  to  consider  it.^  There 

Ls  rmc  ^1*®  Blackwater,  ami  it  ap" 

iSL  a Tnr^f  advance  should  precede  such  a notice,  which  wouhl 
JOCO  a large  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  Norfolk  to  leave  and 

eiidedTo  m ^'*®  ®^Bgatiou  of  passing  them  through  our  lines.  If  wo 

iety  of  givTiSth^notice  " P'®' 

t am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CuAr.  XXX. 

United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neicport  News,  Va.^  8e]^temher  2G,  IbO^. 

Alai.  Gen.  John  A.  13 ix,  U.  S.  A., 

* Co7n(]g.  Seventh  Arm^j  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  ^a.. 

SllaSSoSt— 

itatiou  aucl  delay,  lest  we  put  to  some  inconvenience  the  inhabitant 

,“S.f  “Si.  »5 

A nrematnre  warning  would  be  better  for  them  and  lor'  us  than  non 
t all  and  mi-bt  possibly  have  the  effect  of  inducing  the  enemy,  at  tb 
fusUncrorJSe  inhabitLts,  to  desist  from  any  attempt  against  on 

^'°l'therehSe  ' propose  that  the  terms  of  a notice  shall  at  once  be  a 
ranged  to  your  satisfaction  and  signed  by  me,  so  ‘ 

and  lUlish  it,  whenever  in  your  good  judgment  it  shall  be  prop. 

to  do  ^ general,  very  respectfudy^yo^re^^ 

Actcj.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Sqttadron. 


Hughs  Dept,  of  Vihginia,  Seventh  Aemy  Corps, 

‘ Fort  Monroe,  September  27,  IbG^. 

Mai  Gen.  H.  AV.  Halleck: 

'r*ENFRAL  • Soon  after  I took  command  here  I presented  to  the  Go- 
pr,?mmft  the'cL  of  the  inhabitants  of  Norfolk,  who  wmrc  then  and  a 
“ ore  grievously  affected  by  the  commercial  restrictions  imposed  . 

*’oTithe4th  instant  I presented  their  case  a second  time  to  tho  IV; 

r;35;r,vS'  rc^,.;  o„ 

*''flmAutV'VV' f ® 

icy,  if  there  is  any.  The  permission  was  asked  the  other  day  to  ta 


Chav.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


407 


cargo  of  coal  there  for  the  gas  company,  and  it  was  refused  by  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Treasury.  There  have  been  two  or  three  murders  recently 
and  dark  streets  will  facilitate  the  perpetration  of  crime.  Permits  have 
been  given  to  particular  individuals  to  take  cargoes  there  in  a few  in- 
stances for  general  traffic,  and  in  direct  violation  of  the  laws  of  blockade, 
if  the  blockade  exists.  But  the  Secretary  of  the  Nlavy  has  instructed 
Admiral  Bee  not  to  allow  any  traffic  in  tobacco,  shingles,  or  other  prod- 
ucts of  the  labor  of  the  inhabitants  with  the  places  from  which  merchan- 
dise has  been  introduced  under  the  permits  referred  to,  and  as  they 
have  no  money  they  cannot  as  a general  ride  avail  themselves  of  the 
benefits  ot  this  partial  reopening  of  trade.  Special  permits  are  a source 
of  the  most  unconscionable  extortions.  A man  was  permitted  to  take 
250  tons  of  coal  the  other  day,  and  the  citv  being  nearly  destitute  he 
sold  for  $15  a ton  what  cost  him  about  $6.  '^The  Secretary  of  the  Kavy 
has  instructed  Admiral  Lee  not  to  allow  anything  to  pass  except  sup- 
plies for  the  army  on  permits  from  General  Dix.  There  is  a revenue 
cutter  here  in  charge  of  a discreet  and  vigilant  officer  who  is  exercising 
the  appropriate  function  of  suppressing  illicit  trade ; but  the  Navy 
Department  assumes  that  the  admiral  is  there  to  enforce  a blockade  as 
d the  place  belonged  to  an  enemy,  whereas  it  is  in  our  possession,  held 
by  military  occupation,  and  should  be  governed  by  the  commander  of 
the  military  forces  until  the  laws  of  the  United  States  are  fully  extended 
Dver  it.  How  can  it  be  said  to  be  a blockaded  port  when  the  United 
states  mail  is  carried  to  and  fro  daily  and  a jDost-office  established  for 
general  correspondence  without  restriction  ? I earnestly  ask  your  at- 
tention to  ruy  letter  of  the  4th  instant  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

The  permits  given  at  Washington  to  particular  individuals  to  trade 
it  iSortolk,  for  want  of  proper  information,  have  been  granted  in  some 
iistances  to  unworthy  jiersons.  One  was  obtained  not  long  ago  by  an 
udividual  who  was  turned  out  of  the  quartermaster's  department  at 
his  post  for  fraud  and  who  was  recently  found  with  a large  quantity 
)t  quinine  destined  unquestionably  for  Kichmond. 

You  may  have  heard  that  articles  are  smuggled  through  Norfolk  to 
Inchmond.  No  doubt  a pound  of  tea  and  a pair  of  boots  may  reach 
here  occasionally.  Smuggling  exists  wherever  a large  profit  is  to  be 
nade.  But  these  leaks  at  Norfolk  and  everywhere  els'e  do  not  amount 
>0  an  appreciable  sum.  Tea  has  risen  in  three  months  from  $15  to  $20 
I pound  at  Bichmond,  and  other  articles  in  proportion,  showing  how 
ittle  has  been  gained  by  contraband  trade. 

If  the  War  or  Treasury  Departments  are  unwilling  to  trust  to  the  mili- 
ary commander  the  power  of  grantingpermits  tocarry  to  Norfolk  what 
s necessary  to  save  the  people  from  absolute  suffering,  but  prefer  to 
etam  it,  it  should  be  delegated  to  a special  agent  here,  who  will  know 
precisely  what  is  needed,  and  who  can,  through  the  information  he  will 
;ain,  confine  supplies  to  proper  limits  and  the  privilege  of  trading  to 
•onest  hands.  x 

I hope  you  will  be  able  to  spare  half  an  hour  from  your  urgent  duties 
0 consider  this  matter.  Between  the  Treasury  Department,  whose 
i>rovince  it  is  to  regulate  peaceful  commerce,  and  the  Navy  Department, 
ill  r enforcing  a blockade,  the  unfortunate 'inhabitants  of 

oitolk  and  Portsmouth  (one-third  of  them  loyal)  are  in  danger  ot  starva- 
- and  the  military  authorities,  which  have  tlie  nominal  control,  bear 
the  responsibility  and  the  odium. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


408 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ITdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  27,  1802. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peciv,  Commanding  at  Suffolk  : 

General  : I have  ordered  Captain  Davis’  battery  to  you  from  York- 
town.  I will  direct  General  Yiele,  in  ease  of  any  sudden  emergency, 
to  execute  any  order  yon  may  give  him.  His  force  is  small,  and  I do 
not  wish  it  disturbed  except  in  an  exigency  so  pressing  as  to  render 


consultation  with  me  dangerous. 

The  Morse  draws  so  much  water  that  she  cannot  safely  go  higher  up 
the  Nansemond.  Admiral  Lee  has  promised  me  another  gunboat  of 
less  draught,  and  I will  ask  him  to  put  her  under  your  orders  so  that 
she  can  take  the  place  of  the  West  End  in  case  of  need. 

1 trust  the  telegraph  line  will  be  completed  to-day  so  that  our  com- 
munications may  be  more  regular. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Elag-ship  Minnesota, 
Neivport  News,  September  28,  1802. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  blank  certificates 
for  the  use  of  army  transports  outward  bound  from  Yorktown  and 
vicinity,  to  be  presented  to  the  naval  guard  vessel  in  York  Piyer. 
beg  you  will  cause  these  to  be  sent  to  the  provost-marshal  at  Yorktown. 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 
Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  Va.,  September  27,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  IT.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General  : I have  to  request  that  all  army  transports,  before  at- 
tempting to  pass  in  or  out  through  the  blockade  of  James  Eiver  or  to 
and  from  the  Xansemond  Piver,  may  be  directed  to  stop  and  show  tc 
the  senior  naval  officer  off  Newport  News  the  authority  and  object  toi 
their  passing  the  blockade.  It  will  not  answer  to  allow  any  vessel  oi 
steamboat,  thougli  hoisting  a white  flag,  to  pass  unquestioned  and  mi 
known.  ' 

1 liave  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blocha ding  Squadron. 


IlDQRS.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  September  28,  1802. 

Actg.  Itear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron  : 

Admiral:  1 supposed  all  vessels  going  into  the  James  Eivcr  or  tly 
Xansemond  reported.  Colonel  Ludlow,  one  ot  my  aides,  who  * 

Aiken’s  Landing  with  flag  of  truce  twice,  told  me  he  reported  to  CM 
tain  Dodgers  on  both  occasions,  before  you  came  from  Xorfolk.  iH' 


3iiap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION* 


409 


last  flag-  that  went  up  a few  days  ago  was  a boat  from  Washington  in 
charge  of  an  officer  from  that  city.  He  was  not  aware,  I presume,  of 
the  rule.  I will  give  the  necessary  directions  to  the  captain  of  the 
port  here,  who  has  the  supervision  of  all  vessels  arriving  or  leaving. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  Va..  ^eptemher  29,  18G2. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck:  ’ 

General:  In  my  letter  of  the  27th  instant  I stated  that  permits  to 
trade  in  Norfolk  had  been  given  to  improper  persons.  Yesterday  Mr. 
Noyes,  the  person  I alluded  to  as  having  been  turned  out  of  the  quar- 
inaster’s  department  for  fraud  and  having  been  found  with  a large 
quantity  of  quinine  in  Norfolk  sent  to  him  surreptitiously,  arrived  here, 
^vith  a permit  from  General  Wadsworth  to  trade,  with  a very  heavy 
nvoice  of  merchandise— among  other  items  2,000  tons  of  coal.  I am 
irery  happy  to  know  that  such  a supply  of  necessaries  is  to  go  to  Nor* 
blk  for  the  relief  of  the  people,  but  I greatly  regret  that  it  is  in  such 
lands.  At  the  same  time  the  quartermaster  has  received  for  examina- 
;ion  from  Mr.  Tucker,  Assistant  Secretary  of  War,  a fraudulent  claim 
igainstthe  Government  from  this  same  man. 

There  also  arrived  here  yesterday  a man  named  Ward  with  supplies 
’or  the  Marine  Corps,  purchased  by  him  on  a permit  from  the  Secretary 
)f  the  Navy.  He  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  I stopped 
he  goods.  I sent  him  with  the  assistant  provost-marshal  to  General 
nele,  who  reports  as  follows  : 

“This  man  Ward  is  a rebel  scoundrel,  who  was  imposed  upon  the 
irovost-marshal  by  Captain  McCawley  (Marines),  who  is  certainly  very 
Quch  in  fault  in  the  matter.  The  mafrs  antecedents  are  bad.  He  has 
□ade  a fortune  in  contracts  for  the  insurgents.  I think  a man  named 
iirby,  a renegade  Englishman,  is  the  agent  in  the  matter.’^ 

If  there  had  been  a proper  system  of  supervision  here  in  regard  to 
hermits  to  trade  these  cases  would  not  have  occurred. 

I think  this  will  show  the  importance  of  trusting  the  matter  of  grant- 
Qg  permits  to  the  commander  of  the  military  department  or  of  having 
» spmal  agent  of  the  War  or  Treasury  Departments  here.  In  that 
ase  Capt.  James  Millward,  jr.,  the  captain  of  the  port  here,  would  be 
I proper  person,  and  his  duties  would  be  jierformed  under  my  super- 
ision.  He  keeps  an  account  of  all  supplies  received  for  the  inhab- 
.ants  around  here,  and  is  thus  able  to  tell  at  any  moment  what  any 
imily  needs.  The  same  system  through  subordinates  might  be  ex- 
ended  to  Norfolk. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Viroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Fa.,  September  20,  18G2. 
-ctg.  Hear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  N orth  A.tlantic  Floekading  Sguadron  : 

Admiral  : We  had  advices  yesterday  from  the  Blackwater.  The 
^emy  iiave  not  crossed,  nor  can  I ascertain  that  they  have  been  re- 


410 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


enforced.  I tliiuk  there  is  not  an  armed  insurgent  within  40  miles  of 
Norfolk,  unless  it  be  some  lurking  squads,  or  perhaps  companies,  in  the 
Dismal  Swamp.  In  the  mean  time  we  have  strengthened  Suffolk  so 
as  to  feel  confident  of  resisting  any  force  the  enemy  can  have  on. the 
Blackwater. 

I have  fully  considered  the  matter  of  the  proposed  notice  to  the  people 
of  Norfolk  and  the  foreign  consuls  residing  there,  and  regret  to  differ 
in  opinion  with  you  in  regard  to  the  policy  of  giving  it  at  the  present 
time.  I am  not  sure  that  we  can  say  that  Suffolk  is  threatened  until 
there  is  an  advance  of  the  enemy^s  forces,  and  I do  not  think  the  people 
of  Norfolk  should  be  disturbed  unnecessarily.  The  hostile  attack 
should  be  imminent.  A notice  of  twenty-four  hours  is  all  that  is  needed 
in  case  of  an  attack  or  intended  bombardment,  and  where  we  ^re  merely 
acting  on  the  defensive  a longer  one  cannot  be  expected  of  us. 

I have  express  orders  not  to  allow  any  one  to  pass  through  our  lines 
without  the  permission  of  the  Secretary  of  War.  If  the  proj)osed 
notice  is  to  have  any  effect  at  all  it  will  be  to  induce  the  wealthier 
portions  of  the  people  to  leave,  and  they  are  in  general  opposed  to  us. 
The  poor,  among  whom  are  all  the  loyal  part  of  the  population,  have 
not  the  means  of  leaving.  The  result  would  therefore  be  to  drive  off 
those  who  sympathize  with  the  insurgents  and  diminish  the  objection 
on  the  part  of  their  forces  to  attack  the  place.  I should,  moreover,  feel 
greatly  embarrassed  by  applications  to  pass  our  lines.  I am  constantly 
refusing  them  now  to  parties  who  wish  to  go  to  Bichmond.  The  pro- 
posed notice  would  insure  a renewal  of  these  applications  and  im])ose 
on  me  the  obligation  to  grant  them  as  well  as  others  which  might  he 
made,  while  I am  i)rohibited  from  doing  so. 

There  is  another  consideration : I do  not  like  at  this  time  to  acknowl- 
edge that  we  are  acting  on  the  defensive.  The  enemy,  as  I see  from 
the  Richmond  papers,  have  been  expecting  an  attack  on  Petersburg, 
and  they  think  we  have  been  very  heavily  re-enforced  at  Suffolk.  The 
notice  would  be  an  acknowledgment  that  we  have  not  the  means  of 
making  an  aggressive  movement,  and  it  might  encourage  such  a move- 
ment against  us. 

These  objections,  as  you  see,  relate  chiefly  to  time.  The  form  of  the 
notice  you  inclosed  to  me  is  entirely  unobjectionable.  The  only  sug- 
gestion that  occurs  to  me  is  the  addition  of  the  following  words  at  the 
close,  viz : ‘‘In  case  these  places  shall  be  assailed.” 

If  you  will,  as  you  proposed  in  your  letter  of  the  2Gth,  send  me  such 
a notice,  signed  by  yourself,  I will  use  it  when  I think  it  necessary. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

/ JOHN  A.  UIX, 

Major-General. 


IIdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe.,  Va.,  September  30,  1862. 

Lieut.  Com.  C.  W.  Flusser, 

Commandwfj  IT.  S.  Steamer  Commodore  Ferry : 

Sir  : In  consequence  of  some  unexpected  obstacles  we  cannot  be 
ready  until  about  the  10th  proximo.  I will  give  you  tliree  days’ 
notice. 

The  bridge  has  not  been  reconstructed  at  Franklin  for  tlie  Roanoke 
and  Seaboard  Railroad,  but  a floating  bridge  has  been  thrown  across 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


411 


the  Bhickwater  at  that  point.  A large  force  has  been  sent  down  from 
Petersburg,  but  we  think  the  bulk  of  it  is  at  Ziini,  the  crossing  of  tlie 
, Petersburg  road.  We  are  quite  strong  at  Suffolk.  ' . 

^ Eespectfully,  yours, 

I , , JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Abstract  from  Eeiurn  of  the  Department  of  Virginia,  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding, 

for  September  30,  1862. 


Present  for 
duty. 

o 

OJ 

Sh 

a 

Cj 

(/} 

O)  ^ 
o.  ? 

c: 

Command. 

1 Officers. 

A 

ft 

o 

c3 

a> 

u 

fcc 

to 

Aggregate  ] 

and  abse 

Pieces  of  fiefi 

1 lery. 

nftp.nT't.mf'.nt,  .tjfn.fT  _ 

IG 

3 

21 

Vorf.  AffiTirnpi  (Hnl  S AT  AlforH)  

24 

58G 

774 

859 

Camp  Hamilton  (Col.  A.  Conic) 

47 

1,090 

1,  227 

1,431 

10 

ATp.wpnrt',  ATp.ws  ( iVrnj.  Tf,.  V.  T^^ing)  

29 

419 

541 

752 

Norfoik  (Brig.  Gen.  E.  L.  Viele) 

116 

2,  329 

2,  906 

3,  780 

6 

Sutfolk  (Maj.  Gen,  J.  J.  Peck) 

380 

7,  79G 

9,  386 

11,957 

20 

Yorktown  (Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes) 

231 

4,  533 

5,  918 

8, 168 

28 

Total 

843 

16,756 

20,773 

26,  947 

64 

Abstract  from  Eeiurn  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster  com- 
manding, for  September  30,  1862. 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present.  | 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Remarks, 

CQ 

CD 

C.) 

m 

o 

g 

First  Brigade  (Col.  T.  J.  C. 
Amory). 

Second  Brigade  (Col.  T.  G.  Ste- 
venson). 

Cavalry  (Lient.Col.  J ohn  Mix) . 

Artillery  (Col.  J.  H.  Ledlie) 

Detachments 

81 

81 

32 

40 

5 

2,  591 

2,  059 

666 

819 

266 

3, 594 

2,745 

838 

1,122 

303 

3, 929 

3,  263 

917 
1,  700 
343 

At  New  Berne,  with  detachment  .at 
Newport  Barracks. 

At  New  Berne,  with  detachment  at 
Beaufort. 

At  Now  Berne. 

At  New  Berne. 

At  Port  Macon,  Morehead  City,  New- 
port Barracks,  and  Plymouth, 

Total 

239 

6,  401 

8,  602 

10, 152 

United  States  Flao-siiip  Minnesota, 

Off  N’eivftort  Wetvs,  Uu.,  October  1,  18G2. 
Mjq.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdf/.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : Your  communication  of  the  20th  was  received  yesterday. 
You  thiidv  tlie  notice  proposed  by  me  on  the  25tli  not  now  necessary, 
as  your  outpost  at  Suffolk  lias  been  sufficiently  strengthened  and  as 
you  believe  there  is  not  now  an  armed  insurgent,  excepting  perhaps  some 
larking  companies  in  tlie  Dismal  Swamp,  within  40  miles  of  Norfolk. 
Tlie  situation  was  different  when  I communicated  with  tlie  Department 


412 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


iu  refereuce  to  tbe  notice.  Then  yon  had  just  informed  me  that  the 
enemy  was  .concentrating-  and  threatening  to  attack  Suffolk  Avith  a 
force  double  our  own  there  in  numbers ; that  you  had  suggested  to 
General  Halleck  to  A¥ithdraw  the  troops  from  Suffolk,  which  he  declined 
to  doj  that  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting  between  Suffolk  and 
i^orfolk  you  desired,  and  I stationed,  a gunboat  in  the  Western  Brandi 
of  the  JSTansemondj  and  General  Yiele  had  recentl3^  informed  me  that 
he  had  arranged  to  barricade  and  defend  Norfolk  or  a iiart  of  the  town 
embracing  the  custom-house.  I cheerfully  accept  your  opinion  that 
the  proposed  notice  is  not  necessary  at  the  present  time.  The  altera- 
tion you  propose  in  the  notice,  viz,  that  the  consuls,  women,  and  chil- 
dren should  leave,  “in  case  these  places  shall  be  assailed,”  would,  I 
respectfully  suggest,  render  the  notice  inoperative ; would  not  relieve 
these  non-combatants,  who  would  be  between  two  fires,  and  might 
occasion  complaint  on  the  part  of  foreign  governments. 

As  you  also  think  a notice  of  twenty -four  hours  would  be  sufficient 
and  that  no  notice  is  now  necessary,  I presume  the  matter  had  better 
be  deferred  until  from  your  official  sources  of  information,  which  are 
better  than  mine,  you  think  it  time  to  act;  of  which  I hope  jmu  will 
duly  inform  me. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully",  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg,  A.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 

P.  S. — A steamboat  with  a white  flag  hoisted  ran  this  blockade,  up 
James  River,  to-day. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Fa.,  October  1, 1862. 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron : 

Admiral  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  the  notice  you  sent 
me. 

I also  inclose  a copy  of  a letter  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  in 
regard  to  a vessel  detained  at  Norfolk.  You  will  observe  that  the  right 
of  the  military  commander  to  clear  a vessel  from  a blockaded  port — the 
vessel  having  arrived  there  under  a proper  clearance — is  distinctly  ad- 
mitted. This  will  relieve  the  question  of  supplies  for  Norfolk  of  a good 
deal  of  difficulty.  The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  has  just  granted  a 
permit  for  a very  large  quantity  of  necessaries — among  other  items,  2,000 
tons  of  coal.  The  inhabitants  have  no  money,  or  at  least  none  which 
the  importers  will  take.  They  must  therefore  pay  in  the  products  of 
their  labor — tobacco,  shingles,  sweet  potatoes,  &c.  Under  the  decision 
of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  they  may  do  so ; and  I trust,  as  the 
right  to  regulate  commerce  resides  in  the  Treasury  Department,  that 
you  will  not  consider  your  instructions  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
as  conflicting  with  this  decision.  This  rule  has  always  been  recognized 
heretofore.  On  the  return  of  a vessel  entering  Norfolk  under  the  au- 
thority of  the  Treasury  Department,  with  merchandise,  I have  author- 
ized her  to  be  cleared,  with  a cargo  of  agricultural  products,  to  auj"  port 
of  entry  in  a loyal  State.  Were  it  otherwise  the  permit  to  carry  neces- 
saries there  would  be  a moclvery.  The  case  of  the  Marblehead  is  pre- 
cisely in  point,  for  she  was  regularly  cleared  for  Norfolk,  and  is  laden 
with  staves,  &c.,  for  a return  cargo.  The  Secretary,  you  will  notice, 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  413 

does  not  decide  her  case  as  a special  one  but  states  the  rule  which 
covers  it. 

The  Delaware,  which  has  taken  the  place  of  the  Morse,  is  precisely 
what  we  want.  With  the  West  End,  a heavy  tug  which  I have  armed, 
we  shall  have  an  efficient  river  defense.  I do  not  know  what  instruc- 
tions you  have  given  the  commander  of  the  Delaware,  and  I will  be 
much  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  request  him  to  act  in  conjunction  with 
the  West  End,  under  the  direction  of  Major-General  Peck,  who  will  be 
advised  of  all  exigencies  as  they  arise  and  know  how  to  meet  them. 

I am,  admiral,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


United  States  Eeagt-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  October  2,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : Your  communication  of  the  1st  instant  is  received.  I do 
aot  see  that  the  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  Mr.*  Gutting 
respecting  the  schooner  Marblehead  allows  anything  more  than  that  she 
nay  be  cleared  without  a cargo  of  merchandise.  This  view  is  consistent 
kvith  my  instructions  of  September  18  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
kvhich  I read  to  you,  and  the  substance  of  which  I wrote  to  you  on  the 
23d  ultimo.  The  conclusion  you  arrive  at  and  the  course  you  propose 
reem  to  me  to  be  clearly  in  conflict  with  my  orders.  Your  communica- 
ion  and  this  reply  will,  however,  be  referred  to  the  Department  for  its 
rensideration  and  decision. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  ver^^  respectfully,  your  obedient 
rervant, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acty.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


United  States  Elag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  October  3,  1862. 
flaj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : My  instructions  to  the  commanding  naval  oflicer  in  the 
'iansemond  Eiver  are  to  go  up  as  near  as  he  can  to  the  West  Branch  of 
bat  river  and  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing  there ; to  endeavor  to 
ntercept  rebel  mails  passing  along  there  and  between  Norfolk  and  Bich- 
uoiid,  and  to  avail  himself  of  such  information  as  General  Peck,  from 
us  i)osition,  may  be  enabled  to  give,  in  order  to  facilitate  a co-operation 
vith  General  Peekes  forces,  or  otherwise,  as  may  be  best,  against  the 
,‘neiny.  I hope  General  Peck  will  communicate  freely  with  our  guu- 
)oat. 

I sent  the  Morse  to-day  to  relieve  the  Delaware,  the  latter  to  go  out- 
ide  awhile.  The  Morse  is  the  more  efficient  vessel  of  the  two,  as  she 
a double-ender  and  does  not  have  to  turn  in  that  narrow  stream,  in 
loing  which  I fear  the  Delaware  has  got  aground  as  she  has  not  yet 
eturned. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


414 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Suffolk,  October  3,  18G2 — 10  p.  m. 

Major-General  l)ix : 

Spear  was  iiiclucetl  to  go  on  to  Franklin  in  consequence  of  supposed 
gunboat  firing.  He  has  held  the  enemy  at  bay  all  day  with  his  little 
force,  doing  them  much  harm.  For  the  night,  he  is  occupying  Beaver 
Dam  Church.  He  has  positive  orders  to  fall  back  upon  Wesselis,  10  or 
12  miles  from  here,  toward  Western  Branch  Church.  Enemy’s  pickets, 
infantry  and  cavalry,  reported  at  Windsor;  probably  result  of  deserter’s 
information.  Gunboats  have  not  reached  Franklin.  Spear  has  done 
splendidly. 

JOHN  J.  FECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  October  3,  1802. 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : I very  much  regret  that  last  steamer  sent  with  flag  of 
truce  to  Aiken’s  Landing  should  have  passed  you  without  reporting. 
It  was  sent  oft*  in  great  haste,  on  a direction  from  the  Secretary  of  War, 
with  an  officer  who  had  never  before  been  on  that  service.  I have  taken 
such  measures  as  I trust  will  effectually  prevent  any  such  failure  to  re- 
port hereafter. 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receii)t  of  your  communication 
of  yesterdav,  and  am,  very  respectfully,  admiral,  your  obedient  servanr, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  N G.,  October  3,  1802. 

Maj.  Gen.  IT.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  everything  is  quiet 
throughout  this  department,  and  as  I am  in  the  habit  of  making  con- 
stant armed  reconnaissances  very  little  picket  firing  even  is  at  the  out- 
posts. 

The  health  of  the  troops  is  not  particularly  good  just  now  (we  have 
some  1,500  sick),  but  is  improving,  and  expect  that  cold  weather  v’ill 
soon  bring  them  up. 

Our  hospital  arrangements  we  have  perfected  to  a great  degree  here, 
Beaufort,  and  Portsmouth,  and  we  think  they  will  compare  most  favor- 
ably with  any  United  States  hospitals  elsewhere. 

During  our  stay  here  we  have  formed  and  equipi)ed,  mounted  and 
drilled,  five  light  batteries  from  the  Third  New  York  Artillery.  l^I.v 
requisitions  for  this  object  on  the  Ordnance  Department  have  met  gtui 
erally  prompt  and  full  attention ; the  men  are  good,  the  ofiicers  take  hold, 
and  the  batteries  are,  I think,  quite  efficient.  I am  now  reorganizing.' 
the  batteries  (2)  of  the  New  York  Pocket  Battalion,  and  for  this  pur 
pose  have  required  for  six  Napoleons  and  the  necessary  number  o) 
horses,  which  we  hope  will  be  promi)tly  filled ; also  requisitions  I'oi 
cavalry  horses  to  mount  recruits  and  remount  men  whose  horses  have 
been  killed  in  service  or  by  an  epidemic  which  broke  out  in  the  suinincr 

I had  the  honor  to  make  a brief  statement  of  my  force  in  my  letter  o 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


415 


September  24^  aud  to  request  re-euforcements  of  infantry  to  be  sent  if 
it  was  expected  of  me  to  go  into  active  service  during  the  cool  weather 
now  rapidly  approaching.  Further  reflection  on  this  subject  has  con- 
vinced me  of  the  propriety  of  my  request,  and  especially  as  regards  new 
regiments,  and  I beg  leave  to  reurge  this  matter  and  to  further  say  that, 
even  if  it  is  not  intended  that  I should  mahe  any  decided  mov'’ement 
this  place  presents  v^ery  great  lacilities  as  a camp  of  instruction  for  a 
\ery  large  body  ol  troops  and  would  be  more  available  for  operations 
on  the  flank  of  the  enemy  should  that  be  rendered  necessary  by  their 
retreat  i^fom  Itichmond  or  from  any  other  cause.  Even  if  thirty  or  forty 
new  regiments  be  sent  I will  devote  my  personal  time  to  drilling  and 
perfecting  them  in  their  duties.  I luwe  several  old  colonels  who  are 
abundantly  able  to  assist  me  in  training  the  regiments  in  battalion  and 
brigade  movements. 

I take  measures  to  be  fully  informed  through  deserters,  spies,  &c.,  of 
the  enemy’s  strength,  jareparations  for  defense,  and  movements  in  this 
lepartment. 

Between  this  point  and  Ealeigh  there  are  about  8,000  men,  princi- 
pally infantry,  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  a small  force  of  light 
irtillery.  In  the  country  between  the  Tar  and  Eoanoke  Itivers  there 
s a movable  force  of  about  3,000  men,  threatening  Washington  and 
Plymouth,  and  fearing  to  attack  either. 

My  informant  says  that  a permanent  guard  of  one  regiment  is  kept 
it  Weldon  Bridge  j but  there  are  other  supporting  bodies  that  could 
le  concentrated  to  the  amount  of  5,000  or  10,000  men  before  I could 
’each  there.  This,  of  course,  is  independent  of  any  force  that  might  be 
?ent  from  Eichmond  or  Petersburg. 

At  Wilmington  and  in  the  defenses  at  the  mouth  of  the  Cape  Fear 
Ltiver  are  about  3,000  men.  The  extent  and  strength  of  the  defenses 
it  the  mouth  of  the  Cape  Fear  have  been  largely  increased  of  late.  On 
i^ederal  Point,  north  of  NTew  Inlet,  a long  line  of  batteries  has  been 
Tected,  inclosing  in  their  limits  the  light-house  and  terminating  beyond 
n a large  and  strong  work  called  Fort  Fisher.  The  number  of  guns 
uounted  arc  thirty-six,  several  of  which  are  of  so  great  caliber  as  to 
lirow  shot  farther  than  any  guns  carried  by  the  present  blockading 
iQuadron.  Ihe  force  ot  the  iort  is  now  actively  engaged  in  erecting 
I large  bomb-proof  casemate  battery  of  six  heavy  guns.  Across  Eew 
iilet  is  Turk’s  Island,  on  which  there  is  a battery  of  six  guns.  At  the 
iiouth  of  the  Cape  Fear  Eiver,  Fort  Caswell  has  been  strengthened,  but 
0 what  extent  I am  unable  to  say  j the  sand-hills,  however,  within 
ange  of  its  guns,  have  been  leveled,  so  as  to  afford  no  shelter. 

Fort  Johnston  consists  of,  in  addition  to  the  original  block-house,  a 
►attery  of  at  least  three  guns.  Ascending  the  river  tlie  defenses  are, 
lirst,  Fort  Saint  Philip,  at  Old  Brunswick,  mounting  nine  guns,  bearing 
i'll  the  river— open  gorge.  On  the  east  side  are  three  batteries  : First, 
jazaretto  Battery,  mounting  three  guns;  second,  Fort  French,  a bomb- 
•roof, mounting  tliree  guns;  third.  Fort  Ellis,  mounting  seven  guns, 
-he  first  battery  is  about  7 miles  from  Wilmington;  the  second  is 
■uthin  500  yards  of  the  first,  and  the  third  3^-  miles  from  tlie  lirst,  and 
re  all  ojien  gorge.  There  are  also  small  batteries  protecting  the  roads 
;o  Masonborough  Inlet. 

Epaulements  for  the  purpose  of  sheltering  field  pieces  are  thrown  u[) 
t intervals  from  Fort  Fisher  to  Masonborough  inlet.  The  pieces 
sually  sent  on  the  beach  are  two  heavy  breech-loading  English  rifled 
uiis,  saved  from  the  wreck  of  the  Modern  Greece.  I have'late  infor- 
lation  that  Masonborough  Inlet  is  extensively  used  by  light-draught 


416 


NORTH  CA.ROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAI’.  XXX. 


vcssols  ill  rumiing  tliG  blockade.  At  last  dates  tliere  were  tliere  forty- 
three  lij^ht  schooners.  I have  informed  the  naval  commanders  of  that 
fact.  There  are  also  some  salt-works  at  that  place  and  on  the  adjoining- 
waters.  The  distance  is  too  great  for  an  expedition  from  here,  unless  the 
same  expedition  were  to  attack  Wilmington  itself.  I have  destroyed 
all  the  salt-works  within  reach  of  me,  as  per  previous  report. 

I am  advancing  the  defenses  of  this  town,  and  they  are  now  strong 
enough  to  require  a siege  to  take,  I think.  The  defenses  of  Washing- 
ton which  were  not  mounted  ox  garrisoned  at  the  time  of  the  recent 
attack,  are  now  both,  and  are  sufficiently  strong  to  offer  very  great  re- 
sistance to  an  attempt  at  a coiqi  dc  mam.  _ 

I am  erecting  block-houses  at  all  the  lesser  exposed  points  on  the 
line  of  the  railroad,  &c.  Many  are  finished  and  the  rest  are  progress- 
ing well.  • . . , . n X* 

1 omitted  to  mention,  in  speaking  of  Wilmington,  that  yellow  teyei 
has  broken  out  there  and  bids  fair  to  become  an  epidemic.  The  in- 
habitants have  tied  the  town ; the  telegraph  office  is  closed,  and  all  work 
on  the  iron-clad  gunboats  now  building  there  is  suspended.  Concern 
ing  tliese  gunboats  I have  some  information  which  I demn  accurate,  ann 
which  1 whl  give  in  brief  as  you  may  desire  to  communicate  the  same  t( 
the  Navy  Department:  They  are  150  feet  in  length,  35  or  40  feet  beaiu 
and  will  draw  some  14  feet  wmter.  They  are  simply  intended  for  rivei 
defense  and  are  not  designed  to  cross  the  bar.  The  engines  aie  iron 
the  Modern  Greece  and  the  Uncle  Ben.  They  are  not  yet  set  in.  1 iv( 
weeks’  wmrk  will  be  necessary  to  finish  the  first  and  three  months  lo] 
the  second.  They  are  to  be  plated  with  railroad  iron  and  built  aftc 
the  pattern  of  the  Merrimac  No.  1. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ocioher  5,  18G2. 

General  Dix: 

Although  I supposed  the  9th  would  be  the  day",  yet  I felt  auxiou 
about  matters  in  the  direction  of  Franklin ; the  more  so  as  the  enem; 
was  advancing  his  picket  line  some  4 or  5 miles  from  the  ri;^r;  fienc 
I sent  Spear  for  information  upon  which  to  base  action.  He  wvas  a 
Franklin  from  an  early  hour  till  after  midnight.  Longer  delay  unde 
the  circumstances  would  have  been  risky.  My  information  about  th 
obstructions  led  me  to  doubt  their  ability  to  co-operate.  Sent  a part, 
to  the  South  Quay  region  last  night  to  return  via  Wianoke  and  bomei 
ton  with  information  of  the  boats;  will  aid  it  jiossible.  We  have  acte 
in  good  faith,  and,  as  you  remark,  no  blame  can  attach  to  us.  1 sliai- 
strive  to  reflect  your  views,  and  trust  my  efforts  will  command  you 

approval.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Of'  Neivport  News,  October  5,  186L. 

General  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  \ a. : 

General  : I regret  to  have  to  inform  you  of  a violation  ot  bloc 
ade  by  the  schooner  Caspar  Heft,  chartered  on  the  1st  instant  by  f aiu 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


417 


& Moore,  to  take  a load  of  shingles  from  Suffolk  to  Philadelphia,  and 
with  a permit,  dated  October  1,  from  General  Yiele^s  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  the  provost-marshal  of  hTorfolk,  to  Cattell  & Moore  to  send  this 
schooner  to  Suffolk  to  load  with  shingles.  Lieutenant  Babcock,  of  the 
Morse,  reports  that  this  schooner  is  in  ballast  and  that  her  master  in- 
formed him  that  these  shingles  are  for  a private  speculation  and  not  for 
the  army  or  navy.  I had  the  honor  to  read  to  you  my  instructions 
from  the  Department  on  this  subject  and  to  communicate  to  you  the 
substance  of  them  on  the  22d  ultimo.  Under  these  instructions  1 can- 
not recognize  this  permit  or  allow  this  trade. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  October  6,  1862. 
Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

General  : Your  communications  of  the  27th  and  29fch  ultimo  in  re- 
gard to  trade  with  NTorfolk  have  been  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of 
War,  and  I am  directed  to  reply  that  trade  with  that  post  is  under  the 
general  control  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  Nevertheless,  as 
commanding  officer  of  the  department,  you  have  full  authority  to  com- 
pel all  vessels  to  report  to  you  for  inspection,  and  to  take  such  other 
measures  as  may  be  necessary  to  prevent  frauds. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neieport  News^  Fa.,  October  6,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va.  : 

General  : Your  communication  to  me  of  the  1st  instant,  and  its  in- 
3losure,  with  my  reply  in  copy,  were  referred  to  the  honorable  Secretary 
if  the  Navy.  In  reply  thereto  the  Department  writes  that  my  decis- 
on  in  the  matter  is  correct  and  in  conformity  with  instructions  and 
the  law  of  blockade ; that  there  must  be  no  traffic — no  return  cargo ; 
ithat  supplies  may  be  conveyed  to  the  troops  but  not  to  the  people  of 
^^orfolk  and  Virginia. 

I respectfully  request  your  aid  in  your  department  in  putting  a stop 
^0  all  further  attempts  to  violate  the  blockade  and  the  instructions  of 
,;he  Department,  which  I have  had  the  honor  to  communicate  to  you. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 


Actg. 


^ S.  P.  LEE, 

Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  JST.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

, , Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  6,  1862. 

Vctg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  ; I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  thereceij'itof  your  com- 
munication of  this  date,  and  to  say  in  reply  that  I shall  do  all  in  my 
27  R R — VOL  XVIII 


418  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. j 

power  hereafter,  as  I have  heretofore,  to  aid  you  in  preventing  anji 
commercial  intercourse  with  Norfolk  except  such  as  is  permitted 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  under  special  permits  granted  in  coii-^ 
formity  to  the  printed  regulations  concerning  internal  and  coastwise’ 
intercourse,  of  which  1 sent  you  a copy.  I have  not,  since  I received 
those  regulations,  granted  permission  to  any  vessel  or  any  merchandise 
to  leave  this  post  for  Norfolk  except  in  compliance  with  them. 

The  terms  of  instructions  quoted  by  you  as  having  been  received  h} 
the  Navy  Department  are  so  broad  that  I desire  in  order  to  understanc 
the  interpretation  you  put  on  them  to  make  a few  inquiries  for  my  owi 
guidance.  They  state  that  ‘‘supplies  may  be  conveyed  to  the  troopti 
but  not  to  the  people  of  Norfolk.” 

Do  you  understand  this  declaration  to  include  supplies  of  merchan 
dise  cleared  for  Norfolk  under  the  regulations  referred  to  and  intendec 
for  the  people  and  not  for  the  troops 

The  instructions  also  declare  “ that  there  must  be  no  traffic— no  re 
turn  cargo.”  Do  you  understand  that  you  are  to  prevent  the  traffi( 
carried  on  under  special  permits  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
and  in  conformity  to  the  regulations? 

The  Marblehead  was  allowed  to  return  from  Norfolk  with  a carg< 
under  a i^ermit  and  under  a rule  prescribed  by  the  Secretary  ot  th' 
Treasury.  If  another  vessel  with  a “ return  cargo  ” should,  under  thi, 
rule,  be  cleared  for  a Northern  port  by  a permit  from  the  commander  o 
the  military  department,  would  you  consider  it  your  duty  to  stop  he 
under  your  instructions  from  the  Navy  Department? 

If,  under  your  instructions,  no  traffic”  is  allowed,  what  ‘Hrade”  ii 
or  shipments  of  cotton  or  other  merchandise,  conducted  in  pursuance  o 
said  regulations,  are  referred  to  and  authorized  by  the  order  of  th-i 
Secretary  of  the  Navy,  page  8 of  the  pamphlet  edition  of  the  regula 
tions? 

A gentleman  has  exhibited  to  me  a permit  from  the  Secretary  of  th 
Treasury,  on  the  certificate  and  request  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  t 
carry  a large  quantity  of  supplies  to  the  people  of  Norfolk.  Amouj, 
other  items  are  2,000  tons  of  coal,  of  which  only  160  tons  have  been  dt 
livered.  Do  you  consider  your  instructions  as  requiring  you  to  sto 
the  remaining  1,840  tons  of  coal  and  the  other  supplies  enumerated  i 
the  permit? 

I make  these  inquiries  not  only  because  I desire  to  understand  you 
own  views  distinctly,  but  because  the  instructions  you  have  receivet 
if  taken  literally,  seem  to  me  to  be  inconsistent  and  in  conflict  with  tb 
regulations  which  both  the  W^ar  and  Navy  Departments  have  saiu 
tinned.  In  a word,  I do  not  see  how  any  traffic  should  be  provided  fc, 
and  regulated  if  ^Dio  traffic”  is  allowed. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ‘ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe j Tu.,  October  8,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir:  The  condition  of  the  people  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  is  sue 
as  to  demand  the  immediate  and  decisive  action  of  the  Governiiieu 
It  is  fully  set  forth  in  my  letter  to  you  of  the  4th  September  and  in  m 


Chap.  XXX,] 


CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. UNION. 


419 


letter  to  Major-General  Halleck  of  the  27th.  There  is  this  difference 
however,  that  their  sufferings  for  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life  are  con- 
stantly and  rapidly  increasing.  A fortnight  ago  flour  was  $16  a barrel ; 
it  is  now  $25.  We  have  shut  them  out  from  the  sources  of  supplv  both 
North  and  South. 

The  Treasury  Department,  on  the  28th  of  August  last,  prescribed 
|■‘Eegulatlons  concerning  commercial  intercourse  with  insurrectionary 
States  aud  sections.”  The  Secretaries  of  War  and  NTavy  by  separate 
)rders  called  on  the  officers  of  the  Army  and  hiavy  to  respect  and  carry 
)ut  these  regulations.  On  the  other  hand  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
lotwithstanding  this  direction  to  naval  officers,  has  instructed  Admiral 
jce  to  allow  no  traffic  whatever. 

It  is  not  impossible  that  this  conflict  in  the  Secretary's  own  orders 
las  arisen  from  the  construction  given  by  him  to  regulation  3,  which 
orbids  any  ‘‘clearance  or  permit  whatsoever  to  any  port,  place,  or  sec- 
ioD  affected  by  the  existing  blockade  except  for  military  purposes.”  If 
t be  so,  he  is  in  conflict  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and  the  Sec- 
etary  of  W^ar,  who  are  jointly  (the  former  at  the  request  of  the  latter) 
,;ranting  such  permits  for  traffic  with  Norfolk,  though  to  an  extent  too 
muted  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  people. 

I desire,  in  the  first  place,  to  suggest  that  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth 
re  not  blockaded  ports  j that  they  lack  the  fundamental  condition  of 
blockade— hostile  possession.  That  this  is  the  view  taken  bv  the 
reasury  and  War  Departments  I cannot  doubt,  for  they  would  other- 
ise  have  been  restrained  by  regulation  3 from  granting  any  permits 
r clearances.  The  fact  that  they  are  granting  such  permits  and  clear- 
iices  shows  conclusively  that  they  do  not  regard  them  as  blockaded, 
he  laws  of  blockade,  therefore,  have  no  application  to  them.  I have 
isisted  uniformly  that  it  is  a case  of  military  occupation,  and  that 
lose  places  are  governed  by  the  commander  of  the  military  forces 
uder  the  laws  of  war;  that  it  is  his  province  to  allow  so  much  com- 
ercial  intercourse  as  is  necessary  for  the  comfort  of  the  troops  and  of 
le  inhabitants,  subject  to  such  restrictions  as  the  Government  should 
link  proper  to  impose  on  him,  and  that  neutral  nations  can  raise  no 
-lestion  in  regard  to  such  intercourse  under  the  laws  of  blockade, 
ihe  Secretary  of  the  Navy  has  also  instructed  Admiral  Lee  to  allow 
> return  cargo  to  be  cleared  from  Norfolk  in  the  vessels  sent  there 
itii  supplies  tor  the  people.  These  instructions  are  also  in  direct  con- 
ct  with  those  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  On  application  to 
e latter  a few  days  since  he  authorized  the  schooner  Marblehead  to 
5 cleared  from  Norfolk  with  a cargo  of  staves  and  headings,  and  in 
e same  paper  the  right  to  the  military  commander  to  clear  vessels  on 
^ voyage  was  distinctly  recognized  and  conceded.  It  is  re- 

■ ecttully  submitted  that  any  other  rule  would  be  a mockery.  The 
J Habitants  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  have  no  money — nothing,  at  ail 
‘ents,  which  importers  from  the  loyal  States  will  take— and  a denial  of 
e privilege  of  giving  in  exchange  and  sending  away  the  products  of 
eir  own  labor  is  equivalent  to  a denial  of  all  supplies.  I therefore 
spectiulJ^"  ask  the  decisioh  ot  the  Government  on  the  following  points: 
1st.  Is  Norfolk  a blockaded  port,  or  is  it  a place  held  by  military 
‘cupation  and  governed  by  the  laws  of  war? 

. Is  it  not  open  to  the  traffic  jirovided  for  in  the  regulations  of  the 
^eretary  of  the  Treasury  of  the  28th  August? 

. Mlien  supplies  under  the  authority  of  the  proper  departments 
^,3  sent  to  Norfolk  is  not  the  military  commander  at  liberty  to  grant 
-arances  to  the  vessels  carrying  such  supplies  with  a return  cargo  of 


420 


NORTH  CxVROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. ' 


the  products  of  the  labor  of  the  inhabitants  or  other  merchandise  to 
anv  port  in  a loyal  State  ? 

4th.  May  not  the  commander  of  the  military  department  under  the 
laws  of  war  authorize  the  introduction  into  Norfolk  of  such  necessaries 
of  life  as  are  required  to  save  the  inhabitants  from  suffering  by  hunger 
and  cokb? 

When  these  questions  are  decided  I respectfully  request  that  the 
naval  commander  may  receive  such  instructions  as  to  prevent  any  con- 
flict or  misunderstanding  with  the  commander  of  the  military  forces.. 
I request,  further,  as  a matter  of  more  pressing  necessity,  that  such 
instructions  may  be  given  to  him  as  to  obviate  the  existing  conflict 
with  the  Treasury  and  War  Departments. 

In  the  mean  time  I desire  to  apprise  you  that  as  I put  on  the  regula 
tions  of  the  28th  of  August,  which  have  your  sanction,  a constructior: 
entirely  different  from  that  apparently  given  to  them  by  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy,  under  which  he  has  instructed  Admiral  Lee  to  allow  nc 
traffic  with  the  people  of  Norfolk,  1 shall  consider  it  my  duty  if  sup 
plies  come  here  with  your  permit  and  that  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treas 
ury  to  allow  them  to  go  to  Norfolk,  notwithstanding  the  seemingly  con 
flicting  instructions  referred  to  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' ’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.j  October  8,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.  : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  yesterda;' 

of  your  communication  dated  the  Gth  instant. 

I see  no  difficulty  in  executing  my  instructions  from  the  Navy  Depart 
ment  (the  substance  of  which  1 have  communicated  to  you  under  date 
of  September  18  and  23  and  October  4)  in  connection  with  the  prmte. 
regulations  to  which  you  refer.  . 

Permits  given  by  the  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury,  War,  or  Navy  wil; 
be  respected,  but  not  if  given  by  any  other  officer. 

No  vessel  will  be  allowed  to  pass  the  guard  vessel  with  mercbandis 
until  her  permit  and  manifest  have  been  examined  by  me  in  m3  at 
seuce,  by  the  senior  officer — and  found  to  be  duly  authorized.  A yesst 
attempting  to  pass  under  an  unauthorized  permit  will  be  seized  au-l 
the  facts  reported  to  the  Navy  Department.  • 

Vessels  with  army  supplies  will  be  passed  under  a certificate  no 
headquarters  thattliey  contain  only  army  supplies  and  no  merchandise, 
this  certificate  to  be  left  with  the  guard  vessel.  i x .1 

In  either  case  the  papers  justifying  admission  will  be  forwarded  to  tu 

Navy  Department.  , ^ • x.  +1,0 

By  my  communication  to  you  of  October  G you  were  mforraed  ^ 
the  Navy  Department,  after  seeing  a copy  of  your  letter  dated  Uctooc 
1,  and  of  its  inclosed  copy  of  Secretary  Chase’s  letter  of  September  ^ 
to  Mr.  E.  H.  Cutting,  decided  that  the  Marblehead  was  not  authorize, 
to  take  a return  cargo.  The  report  made  to  me  from  the  guard  ve.sse 
whose  commander  has  since  been  detached  from  the  squadron,  J ' 
the  Marblehead  passed  out  in  ballast.  I am  now  surprised  to  learn  ro 
your  letter  of  October  G that  this  vessel  “was  allowed  to  return  iroi. 


I 


COEKESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


421 


HAP.  XXX. 3 

^rfolk  with  a cargo,  under  a permit  and  under  a rule  prescribed  by 
he  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.” 

I know  hot  who  gave  such  a permit.  Neither  it,  nor  a rule  for  it,  can 
»e  found  in  the  above-mentioned  copy  of  Secretary  Chase’s  letter  to  Mr. 
putting.  The  proceeding  was  a manifest  violation  of  the  blockade;  it 
|3  my  duty  to  state  the  facts  to  the  Department. 

‘ I beg  leave  to  suggest  that  the  War  or  Treasury  Department  can  best 
xplain  any  part  of  the  printed  instructions  not  distinct  to  you.  Per- 
aps  embarrassment  arises  from  considering  that  the  port  of  Norfolk 
lie  blockade  of  which  has  never  been  raised  by  proclamation  of  the 
’resident,  is  to  be  regarded  as  on  the  same  footing  as  the  ports  of  Beau- 
)rt  and  New  Orleans. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  genera!,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

. „ . S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiraly  Comdg.  W.  Atlmitic  Blockading  Squadron, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Va.,  October  9,  1862. 

LCtg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : 1 have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
lumcation  of  the  8th  instant,  in  reply  to  mine  of  the  7th,  and  am 
appy  to  know  that  the  instructions  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  de- 
armg  that  ‘‘no  traffic”  should  be  permitted  with  Norfolk,  is  not  con- 
dered  as  interfering  with  traffic  by  permits  given  under  the  regulations 
incermng  coastwise  intercourse,  &c. 

! In  regard  to  the  schooner  Marblehead  the  permit  to  pass  was  given 
Aortolk  in  the  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  of  the  27th  of 
eptember,  written  in  reply  to  one  from  Mr.  Cutting  asking  a clear- 
ice  tor  the  vessel  and  a rhturn  cargo,  as  was  stated  by  him,  although 
le  rtitum  cargo  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Secretary’s  answer.  I have 
‘lit  to  Washington  to  ascertain  whether  it  was  mentioned  in  Mr  Cut- 
ugs  letter  which  the  Secretary  acknowledges. 

The  Marblehead  was  cleared  before  any  notice  of  the  view  taken  by 
le  Secretary  of  the  Navy  was  received.  Why  she  was  reported  to  you 
i cleared  in  ballast  I cannot  imagine. 

I Lave  brought  the  whole  subject  of  traffic  with  Norfolk  before  the 
overnment  and  trust  that  it  will  be  disposed  of  in  some  satisfactory 
ode.  Among  other  questions  I have  specifically  referred  to  is  that  of 
tuin  cargoes.  In  the  mean  time  I shall  act  in  strict  conformitv  to 
e regulations. 

1 have  just  learned  that  a permit  was  granted  yesterday  in  my  ab- 
uce,  at  the  request  of  General  Viele,  to  a schooner  laden  with  coal  and 
inber  tor  Norfolk,  and  that  the  captain  of  the  guard  boat  after  allow- 
S'  her  to  ])ass  sent  to  Norfolk  to  recall  her.  I have  directed  that 
e be  sent  back  as  he  requests.  I have  not  seen  her  papers,  but  be- 
5ve  that  the  permit  was  improperly  granted  by  Captain  Millward. 
le  schooner  came  here  with  a regular  clearance  for  Norfolk,  as  I am 
ormed,  but  the  permit  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  was  wanting, 
mall  see  that  there  is  no  recurrence  of  this  irregularity. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 

^ have,  on  reflection,  thought  best  to  notice  briefly  the  sug- 
stion  in  your  letter  “ that  the  War  or  Treasury  Departments  can  best 


m 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.* 


PTnlfliti  aiiv  Dart  of  the  printed  instructions  not  distinct  to  me.”  I be 
Si  hav^«  I perfectlv  distinct  understanding  of  them  The  questions, . 
I proposed  to  you  were  made  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  how  yon 
unSood  them,  with  a sincere  desire  to  obviate  all  misunderstandm^| 
between  us  in  carrying  them  out,  and  if  we  disagreed  to  ask  the  de^ 

cisioii  of  tbe  proper  authority.  , • ^ 

The  grounds  I have  taken  with  the  Government  are  briefly  these : 
1st.  That  Norfolk  is  not  a blockaded  port ; that  it  lacks  the  fnnda 
mental  condition  of  a blockade — hostile  X30ssessmu.  ^ 

od  That  if  it  were  a blockaded  port  the  traffic  allowed  ^^der  tla 
reomiations  concernino’  coastwise  intercourse  is  m violation  of  the  lawil 
ofwXde  recognized  by  civilized  States,  donation  can  shut  on 
neutrals  from  iutercourse  with  a blockaded  port  and  allow  intercours, 

3d  *Vhat*Norfolk*^not%eing  a hostile  possession,  but  held  as  a mih 
tarv  occupation,  we  are  free  to  allow  so  much  traffic  as  is  necessary  fo 
military  purposes  and  to  prevent  those  whom  we  have  subjected  to  on 
power  from  suffering  by  hunger  or  cold — a duty  dictated  b,Y  tb©  ©o® 
honest  principles  of  humanity,  and  that  it  is  on  those  conditions  onl, 
that  the  traffic  allowed  under  the  regulations  can  be  justified. 

I do  not  state  these  views  with  the  desire  or  , 

encing  your  own,  but  to  advise  you  frankly  of  the  grounds  I have  taker 
T deem  this  frankness  due  to  the  relations  between  us. 

T have  instructed  the  provost-marshal  at  Norfolk  to  issue  no  permit 

for\trels““tu™  cLgoes  or  to  vessels  1®---  “hrereme'nt'i 

mestic  or  other  products  until  the  decision  of  the  Go^einment 

known. 


Minnesota, 
October  10,  1862. 


United  States  Flag-ship 
Off  Newport  News, 

General  John  A.  Uix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. ; 

General  - The  steamer  John  A.  Warner  passed  up  this  mornm 
nn™  fltg-  of  truce  and  in  charge  of  an  army  offfi®--- 
nized  by  the  boarding  officer  from  this  ship.  ^ 
the  officers  in  charge  of  steamers  on  this  duty 
authority  to  me  from  your  headquarters,  as  they  generally 
Very  respectfully,  yours,  ^ ^ 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  BlocUding  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-Ship  co 

Off  Neicport  News,  October  10,  180-. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A.,  ^ ^ 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Ka. . 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  to-night 

your  communication  of  the  9th  instant.  ,mniith( 

The  words  “ no  traffic,”  to  which  you  refer  related  such  un^ 

ized  traffic  as  in  the  case  in  hand-that  of  the 

but  did  not  revoke  my  previous  instructions  to  respect  the 

the  Trl^ry^Var,  and  Navy  Departments  1 

authorized  permit,  viz,  that  given  by  the  War  Department,  at  tli 


iCfiAP.  XXX.  j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


423 


stauce  of  the  Peruvian  minister,  to  the  agents  of  the  Peruvian  Govern- 
ment to  reship  from  Norfolk  the  guano  belonging  to  that  Government, 
which  permit  was  immediately  respected  by  me.  If  Mr.  Cutting  applied 
for,  and  the  Treasury  Department  did  not  give  him,  a permit  to  take 
a return  cargo  in  the  Marblehead,  it  was  a virtual  refusal  of  such  a 
permit  by  that  Department  instead  of  being  a permit  to  take  a return 
cargo  as  construed  and  carried  out  by  General  Viele.  The  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  only  ruled  that  the  Marblehead— the  vessel  only— might 
be  ‘‘cleared”  (have  permission  to  sail),  not  with  a cargo,  and  did  not  1 
respectfully  submit,  authorize  her  being  cleared,  as  she  was,  with  a 
return  cargo,  under  a military  permit  purporting  to  be  based  on  a rule 
of  the  Treasury  Department,  which  cannot  be  construed  from  the  coiiy 
you  sent  me  of  Mr.  Chase’s  letter  to  Mr.  Cutting  of  September  27. 
This  military  permit  for  a return  cargo  was,  I beg  leave  to  remind  you 
m conflict  with  my  instructions  from  the  Navy  Department,  which  I 
had  the  honor  to  communicate  to  you  on  the  23d-24th  of  September 
six  days  previous  to  the  sailing  of  the  Marblehead.  ’ 

It  appears  that  the  schooner  Conrad  Pox,  which  you  say  came  to 
Fortress  Monroe  loaded  with  coal  and  lumber  for  Norfolk,  did  not,  as  you 
were  informed,  come  to  Fortress  Monroe  “ with  a regular  clearance  for 
^ orfolk.  The  captain  of  this  schooner  informed  Captain  Case  to-day  that 
lie  has  no  clearance  or  manifest,  as  there  was  no  custom-house  at  Havre 
lie  Grace  to  issue  them.  Besides  her  enrollment  and  license  for  coast- 
ing trade  she  has  nothing  but  a bill  of  lading,  dated  Havre  de  Grace 
September  27,  1862,  for  85  tons  of  coal  and  5,000  feet  of  cullings,  to 
Ibe  delivered  to  Kimberly  & Bros.,  at  Norfolk,  Va.  On  the  back  of  t his 
bill  of  lading  are  the  following  indorsements : 


Headquarters, 
Norfolk,  Va.,  Octobtr  8,  1862. 

Permission  is  hereby  given  to  Messrs.  Kimberly  & Bros,  to  receive  from  Fortress 
Monroe  85  tons  of  coal,  per  schooner  Conrad  Fox. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Viele ; 


Approved  and  permitted. 


^ . J.  H.  LIEBENAU, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General  and  Provost- Marshal. 


Lumber  is  included  in  the  above  permit  from  Norfolk. 


JAMES  MILLWARD, 

Captain  of  Fort,  <j'c. 

EGBERT  L.  VIELE, 

Brigadier-  Gen  era  1. 


Whilst  the  Conrad  Pox  had  no  special  permit  from  the  Treasury,  War, 
)r  JNavy  Departments  to  trade,  and  not  even  the  usual  custom-house 
. earance,  the  military  facilities  shown  by  these  indorsements  were,  I 
‘egret  to  find,  given  to  her  to  trade  here  in  violation  of  the  instructions 
^ ^ ® Government,  which  I had  duly  and  seasonably  communicated  to 
rou.  Ihe  Conrad  Fox  was  boarded  by  an  officer  'from  the  Victoria 
guard  vessel),  near  Norfolk,  on  the  8th,  and  her  papers  examined  and 
ound  informal.  When  this  officer  returned  and  made  his  report  to  the 
•ommander  of  the  Victoria  the  latter  immediately  dispatched  a boat  to 
mng  tlie  Conrad  Fox  back,  but  she  got  to  the  wharf  at  Norfolk  before 
16  boat  could  reach  her,  when  the  provost-marshal  interfered  and 
laimed  control  of  the  vessel.  He  delivered  her  up  on  the  9th  instant, 
)y  your  order,  and  I am  relieved  by  your  assurance  that  there  shall  be 
irregularity.”  I am  gratified  that  the  provost- 
narslial  at  Norfolk  has  your  instructions  “to  issue  no  permits  to  ves- 
^ return  cargoes  or  to  vessels  desirous  of  exporting  domestic 
r other  products  until  the  decision  of  the  Gov^ernment  is  known.” 


424 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Whilst  wishing  to  avoid  all  discussion  about  the  policy  of  the  block- 
ade here,  in  my  reply  of  the  8th  to  yours  of  the  7th  instant  I endeav- 
ored to  meet  the  scope  of  your  questions  by  stating  what  my  lustruc-., 
tions,  which  I had  some  time  before  communicated  to  you,  required  me 

Allow  me  in  conclusion  to  thank  you  for  the  frankness  with  which 
vou  have  communicated  to  me  your  views,  and  to  say  that  whatever 
mav  be  the  determination  of  the  Government  upon  the  points  you 
have  presented  it  will  be  my  duty  and  effort  at  all  times  to  carry  out 
faithfully  my  instructions  from  the  Department,  and  in  the  manner  the 
most  convenient  to  the  administration  of  your  branch  of  the  public 
service. 

i have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  F.  IdlilLi, 

Actg.  Rear- Admiral^  Comdg.  N,  Atlantic  Blocliading  Squadron. 


Headquarters, 
Washington^  October  10,  1862. 

Dear  Hoffman  : I inclose  a copy  of  a letter  sent  by  flag  of  truce, 
and  copy  of  an  order  issued  with  regard  to  the  shooting  J^^^^^es  or 


pickets,  and  the  paroles  of  two  wounded  prisoners  sent  outside  the  lines. 

id  order  were  in  accordance  with  instructions  from  General 


The  letter  and 
Foster. 


Yours,  truly, 


EDWARD  E.  POTTER. 


[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters, 
Washington^  N.  0.,  October  9,  1862. 

Commanding  Officer  Confederate  Forces  nearest  Washington  : 

Sir:  I send  by.flag  of  truce,  of  which  Captain  Willson,  Third 
York  Cavalry,  is  the  bearer.  Surgeon  Stone  and  two  paroled  prisoners 
By  the  advice  and  suggestion  of  Major-General  Foster,  commanding 
the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  I avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  tc 
inquire  whether  the  inhuman  and  murderous  practice  of  shooting  pickeu 
and  vedettes  is  countenanced  by  the  officers  of  the  Confederate  Army 
Brigadier-General  Martin  in  conversation  with  General  Burnsiae 
and  Captain  Tucker  while  here  a few  days  ago  as  the  bearer  of  a naj. 
of  truce,  both  denounced  this  custom  and  agreed  to  use  their  best  en 
deavors  to  put  an  end  to  it.  Notwithstanding  this  agreement  and  thes 
denunciations  two  of  our  vedettes  were  yesterday  murdered  in  the  mosi, 
cold-blooded  manner. 

I desire  to  know  whether  these  acts  are  committed  by  the  authoni} 
and  with  the  approval  of  officers.  If  such  outrages  be  not  checkea  Ji 
shall  be  compelled  to  resort  to  retaliation  of  the  severest  character. 

1 am,  sir,  your  obedient  ^ POTTER, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 


General  Orders, 


) Headquarters, 

(3^  } Washington,  October  8,  1862. 

Ill  order  to  check  the  iubuinan  and  cowardly  practice  on  the  part  o 
the  enemy  of  shooting  our  vedettes  and  pickets  it  is  hereby  ordered  tu. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


425 


whenever  these  outrages  shall  be  committed  by  persons  secreted  near 
houses  or  on  plantations  the  premises  in  question  shall  be  at  once  laid 
waste  and  destroyed. 

By  order  of  Col.  Edward  E.  Potter,  commanding  post : 

^ J.  W.  ATWILL, 

Acting  Adjutant. 


United  States  Flao-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  Neics^  October  11,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps^  Fortress  Monroe : 

General:  I am  just  informed  by  Lieutenant-Commander  Babcock, 
U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  the  gunboat  Morse  on-  guard  duty  at  Norfolk, 
that  yesterday  he  detained  the  schooner  Chesapeake,  going  into  Norfolk 
for  repairs,  under  a ‘‘permit’^  signed  by  “James  Millward,  Captain  Port 
and  Harbor-Master,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya.,”  and  by  your  command. 

I respectfully  suggest  to  you  that  this  vessel  was  not  going  in  with 
army  supplies,  and,  as  she  is  not  known  to  be  in  distress,  that  it  would 
be  better,  rather  than  have  her  pass  the  blockade,  that  she  should  be 
sent  to  Baltimore  for  any  convenient  repairs  she  may  need.  I will 
direct  Lieutenant-Commander  Babcock  to  return  her  papers  and  send 
her  to  you. 

The  boarding  officers  understood  that,  according  to  the  arrangement 
between  you  and  myself,  the  necessary  certificates  to  pass  vessels  were 
to  come  from  your  headquarters  and  to  be  signed  by  Captain  Blake, 
your  assistant  adjutant-general.  Lieutenant-Commander  Babcock  had 
Qot,  I presume,  heard  of  the  other  officer  or  office  above  mentioned. 

Allow  me  further  to  suggest,  in  connection  with  the  matter  of  repairing 
3utside  vessels  at  Norfolk,  that,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  getting  hands 
there  to  repair  the  gunboat  Barney  I was  obliged  to  send  her  to  her 
station  unfinished  after  a fortnights  detention,  and  this  notwithstand- 
ing that  the  United  States  quartermaster  at  Norfolk,  Captain  Ludlow, 
aas  always  been  very  obliging,  [tendering]  us  the  facilities  for  repairs 
It  the  ship-yards  in  Norfolk,  which  are  all  under  his  control.  As  there 
ire  no  facilities  for  repairing  the  United  States  gunboats  at  the  Gosport 
Navy-Yard,  owing  to  the  destruction  by  the  enemy  of  the  work  shops,  I 
3eg  that  the  facilities  for  repairs  at  the  ship-yards  under  army  control 
It  Norfolk  may  be  reserved  as  far  as  practicable  for  the  use  of  the  Navy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

^ S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Ya.,  October  11,  1862. 

daj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe : 

General  : Lieutenant- Comm  under  Babcock,  of  the  gunboat  Morse 
‘u  duty  ^ Norfolk,  reports  that  the  master  of  the  Pioneer,  mail-boat 
'ciween  Fortress  Monroe  and  Norfolk,  says  that  he  has  been  in  the  habit 
or  some  time,  by  your  permission,  of  carrying  merchandise  in  consider- 
oie  quantities  between  the  two  places,  and,  as  I understand,  for  pur- 
poses ot  traffic.  The  same  officer  reports  to  me  that  he  is  informed  that 


426 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXXI 


agents  from  Baltimore  are  in  the  habit  of  going  to  Norfolk  in  the  mail 
boat  Pioneer,  getting  vegetables,  fruit,  &c.,  which  they  take  to  Fortresii 
Monroe  and  ship  immediately  to  be  sold  in  Baltimore  on  private  specu 
lation.  I beg  that  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  inquire  into  this  matte: 
and  forbid  traffic  on  board  these  mail-boats,  which  are  under  your  con 
trol.  You  are  aware  that  the  mail-boats  have  not  been  required  in  pass 
ing  to  leave  the  usual  certificate  at  the  guard  vessel,  because  it  wa: 
understood  that  they  were  under  good  military  police  and  would  no 
therefore  violate  the  blockade.  If,  however,  they  are  engaged  in  trad(, 
the  usual  official  certificate  will  be  necessary  as  in  case  of  vessels  pass 
ing  the  blockade  with  army  supplies. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia.,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Fa.,  October  11,  1862. 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  Forth  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadrons 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  Inclose  the  copy  of  Mr.  Cutting’s  letter  oi 
which  the  schooner  Marblehead  was  cleared  ‘‘  with  her  cargo”  by  th. 
direction  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  a copy  of  whose  letter  yoi 
have.  *In  the  latter,  a rule  is  prescribed  for  like  cases. 

I have  therefore  to  advise  you  that  1 shall  on  application  clear  wit! 
return  cargoes  from  Norfolk  vessels  which  go  there  with  permits  froii 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  in  conformity  with  the  regulations  con 
cerning  coastwise  intercourse,  &c. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Netcport  Neivs^  Fa.,  October  11,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comma7iding  Seventh  Army  Corps: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  this  aftei 
noon  of  your  communication  of  this  date,  inclosing  a copy  of  Mr.  Ciil 
ting’s  letter  of  September  27,  1862,  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 

There  is  an  inaccuracy  in  Mr.  Cutting’s  letter  which  requires  a promp 
correction  at  my  hands.  Mr.  Cutting  came  on  board  to  inquire  if  hi 
vessel  (not  vessels)  with  lumber  could  pass  the  guard  vessel.  1 ha* 
but  recently  assumed  the  command,  and  not  being  familiar  with  tli 
state  of  aftairs,  inquired  of  Commander  Case,  captain  of  the  tieet,  to 
information  about  the  matter,  and  was  informed  in  reply  that  Admira 
Goldsborough  had  allowed  Mr.  Cutting’s  vessels  to  pass,  and  Con 
mander  Case  said  he  believed  Mr.  Cutting  was  one  of  several  firms  wli 
were  trading  here  under  a permit  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasur^ 
It  was  upon  this  understanding  of  the  case  that  I assented  not  to  n 
terrupt  what  seemed  usual  and  jjroper.  But  it  is  incorrect  in  Mr.  Cu 
ting  to  assert  that  I granted”  him  the  privilege  ” of  trading.  I uevt 
meant  to  do  any  such  thing. 

On  the  18th  of  September  I received  instructions  from  the  Secretai 


Chap,  XXX,] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNIOJ5. 


427 


of  the  Navy,  in  reply  to  the  application  of  the  gas  company,  ‘Hhat  no 
traffic  in  shingles,  cotton,  or  tobacco  could  be  permitted’’  here.  I im- 
mediately sent  Commander  Case  and  Mr.  Saltonstall  on  shore  to  inform 
Oeneral  Viele  of  the  Department’s  answer  to  the  gas  company,  and  di- 
rected them  to  inform  Messrs.  Catlett  & Moore  and  Mr.  Cutting  that 
tradehere  was  not  allowed. 

Commander  Case  learned  from  the  provost-marshal  that  Mr.  Cutting 
had  gone  North  the  evening  before,  and  the  provost-marshal  said  he 
could  not  direct  Commander  Case  where  he  could  find  Messrs.  Catlett 
& Moore,  but  he  would  notify  them  of  this  order  of  the  Department. 

The  Marblehead  sailed  under  a military  permit,  purj)ortiug  to  be 
under  sanction  of  the  Treasury  Department,  on  the  30th  of  September. 

Commander  Case  has  read  and  indorsed  this  statement. 

In  reply  to  your  notice  to  me  that  you  shall,  on  application,  clear  with 
return  cargoes  from  Norfolk  vessels  which  go  there  with  permits  from 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  in  conformity  with  the  regulations  con- 
cerning coastwise  intercourse,”  &c.,  I have  to  inform  you  that  it  will  be 
my  duty,  under  my  instructions,  to  pass  any  vessel  into  Norfolk  with  a 
cargo  of  merchandise  showing  me  a permit  therefor  from  the  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury,  and  that  it  will  also  be  my  duty,  under  instructions,  to 
seize  any  vessel  passing  out  of  Norfolk  with  a cargo  of  merchandise 
under  a permit  from  you. 

In  your  comunication  to  me  of  the  9th  instant  you  say:  “I  have 
brought  the  whole  subject  of  traffic  with  Norfolk  before  the  Government, 
and  trust  it  will  be  disposed  of  in  some  satisfactory  manner;”  and  you 
also  say  in  the  same  communication:  “I  have  instructed  the  provost- 
marshal  at  Norfolk  to  issue  no  more  passes  to  vessels  with  return  car- 
goes or  to  vessels  desirous  of  exporting  domestic  or  other  products  until 
the  decision  of  the  Government  is  known.”  I sincerely  trust,  general, 
that  you  will  adhere  to  this  considerate  course.  You  know  my  instruc- 
tions and  my  duty  to  obey  them. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  290.  j Washington^  October  11,  1862. 

* ^ If'  # # ^ 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Van  Alen,  U.  S.  Yoluuteers,  is  liereby  re- 
lieved from  duty  at  Yorktown,  Ya.,  and  will  report  in  person  without 
delay  to  the  General-in-Chief. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 

A ssistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Ya.,  October  12,  1862. 

^ctg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

North  Atlantic  Blockading  Sguadron  : 

Admiral:  Lieutenant-Commander  Babcock  is  entirely  mistaken  in 
opposing  that  the  Pioneer  has  been  engaged  by  my  permission  in  car- 
I’ymg  merchandise  in  considerable  quantities  between  Norfolk  and  this 
lost  lor  purposes  of  traffic.  The  only  articles  allowed  to  go  in  the  mail- 


428 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  i 


boat  are  sutlers’  goods  for  the  military  forces,  or  goods  in  small  quan- 
tities, having  the  requisite  permits  from  the  Treasury  Department.  1 
have  given  the  strictest  orders  to  the  captain  of  the  port,  Capt.  James 
Millward,  and  am  assured  by  him  that  they  are  rigidly  enforced.  I 
will  thank  you  to  recognize  him  as  authorized  to  give  permits  to  vessels 
and  merchandise  going  to  Norfolk  with  the  requisite  permission  from 
the  Treasury  Department. 

I am  also  assured  by  Captain  Millward  that  no  vegetables  nor  fruit 
are  brought  here  in  the  Pioneer  and  shipped  direct  to  Baltimore  to  be 
sold  on  speculation.  The  only  articles  of  that  description  brought  here 
from  Norfolk  are  for  the  use  of  the  troops  and  the  population  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  fort. 

Captain  Millward  w^as  appointed  captain  of  the  port  by  Major-Gen- 
eral Wool  before  the  capture  of  Norfolk.  His  duty  is  to  board  all  ves- 
sels coming  here  or  departing,  and  to  supervise  generally  all  that  is 
done  in  the  harbor. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  NewSj  Fa.,  October  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe^  Fa. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  a guard  steamer  has 
been  stationed  at  a convenient  distance  from  Fortress  Monroe  for  the 
purpose  of  enforcing  the  blockade. 

I would  respectfully  request  you  to  cause  the  masters  of  all  vessels 
in  the  employ  of  the  army  to  leave  a certificate  on  board  of  her  similar 
to  that  left  on  board  the  guard  steamer  at  Norfolk  by  vessels  so  em- 
ployed. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off'  Newport  Netcs^  Fa.,  October  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Geii.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Fa. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  6th  instant,  making  certain  specific  in- 
inquiries  relative  to  my  interpretation  of  and  proposed  course  of  con- 
duct under  my  blockading  instructions  from  the  Department,  was,  with 
my  reply  thereto  of  the  8th,  submitted  to  the  Navy  Department  lor  it> 

decision.  . ^ , 

The  Department  approves  of  mj’^  letter  of  the  8th  instant  to  3 011  Oi 
m3"  course  in  regard  to  traffic  and  the  ingress  and  egress  of  vessels 
correct  and  in  conformit3^  with  my  instructions  and  duty,  and  instruct!- 
that  until  the  blockade  is  raised  or  modified  it  must  be  strictly  mam 
tained. 


; Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


42y 


The  honorable  Secretary  of  the  Navy  says ; 

That  there  is  distress  in  Norfolk  and  the  whole  insurrectionary  region  I doubt  not. 
The  object  of  the  blockade  is  to  destroy  their  traffic  while  in  rebellion.  The  relief  is 
in  the  hands  of  the  people  who  have  only  to  be  loyal  to  be  relieVed.  The  case  is 
not  one  of  sympathy  but  of  duty. 

The  honorable  Secretary,  under  date  of  October  13,  also  says  : 

The  rule  which  General  Dix  applies  to  Norfolk,  denying  that  it  is  a blockaded  port, 
would  exempt  any  port  and  the  whole  coast,  with  the  exception  of  Wilmington  and 
Charleston,  from  blockade,  for  all  are  held  by  military  occupation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

. ^ . S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.  N . Atlantic  Blockading  Sguadron. 


The  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 


Treasury  Department, 

October  16,  1862. 


Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith,  for  your  information 
and  such  action  as  you  may  think  necessary,  copy  of  a letter  this  day 
received  from  Maj.  E.  W.  Shenk,  of  the  One  hundred  and  thirty-fifth 
Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  relative  to  abuses  of  flag  of  truce 
boats  on  the  James  Eiver. 

With  great  respect, 

S.  P.  CHASE, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


[Inclosure.l 


On  Board  Steamer  Kennebec, 

Annapolis  Bay,  October  15,  1862. 

Ton.  Salmon  P.  Chase, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury : 

Dear  Sir  : I respectfully  call  your  attention  to  certain  facts  which 
mve  come  to  my  notice,  and  which  as  an  officer  of  the  United  States 
jovernment  I feel  my  duty  to  make  known  to  you.  Flags-of-truce 
loats  are  now  and  have  been  to  a great  extent  used,  in  addition  to  their 
awful  mission,  to  pass  contraband  goods  and  other  articles  through 
lie  lines  at  Aikeffis  Landing  on  James  Eiver.  I predicate  my  belief 
ipon  this : First,  a trunk  was  placed  on  board  of  the  John  A.  Warner, 
)urporting  to  pass  upon  the  permission  of  a lady  going  South  and 
)laced  by  accident  on  board  of  said  boat,  then  under  my  command. 
Jpon  examination  I found  no  single  article  of  woman’s  apparel,  but 
cloths,  quinine,  mathematical  instruments,  a large  quantity  of  silk, 
iiread,  needles,  &c.  I retained  and  will  turn  it  over  to  the  proper 
luthorities  at  Washington  on  my  return.  Second:  I was  approached 
It  the  landing  by  a certain  Col.  Blanton  Duncan,  of  Kentucky,  now 
ngrayer  of  the  notes  of  the  Confederate  Treasury,  who  desired  me  to 
nter  into  arrangements  to  fi-ass  goods  suitable  to  his  business  and  other 
uocanons  from  the  boat  through  the  lines,  and  mentioned  in  connec- 
1011  the  assistance  of  a prominent  officer  of  the  rebel  Government. 
Juncan  assured  me  that  he  had  such  arrangements  with  officers  con- 


430  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chai*.  XXX.  f 

nectecl  with  flag-of-truce  boats,  and  mentioned  a firm  in  Wasbingtoii 
where  the  articles  could  be  supplied ; also  giving  me  a list  of  them. 

No  doubt  many  other  violations  could  be  discovered  if  ordinary 
watchfulness  weie  instituted.  I write  the  above  in  order,  if  the  Depart- 
ment desires,  to  take  some  action  to  prevent  the  same.  I have  had 
charge  of  flag-of-truce  boats  during  the  past  two  weeks,  and  return  to 
Aiken’s  Landing  to-morrow  morning,  and  if  any  new  evidence  comes 
to  my  notice  the  same  will  be  promx)tly  made  known  to  you.  I return 
to  Washington  on  the  20th  instant. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ‘ E.  W.  SHENK, 

Major^  One  hundred  and  thirty-fifth  Fa.  Vols.^  Comdg. 


Navy  Department, 

October  IG,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : A dmiral  Lee,  commanding  the  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squad- 
ron, informs  the  Department  that  considerable  quantities  of  merchan- 
dise are  carried  in  the  mail  steamers  which  pass  daily  between  Fortress 
Monroe  and  Baltimore  and  between  Fortress  Monroe  and  Norfolk.  Un- 
less some  measures  are  adopted  to  prevent  it  the  practice  will  lead  to 
difliculty,  for  while  the  blockade  continues  Admiral  Lee  has  no  alterna- 
tive but  to  enforce  it  in  good  faith.  He  suggests  that — 


It  Avould  be  a partial  remedy  if  the  War  Department  would  order  Generals  Wool 
and  Dix  not  to  allow  any  merchandise  or  articles  for  traffic  to  be  shipped  on  these 
mail  steamers  plying  between  Fortress  Monroe  and  Norfolk  and  between  1 ortress  Mon- 
roe and  Baltimore  j it  would  be  an  effectual  remedy  and  a more  natural  state  of  things, 
if  these  steamboats  were  under  navy  control. 


I would  respectfully  recommend  that  the  recommendations  of  Admiral 
Lee  in  regard  to  orders  to  Generals  Wool  and  Dix  be  given  by  the  Mar 


Department. 

Very  respectfully. 


GIDEON  W^ELLES, 


Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


WWr  Department, 
Washington  City,  October  17,  18G2. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Sir:  The  Seeretary  of  War  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  o 
your  communication  of  the  16th  instant  relative  to  the  report  of  Aduiira 
Lee,  commanding  the  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  that  mei 
chandise  is  daily  transported  in  the  mail  steamers  between  Fortres; 
Monroe  and  Baltimore  and  between  Fortress  Monroe  and  Norfolk,  aii< 
suggesting  orders  for  .a  more  stringent  enforcement  of  the  blockade 
In  reply  i am  instructed  to  inform  you  that  copies  of  your  commumca 
tion  have  been  transmiited  to  Major-Generals  Dix  and  Wool  for  thei 
information. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


lAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


431 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  18,  1862 

xtg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclmding  Squadron: 

Sir  : 1 have  the  hoDor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt,  on  my  return  from 
Washington,  of  your  three  communications,  one  of  the  11th  and  the  other 
vo  of  the  15th  instant. 

In  regard  to  permits  for  vessels  with  return  cargoes  from  Norfolk  I 
3 not  see  how  I can  properly  refuse  to  grant  one  if  application  is  made 
► me  under  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  If  you  deem 
your  duty  under  the  instructions  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Bavy  to  seize 
vessel  having  such  a permit  I can  have  no  possible  objection.  It  is  a 
mflict  between  two  Departments  of  the  Government,  for  which  neither 
'us  IS  responsible.  I trust,  however,  that  no  such  case  will  arise  until 
tme  proper  disposition  is  made  of  the  wLole  subject.  But  individuals 
ive  rights  which  I am  bound  to  respect,  and  if  anv  one  brings  himseff 
early  within  the  class  of  cases  disposed  of  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
reasury,  who  has  the  general  regulation  of  commerce,  I cannot  put 
m off  because  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  takes  a view  of  the  question 
blockade  which  I conceive  to  be  at  variance  with  all  the  received  rules 
international  law.  I had  the  honor  to  reply  personally  to  the  argu- 
ents  quoted  from  one  of  his  letters  to  you  in  your  communication  of 
e loth. 

The  instructions  you  have  given  to  the  commander  of  the  gunboat 
atioued  under  the  guns  of  this  fort  are  embarrassing  the  public  service 
veediiigly.  A vessel  laden  with  coal  and  lumber,  purchased  by  the 
dnance  officer  for  public  use,  was  stopped  yesterday  and  detained  the 
liole  day  tor  certificates,  greatly  to  my  annoyance. 

Vessels  cleared  to  this  post,  unless  it  is  regarded  as  a blockaded  port 
ight  not  to  be  detained;  and  I believe  such  an  interference  with  the 
ilitary  administration  of  this  command  to  be  entirely  without  prece- 
nt.  It  certainly  was  so  under  your  two  predecessors,  and  I consider 
altogether  inconsistent  with  the  comity  due  from  one  service  to  the 
her.  II  you  deem  it  your  duty,  under  the  instructions  of  the  Secretary 
the  Bavy,  to  place  a gunboat  under  the  guns  of  this  fort,  the  head- 
larters  ot  a military  department,  and  subject  it  to  all  the  restrictions 
an  enemy^s  port  in  order  to  enforce  the  blockade,  I shall  brino-  the 
itter  belore  the  Government  without  delay.  If  you  do  not  then  I 
spectiully  request  that  the  gunboat  may  be  anchored  above  the  fort 
d that  commercial  intercourse  with  this  post  may  be  left,  as  it  always 
s been  heretofore,  under  the  control  of  the  Treasury  Department  and 
e military  authorities.  All  vessels  coming  here  are'boarded  and  their 
pers  and  cargoes  examined  by  the  officers  of  the  revenue  cutter  and 
ey  are  visited  again  by  the  captain  of  the  port,  to  whom  they  are  re- 
ired  to  report  on  shore  and  who  also  examines  their  papers  To  sub- 
•t  them  to  a third  visitation  appears  to  me  to  be  superfluous  and  a 
euless  vexation.  I state  these  facts  not  as  having  any  bearino-  on  the 
aver  objectmns  I have  made  to  the  system  of  visitation  at  this  post 
T to  show  that  It  IS  called  for  by  no  considerations  of  public  necessity! 
Ihe  sloop  A.  0.  Broderick  was  cleared  from  this  post  for  Baltimore 
)n  1 wheat,  19  hides,  100  pounds  rags,  2,000  pounds  of 

and  100  bushels  of  oysters,  and  has  been  stopped  by  vour  gunboat 
're  Monroe  as  blockaded  I respect  Ihlly  submit  that 

instructions  of  the  Navy  Department  which  you 
ramnnicated  to  me  to  warrant  the  detention  of  this  vessel  The  prop 


432 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[Chap.  XXX 


erty  belongs  to  persons  within  our  lines,  and  as  the  military  commandei 
here  I claim  the  right  to  clear  vessels  to  any  port  in  a loyal  btate,  sub 
iect  to  the  usual  custom-house  inspection.  1 respectfully  ask  it  you  cou 
skier  this  post  as  blockaded,  and  if  not  I will  thank  yon  to  furnish  mi 
with  a copy  of  the  instructions  under  which  the  detention  is  made  thai 
I may  make  a proper  representation  to  the  Government. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ^ jyiX. 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota,  j 
Off  Neicport  News,  Va.,  October  18,  18G2.  | 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A.,  ^ rr  i 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : i 

General  : Lieutenant-Commander  Babcock,  commanding  guard  ve.^ 
sel  below  Norfolk,  reports  that  he  has,  under  his  instructions,  detain ei 
the  schooner  Elizabeth  English,  as,  excepting  her  enrollment  and  license 
she  had  only  a bill  of  lading,  showing  that  she  co^ained  330  tons  o,. 
coal  purporting  to  be  shipped  by  the  United  States  War  Department  a 
Philadelphia  on  the  2d  instant,  and  signed  David  English,  who  or  whos 

office  is  not  known  here.  . -u 

The  master  of  the  army  tug  which  was  towing  the  schooner  up  u 
formed  the  commanding  officer  of  the  guard  vessel  that  he  asked  tb 
assistant  quartermaster  and  provost-marshal  at  Fortress  Monroe  o 
the  usual  certificates  (viz,  that  the  vessel  is  in  the  employ  of  ^he  ar  , 
and  has  only  supplies  for  the  army  on  board),  and  that  they  told  bii ; 
he  did  not  want  any  such  a certificate  and  should  not  have  any.  . 

If  the  Elizabeth  English  is  in  the  employment  of  the  army,  and  ba 
supplies  for  the  army  only  on  board,  I will  thank  you  to  have  the  usm 
and  proper  certificate  to  that  effect  sent  to  Lieutenant-Commander  Ba 
cock  for  me.  If  she  is  not  in  the  employment  of  the  army,  and  b( 
cargo  is  not  exclusively  for  the  use  of  the  army,  you  would  oblige  n: 
by  letting  me  know  it.  I beg  to  observe  that  no  inconvenience  wi 
be  experienced  by  your  department  if  the  usual  and  proper  certifica 
is  always  sent  with  the  vessel  having  army  supplies  on  board. 

The  commanding  officer  of  the  guard  vessel  below  Norfolk  also  i 
ports  to  me  that  he  has  vainly  endeavored  to  obtain  from  some  ot  t 
steam-tugs  passing  to  and  fro  between  Fortress  Monroe  and  o 
isuch  a certificate  as  would  show  that  they  are  in  the  employment  ot 
army  and  are  only  so  employed.  This  was  according  to  the  unde 
standing  between  us,  as  shown  by  my  communication  to  you  o | 
tember  18  and  your  reply  of  iSeptember  19.  I respectfully  request  li. 
you  will  now  favor  me  with  a list  of  the  names  ot  all  the  steam  tu„s 
the  employment  of  the  army  plying  between  Fort  Monroe  andjSt, 
folk,  so  that  when  once  known  to  the  guard  vessel  in  the 
Fiver  there  may  be  no  difficulty  about  their  passing  al  ter  ward 
stopping,  provided  thev  are  not  towing  vessels,  especially  suck  as  ajj 
not  in  the  employment  of  the  army  and  whose  cargoes  are  not  dir 
certified. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LLL,  i 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  Comdg.  JST.  Atlantic  Blocking  Squadron.'^ 


p.  s. — The  cornnianding  officer  of  the  gunboat  Wyandotte,  ok  gii^.' 
Muty  off  Fort  Monroe,  reports  that  he  yesterday  detained  the  sciiooi  • 


'HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


433 


foliii  Francis,  loaded  with  merchandise  and  articles  for  traffic.  Tlie 
rohii  Francis  was  bound  from  Fort  Monroe  to  Yorktown  under  a per- 
nit  signed,  by  your  command,  by  Captain  Millward,  of  the  army.  Her 
nanifest,  written  in  a large  folio  book,  consists  of  miscellaneous  mer- 
ihandise,  owned  by  B.  F.  Yoorhees  (name  not  legibly  written).  This 
d'ternoon  a certificate  was  brought  to  me  signed,  by  your  command,  by 
kiptain  Millward,  saying  that  this  cargo  of  goods  (not  army  supplies)  is 
olely  for  the  use  of  the  Sixth  [Fourth  ?]  Army  Corps,  under  the  command 
>f  Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes,  at  Yorktown.  The  bearer  of  this  certificate 
tates  that  Mr.  Yoorhees,  who  swears  in  the  manifest  that  he  is  the 
wner  of  the  cargo,  is  not  a sutler  in  the  army  but  a general  trader  at 
ffirt  Monroe. 

The  certificate  does  not  state,  as  is  usual,  that  this  vessel  is  in  the 
iiiploy  of  the  army  and  has  only  supplies  for  the  army  on  board.  I 
m not  informed  that  Mr.  Yoorhees  has  a permit  to  trade  from  either 
[le  Treasury,  War,  or  Kavy  Departments.  I decline  under  the  circum- 
tances  to  accept  the  certificate  as  sufficient  to  justify  this  vessel  pass- 
ig  the  blockade  with  her  cargo  of  goods. 

1 have  reported  the  facts  to  the  Kavy  Department. 

Yery  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE. 


Washinuton,  October  18,  1862—10.25  a.  m. 

[ajor-General  Dix : 

It  was  resolved  in  Cabinet  yesterday  that  the  Korfolk  trade  should 
e placed  under  your  personal  direction,  in  the  manner  i^roposed  when 
ou  were  here. 

Clearances  for  which  you  ask  admission  into  the  port  will  be  granted 
V the  Treasury  Department,  and  all  exports  i)ermitted  by  you  will  b(*, 
lowed  by  the  Kavy  to  pass.  Your  own  attention  personally  is  re- 
vested and  your  own  signature  to  permits  required. 

EDWIK  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Philadelphia, 

Ham,pton  Roads,  Va.,  October  20,  1862. 
aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
umcations  of  the  18th  and  19th  instant.  In  regard  to  permits  for 
issels  with  return  cargoes  from  .Norfolk  you  are'aware  that  the  de- 
[51011  ot  the  Navy  Department  is  adverse  to  your  making  any  such 
xara^e.  I do  not  know  of  any  conflicting  decision  of  the  Secretarv 
the  Treasury.  The  North  Atlantic  blockade  extends  from  the  Pian- 
l-taiik  Elver,  on  the  western  shore  of  Yirginia,  to  the  coast  of  South 
irolina,  excepting  the  harbor  of  Beaufort,  the  blockade  of  which  has 
*en  raised  by  proclamation  of  the  President.  Within  these  limits  I am 
'tuned  to  maintain  a strict  blockade  and  to  jirevent  all  traffic,  except 
aor  a permit  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Wnr,  or  Navy. 
} instructions  to  the  gunboat  offi  Fort  Monroe  are  only  to  carry  out 

$8  R R— VOL  xvm 


434 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


,Chap.  XXX.  I 


iriv  orders  from  the  Government,  and  her  station  is  safe  and  con venienti  ^ 
for  that  purpose.  Fort  Monroe  has  never  been  declared  a port  of  entry  ;j 
it  is  situated  within  the  blockaded  region,  and  all  vessels  in  the  employ: 
ment  of  the  army  with  only  army  or  supplies  of  any  kiml  or  imblic 
property  on  board  pass  freely  and  frequently  not  only  to  Fort  Monroe 
but  to  all  other  points  herein  the  occupation  of  the  army,  on  a cer 
tificate  from  your  headquarters ; or,  in  case  of  a vessel  coming  from  a 
Northern  port,  on  a certificate  from  the  United  States  quartermasteij 
there  stating,  in  a very  fsw  words,  that  such  is  the  character  of  tail 
vessel  and  cargo.  It  is  impossible  therefore  that  the  public  serviw- 
should  thereby,  be  embarrassed  exceedingly,  or  at  all ; but  the  contrary 
is  the  case-the  public  service  is  benefited  to  the  extent  tiiat  snpphe,- 
are  thus  kept  out  of  the  insurrectionary  region. 

You  say : “ A vessel  laden  with  coai  and  lumber,  purchased  by  tlu: 
ordnance  officer  for  public  use,  was  stopped  yesterday  and  detained  th( 
whole  dav  creatly  to  my  annoyance.”  You  refer  doubtless  to  the  Con 
ml  rS^ffi  Ld  violated  the  blockade,  got  to  Norfolk  wittiou  i 
permit  from  either  the  Treasury,  War,  or  Navy  Departments,  but  unde? 
In  unauthorized  permit  from  army  officers  (which  I am  expressly  ordered 
not  to  respect),  and  with  a cargo  of  coal  and  lumber  brought  troni  Havr, 
de  Grace  without  any  clearance,  for  Kimberly  & Bros.,  tiadeis  at  Not 
folk.  The  Navy  Department  released  this  vessel  on  the  gioiiiid  tlia 
she  acted  on  supposed  authority,  but  forbade  ber  to  land  or  receiv( 
cargo.  To  prevent  any  further  violation  of  the  blockade  by  lier  sin 
waf  towed  just  outside  the  lower  gunboat  and  released  to  go  w i^ 
she  pleased  outside  the  blockade,  but  the  Conrad  ' 

awav  anchored  immediately,  and  your  ordnance  officer  bought  ht 
cargo.  As  soon  as  the  usual  certificate  was  sent  to  the  guard  vessel 
showing  that  the  cargo  of  this  vessel  had  now  become 
she  was  permitted  to  pass  in  to  unload,  as  I am  informed  J’y 
commanding  the  guard  ves.sel.  If  there  was  any  delay  about  semi  u 
off  the  usual  and  necessary  certificate  to  the  gunboat  it  was  wholly  ui. 
necessary  as  you  have  already  complained  “ that  she  is  stationed  unde 
thrgrsVthffi  fort”-the  necessary  situation  of  the  memof-war,  -m 
own^and  foreign,  at  anclior  here— where  one  of  yonr  many  ^^teamdendui 
might  communicate  with  her  in  fifteen  or  twenty  niinutes.  You 
to  remove  this  gunboat  from  her  anchorage  outside  and  below  the  lor  . t 
an  anchorage  iLide  and  above  the  fort,  that 

go  on.  This  would  be  to  violate  my  orders  to  maintain  WocU  I 
strictly  until  it  is  modified  or  raised  ; to  this  end  the  ‘ 

stationed  where  she  can  conveniently  intercept  and  board  i essih,  < 
when  these  have  merchandise  for  traffic  detain  them  to  be  reP™ 
the  Department.  When  vessels  with  army  supplies  P^ve  f J : 
blockade  and  are  inside  dischai-ging,  I see  ,,  o i 

tion  and  search  by  both  the  military  authorities  and 
cers,  as  gross  irregularities  may  be  delected  and  prevented  bj  such  . 

‘''sffici!  thereeSprof  your  communication  of  the  19th  (although  I Ir? 
prSsi  r^rort^l  4e  case  of  the  John  Francis  to  the  J>cpart.^. 
mforming^ne  that  her  cargo  of  goods  is  sent  at  the  request  of  Gemr 
Koves  to  be  sold  within  the  fortifications  at 
hi.s‘ command  there,  I have  directed  the  ^o  ffit  hu 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectf»Pj  ouns^^ 

Mig.  Rear- Admiral,  Gomdg.  N.  Atlantic  BloclwUng  Sqvadron. 


AP.  XXX.] 


COEEESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


435 


IIdqks.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  October  21,  18G2. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  IIaeleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

General  : 1 have  an  arrangement  with  a man  who  has  the  means 
obtaining  accurate  information  in  regard  to  affairs  in  Eichmond  and 
e districts  lying  upon  the  James  Eiver,  the  Ohickahominy,  and  the 
ackwater.  I have  no  secret-service  fund,  but  I allow  him  to  carry 
me  articles  for  peddling  in  the  districts  referred  to  and  to  bring  back 
3acco.  He  has  crossed  the  lines  without  suspicion  four  times  in  his 
igon,  and  will  leave  here  in  two  or  three  days. 

rhe  forces  of  the  enemy  in  Eichmond  and  the  country  on  this  side 
3 as  follows : 


Hankliii,  ou  the  Blackwater,  iiuder  Geucral  FreDch 4 000 

Zniii,  ou  tlio  Blackwater,  under  General  Pettigrew 5'  qoo 

V\  akefield,  8 miles  from  Ziiiii,  under  General  Anderson o’  ooo 

Petersburg  one  regiment,  about ’unn 

Richmond I'! ! 7 000 

ween  the  James  and  Chickahominy,  under  General  Wise,  including  a'cav-  ’ 

by  regiment  just  arrived  from  Georgia t 7 000 

ween  Richmond  and  White  House  two  regiments,  just  sent  there,  about ! 1 ’ 500 

~27,300 

?roin  other  and  less  reliable  sources  I get  nearly  the  same  result, 
dy  informant  says  there  is  no  intention  of  moving  down  the  Penin- 
a in  force  iintil  the  naval  armanent  is  complete.  The  Eichmond 
d the  new  Merrimac)  has  taken  out  her  boilers,  which  were  found 
• small,  and  otners  are  in  course  of  construction.  He  thinks  she  can- 
be  ready  for  a month. 

shall  be  advised  of  any  intended  general  movement  unless  my  man 
s under  suspicion  and  is  not  allowed  to  go  at  large.  He  has  a pass 
at  Eichmond  to  peddle  in  Henrico  County,  and 
isbur^^^^  crossing  the  lines  and  reaching  me  by  way  of  Will- 

I I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I JOEK  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


1802. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps. 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  22, 

g.  Eear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

tommanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  t^quadron  : 

IK : 1 have  the houor  to  inclose  a dispatch  received  by  telegniph  from 

I mmcated  to  you;  also  whether  it  will  be  considered  by  you  as  suf- 

vessels  from  the  Nansemond  and 
ktown,  with  exports,  under  my  permits? 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


8oe  of  October  18,  p.  433. 


436 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


TIi)ors  I3ept.  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  October  22,  18C2. 

Hoii.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

/Secretary  of  War : 

SiR'  1 received  yesterday  Mr.  Watson’s  letter  ot  tlie  l^tli  instant  ii 
closin'^  a copy  of  a communication  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  of  tli 
IGth  concern  in  the  carrying  of  merchandise  in  the  mail  steamers  pl^ 
iim-  between  this  post  and  Baltimore  in  one  direction  and  Norfolk  m tli 
other.  The  Secretary  says  he  is  informed  by  Admiral  Lee  that  consic 
erable  (luantities  of  "merchandise  are  carried  on  these  steamers,  au 
sue^’-esting  as  a partial  remedy  tliat  Generals  W ool  and  Dix  should  I 
ordered  not  to  allow  any  merchandise  or  articles  for  traffic  to  be  shippe, 
on  tliese  steamers,  and  as  an  effectual  remedy  that  they  should  be  pi 

under  navy  control.  . 

[f  Admiral  Lee  intends  to  intimate  that  merchandise  is  illicitly  caiiu 
on  these  steamers  and  in  violation  of  any  law,  either  of  revenue  f 
blockade,  I take  it  upon  myself  to  say  that  he  is  laboring  under  a vei 
o-reat  error:  that  every  article  which  is  brought  here  from  Baltimore 
examined,  and  it  it  has  not  the  proper  custom-house iiermit  is  sent  bai 
or  detained:  that  every  article  put  on  board  the  mail  steamer  for 
folk  comes  within  One  of  the  two  classes,  of  supplies  for  the  army 
merchandise,  usually  in  very  small  quantities  passed  regulaiTytliroiij 
the  custom-house  at  Baltimore  with  permits  for  Norfolk,  and  if  there, 
any  violation  of  established  regulations  the  fault  is  Avith  the  Treasu 
Department,  and  this  1 will  not  presume.  The  captain  of  the  port  lie; 
keeps  a re<'ister  of  every  packet  and  its  contents  coming  from  bal 
moip'or  going  to  Norfolk,  with  the  name  of  the  , party  receiving  it,  ai 
everything  is  carelully  examined.  Eyery  possible  precaution  is  taki 
to  Droveiit  abuse,  ami',  as  I believe  it  can  be  shown,  with  entire  sncw. 

The  officms  under  my  command,  as  well  as  those  belonging  to  ti 
revenue  (lenartnient  placed  here  by  the  Secretary  of  the  peasury,  n 
as  anxious  as  those  of  the  navy  to  arrest  all  illicit  traffic  and  uitercoin; 
with  the  insurgents,  and  I believe  they  have  performed,  and  will  cc 
tinue  to  perform,  their  duty  with  quite  as  muchtaithiuliiessaudefiicicii'. 
1 see  no  reason  on  this  score  for  rmtting  these  mail  steamers  under  iia, 
control;  and  on  every  other  Ij'ero  are  insuperable  objertion^to^su 


control:  aiio  uii  a-avtij  

arrangement.  They  are  employed  by  the  Quartermaster’s  Departme^ 


Those  which  run  between  this  post  and  Baltimore  under  a contracts  i 
that  Department  are  specially  designed  to  carry  troops  and  supplies 
the  army  in  addition  to  the  mails,  and  I see  no  more  propriety  m 
ting  them  under  nayy  control  than  in  ])lacing  a nayal  transport  uu' 
army  control.  The  Secretary  of  the  Nayy  has  not  in  his  commuim- 
tion  approyed  this  suggestion  of  Admiral  Lee ; but  I deem  it  neyei 
less  my  duty  to  my  command  to  state  to  you  my  objections  to  ff-  , 
In  regard  to  orders  to  General  AVool  and  myself  1 take  it  for  g < 
the  Goyernment  does  not  object  to  the  transportation  by  ^ 
Steamers  of  merchandise  for  this  post  or  Norfolk  under  the 
sanctions  of  the  Treasury  Department.  There  are  «eym^ 
ndditiun  to  the  sutler  who  have  permission  to  tiadc  with  the  g< 
and  with  the  people  in  this  vicinity.  Such  an  ,,ts. 

to  employ  a sailing  vessel  every  time  they  had  a small  quantity  ; 
saries  to  bring  here.  This  morning  some  ice,  flour,  and  other  ait.^^ 
came  down  by  the  mail  steamer,  loiving  Ki,,mpriv  .»o 

tom-iioiiso  formalities,  for  our  sutler,  Mr.  Moody  ; k| 

siqiplies  the  liospital,  and  someother  persons.  ai  tide  is  si  J 

to  the  most  rigid  scrutiny.  If  it  is  intended  to  interlere  with  the  tr. 


fAi-.  i:xx.  j 


CORliE^POi^DEKCE,  ETC. — UNIOJ^. 


437 


)rtati()ii  of  sui)i)lies — a measure  I consider  entirely  uncalled  for  and  iin- 
ise_tl]e  ordm*  should  be  addressed  to  tbe'Baltiinore  cnstom-honse  and 
)t  to  Genei'al  ool.  It  is  unnecessary  to  state,  for  yon  know  the  fact, 
lat  there  is  a very  considerable  population  outside  of  the  fort  under 
e protection  of  the  Government,  and  that  there  are  some  3,000  colored 
;rsons  here  who  require  their  little  comforts.  I allow  a colored  man 
occastonally  and  bring  here  supplies  for  these  peo- 
necessarily  obtained  in  small  quantities  would 
■ cut  oil  if  Admiral  Lees  recommendation  to  allow  no  merchandise  to 
brought  by  the  mail  boat  were  adojited. 

HaWijg  .lisi)ose(l  of  this  matter  I deem  it  my  duty  to  call  the  atten- 
m ot  the  Department  to  what  I consider  an  unwarrantable  interfer- 
ce  with  my  command  by  Admiral  Lee.  This  will  be  best  illustrated 
presenting  the  cases  in  which  he  has  detained  vessels  havino'  sup- 
es  tor  the  army  or  employed  in  services  connected  with  it 
1st.  Mr  J . B.  Braham,  a contractor  for  hides  and  fat  with  the  commis- 
ry  ot  subsistence  at  Suffolk,  sent  a vessel  here  from  ISTnv  York  to  re- 
'.ye  these  articles,  which  had  been  accumulating  for  some  time,  with  20 
3ks  ()f  salt  for  their  preservation.  The  vessel,  the  schooner  Alexander, 
-s  cleared  for  this  port  at  l^ew  York.  The  permit  was  approved  bv  the 
riimssary  of  subsistence,  Major-General  Pec^k,  and  myself,  and  the 
pels  V ere  found  correct  by  the  revenue  ofhcers.  My  apiiroval  was 
these  words,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  papers : 

he  duty  of  the  Government  to  allow  the  purchaser  of  its  i)ropertv  to  take  it  nwuv 
^ ^ that  the  captain  ot  the  port  will  give  a permit  to  the  xilexander  Vo  ffo 

Snfiolk  to  receive  the  hides  (and  with  the 

111),  suhiect  to  the  approval  of  Admiral  Lee.  ^ 

5trictly,  I had  a right  to  send  the  vessel  to  her  destination  to  perform 
service  connected  with  my  department,  but  out  of  courtesy  to  the 
mral,  and  with  a snicere  desire  to  maintain  in  all  things  a friendly 
lerstauding  with  him,  I made  the  permit  subject  to  his  approval.  It 
y rejected;  and  the  contractor  sent  the  vessel  back  to  New  York 
ving  the  articles  he  had  purchased  to  spoil  in  the  hands  of  the  Gov- 
ment.  Ihe  papers  are  annexed,  marked  A.* 

loaded  at  Fort  Monroe  with  51 
1 1(0  P'’""'’®  oP  2,000  pounds  of  iron, 

linlj  fl?  oysters-  goods  were  owned  by  persons  within 

jp  Y®’’®  feared,  under  apermit  from  me,  for  Baltimore, 

Ii  po!  ^ f®  •’®  to  the  custom-house  inspection  usual  in 

.tpfi  « . f ‘’®  ns-Iit  as  the  military  commamler  here,  and 

-rffi  -f , -f®' ®‘  ''''®  ‘0'’00®  "ot  witl.  propriety 

tuice  s!w  ';' u -n  l®t'’®‘‘^'‘f  I’®'®"  ®tO01>e(l  against  my  remon- 

bhe  IS  still  detained,  and  the  oysters  have  been  thrown  over- 

®‘'"®i-'l  ’I'  '''‘"®‘‘  '■®""®'"  '>oen  detained,  and  in 

'ed  1 o‘  t 1 S'reaty-  to  my  aniioyanee,  but  as  they  have  been  re- 
■eu  t (lo  not  deem  it  necessary  to  state  them.  But  I desire  to  call 
attention  ot  the  peiiartme.iit,  to  the  fact  that  a gunboat  has  been 

■rs  the  ifo-i'd  purpose  of  boarding  every  vessel  that 

s the  Koads,  when  the  sei  vic,e  could  b(^  just  as  well  nerformed  be 

osl  of' the  f ®F®f  ®"  t ''  -neceSmy  for  tt, 

! ' ot  the  blockade  ot  tlie  daimss  Biver  and  Naiisemoiid  as  oil 

I dv  hole  and  *^''®  'uvciiiie  oflicers  who  are 

'Lm  e - li  ' P ^ ‘ tlie  naval  forces 

_ Cl  the,  commaiiu  of  Ooiiiiiiodoro  Striiighaiii,  Admiral  Golds- 


Not  found, 


438 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAi'.  XA5!) 


borougli,  and  Admiral  Wilkes  no  such  system  of  visitation  was  iiist 
tilted,  and  there  is  no  reason  wliy  it  should  be  adopted  now.  On  th 
18th  instant  1 called  the  attention  of  Admiral  Lee  to  the  suliject  iii 
letter,  of  Avhieh  the  following  is  an  extract : 


Vessels  cleared  to  this  post  [unless  it  is  regarded  as  a hlockaded  port]  .<^15^1]^  «' 
to  he  detained,  aud  I believe  such  an  interference  with  the  ailmmistiation  of  th 
command  to  be  entirely  without  precedent.  It  certainly  xvas  so  under  your  tiv 

Secessors,  and  I consider  it  altogether  inconsistent  wUh  the  comity  dim 
service  to  the  other.  If  you  deem  it  your  duty,  under  the  instructions  of  the  bccicta. 
of  Ihe  Navy?to  place  aVuiboat  under  the  guns  of  this  fort,  the  headquarters  of 
military  department,  and  sub.iect  it  to  all  the  restrictions  of  an  enemy  s 
to  enforce  the  blockade,  I shallbriug  the  matter  before  the  ! w 

If  you  do  not,  then  I respectfully  request  that  the  gunboat  in  ay  be  anchoied  abo 
the^fort,  and  that  commercial  intercourse  with  this  post  may  be  left,  as  it  always  Ii{ 
been  heretofore,  under  the  control  of  the  Treasury  Department  and  the  military  ai 
thorities.  All  vessels  coming  here  are  boarded  and  their  papers  aiul  caigocs  cx.ii 
ined  by  the  officers  of  the  revenue  cutter,  and  they  are  visited  again  by  the  capta. 
of  the  port,  to  whom  they  are  required  to  report  on  shore  and  who  also 
papers!  To  subiect  them  to  a third  visitation  appears  to  me  to  be  si  pulluoiis  n 
a needless  vexation.  I state  these  facts  not  as  having  any  bearing  on  ^ J 

lections  I have  made  to  the  system  of  visitation  at  this  post,  but  to  shov  that  ffi 
called  for  by  no  considerations  of  public  necessity. 


To  this  remonstrance  I have  received  tbe  following  reply : 


You  wish  me  to  remove  the  gunboat  from  her  anchorage  outside  or  below  the  forti 
au  anchorao-e  inside  and  above  the  fort,  that  commercial  intercourse  may  go  on.  1] 
would  be  to  violate  my  orders  to  maintain  the  blockade  strictly  until  it  is  moclili. 
or  raised;  to  this  end  the  gunboat  must  be  stationed  where 

intercept  and  board  vessels,  and  where  tnese  have  merchandise  foi  tialhc  detain  tli. 
to  bo  reported  to  the  Department. 


In  another  part  of  this  communication  Admiral  Lee  says : 

The  North  Atlantic  blockade  extends  from  the  Piankatank  River,  on  the  weshj 
shore  of  Virginia,  to  the  coast  of  South  Carolina,  excepting 
C.,the  blockadeof  which  has  been  raised  by  proclamation  of  the  I resident, 
these  limits  I am  required  to  maintain  a strict  blockade  and  to  iirevent  all  tr.  ^ 
except  under  a permit  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  War,  or  Navy. 

My  instructions  to  the  gunboat  off  Fort  Monroe  are  only  to  carry  out  my  o _ 
from  the  Government,  and  her  station  is  safe  and  convenient  for  that  P’^yP^®-  ^ 
Monroe  has  never  been  declared  a port  of  entry  ; it  is  situated  within  theblockad 
region. 

From  the  whole  tenor  of  this  reasoning  it  is  manifest  that  the  admil 
deems  it  his  duty  to  enforce  the  blockade  against  this  post. 
within  the  blockaded  region  it  is  a military  station,  occuined  by  u 
Government  forces,  and  lacks  the  essential  condition  ot  a blockadi- 
hostile  possession.  What  I insist  on  is  that  the  commercial  intcrcou . 
witli  it  shall  be  carried  on  under  the  usual  custom-house  regulati<''» 
and  that  the  planting  of  a gunboat  under  the  walls  ot  the  tort  to 
amine  vessels  going  to  it  (for  vessels  going  into  the  Roads  can  be|> 
well  examined  higher  up)  is  altogether  unprecedented,  uncalled  b 
and  nov/  practiced  for  the  first  time  since  the  war  commenced,  altiioi « 
the  naval  forces  on  this  station  have  been  commanded  by  three  ot  »- 
most  distinguished  and  experienced  officers  in  the  naval  service. 

It  is  with  great  regret  that  I feel  constrained  to  trouble  ytffi  ^ 
these  matters.  I have  endeavored  by  friendly  correspondence  with . ■ 
miral  Lee  to  adjust  them ; and  1 might  have  rested  still  longcw  in 
hope  of  success  had  not  the  communication  of  the  Secretary  ot  tlie  x .. 
been  referred  to  me.  The  whole  matter,  however,  concerns  the  ^ r 
department  quite  as  deeply  as  myself,  involving  as  it  does  a quest 
of  authority  and  of  comity  between  the  military  and  naval  services. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' JOHN  A.  I)L\, 

Major- Genera 


HAr.  :^xX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


439 


United  States  ULAet- steamer  Philadelphia 

Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  October  23,  1862 
laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va.  : 

General  : I Jiave  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
lunications  of  the  20th  and  23d  instant,  inclosing  lists  of  the  thirty  4 ve 
teainers  now  m the  employment  of  the  army  in  the  Department  of  Vir- 
inia,  any  of  which  I suppose  are  liable  to  be  discharged  at  any  time  In 
those  which  are  employed  inside  of  Fortress  Monroe  their  cer- 
ficates  once  left  with  the  blockading  vessel  below  Norfolk  are  sufficient- 
ut  m respect  to  those  (except  the  mail-boats)  coming  from  or  going  to 
.altimore  or  to  and  from  the  North,  I have  respectfully  to  recnest  that 
ou  will  have  them  ordered  to  stop  at  the  Wyandotte,  the  outside  guard 
essel  on  b ockade  for  Hampton  Eoads,  &c.,  and  leave  the  usual  certificate 
w"  6ntv  or  ^rom  the  proper  officer  detailed  by  you  for 

quartermaster  at  the  post  whence  they  came, 
atmg  that  the  steamer  m question  is  then  in  the  employment  of  the 
overnment  and  has  only  army  supplies  on  board  or  is  in  ballast  as 
10  case  may  be.  This  will  occasion  but  a few  moments’  delay  and  will 
revent  violations  of  the  blockade.  The  guard  vessel  htm  omitted  all 
tamers  from  her  report  an  irregularity  which  will  be  coryected  imme- 
lebtv  nml  TPt  my  instructions  can  be  carried  out  with 

Tvicp’  wHb  vonr  * incouvenience  to  your  branch  of  the  public 
rvice,  witn  your  co-operatiou.  ^ 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

Aetg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  H.  Atlantic  RlocJcadingSqmkron. 


United  States  Steamer  Philadelphia 
aj.  Gen.  John  a'.  Dix,  October  25,  1862. 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps : 

General  : Enclose  a copy  of  a report  of  the  24th  instant  from  the 
inmandiug  officer  of  the  United  States  gunboat  Wyandotte  stationed 
blockade  duty  off  Fortress  Monroe,  showing  that 

ssel^dffiffieiateH  s.^^re  when  on  quarter-deck  ol'that 

ssci,  ueiiDeiately  filed  at  several  times  by  one  of  your  sentinels  nrul 

rrowly  escaped  being  shot.  Whilst  I oonfiMently  eS  you  wdl  co 
rtia^n  ^^Smtudo  of  this  crime  calls  foraiLmpt  trffirbv  cor  . 
irtial  and  exemplary  ppishment,  I respectfully  request  to  be  iiiformed 

J artmeiff  e ^ acquaint  the 

I h e the  hoA^  connection  wuth  my  report  of  this  grave  affair. 
I ii.u  e the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

Aetg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  ^wdron. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
tg.  llear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee,  October  25, 1862. 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron : 
enm't'tvnn’,  o’lf  ' ® received  your  communication  of  this  morning,  witli 

• officers  tlie  Wyandotte,  stating  that 

olheus  weie  deliberately  fired  ou  by  one  of  the  sentinels  at  this 


440 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


It  is  the  first  intimation  I have  received  from  any  quarter  of  this  i 
extraordinary  occurrence.  I shall  take  immediate  measures  to  bring  i 
the  ofiender  before  a court-martial,  that  he  may  be  punished  in  the  most: 
exemiilarv  manner.  I should  not  have  waited  for  a request  from  you 
to  that  effect  had  I been  aware  of  the  occurrence  before  your  communi- 
cation was  received.  , ^ ^ 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ^ 

Major-General. 


United  {States  Elag-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Hampton  MoadSy  October  25,  18G2. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A.,  ^ ^ t- 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  CorpSy  Fortress  MonroCy  Va. : 

General:  1 received  yesterday  afteruooa  your  comnyuiicatiou  ol 
October  22,  inclosing  a copy  of  a telegram  to  you  from  the  honorablr 
tlie  Secretary  of  War,  dated  the  18th  instant,  iniormmg  you  oi  the  con 
elusion  of  the  Cabinet  to  place  the  Norfolk  trade  under  jwir  persona 
direction  in  the  manner  proposed  by  you  when  you  wye  m W ashingty 
lu  reply  to  your  inquiry  1 beg  leave  most  respeytully  to  say  that  J 
have  not  received  from  the  Navy  Dy^rtment  the  instructions  refeme 
to  by  the  Secretary  of  War  in  his  telegram  of  the  18th,  but  on  the  con 
trary  I have  received  a dispatch  from  the  honorable  the  Syretaij  o 
the  Navy,  dated  October  22  (four  days  later  than  the  date  of  Secrerai ; 
Stanton’s  to  you),  approving  of  the  detention  of  the  schooner  yin 
Francis,  loaded  with  merchandise  for  Yorktown,  with  a permit  fron 

^"^Under  these  circumstances  I deem  it  my  duty  to  teansmit  a cyiy  o 
vour  letter  and  its  inclosure  to  the  honorable  Secretary  ot  the  iSai  J 
and  to  await  the  orders  of  the  Navy  Department  before  attempting  t. 
deviate  from  my  ]>resent  positive  instructions. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yoiirs,^ 

b.  i . LIi/ll(, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiraly  Comdg,  Af.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Sguad't  on. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  25, 18G2. 

Hou.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Admiral  Lee  informs  me  that  he  has  no  notice  from  the  Sewyy'’ ' 
the  Navy  of  the  decision  of  the  CaWnet  as  to  trade  with  ^ 

have  communicated  to  him  your  dispaten  of  . . ,, 

directions  from  the  Navy  Department  as  late  as  the  ....d  " • 

be  in  conflict  with  it.  1 am  giving  permits  to  bring  out  stai  t.s  . ■ 
Other  articles,  and  the  vessels  are  stopped  by 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  District  of  North  Garolixa, 

Baleighy  October  2o,  1M)J. 

Gou.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A.,  v . 

Comdg.  Department  of  Forth  CarolhWy  Acw  ]>erney  A.  0.  • 
General:  Your  letter  of  the  ISth  instant  was  received  a fc\\  <hi\ 
ago.  I send  inclosed  herewith  a list  of  men  belonging  to  Comp.  } 


Mai 


TAP.  XXX.] 


COEREkSPONDENCE,  Etc. UNiON. 


441 


hirty-iirst  Ive^^inieiit  North  Caroliua  Troops^  who  are  within  your  lines, 
hese  men  were  paroled  on  Eoanoke  Island,  and  I respectfully  request 
ou  to  send  them  beyond  your  lines. 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  D.  Pool,  Tenth  Eegiment,  will  send  a list  of  the  men 
Dsent  from  his  command  within  your  lines.  I would  thank  you  to  send 
lem  out  as  promised  in  your  letter  of  the  18th. 

I received  on  the  20th  a letter  written  by  Colonel  Potter,  U.  S.  Army 
)mmanding  at  Washington,  dated  the  9th  instant,  asking  if  the  “prac- 
ce  of  shooting  pickets  and  vedettes  is  countenanced  by  officers  of 
le  Confederate  Army.”  He  stated  in  that  letter  that  ‘‘two  of  our 
idettes  were  yesterday  murdered  in  the  most  cold-blooded  manner.” 
be  practice  of  shooting  pickets  is  not  countenanced  by  officers  of  the 
ontederate  States  Army,  but  when  pickets  are  surprised  by  a superior 
rce  and  surrender  demanded  they  are  liable  to  be  shot  if  they  at- 
mpt  to  escape.  I have  investigated  the  case  reported  by  Colonel 
otter  and  find  that  the  vedettes  referred  to  by  him  were  surprised 
id  ordered  three  times  to  halt  and  surrender  before  they  were  fired 
i.  The  statement  made  by  the  Washington  paper  of  the  ilth  instant 
regard  to  the  affair  acknowledges  that  they  were  halted  once,  which 
lould  have  been  sufficient,  considering  the  force. 

I am  satisfied  that  the  conduct  of  a detachment  of  the  Third  New 
ork  Cavalry  at  Mr.  Woods’,  near  Core  Creek,  was  as  reported  to  you, 
id  I would  be  glad  to  know  the  result  of  your  investigation  of  the 
citter,  and  what  has  been  done  with  the  guilty  parties. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MAETIN, 
Brigadier-  General. 

P.  S.— Your  letter  of  the  22d  instant  is  received.  The  one  sent  to  the 
Dvernor  was  delivered. 


. Suffolk,  Ootoher  26,  1862. 

ajor-General  Dix:  . ’ 

reports  that  Longstreet  has  arrived  at  Petersburg 
w"i  now  occupying  Waveriy  (7  miles  from 

akefield),  Wakefield,  Berlin,  and  Prankliu.  He  also  reports  consid- 

tcs  of^Fauldin^**^  Seaboard  and  Eoanoke  road,  probably  within  15 

•^nsyeen  repaired  and  busy  for  two  days  carry- 
lin  witli  information,  save  as  to  the  numbers,  agrees  in  the 

.1  deserters  and  contrabands  whom  I have  examined, 

'eiitj  thousand  troops  may  be  there,  and  perhaps  more. 

JOHH  ,T.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Hdqes.  Dept,  of  Vieginia,  Seventh  Aemy  Coeps 

^tg.  Bear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee,  OetoUr  21 , 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Sguadron: 

have  the  hmior  to  inclose  a copy  of  a report  from  Colonel 

ai  ’ on  tny  ",  *'‘®  regard  to  the  supposed 

'll.,  on  the  gunboat  lying  oft  the  fort  by  a sentry.  ^ ^ 

Suard,  but  not  posted  as 
e or  e ; V?  IS  1 • ® . battery,  and,  in  violation  of  posi- 

!■  ordtis,  filed  his  musket  three  times  at  some  ducks  a short  distance 


442  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CiiAr.  XXX 

from  the  shore.  I have  examined  the  man  myself,  and  am  satisfie(; 
from  his  statement  that  it  was  an  act  of  mere  carelessness,  and  that  i 
did  not  occur  to  him  that  any  one  on  hoard  of  the  gunboat  would 
in  danger.  Indeed  he  says,  what  1 have  no  doubt  is  true,  that  he  wa 
not  thinking  of  the  gunboat  at  all.  The  occurrence  is  very  much  re 
gretted  by  Colonel  Alford  and  myself,  and,  as  you  will  perceive,  tli 
guilty  party  had  been  imprisoned  for  trial  by  court-martial  before  au;, 
attention  had  been  called  to  the  transaction. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

' Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Hampton  Hoads,  October  27,  1862 — 8 j).  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe.,  Ya. : 

General  : I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  the  dispatch  of  this  date  froi  i 
General  Lockwood  at  Drummondtown,  just  received  through  your  telt 
graphic  office. 

The  Coast  Survey  chart  does  not  show  that  a gunboat  can  approac 
Drummondtown,  which  the  general  map  shows  is  situated  about  hal 
way  between  the  bay  and  sea-coast.  I will  cheerfully  send  a gunboai 
if  it  can  get  where  the  Belvidere  is,  for  moral  effect  and  to  accompan 
such  a detachment  of  troops  as  you  may  deem  it  proper  to  send  t 
the  assistance  of  General  Lockwood,  but  I shall  need  instructions  froi 
Washington,  which  you  or  General  Wool  may  solicit,  to  justify  the  up 
of  naval  force,  the  necessity  of  which  I think  may  be  obviated  by  sue 
military  measures  as  you  have  the  ready  means  of  taking. 

i have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg,  JY.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Navy  Department, 

October  27,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  an  extract  from  a (li: 
])atch,  dated  the  24th  instant,  received  from  Actg.  Pear-Admiral  S.  I 
Lee,  commanding  the  Xorth  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron,  in  wliic: 
lie  ventures  to  express  his  views  in  favor  of  abandoning  Yorktowii  an 
Norfolk. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLILS, 

Secretary  of  the  JYavy. 


[Inclosure.] 

United  States  Flag-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Chesapeake  Bay,  October  24, 1862. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Washington,  B.  C.: 

Sir  : * * * We  occuiiy  this  unimportant  and  untenable  positio 

(Yorktown)  at  considerable  expense.  I am  confirmed  in  my  former  lx 
lief  that  our  best  course  would  be  to  abandon  this  position  after  d» 
stroying  all  the  military  works  at  and  near  Yorktown,  whether  erecte 


:^HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. — UNION. 


443 


by  the  rebels  or  ourselves,  which  could  encourage  a future  occupation 
even  with  field  pieces  by  the  former,  especially  for  the  purpose  of  an- 
noying the  gunboats,  which  are  sufficient  to  keep  the  blockade  and  po- 
lice of  these  waters.  I would  apply  the  same  rule  to  all  the  rebel  works 
near  il^orfolk,  and  would  hold  no  military  occupation  of  any  place  in 
this  vicinity  outside  Fortress  Monroe  except  such  as  might  be  necessary 
to  protect  our  present  occupation  of  the  Gosport  ISTavy-Yard.  This 
w'ould  allow  a large  force,  of  from  20,000  to  30,000  (now  scattered  and 
making,  as  it  were,  a frontier  line,  liable  to  attack  in  detail),  to  be  con- 
centrated for  the  effectual  prosecution  of  a campaign,  and  it  would  leave 
nir  gunboats  free  to  move  about  and  preserve  a strict  blockade  instead 
ff  occupying  positions  rendered  necessary  only  by  the  positions  of  ihe 
iriny. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

S.  P.  LEE, 

uictg.  Rear-Admiral,  Gomdg.  N,  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Washington,  October  28,  18G2-- 7 p.  m. 

dajor-General  Dix: 

The  Secretary  of  State  desires  to  have  a personal  interview  with  you 
•especting  IsTorfolk  trade,  about  which  there  is  difficulty  with  the  I7avy 
Tepartment,  and  that  in  the  mean  time  you  grant  no  more  permits 
‘ither  for  exports  or  imports. 

You  will  please  come  here  at  your  earliest  convenience,  and  suspend 
ill  permits. 

EDWm  M.  STANTOISr, 

Secretary  of  War. 


United  States  Flag-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Hampton  Roads,  Ya.,  October  28,  1862. 
daj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General  : Our  troops  in  the  Sounds  have  at  some  important  points  no 
v^orks,  and  are  protected  there  by  the  vessels.  In  view  of  the  threat- 
med  attack  in  that  quarter  the  light-draught  and  heavy  battery  of  the 
hjiithfield,  which  vessel  has  for  some  time  been  undergoing  very  slow 
^epairs  at  Norfolk,  make  her  services  absolutely  necessary  in  the  Sounds 
||t  this  time.  I have  urgently  to  request  that  you  will  cause  all  the 
[orce  at  Norfolk  which  can  be  efi’ectually  emploj^ed  to  be  assigned  to 
icr,  with  a view  to  her  immediate  completion. 

I will  thank  you  for  an  answer  to  this. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Udqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

, Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  October  29,  1862. 

vetg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commandmg  North  A tlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron : 

Admiral:  I have  not  thooglit  it  profitable  to  continue  the  discus- 
iion  with  you  of  the  blockade  at  this  post,  as  you  assure  me  that  in  all 


444 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


tCiiAP. 


yon  have  done  and  are  doing  you  are  carrying  out  tlie  orders  of  the 
Navy  Departinent.  I shall  therefore  address  what  I have  to  say  to  the 
Secretary  of  War,  that  all  questions  arising  here  may  be  adjusted  at 
Washington. 

I have  endeavored  to  give  you  all  the  aid  in  my  power  in  carrying 
out  your  instructions,  and  shall  continue  to  do  so,  for  I am  as  anxioirs 
as  you  can  possibly  be  to  prevent  illicit  traffic  with  the  States  or  ])arts 
of  States  in  actuai  insurrection  against  the  Government  of  the  United 
States,  and  1 agree  with  you  that  those  instructions  may  be  carried 
out  without  inconvenience  to  the  branch  of  the  public  service  with 
which  I am  connected. 

I respectfully  suggest  that  as  you  have  a complete  list  of  all  the 
steamers  in  the  employ  of  the  army  here  they  should  be  allowed  to 
pass  freely  from  this  post  to  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  Yorktown,  and  New])ort 
News.  They  will  all  be  provided  with  certificates  from  the  chief  quar- 
termaster of  the  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  W.  Thomas.  The 
authentic  list  sent  to  you  by  me  is  a certificate  from  myself  that  the 
steamers  named  in  it  are  actually  in  the  employ  of  the  army. 

It  is  desirable  that  the  certificates  given  by  Colonel  Thomas  should 
be  retained  by  the  captains  of  the  steamers.  If  any  steamer  is  dis- 
charged, Colonel  Thomas’  certificate  will  be  taken  from  the  captain,  and 
I will  notify  you  immediately,  in  order  that  :^ou  may  strike  the  steamer 
from  your  list.  On  the  other  hand,  if  any  new  steamer  is  chartered,  I 
will  give  you  the  like  immediate  notice,  that  you  may  add  it  to  the  list. 

All  steamers  x^assing  the  Wyandotte  and  not  being  on  your  list  will 
be  directed  to  stop  and  exhibit  their  certificate.  I respectfully  suggest 
that  the  steamers  on  your  list,  of  which  the  commander  of  the  Wyan- 
dotte should  be  x^rovided  with  a copy,  ought  not  to  be  required  to  stox). 
The  delay  is  often  inconvenient,  independently  of  all  other  considera- 
tions. I am  going  to  Washington  this  morning  on  the  Metamora,  on  a 
summons  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  it  will  be  neither  convenient 
nor  consistent  with  my  x>osition  as  the  commander  of  the  dex^artinent 
to  be  stox)i^ed  by  the  guard  boat,  when  the  commander  is  aware  that 
the  Metamora  is  in  the  service  of  the  army  and  that  is  the  boat  I use 
when  I leave  the  i^ost  in  x^erformance  of  my  military  duties. 

I am,  very  resx^ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  October  29,  18G2. 

Major-General  DiX: 

Colonel  Dodge,  who  commanded  the  cavalry  that  crossed,  ga\'e  the 
information  that  I rex^orted  from  the  other  side.  It  was  in  every  one’s 
mouth  and  so  confidently  talked  that  he  thought  it  was  only  a question 
of  estimates.  He  says  20,000 ; they  saying  30,000.  Longstreet’s  name 
has  never  been  used  over  there  until  last  week.  Deserters  and  con- 
scripts  rex^orted  to  me  that  Longstreet  was  on  his  way  early  in  the 
week,  but  I did  not  believe  it.  One  says  he  saw  a division  on  its  way 
for  Longstreet.  When  I asked  the  sergeant  if  Longstreet  was  there 
he  said  it  would  not  be  xiroper  to  answer.  He  and  other  x^ersons  s])ohe 
of  French  and  Pettigrew  freely.  This  poiiulation  all  asking  to  go  away 
of  late  is  suspicious.  A heavy  x^icket  was  at  Carrsville  last  night. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


)HAr.  XXX.] 


COEEESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  445 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  October  2d,  18G2.  ' 

jeiieral  Peck,  SuffolJc: 

General  Keyes  reported  a force  of  about  800  cavalry  as  approaching 
Yilliamsbiirg.  They  intended  attacking  this  morning,  but  one  of  their 
)ickets  was  captured  by  ours  last  night,  and  since  then  nothing  has  been 
lone  by  them  except  picking  up  straggling  negroes.  Ko  infantry  are 
iientioned  as  being  with  them. 

D.  T.  YAK  BUKEK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yiroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  October  30,  18613. 

Ion.  Salmon  P.  Chase, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury : 

Sir:  I have  received  this  evening  your  letter  and  the  papers  prepared 
)y  you  concerning  trade  with  Korfolk,  and  I feel  a good  deal  of  embar- 
assment  in  regard  to  the  certificate.  Tliere  are  in  Korft)lk,  Princess 
Vnne,  and  Kansemond  Counties,  which  we  have  taken  possession  of  and 
lit  oif  from  Southern  sources  of  supply,  40,000  inhabitants.  We  must 
eed  them,  and  they  can  only  be  fed  from  the  Korth.  Can  I certify  that 
he  supplies  they  need^food,  fuel,  clothing  (for  they  must  be  warmed 
iid  clothed  as  well  as  fed)— are  “required  for  military  purposes  ! ” Will 
lot  this  extended  traffic  be  complained  of  as  a violation  of  the  law  of 
►lockade  if  we  admit  that  Korfolk  is  blockaded? 

I regret  that  the  Government  has  taken  this  view  or  the  subject,  for 
feel  with  you  the  exceeding  embarrassment  to  which  it  subjects  ns. 

I have  insisted  that  it  was  a case  of  military  occupatton  and  not  of 
tlockade;  that  you  cannot  blockade  your  own  ports  or  a port  you  have 
aken  from  an  enemy  j that  the  act  of  capture  ipso  facto  terminates  the 
•lockade  and  puts  you  in  military  possession  with  a totally  difierent 
ode  of  law  for  yourself  as  well  as  neutrals.  You  may  make  it  as  to 
hem  a closed,  but  it  is  no  longer  a blockaded,  port.  In  most  modern 
reaties,  I believe,  certainly  in  some,  there  is  a chapter  on  military  oc- 
upation,  stating  the  consequences  that  flow  from  it.  I conversed  with 
lajor-General  Halleck  on  the  subject,  in  Washington,  ten  days  ago, 
lid  he  concurred  with  me  fully.  I also  conferred  with  the  President, 
ecretary  of  State,  and  Secretary  of  War,  and  understood  the  latter  to 
ssent  to  my  positions,  and  the  two  former  to  be  at  least  impressed  by 
ly  suggestions.  I was  very  anxious  to  see  you  and  called  both  at  your 
nice  and  your  house,  but  was  disappointed* 

My  reasoning  is  briefly  this : 

1st.  Norfolk  is  not  a blockaded  port,  as  it  lacks  the  fundamental  con- 
ition  of  a blockade — hostile  possession. 

■3d.  if  it  is  a blockaded  port,  the  traffic  allowed  under  the  regulations 
oncerning  “ coastwise  intercourse”  is  in  violation  of  the  laws  of  blockade 
•^cognized  by  all  civilized  States.  A government  cannot  shut  out  neu- 
rals  from  trade  with  a blockaded  port  and  allow  intercourse  with  such 
ort  to  its  own  people. 

3d.  Norfolk  not  being  an  enemy’s  port,  but  held  by  military  occupa- 
011,  Ave  are  free  to  allow  such  traffic  as  is  necessary  to  maintain  the 
ossession  and  to  prevent  those  whom  we  have  subjected  to  our  power 
■om  suflering  by  hunger  and  cold,  a duty  enjoined  by  every  considera- 
011  of  humanity.  It  is  on  these  conditions  only  tliat  the  traffic  pro^ 
osed  to  be  allowed  can  be  justified,  ^ 


446 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


On  tlie  theory  of  military  occupation  the  answer  to  inquiries  from  tlio 
representatives  of  foreign  governments  seems  to  me  very  simple  and  i 
conclusive.  The  Treasury  Department  gives  no  permits  to  trade ; gen-  i 
eral  trade  is  not  restored  5 the  place  is  governed  by  martial  law,  and  iti 
rests  with  the  commander  of  the  forces  to  authorize,  by  special  permits,! 
the  introduction  of  such  supplies  as  are  indispensable  for  the  troops  and: 
the  people  they  hold  in  subjection  and  no  more.  In  the  exercise  of  tliisi 
authority  he  may  in  his  discretion  grant  permits  to  others  than  our  own 
citizens:  it  is  a matter  over  which,  as  the  military  commander,  he  bas; 
the  entire  control,  subject  to  the  interposition  of  the  Government  for  thel 


correction  of  abuse.  ^ i i 

On  tlie  other  hand,  if  it  is  a blockaded  instead  of  being  simply  a closedi 
port,  you  can  only  reach  your  object  by  certifying  that  the  supplies  nec- 
essary to  the  sustenance  of  40,000  people  are  required  for  military  piir- 
l)oses  or  something  equivalent.  If  the  population  were  but  a tithe  ol 
that  for  which  we  are  to  provide,  though  the  principle  would  not  he 
changed,  the  amount  of  necessaries  sent  to  them  might  not  attract  at- 
tention. But  in  this  case  they  can  hardly  fail  to  be  noticed ; and  I do 
not  see  how^ou  are  to  maintain  your  ground  on  the  hypothesis  of  a 
blockade  according  to  the  received  principles  of  international  law. 

I have  made  these  hasty  suggestions  under  a strong  sense  of  the  eni- 
liarrassment  I feel  in  regard  to  the  certificate  I am  required  to  give.  li 
vou  can  resolve  my  doubts  I shall  be  greatly  relieved.  • But  the  solution 
of  the  whole  difficulty  in  regard  to  Norfolk  seems  to  be  so  easy  undei 
one  view  of  the  question  and  so  beset  with  complications  under  the  othei 
that  I cannot  rest  satisfied  without  stating  to  you  the  conclusions  tcj 
which  my  refiectious  have  brought  me.  . i 

I do  not  see  that  any  possible  difficulty  can  arise  within  the  block 
aded  region  under  this  solution  of  the  question  of  trade  with  Norfolk' 
AVhenever  you  are  blockading  the  enemy^s  ports  or  territory  the  law  0 
blockade  controls;  whenever  you  get  actual  possession  and  hold  h\ 
military  occupation  the  commander  of  the  forces  governs  under  the  lawf 

of  war.  ^ - 1 X*  ^ 

If  the  question  is  settled  beyond  the  possibility  of  reconsideration  j 
beg  to  be  immediately  advised,  as  the  people  ot  Norfolk  are  suliering  loi 
want  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  In  any  case  a speedy  determination  if 
for  the  same  reason  exceedingly  desirable.  ^ . x .t* 

If  the  question  is  not  an  open  one,  will  it  not  be  sufficient  lor  me  T( 
certify  that  the  shipment,  &c.,  is  “required  for  the  purposes  of  my  com 
mand  in  this  military  department! 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  Octchcr  30, 1862. 

Major-General  Dix : 

No  longer  any  doubt  of  Longstreet’s  arrival  at  Petersburg  with  on- 
division  last  week.  It  comes  from  all  quarters  and  from  jiarties  w " 
have  no  knowledge  of  each  other.  It  has  just  come  from  two  ot  1 1 
Surry  Court-House  jiickets — deserters.  It  is  only  a question  as  to  1 1 
numbers  and  positions  of  them.  Will  shell  something  at  2 this  mgn 

JOHN  J.  PEClv, 

Major-General, 


flAP.  XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


447 


Headquarters  Department  of  Horth  Carolina, 

October  30,  1802. 

raj.  Geu.  H.  W.  Halle CK, 

General-in-Chief,  U.  8.  Army,  Washinyto7i,  D,  C.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  1 am  about  to  start  on  an 
spedition,  for  the  following  purposes : 

Information  was  sent  me  from  Plymouth  by  the  navy  that  three  regi- 
ents  had  left  from  the  neighborhood  of  Plymouth  to  go  down  into 
Washington  and  Hyde  Counties,  for  the  purposes  of  foraging  and  ob- 
dning  conscripts.  These  counties  form  a bag,  the  mouth  of  which  is 
3tween  Washington  and  Plymouth.  If  I am  not  too  late  (as  the  in- 
rmation  was  forty  hours  in  reaching  me)  I hope  to  engage  and  cap- 
irc  this  force.  Should  I accomplish  that  I shall  push  on  for  Hamilton, 
1 the  Eoanoke  Diver,  and  endeavor  to  take  that  place.  Should  the 
rces  in  the  counties  above  named  have  escaped  I will  push  on  at  once 
r the  same  place.  I am  led  to  make  this  attempt  from  information 
eceived  from  the  Havy)  that  two  iron-clad  gunboats  were  being  con- 
ructed  there,  and  these,  of  course,  it  is  essential  to  destroy. 

I shall  take  the  following  force,  to  rendezvous  at  Washington,  N.  C. : 
elger’s  Ehode  Island  battery,  six  pieces  j four  batteries  of  the  Third 
e\v  York  Artillery,  sixteen  pieces;  about  130  of  the  Third  New  York 
ivalry,  and  about  4,000  infantry,  made  up  of  detachments  from  the 
giiuents  under  my  command,  and  shall  go  in  command  myself. 

I learn,  and  I believe  reliably,  that  Governor  Yance,  of  this  State,  has 
me  to  Eichmond,  for  the  purpose  of  demanding  of  the  Confederate 
3vernment  the  return  to  the  State  of  all  the  troops  from  North  Caro- 
la,  and  that  as  an  earnest  of  his  success  several  regiments  have  been 
leady  ordered  here;  so  with  my  force  this  is  my  only  OT)portunitv  to 
like  a blow.  . . x ^ j 

The  New  York  papers  gave  a very  accurate  statement  of  the  tliree 
giments  from  Massachusetts  arrived  at  this  post,  so  of  course  my 
esent  force  is  well  known  to  the  enemy. 

As  soon  as  I return  I shall  have  the  honor  of  reporting  my  opera- 
ms  and  the  results.  ^ ^ j i 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  POSTED, 

Major-  Geiieral,  Commanding. 


United  States  Flau-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Ea^npton  Boads,  Va.,  October  31,  18G2. 
ij.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comonanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
uucation  of  the  29th  instant. 

[am  gratified  by  your  conclusion  to  adjust  the  question  of  blockade 
til  the  authorities  at  Washington,  and  very  truly  regret  that  you  did 
t find  it  profitable  to  do  so  sooner. 

[ have  always  informed  you  of  the  text  of  my  orders  on  this  subject 
-m  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  to  wliom  I have  regularly  communi- 
«d  our  correspondence. 

Haying  endeayored  faithfully  to  discharge  my  duty,  under  very  clear 
lers  to  maintain  the  blockade  strictly,  I have  the  satisfaction  of'know- 
lv!r7  fully  approved  by  the  Department  in 

iiil  military  permits  to  trade  have  been  given  in  violation 

’--I-  dockade.  In  this  connection  I beg  leave  to  inform  you  that  in 


448 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  B.  E.  YIROINIA. 


fCnAP.  x:j;  ] 
I- 

reply  to  my  dispatch,  inclosing  a copy  of  yours  of  the  lOtli  instant  wi! 
a copy  of  a dispatch  of  the  Secretary  of  War  to  yon  of  the  18tli  instaj 
respecting  trade  at  Norfolk,  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  informs  me  th. 
he  is  expecting  a communication  from  the  Treasury  or  War  Departmei 
specifying  details  of  a i)roposed  arrangement  for  ixuanits,  and  until' 
is  received  that  he  has  no  new  instructions  to  give  in  regard  to  tl 
blockade. 

In  reference  to  the  detention  of  the  William  Penn  the  Navy  Pepa) 
ment,  under  date  of  the  29th  instant,  approves  my  course  and  instriic 
me  as  follows : 

Uutil  tJie  blockade  is  raised  or  broken  or  publicly  modified  it  must  be  enforced, 
good  faith  by  the  navy.  Fort  Monroe  is  not  a ])ort  of  entry,  and  clearance's  are  i , 
to  be  made  from  that  point,  wbicb  is,  like  Norfolk,  subject  to  blockade.  If  the  Sec- 
tary of  War  or  Treasury  have  seized  or  obtained  x)osse8sion  of  staves  or  tobacco/ 
any  other  articles  which  belong  to  the  Government,  and  either  of  them  have  autli- 
ized  such  articles  to  be  exported,  yon  will  recognize  their  authority.  But  perin* 
from  any  officer  for  general  traffic  or  exports  on  private  account  are  unknown  to  1* 
Department  intrusted  with  the  blockade  and  cannot  be  recognized. 

In  re])ly  to  my  communication  of  the  24th  instant  you  suggest,  i 
substance,  that  all  the  steamers  in  the  employ  of  the  army,  as  shown  ? 
the  authentic  list  you  have  sent  me,  should  pass  the  blockade  withti 
stopping  even  at  the  outer  guard  vessel ; that  Colonel  Tliomas,  clif 
quartermaster  here,  will  give  certificates  to  each  steamer,  which  sb 
shall  retain  while  so  employed,  and  when  she  is  discliarged  Coloil 
Thomas’  certificate  will  be  taken  from  the  captain,  and  you  will  iraii- 
diately  notify  me,  that  she  may  be  erased  from  the  list  you  have  sei: 
and  if  any  new  steamer  is  chartered  you  will  give  me  like  immedi;.* 
notice,  that  she  may  be  added  to  the  list ; and  that  all  steamers  not  i 
tlie  official  list  will  be  directed  to  stop  at  the  outer  guard  vessel  al 
show  their  certificates. 

I cheerfully  accept  this  proposition,  and  shall  submit  our  correspoi- 
ence  on  the  subject  and  my  action  in  relation  thereto  for  the  cons'- 
eration  and  decision  of  the  Navy  Department. 

In  respect  to  the  Metarnora  I beg  leave  to  say  that  as  soon  as  you  ■ 
formed  me  she  was  in  your  personal  service  the  gunboat  on  guard  div 
was  firomptly  instructed  on  the  subject.  Had  the  gunboat  on  blockau 
while  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  you  were  on  board  the  Metarnora,  st(- 
ped  her,  I am  sure  you  would,  on  reflection,  not  have  felt  oflendeiDs 
military  men  do  not  take  offense  at  the  proper  challenge  of  a sentii;. 
Yesterday  I was  not  allowed  to  go  on  the  ramparts  of  Fort  Moiirb 
thougli  I was  in  uniform  and  had  made  myself  known,  without  a pent 
from  one  of  your  officers,  and  then  I wms,  and  very  properly,  I belie.*, 
challenged  by  a sentinel  and  stopped  until  I exhibited  my  pass.  I s:v 
in  this  only  military  propriety  and  felt  no  infraction  of  dignity  was  i- 
tended. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Hear -Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcadlng  Squadron 


Headquarters  District  of  North  Carolina, 

Raleigh,  Noveinher  1,  180- 

IMaj.  (xeii.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 
General:  Yfour  letters  of  the  24th  and  28th  ultimo  are  received.  1 
appreciate  the  many  dilliculties  in  the  way  of  finding,  identifying, 


COKRESPOiS^DENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


HAF.  XXX.] 


449 


ollectiug-  individuals  scattered  within  your  lines  and  your  promptness 
1 sending  them  when  found. 

I respectfully  request  that  hereafter  all  communications  by  flag  of 
•uce  will  be  by  laud  as  heretofore,  as  I shall  feel  constrained  to  decline 
3ceiving  flags  of  truce  by  boats  sent  up  the  river. 

I inclose  herewith  a letter  to  the  Hon.  Edward  Stanly  and  two  others, 
hich  X would  thank  you  to  forward. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MAETIN, 
Brigadier- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  November  3,  1862. 

on.  E.  M.  Stanton: 

I have  just  learned  that  Major-General  Wool  has  gone  to  Accomack 
ounty  with  a large  force.  Two  companies  of.  Wilkins’  regiment  of 
'aryland  Home  Guards  refused  to  land  at  Pungoteague  on  Wednes- 
ly  last.  I sent  over  my  gunboat  on  a call  from  General  Lockwood, 
It  before  it  arrived  the  malcontents  had  returned  to  their  duty.  The 
gimeut  was  raised  expressly  to  serve  in  Maryland  j hence  the  discou- 
nt, which  was,  however,  very  brief. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yiroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  November  3,  1862. 

ctg.  Kear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloehading  Squadron  : 

Admirm.:  I believe*  I have  never  urged  on  you  any  matter  a com- 
iance  with  which  would  have  been  a violation  of  your  instructions 
nn  the  Navy  Department.  It  is  only  in  cases  which  I considered 
thin  your  discretfon  that  I have  ventured  to  press  on  you  my  own 
ews.  They  are  now  in  possession  of  the  Government  and,  I have  no 
•ubt,  will  be  satisfactorily  disposed  of. 

The  permits  given  by  me,  which  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  in  his 
tter  to  you  on  the  29th  ultimo  says  ‘‘cannot  be  recognized,”  were  in 
cordance,  in  some  instances,  with  a special  authority  from  the  Secre- 
ry  of  the  Treasury,  and  in  others  with  a general  authority  emanating 
)iii  the  same  Department.  I shall  of  course  give  no  more  until  this 
ntlict  of  ojiiiiion  and  action  is  reconciled. 

Ill  regard  to  the  occurrence  alluded  to  in  your  letter  of  the  31st  ultimo 
thill  the  fort,  it  is  proper  to  state  that  there  is  a permanent  rule, 
opted  long  ago,  that  no  officer  can  go  upon  the  ramparts  without  the 
rmission  of  the  officer  of  the  day,  unless  he  is  accompanied  by  the 
inmaiuling  general  or  one  of  his  staff*.  The  rule  is  applicable  to  all 
leers,  whether  belonging  to  the  garrison  or  not,  or  whether  of  the 
'iiiy  or  Navy.  The  case  would  be  precisely  similar  if  I had  gone  on 
ard  of  one  of  your  vessels  without  announcing  myself. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  harbor  I respectfully  suggest  that  it  is  entirely 
•lerent..  I have  from  the  beginning  objected  to  the  blockade  of  this 
' t by  a gunboat  stationed  under  its  guns  as  entirely  unprecedented, 
necessary,  and  in  disregard  of  the  comity  and  friendly  understanding 
ncli  should  exist  between  your  service  and  mine,  and  which  I am  most 
^i^ioiis  to  preserve., 

29  R R — v(^L  xviil 


450 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX' ‘ 


Knowing'  your  instriictious,  wlieu  I found  the  Metainora  wanted  fo 
another  |)urj)ose,  and  when  [ decided  to  go  to  Washington  in  the  Cit;; 
of  Uudsou,  the  Norfolk  mail-boat,  I sent  on  board  the  Wyandotte  t 
advise  the  commander  that  I should  pass  in  the  last-named  stearaei 
and  that  I was  in  haste  to  obey  a summons  from  the  Secretary  of  Wai 
While  objecting  to  the  arrangement  in  my  communications  with  you, 
have  nevertheless  been  careful  not  to  act  in  contravention  of  itj  and 
now  repeat,  and  ai)peal  to  your  courtesy  in  making  the  request,  tha 
the  Wvandotte  may  be  stationed  above  the  Baltimore  Wharf,  and  tha 
this  fortress,  the  headquarters  of  the  department,  may  be  relieved  froi| 
a system  of  visitation  to  which  it  was  never  before  subjected.  I shout 
not  make  the  request  if  I did  not  feel  a perfect  assurance  that  ever 
public  object  in  view  could  be  as  effectually  accomplished,  and  that 
is  a matter  entirely  in  your  own  discretion. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIN, 

Major- General 


United  States  Flag-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Hampton  Boads,  Va.,  November  4, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  tv\ 

communications  of  yesterday.  ^ 

The  witnesses  on  board  the  W^yandotte,  in  the  case  ot  Private  Dii 
have  been  directed  to  obey  the  summons  of  the  judge-advocate. 

Considering  your  request  for  the  removal  of  the  W^yandotte  as  3'  vi 
tual  proposition  to  raise  the  blockade  of  these  waters  in  violation  of  u. 
instructions  from  the  Navy  Department,  I have  respectfully  to  mfor 
you  that  I have  referred  your  application  to  that  Department  lor  i 
structions. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


Treasury  Department, 

November  6,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Fort  Monroe : 

General:  I have  read  your  letter  of  the  27th  [oOth]  ultimo,  and  t 
subject  has  been  again  considered  by  the  Presicent  and  the  CabiiH 
I am  myself  strongly  inclined  to  ado])t  your  views  in  regard  to  nulita 
occupation,  but  would  not  the  certificate  now  required,  or  one  m su 
stance  the  same,  be  equally  necessary  in  case  that  Norfolk,  Pnnc  • 
Anne,  &c.,  were  regarded  not  as  blockaded  but  as  militarily  occupies 
At  any  rate  for  the  present  it  is  not  decided  to  change  the  existing  leg 
latioii.  The  subject  is  reserved  for  further  consideration,  ihe  ceitv 
cate  and  request  mentioned  in  my  letter  will  still  be  required  as  cone 
tions  for  the  clearances.  I see  no  special  objection,  however,  to 
stitiiting  for  the  words  “military  purposes”  the  words  “for  the  pnrpc 
of  my  militarv  command,”  as  suggested  by  you,  in  conversation,  io| . 
1 i>rder  tlie  former  phrase,  which  1 regard  as  eipiivalent  m nieanu- 


AP.  XXX.]  COEEESPONDENCE^  ETC. UNION.  451 

prefer  it  simply  because  those  words  have  hitherto  been  used  in  the 
rtificates  from  the  War  Department. 

With  the  very  highest  respect  and  esteem,  I remain,  dear  general, 
aiy,  yours, 

S.  P.  CHASE. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yiroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  November  7,  1862. 
)n.  Salmon  P.  Chase,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury: 

Your  letter  of  the  6th  is  just  received.  The  Secretary  of  War  has  di- 
3ted  me  to  give  no  permits  at  present  to  take  anything  to  or  from  JSTor- 
k.  Those  I gave  previously  under  your  instructions  have  been  dis- 
uored  by  Admiral  Lee,  under  instructions  from  the  Secretary  of  the 
ivy.  The  Government  owes  it  to  me,  to  itselt;  and  to  the  people  of 
)rfolk,  who  are  starving  with  hunger  and  cold,  to  do  something.  I 
i willing  to  give  any  certificate  which  will  insure  these  people  food, 
il,  and  clothing.  The  loyal  portion  of  the  people  of  Norfolk  and  the 
wernment  employes  not  in  the  army  are  all  sufiering.  Even  the 
leers,  who  do  not  draw  rations,  are  paying  enormous  prices  for  all  the 
cessaries  of  life. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  B,  G.,  November  8,  1862. 

m.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy: 

Sir:  Will  you  have  the  goodness  to  inform  me  whether  instructions 
v^e  been  given  to  Admiral  Lee  to  pass  staves  and  other  products  from 
ffolk  and  Norfolk,  on  the  permit  of  Major-General  Dix,  to  go  North 
the  purchase  of  supplies? 

Che  accompanying  telegram  from  General  Dix  is  the  occasion  for  the 
luiry. 

Yours,  truly, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War, 

[Inclosnre.] 

Fort  Monroe,  November  8, 1862. 

n.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Vm  I authorized  to  permit  the  people  of  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  to  send 
rth  staves  and  other  products  to  pay  for  supplies,  and  has  the  Sec- 
ary of  the  Navy  instructed  Admiral  Lee  to  pass  them  ? 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virghnia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

. ^ Fort  Monroe.  Ya..  November  8, 1862. 

J.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  ’ 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 
tEneral  : When  in  Washington  last  week  I was  told  by  Major-Gen- 
i Halleck  that  re-enforcements  had  been  sent  to  you  and  that  you 
Jht  perhaps  move  on  Goldsborough  or  some  point  farther  north. 


452 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  x: 


possibly  Weldou,  and  cut  the  railroad  connection  between  Eicbmon 
and  the  Southeastern  Atlantic  States.  To  reach  Weldon  you  wou] 
have  a lonj?  inarch,  unless  you  ascend  the  Tar  or  Koanoke  Eivers  undt 
the  cover  of  gunboats;  but  I suppose  in  either  case  troops  might  1 
drawn  from  Petersburg  or  its  vicinity  to  oppose  you.  I think  it  wou! 
be  in  mv  power  to  defeat  such  a purpose  by  making  a strong  demo 
stration  of  an  attack  on  some  point  between  W^eldon  and  Peteisbui 
The  enemy  has  a considerable  force,  which  I can  at  least  hold  in  clie(  - 
and  neutralize  on  the  Blackwater,  near  which  it  is  embodied.  If  yu 
have  any  movement  in  contemplation  it  will  afford  me  great  pleasuj 
to  co-operate  with  you,  and  it  may  be  in  my  power  to  do  so  more  effed 
ually  than  I have  above  suggested. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ ’ JOH^f  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Xavy  Department, 

November  9,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir:  In  reply  to  your  inquiry  of  the  8th  instant  I have  the  lioiion 
inform  you  that  this  Department  has  issued  no  instructions  to  Acti: 
Bear- Admiral  Lee  to  allow  exports  from  Suffolk  or  Norfolk  or  a' 
other  place  within  the  limits  of  the  blockade  confided  to  him. 

He  is  not  authorized  to  recognize  permits  of  any  one  but  the  Secj- 
tary  of  the  Treasury  and  Secretary  of  War.  I am  not  aware  that  t? 
blockade  enforced  by  the  Xorth  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  has  j 
any  respect  been  modified  except  by  the  President’s  proclamation  opo 
ing  the  port  of  Beaufort. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  «erva^t^^^  BELLES, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy 


Washington,  November  12, 1802 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 

By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War  I send  the  following  ordei^'l 
the  President  : 

Executive  Mansion, 
Washington,  Novemh&r  12,  IBti 

Ordered,  first,  that  clearances  issued  by  the  Treasury  Department  for  vesselsr 
merchandise  bound  for  the  port  of  Norfolk,  for  the  military  uecessi  les  of  the  dep  .- 
ment,  certified  by  the  military  commandant  at  Fort  Monroe  sbal  be  allo^ved  to  »“i  r 
said  port:  second,  that  vessels  and  domestic  produce  Irom  Norfolk,  permitted  by  » 
military  commandant  at  Fort  Monroe  for  the  military  purposes  ot  his  command, 
ou  his  permit  be  allowed  to  pass  from  said  port  to  its  destination  to  any  port 
blockaded  by  the  United  States.  ^ LINCOLN 


JOHN  TUCKEE, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  Wat 


War  Department, 
Washington  City.,  November  13,  180. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding.,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : In  view  of  the  numerous  applications  made  to  this 
partment  for  permits  to  trade  with  Norfolk,  Portsmouth,  and 


lAP. 


cokrespondenoe,  etc, — tTNio>r.  453 

]d  the  large  aggregate  amount  of  goods  embraced  in  the  schedules 
Most  if  not  quite  enough  to  supply  Eichmond  as  well  as  Norfolk  and 
s neighborhood),  the  Secretary  of  War  deems  it  proper  to  suggest  that 
acting  upon  applications  for  licenses  to  ship  goods  to  those  places 
tre  should  be  taken  to  scale  them  down  so  as  to  limit  the  supplies  im- 
irted  to  the  actual  necessities  of  the  inhabitants.  Unless  this  be  done 
e places  named  will  again  beconie  depots  of  supplies  for  the  rebels  at 
ichmond.  An  estimate  of  the  population  of  Norfolk,  Portsmouth,  and 
ifiblk,  counting  four  children  or  negroes  as  the  equivalent  of  one 
lult  citizen,  will  enable  you  readily  to  determine  approximately,  by 
e application  of  the  army  ration  and  clothing  tables,  the  quantities  of 
tides  required  by  the  inhabitants  to  supply  their  necessities. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War, 


United  States  Steamer  Hetzel, 

Off  New  Berne^  N.  (7.,  November  13, 1862. 
ij.  Gen.  J,  G.  Poster,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

[tENEral  : I respectfully  beg  leave  to  offer  for  your  consideration 
3 following  copy  of  a dispatch,  dated  November  4 instant,  and  re- 
ved  this  day  from  Acting  Bear- Admiral  Lee,  viz : 


have  official  information  that  the  rebel  gunboat  No.  290  is  on  the  coast.  She  may 
^e  consorts.  Notify  the  vessels  under  my  command  in  the  Sounds  of  this  and 
give  the  intelligence  to  General  Foster. 


have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ H.  K.  DAVENPOET, 

Commander  and  Senior  Officer  in  Sounds  of  North  Carolina. 


jor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 


Suffolk,  November  14, 1862. 


am  surprised  that  General  Foster  did  not  advise  you  of  his  opera- 
is,  as  we  could  at  that  time  have  threatened  about  the  Blackwater. 
i movement  will  cause  some  concentration  of  troops,  which  mav  ner- 
)s  extend  to  the  Blackwater  region. 

^ Georgia  deserter,  who  left  the  company  near  Surry  Court-House 
' says  Longstreet’s  troops  are  coming  to  Suffolk.  His  lieu- 
ant  said  that  he  saw  15,000  of  them,  and  that  they  were  barefooted 
i very  destitute  of  clothing. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


. ^ , Suffolk,  Va.,  November  14, 1862. 

lor-General  Dix:  ^ 

approval  will  have  4,000  infantry,  1,000  cavalry,  and  bat- 
^ ot  artillery  4 miles  above  Franklin  before  dawn  of  Ihiesday.  Pro- 
e to  cross  cavalry  and  about  1,500  infantry,  with  one  rifled*  cannon 
two  mountain  howitzers,  under  Spear  and  I’oster.  Wish  to  clear 
e neck  to  Nottoway  if  possible,  and  reach  Jerusalem  with  cavalry. 


454 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


This  will  have  much  effect  on  pending  operations  about  Weldon  and; 
Petersburg.  Can  you  not  give  me  JourdanVs  regiment  Shall  ^ 
Wessells  in  command.  If  weather  should  be  unfavorable  will  delay  i 
Getting  boats  ready  for  a bridge.  ^ 

Major- General. 


Edqes.  Dept,  op  Vieginia,  Seventh  Aemy  Ooeps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Va.,  November  15,  18bJ. 

P.  H.  Watson,  Esq., 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War : 

I have  iust  received  your  communication  of  the  ISth  instant. 

Please  say  to  the  Secretary  of  War  that  his  wishes  have  been  in  ever: 

'llia^an'estimate  made  two  weeks  ago  of  the  principal  article 
needed  for  the  population  within  our  lines  at  Norfolk  and  \icinity. 
am  reducing  it  to  greater  precision  by  an  actual  enumeration  of  the  ir 
habitants,  considerably  diminished  in  number  by  the  war  since  the  las 

have  opened  a set  of  books  in  which  are  to  be  entered,  under  thei 
proper  heads,  each  article  and  the  quantity  ol  each  article  1*1 

niits  are  granted  and  also  the  quantities  actually  received,  so  that  th 
footings  of  each  day  will  exhibit  the  aggregate  ot  both. 

No  effort  will  be  spared  to  prevent  abuse. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ^ 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  November  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 

Geneeal:  a letter  was  addressed  to  you  by  *1''®  "5^ 

date  of  the  13th  instant,  in  relation  to  l>erui^ite  to  trade  ^dh  Norfo  . 
Portsmouth  and  Suffolk.  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  intor 
you  that  as  the  action  of  which  you  will  be  duly  advised ‘S. 
there  will, be  no  necessity  for  compliance  on  your  part  with  the  sugg 
tions  (iontaiued  in  the  communication  above  referred  to. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ WATSON 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Fort  Monroe,  November  15, 1862. 

Major-General  Peck: 

I approve  of  your  plan.  If  you  cross  only  1,500  cavalry  they  must  ^ 
free  from  all  incumbrances,  so  as  to  move  rapidly,  and  -i  j ]• 

the  residue  of  your  force  ready  to  move  to  their  ‘ a; 

superior  numbers.  Try  to  make  the  otticers  and  men  feel  that  they 
equal  to  double  their  numbers,  as  I believe  ^ 

Major-General 


HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


455 


Fort  Monroe,  November  15, 1862. 

[ajor-General  Peck,  Suffolk: 

I approve  entirely  of  your  movements  on  the  Blackwater.  These  lit- 
e successes  encourage  our  men  and  habituate  them  to  the  fire  of  the 
oemy.  The  weather  is  fine.  Keep  a portion  of  your  troops  in  motion, 
ut  let  them  be  careful  and  not  be  surprised.  The  immense  number  of 
[•oss-roads  require  the  utmost  vigilance.  Finish  the  railroad  bridge  as 
)on  as  possible. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


November  16,  1862. 

[aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

A few  days  since  I telegraphed  that  LongstreeUs  troops  had  passed 
etersbiirg,  some  15,000.  A deserter  from  Surry  Court-House  learned 
lis  from  one  of  his  officers,  who  had  been  to  the  city.  A special  dis- 
atch  from  Washington  to  Philadelphia  Inquirer  on  the  14th  confirms 
le  report  by  news  from  Culpeper.  Foster’s  operations  do  not  appear  to 
ave  been  entirely  successful.  They  can  concentrate  so  rapidly  the 
lances  are  in  their  favor. 

JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquaeters  Department  of  Yirginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  November  17,  1862. 

Is  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States : 

Sir  : I feel  a strong  sympathy  in  behalf  of  the  people  of  the  Eastern 
bore  of  V irginia— Accomack  and  Northampton  Counties.  When  I sent 
I armed  force  against  them,  giving  them  assurances  of  protection  and 
remising  them  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  rights  of  loyal  citizens,  they 
id  down  their  arms.  They  have  at  no  time  since  been  in  rebellion 
?^st  the  United  States  j on  the  contrary,  they  have  united  themselves 
> Western  Virginia  j they  have  had  two  elections,  and  they  have  sent 
rong  Union  men  to  the  Legislature  and  Congress.  In  all  things  they 
ive  fulfilled  the  conditions  on  which  I pledged  to  them  equality  iii 
ghts  and  privileges  with  the  people  of  the  loyal  States.  When ’you 
sued  your  proclamation  in  July  last,  designating  the  States  and  parts 
States  that  were  to  be  deemed  loyal  and  omitting  these  two  counties, 
thought  to  write  to  you  begging  that  they  should  be  added  to  the 
amber  thus  designated.  I write  now  to  make  the  request  in  order 
lat  they  may  be  relieved  from  the  penalties  of  disloyalty,  and  that  the 
imt  of  disaffection  may  not  rest  upon  a community  in  which  no  such 
leling  exists  excepting  in  individual  cases  which  may  unfortunately 
3tound  evpywhere.  They  are  entitled  to  exemption  by  their  loyal 
>u  uct  during  the  last  year,  and  the  efiect  of  such  a declaration  from 
^u  at  tins  time  could  not  fail  to  have  a beneficial  efiect  in  other  quar- 
I'rs.  But  it  is  chiefly  as  an  act  of  justice  to  them  that  I urge  it,  and  I 
.D  sure  you  will  appreciate  the  earnestness  with  which  I ])ress  it  when 
pu  consider  the  relation  in  which  I stand  to  them. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOIIX  A.  DIX, 

! Major-General. 


456 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  f3.  E.  VIRGINIA.  IChap.  XXS.| 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  V«.,  November  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  Oeneral-in-Chief : 

General  : I return  herewith  the  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treas 
urv  of  the  16th  ultimo,  with  a copy  of  a letter  from  Maj.  R.  W.  bhen  <. 
One  hundred  and  thirty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  of  the  loth 
which  I received  yesterday.*  Major  Shenk  charges  that  the  “ flag-ol 
truce  boats  are  now  and  have  heretofore  been  to  great  extent  used,  u 
addition  to  their  lawful  mission,  to  pass  contraband  goods  and  othei 
articles  through  the  lines  at  Aiken’s  Landing  on  James  River.  Ht 
states  two  grounds  for  his  charge : First,  that  a trunk  containing  cloths 
&c.,  was  placed  by  accident  on  board  of  the  boat  under  his  command 
and,  second,  that  he  was  approached  by  a certain  Col.  Blanton  Duncan 
of  Kentucky,  to  enter  into  an  arrangement  to  pass  goods,  &;c.  Un  tliesi 
ffrouuds  he  brings  a general  accusation  against  the  officers  in  charge  o 
flag-of- truce  boats,  accusing  not  only  them  but  the  authorities  here  \\utl 
want  of  ordinary  watchfulness.”  Why  did  he  not  report  these  fact!, 
to  me  on  his  return  from  Aikeffis  Landing  that  I might  institute  prope 
inquiries  to  detect  and  punish  the  frauds  and  the  neglect  which  la 
charges  upon  officers  here  ? Why  send  his  charges  to  the  Secretary  o 
the  Treasury,  who  could  at  best  only  refer  them  tome  for  examination  an( 
report.  Maior  Shenk  was  not  placed  in  charge  of  a flag-of-truce  boa 
by  my  order.  He  came  here  from  Washington.  It  is  probable  that  tlr 
trunk  to  which  he  refers  was  put  on  board  his  boat  there,  and  that  n- 
one  was  in  fault  but  himself;  but  he  was  placed  under  my  control,  anj 
it  was  his  duty  to  have  reported  to  me  on  his  return  from  Aiken  s Land 
ino-  the  more  so  as  he  was  detained  here  by  me  and  sent  several  time 
up^’the  James  Eiver.  He  not  only  neglected  his  duty  but  brought 
totally  unfounded  accusation,  as  I believe,  against  others. 

1 venture  to  say  that  flags  of  truce  have  never  been  used  with  a mor 
careful  regard  to  their  sacred  character  than  at  this  post.  1 hav 
always  selected  the  most  discreet  and  vigilant  officers  and  placed  thei 
under  the  most  rigid  instructions.  So  careful  have  I been  not  to  vioM 
them  that  I refused  permission  to  one  of  the  principal  officers  at  tin 
post  to  send  some  mourning  garments  to  a little  girl,  his  niece,  m Kiel 
mond,  that  she  might  notice  in  the  customary  mode  the  death  of  a nea 
relative.  Passengers  have  only  been  allowed  to  take  their  wearing  a] 
parel,  except  in  a single  instance,  in  which  a French  lady  ot 
age  had  permission  to  take  some  claret  for  her  own  use.  Confederat 
prisoners  have  not  been  permitted  to  take  anything  with  them  but  the 
ordinary  baggage,  and  articles  in  their  possession  not  coining  witln 
this  restriction  have  been  uniformly  taken  from  them.  The  only  n 
stance  in  which  I have  allowed  anything  to  be  sent  to  Aiken  s Laia 
ing  was  for  Mr.  Aiken  himself.  He  had  been  very  land  to  oui  su 
officers  and  men,  and  I allowed  him  to  purchase  in  Baltimore  four  boxi 
of  tin  to  repair  his  roof,  1,000  cigars,  and  a dozen  pocket  handkerchuh 
all  for  his  own  use.  I have  been  thus  particular  because  IVIajor  o ic  i 
who  appears  to  have  had  more  zeal  than  discretion  or  just  conceptu 
of  his  own  duty,  has  been  guilty  of  a breach  of  trust  in  failing- to  repo 
to  me  the  facts  stated  in  his  letter,  and  has  done  a great  inpistice  to  ti 
officers  in  charge  of  flag-of-truce  boats  by  bringing  accusations  again 
them  implying  either  fraud  or  gross  negligence. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  secant, 

^ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General 


See  p.  429. 


;ttAP.  :txx.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  EtC. UNlOlT. 


467 


Headquarters  Department  of  I^^'orth  Carolina, 

vTo.-  TT  w TT  Netv  Berne^  November  IS  im2, 

Vlaj.  Gen.  H.  N,  Halleck,  ’ 

General-in-Chief  TI,  8.  Army^  Washington^  D.  C.: 

General  : Referring  to  my  report  of  recent  recounaissance,  I have 
he  honor  to  make  the  following  statements : 

The  enemy  have  much  increased  their  force  and  their  activity  in  this 
^tate.  We  have  engaged  at  different  times  in  one  way  and  another 
|even  old  regiments,  viz,  the  Eighth,  Tenth,  Seventeenth,  Twenty-sixth, 
Chirty-first  Fi  ty-first,  and  Fifty-ninth  5 and  I am  informed  by  what  I 
ionsider  reliable  authority  that  Governor  Vance  has  had  a difficulty  or 
Davis  as  regards  conscripts,  the  consequence  of 
vhich  IS  that  the  Governor  is  raising  or  has  raised  two  brigades  of  con- 
Tn assisting  distance  of  Goldsborough.  Their  artillery  force 
think  to  be  inferior  to  mine  as  yet.  There  were  at  Tarboroiigh  sixteen 
>ieces,  and  I found  threatening  this  town  on  my  return  ten  other  ])ieces. 
nese,  with  the  supiiorting  force,  retired  on  my  return.  And  in  the 
ame  connection  I would  state  that  I heard  near  Tarboroiigh  of  the 
ppointment  of  General  Longstreet  to  the  command  of  this  department 
has  since  been  confirmed,  both  here  and  in  the  Riclimond 
t Tart)orough^^^^^^^^’  Governor  Vance  in  person  was  with  the  forces 

li  remark  that  the  above  simple  statements  prove 

' rnfin^i  nP  in  opening  paragraph,  and,  in  addition,  show  tlie  de- 
Amination  of  the  enemy  to  withstand  my  advances  in  their  rich  coun- 
counties,  and  also,  if  possible,  to  diminish  my  hold  on 
jat  section.  On  the  other  hand  the  weakening  influences  of  the  past 
lalarious  season  has  so  weakened  the  strength  of  my  old  regiments 
imiMMi  service  I have  scarcely  available  one-half  their 

inal  strength  at  the  moment.  The  new  regiments  (nine-months’ 

'rtvfiftirnnH^u^  Forty-third,  Forty-fourth, 

rty-fifth,  and  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts,  are  good  troops  but  are 

I sliould  wish  some  drill 

efore  trusting  them  in  a fight. 

Admiral  Lee  has  been  here,  and  with  him  I have  had  a full  and  free 
Ik,  and  am  happy  to  say  that  he  fully  coincides  with  me  in  my  views 
and  as  to  force  required. 

statements  I would  most  respectfully 
possible  I should  be  allowed  at  once  10,000  old  troops  in 
ordered  here,  and  would  express  inv 
™v  0“*^  '^'slies  that  those  old  troops  should  be  the  men  of  the,  Ninth 
, “A  „ “P?’  whom  I have  been  associated,  and  of  which  corps  I 
as  the  senior  officer  under  General  Burnside. 

I endeavor  to  perform  mv 
.'Id  Government,  viz,  the  cutting  of  the  rail- 

orkfJt  Npw  rf  and  the  taking  of  Wilmington  and  the 

orks  at  New.  Inlet  and  the  mouth  of  the  Cape  Bear  River. 

r addition  to  the  officer  recommended 

- lent  rl*  brigadier-general,  that  three  regular  brigadier-generals 
i(i  if  urn, o f choice  I would  suggest  General  Gillmore, 

no  \T  available  now  appointed,  call  your  attention  to  (Japtains 

'ilolud^iw^  tiorps,  and  Lieutenant- 

ilo  to  ino'^'^  i ^aPt.  B.  W.  I'lagler,  Ordnance  Corps,  as  most  iiccept- 
iiU  Hi  Ivi’.,..  *'  ‘r®,^  c"gi.i"-'er  officer,  of  which  1 liave  none, 

^ ■ .dii.iiice  officer.  I have  received  from  General  i)ix  a letter  as 


458 


NOBTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  H 


to  liis  co-operation  with  me  in  any  attempt  to  cut  the  railroad  coinnm- 
nications,  and  would  say  that  such  co-operation  would  he  most  desirable, 
as  proved  at  Tarborough,  where  the  re-enforcements  came  even  from 
Petersburg.  I can  act  and  he  assist  if  the  line  be  cut  south  of  Weldon, 
and  he  act  and  I assist  if  at  Weldon,  which  point  he  can  reach  more 
easily  than  I. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

' . J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-General^  Commanding, 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  November  18, 1862. 
Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

In  consequence  of  our  several  repeated  attacks  upon  Franklin,  Zuui, 
&c.,  the  rebel  authorities  have  been  led  to  the  belief  that  my  force  is 
large  and  that  I have  designs  upon  their  communications.  My  belief 
is  that  they  are  bringing  back  all  the  forces  taken  away. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  November  18, 1862. 


General  Dix : 

You  will  see  that  the  Richmond  papers  of  October  29,  and  since,  are 
calling  attention  to  movements  on  Weldon  from  Suffolk. 

They  also  give  it  out  that  they  are  driven  out  of  Franklin  after  a 
severe  fight.  See  Petersburg  Express  27th,  in  Philadelpliia  Inqiiirei 


of  17th. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


• Washington,  T>.  C.,  November  18, 1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

Please  give  me  your  best  opinion  as  to  the  number  of  the  enemy  nov, 
at  Richmond  and  also  at  Petersburg. 

A.  LINCOLN. 


Fort  Monroe,  November  18, 1862 — 2 p.  m. 
His  Excellency  the  President  : 

My  only  reliable  information  in  regard  to  the  enemy’s  forces  in  Rich 
mond  and  vicinity  of  Petersburg  comes  from  a man  who  has  not  beei 
here  for  four  weeks.  It  was  then  11,000  on  and  near  the  Black  water 
north  of  Franklin  or  Carrsville;  at  Petersburg,  700;  at  Richmond,  7,000 
between  the  James  and  Chickahominy,  7,000 ; and  near  White  Hoiijse 
1,500;  total,  27,200.  This  is  my  latest  information,  ^le  forces  at  (In 
ferent  points  frequently  vary,  and  I jdace  little  reliance  on  report! 
brought  to  me  by  deserters,  stragglers,  and  negroes. 

I sent  4,000  men  to  the  Blackwater  yesterday,  intending  to  cross 
While  writing  this  dispatch  information  is  sent  to  me  by  Major-Genera 
Peck,  from  Suffolk,  that  the  expedition  found  the  enemy  re-enforced  n 


Chap.XXX.1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


459 


artillery  and  infantry  at  Franklin  (Oarrsville  on  the  maps)  and  the  fords 
blocked.  A sharp  skirmish  was  going  on  across  the  river,  which  is  very 
narrow  higher  up.  The  enemy  is  on  this  side  of  the  Blackwater,  and 
our  pickets  are  engaged  almost  every  night.  The  moment  I can  get 
any  reliable  information  as  to  the  force  in  Richmond  and  Petersburg  I 
will  forward  it.  I have  reason  to  believe  that  the  force  specified  in  the 
district  embraced  in  the  enumeration  at  the  beginning  of  this  dispatch 
is  reduced  rather  than  increased.  In  twelve  hours  it  can  be  concentrated 
either  at  Richmond  or  Petersburg. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  November  18,  1862. 

General  H.  W.  Haeleck, 

General-in-  Chief : ^ 


I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  Major-General  Peck 
it  Suffolk,  viz : ’ 

A communication  has  just  been  received  by  the  surgeon  of  the  One  hundred  and 
hirty-second  New  York,  from  headquarters  Banks’  expedition,  medical  director,  order- 
ng  immediately  certain  reports  about  officers,  ambulances,  &c.  It  came  direct.  I 
ior  explanation  and  for  instructions.  We  need  more  troops  here,  and  can  hardly 
ittord  to  lose  this  regiment.  ^ 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  G eneral. 


Independently  of  the  impropriety  of  asking  information  from  my  sub- 
>rdinates,  except  through  me,  I must  request  that  this  regiment  may 
lot  be  taken  from  me.  Indeed,  General  Casey  has  only  sent  me  three 
•t  the  lour  regiments  he  was  ordered  to  send.  I have  sent  4,000  men  to 
he  Blackwater  to-day,  with  a view  to  cross.  Our  vessels  have  been 
ired  on  almost  every  night  for  a week.  At  Gloucester  yesterday  we 
ost  6 men  in  killed  and  wounded  and  3 taken  prisoners.  We  captured 
and  did  about  the  same  damage  to  the  enemy. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


, . Washington,  November  19, 1862. 

laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix:  , 

No  orders  have  been  given  to  my  knowledge  for  any  part  of  your  com- 
land  to  report  to  Major-General  Banks. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Taj  or- General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 


November  19, 1862. 


Wessells  remained  all  night  at  Beaver  Dam  Church,  a short  distance 
om  Iranklin,  and  moved  at  dawn. 

The  rebels  were  telegraphing  over  the  country  with  various  colored 
ghts  until  long  after  midnight. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 


460 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  H.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Ohap.  XXX. 


Suffolk,  November  19,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix:  i 

The  cars  were  running  from  Petersburg  to  Zuni  all  last  night,  and  it 
is  presumed  with  additions  of  force.  This  information  has  just  come  in, 
and  I doubt  not  accounts  for  the  signals.  Probably  intending  to  strike 
here  in  the  absence  of  one-half  of  my  force,  or  strike  Wessells  in  the 
flank.  Colonel  Dodge  is  going  out  toward  Zuni  to  watch  any  move- 
ments. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 

• I 


Suffolk,  November  19, 1862.  | 

Major-General  Dix:  i 

A courier  is  just  in  from  the  commander  of  Winfleld,  N.  C.,  and 
of  tlie  gunboat  there;  states  200  rebel  infantry  crossed  Chowan  and  are 
threatening  the  region.  Lieutenant  Etheridge  is  near  the  gunboat  with  i 
his  party  and  has  destroyed  their  boats.  They  attacked  the  camp  last  ! 
night. 

Wessells  is  in  with  his  force. 

JOHN  J.  PECK,  I 
Major-General.  ! 


Suffolk,  November  19, 1862.  1 

Major-General  Dix: 

The  Weldon  road  is  now  in  complete  order  to  the  Nottoway,  miles  \ 
from  Franklin.  I have  positive  information  that  they  are  building  the  I 
bridge  across  that  river.  * 

JOHN  J.  PECK,  i 

Major-General.  I 


Maj. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yirginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  November  19, 1862. 

Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  six  telegraphic  dispatches  from 
Major-i  General  Peck.* 

]'  wrote  to  General  Foster  soon  after  I saw  you  in  Washington,  offer- 
ing to  co-operate  witli  him,  and  promising  at  least  a demonstration  on 
tlie  Llackwater  which  might  produce  a diversion  in  his  favor.  I liave 
liad  no  answer  from  him  and  have  acted  on  the  presumption  that  my| 
letter  never  reached  him,  although  in  sending  expeditions  to  the  Black--  j 
water  I have  been  influenced  also  by  the  desire  to  accustom  my  troopsj: 
to  marching,  bivouacking,  &c.,  and  to  the  Are  of  the  enemy.  1 

1 inclose  a map  of  the  district  between  Suffolk  and  the  Blackwater,!  i 
on  which  the  roads  are  carefully  drawn. t . I 

Will  you  please  let  the  President  see  the  accomppying  telepaphic  ; 
dis])atches,  which  may  throw  a little  light  on  my  dispatch  to  him  yes-' 
terday? 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JO  UK  A.  DIX, 

* Major-General. 


Probalily  those  of  Ibth  and  19tli,  pp.  458-400. 


tNot  found. 


I 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


461 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

November  22,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton: 


Sir  : I have  received  your  order  appointing  Dr.  Le  Grand  Eussell 
^‘special  commissioner  to  take  charge  of  the  colored  refugees  from  the 
enemy  at  Fortress  Monroe  and  its  vicinity,”  and  shall  do  all  in  my  power 
to  aid  him  in  the  proper  discharge  of  his  duties. 

The  peculiar  phraseology  of  the  order  suggests  the  propriety  of  stat- 
ing that  all  the  negroes  here  are  not  refugees  from,  the  enemy."  On  the 
contrary,  there  are  a number  who  are  fugitives  from  the  service  of 
Union  men,  who  have  been  persecuted  by  the  secessionists  for  their 
lidelity  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  and  a few  who  belong 
to  pmsons  residing  in  districts  which  have  never  been  in  possession  of 
the  insurgents.  Some  Union  families  in  this  neighborhood  have  lost 
all  their  negroes,  whom  I have,  in  obedience  to  the  act  of  Congress, 
refused  to  giVe  up.  It  will  be  troublesome  to  separate  one  class  liouj 
the  other,  and  assuming  that  the  order  was  not  intended  to  make  any 
distinction,  1 shall,  unless  otherwise  directed,  put  Dr.  Eussell  in  eliarge 
of  both. 

I avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  of  stating  'that  under  vour  au- 
thority I opened  negotiations  with  the  Governors  of  the  States  of 
Maine,  Massachusetts,  and  Ehode  Island,  with  a view  to  provide  a tem- 
porary asylum  for  the  contrabands  here  until  the  Government  could 
make  some  permanent  provision  for  them.  The  proposition  was  re- 
ceived with  such  marked  disfavor  by  Governor  Andrew,  of  Massachu- 
setts, that  I decided,  notwithstanding  a very  kind  and  prompt  response 
from  Governor  Sprague,  of  Ehode  Island,  to  retain  them  here  and  make 
suitable  iirovision  for  them  for  the  winter.  Accordingly  I withdrew 
the  sick  from  the  hospital  at  E^ewport  Eews  and  sent  over  a thousand 
of  the  colored  fugitives  there.  But  the  very  day  they  were  removed 
from  their  encampment,  where  they  were  dying  rapidly,  I was  advised 
that  the  Irish  Legion,  under  General  Corcoran,  would  arrive  on  the 
following  day.  Their  tents  had  been  so  injured  in  New  York  by  a 
storm  on  the  eve  of  their  departure  that  they  were  obliged  to  be  put 
under  cover,  and,  having  no  place  for  them  but  Newport  News,  I was 
compelled  to  remove  the  colored  people  again.  They  were  sent  to  Cra- 
iiey  Island,  and  the  quartermaster  is,  -under  my  instructions,  erecting 
barracks  for  them.  They  will  all  be  covered  in  the  course  of  the  coming 
week. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- 'General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  November  23,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

A reconnaissance  was  made  from  Williamsburg  yesterday  toward  the 
Chickahominy.  Killed  2 and  captured  6 of  the  enemy  and  took  11 
aorses.  No  loss  on  our  side. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


462  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  IChap.XXX. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya,,  November  24,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

Sir  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  20th  instant* 
in  regard  to  the  counties  of  Accomack  and  Northampton,  or  what  is 
usually  called  the  Eastern  Shore  of  Virginia,  and  am  gratified  to  learn 
from  you  that  there  is  no  objection  to  a recognition  of  their  loyal  condi- 
tion. The  reasons  which  make  them  so  anxious  on  the  subject  are  two : 

1st.  An  unwillingness  to  be  classed  with  the  insurrectionary  districts, 
considering  it  a stain  upon  their  character  and  unjust  to  them,  as  they 
have  given  repeated  evidences  of  their  loyalty ; and 

2d.  A desire  to  be  exempt,  as  they  claim  they  are  entitled  to  be,  from 
the  penalty  of  50  per  cent,  in  addition  to  the  taxes  to  be  raised  to  sup 
port  the  Government,  &c.  This  penalty  is  imposed  by  the  concluding! 
clause  of  section  1 of  the  act  of  June  7,  1862,  chapter  98^  of  the  laws  ol 
1862.  This  is  a “ practical  difficulty  ” from  which  they  ask  to  be  relieved 
They  are  perfectly  willing  to  pay  their  share  of  the  taxes  like  otliei 
loyal  districts. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  November  24, 1862. 
Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Naglee,  a 
Yorktown ; 

My  salt  expedition  to  Matthews  County  has  hep  a perfect  success.  Destroye) 
seventy- three  large  cast-iron  boiling  vessels  of  nine  establishments  and  oyer  od 
thousand  bushels  of  salt.  We  are  indebted  to  Capt.  Foxhall  Parker,  commanding  th 
naval  branch  of  the  expedition,  for  very  effective  service. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  November  24, 1862. 
Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief: 

I send  you  by  this  evening’s  boat,  via  Baltimore,  Mr.  Bernard,  wh 
is  just  from  General  G.  W.  Smith’s  office  in  Bichmond.  He  has  ver 
valuable  information.  He  is  from  Utica.  He  confirms  my  stateiueii 
of  21st  October  as  to  the  number  of  troops  in  the  district,  including  tli 
Blackwater,  Petersburg,  Eichmond,  and  south  toward  the  Chicki 
hominv,  about  27,000,  though  the  distribution  is  not  the  same. 

’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Maior- General. 


United  States  Steamer  Shawsheen, 

Off  Winfield,  N C.,  November  24,  1862. 

Lieut.  0.  W.  Flusser,  Commanding,  Albemarle  Sornid: 

Sir:  As  there  are  many  reports  in  circulation  which  appear  to  be  i 
liable,  some  of  them  at  least,  I deem  it  my  duty  to  inform  you  of  thei 
Part  of  Small’s  men  are  still  on  this  side  lurking  about ; Hiu^eoi 


Not  found, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


463 


is  reported  to  be  in  Gates  County  and  a portion  of  the  Kanse- 
moiid  Cavalry  there,  as  two  companies  of  paroled  Koanoke  prisoners  that 
have  been  exchanged,  now  organized,  and  before  crossing  the  lines  intend 
to  co-operate  with  the  forces  that  have  crossed  the  river  and  make  an 
attack  on  this  place  and  also  to  clean  the  counties  of  all  the  produce 
that  they  can  get  hold  of  and  convey  it  across  the  river.  The  principal 
part  of  the  citizens  are  very  much  enraged  at  those  people  coming  across 
here  committing  such  acts  as  they  have  since  coming  over. 

Lougstreet’s  force  of  45,000  men  is  reported  at  Weldon.  It  is  to  be' 
lamented  that  we  have  not  taken  that  important  place  before  this. 

I saw  and  read  a letter  written  in  Raleigh  by  one  of  the  convention 
men,  wherein  he  says  if  Weldon  falls  into  our  possession  that  Virginia 
will  have  to  come  into  the  Union  and  North  Carolina  with  her.  He 
says  their  only  hope  is  in  the  Conservative  Democratic  party  North,  but 
adds  that  there  is  little  hope  from  them,  as  they  are  anxious  for  prose- 
cuting the  war,  and  it  is  so  long  before  they  come  into  power  that  death 
and  starvation  stare  the  Confederate  Army  in  the  face.  He  says  their 
^oops  are  in  a deplorable  condition,  neither  shoes,  clothing,  nor  tents 
Be  says  he  converses  with  the  best  men  in  the  Confederacy  from  the 
President  down.  He  says  they  called  a convention  of  the  State  Council, 
vvhich  consists  of  seven  members,  and  only  three  of  them  met;  they 
^aited  three  days  and  no  other  members  met.  He  adds  that  this  is  the 
irst  time  since  the  world  was  made  that  such  a convention  was  called 
md  not  responded  to. ' 

To-day  I was  down  across  the  river  and  met  one  of  four  men  who  can 
^ontrol  the  Legislature,  and  he  says  remove  the  bayonets  from  North 
.arolina  and  there  would  be  a Noah's  deluge  for  the  State  to  come  into 
he  Union.  I will  not  mention  his  name,  but  you  can  depend  upon  this. 

ihere  is  a move  on  the  tapis  now  of  vital  importance  to  the  State 
rhich  would  develop  itself  on  the  fall  of  Weldon,  for  which  they  are  all 
uxious  to  see.  This  man's  assertion  is  substantiated  by  other  good 
-uthority  and  may  be  depended  upon.  If  you  think  this  worth  noticing 
nope  you  will  make  it  known  to  the  proper  authorities,  and  if  there 
5 going  to  be  anything  done  in  this  direction  it  should  be  done  imme- 
lately,  as  much  dependence  is  placed  on  the  support  received  from 
liese  counties,  and  a small  force  would  defeat  their  movements  in  this 
uarter.  I hope,  as  many  others  do,  that  something  will  be  done:  most 
11  are  willing  to  take  the  oath.  ‘ 

I went  down  the  river  yesterday  (Sunday)  and  captured  eleven  boxes 
t tobacco,  which  are  very  valuable.  To-day  we  captured  a flue  mule 
ud  cart  that  was  in  waiting  to  convey  some  goods,  no  doubt,  into  the 
3uiitry.  Have  destroyed  all  the  boats  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  • 
ley  seem  perfectly  willing  to  destroy  them.  The  difference  in  feeling 
iward  our  cause  now  and  what  it  was  two  months  ago  is  very  apparent. 

1 was  down  to  the  mouth  of  Chowan  to-day.  I have  one  more  trip  to 
lake  down  that  way  to-morrow  or  next  day. 

I have  twelve  tons  of  coal  yet  on  hand. 

One  of  Small's  men  was  killed  in  the  attack  the  first  night  by  a shell 
I he  pickets  were  fired  on  the  next  night  after  the  Lockwood  left,  but 
e did  not  fire  any  from  the  boat,  but  embarked  all  but  a guard.  Our 
ien  are  all  in  pretty  good  health. 

I will  send  this  by  a small  boat  furnished  by  Lieutenant  Etheridge, 
lends  anything  more  of  importance.  Remember  me  to  all 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  J.  WOODWARD, 

I Acting  Volunteer  Lieutenant,  Conunanding. 


464 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XXX. 


Suffolk,  November  25,  1862. 

GeJieral  Dix: 

1 have  a deserter  from  one  of  Wise’s  regiments  at  Drewry’s  BUih.  Hcj 
says  Wise’s  brigade  has  orders  to  come  over  to  tlie  Petersburg  road  ii 
case  of  our  advance.  This  man  was  carried  to  Ivor  and  esca])(*d  again 
A six-gun  battery  and  one  regiment  of  infantry  came  there  from  P(ders 
burg  last  week.  They  told  him  that  15,000  were  at  Weldon,  and  tliai 

we  had  25,000  here.  . ... 

■ I hope  for  a dash  soon.  The  river  is  high  and  a bridge  is  necessary 

am  making  one.  ^ 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs. 


Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  November  26,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  M.  Corcoran, 

Commanding,  Newport  News  : 

General  : A complaint  has  been  made  to  me  that  the  colored  peopl 
who  are  to  go  to  Craney  Island  have  been  forced  to  remain  all  nigh 
on  the  wharf  without  shelter  and  without  food  j that  one  has  died,  am 
that  others  are  suffering  with  disease,  and  that  your  men  have  turne< 
them  out  of  their  houses,  which  they  have  built  themselves,  and  hay 
robbed  some  of  them  of  their  money  and  personal  effects.  You  wf 
inquire  promptly  into  these  complaints  and  redress  the  wrongs  vdiic 
have  been  committed,  if  they  are  truly  represented  to  me.  You  wi| 
also  see  that  the  means  are-  provided  for  burying  the  dead,  and  tlia 
these  people  are  furnished  with  food  by  the  commissary  until  they  ca 
be  sent  from  Newport  News.  A boat  will  be  sent  as  soon  as  possibl 
These  peojile  are  in  our  care  and  we  are  bound  by  every  principle  i 
humauity  to  treat  them  with  kindness  and  protect  them  from  exposui 
and  injury  in  their  persons  and  jiroperty. 

Eespectfully,  yours,  ^ 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  November  26,  1862. 

■ Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

Have  organized  an  attack  upon  Ivor  with  at  least  5,000.  The  ui()\ 
Avould  have  been  this  day  save  rain  and  mud.  Our  reconnmssanct 
show  that  every  bridge  is  down  and  all  tbe  fords  are  blocked  by  slasi 
ing  the  axiproaches.  We  will  have  much  to  cut  away  on  both  sides. 

The  Banks  command  in  your  waters  is  calling  the  attention  ot  tl 
Government  [enemy*?]  to  the  Suffolk  line,  and  they  may  re-eiiloic 

Have  you  any  data?  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  November  26,  1862. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

My  last  advices  from  Bichmond,  very  recent,  are  that  they  bavc  i 
fears  of  an  advance  on  the  Suffolk  line,  but  are  fortifying  slowly  In 
Petersburg  to  Kiebmoud. 

Major-General, 


Uhap. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


465 


Fort  Monroe,  Novemler  27,  1862. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

I have  just  received  a letter  from  General  Foster,  at  ISTew  Berne,  say- 
ing he  may  ask  my  co-operation  in  an  important  movement  about  the 
5th  of  December.  Has  your  expedition  gone  % A week  ago  General 
French  was  at  Petersburg  with  4,000  men.  I have  nothing  later. 

/ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Major-General  Dix : 


SUPFOLK,  November  27,  1862. 


Mud  and  water  have  delayed  our  move.  The  enemy  are  signaling  be- 
ween  here  and  the  Blackwater. 


JOHN  J.  PECK. 


Fort  Monroe,  November  27,  1862. 

lajor-General  Peck: 

Perhaps  it  would  be  as  well  to  wait  till  I hear  from  General  Foster, 
n that  case  I will  send  an  officer  to  him  to-morrow.  What  do  you 
hink  ? 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yiroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Fa.,  November  27,  1862. 

laj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

General  : I only  received  this  evening  your  letter  of  the  14th  in- 
tan t.  It  is  now  too  late  for  me  to  meet  you,  but  if  you  will  send  by 
lieutenant  Mabie,  who  will  take  this  dispatch  to  you,  any  communica- 
on  which  will  indicate  your  wishes  I will  endeavor  to  meet  them.  I 
ave  not  a large  force  at  Suffolk,  but  sufficient  to  make  a diversion  on 
lie  Blackwater.  The  enemy  are  now  turning  their  attention  to  the 
uftolk  route  to  Petersburg.  They  have  recently  put  the  railroad  from 
ae  latter  city  to  the  Blackwater  in  order,  but  I have  changed  the 
auge  on  this  side  so  that  they  cannot  use  it.  They  are  repairing  the 
nd^  on  the  Seaboard  Kailroad  over  the  Nottoway  so  that  they  can 
;3-enforce  on  the  Blackwater  from  Weldon.  I can  attack  at  Franklin, 
here  the  Seaboard  Eailroad  reaches  the  Blackwater  (Carrsville  on 
lie  maps),  or  at  Zuni,  where  the  Petersburg  Eailroad  strikes  the  same 
ver ; or  if  I can  aid  you  by  a different  movement  let  me  know  and  I 
111  do  all  in  my  power. 

I had  an  expedition  organized  under  Major-General  Peck  to  move  on 
mil  to-morrow  with  5,000  men,  but  ' since  the  receipt  of  yours  have 
Hintermanded  it  in  order  to  make  the  time  suit  you. 

I am,  respectfully  and  truly,  yours. 


30  R R— VOL  XVIII 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


I 


400  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 
Petersburg,  Ya.,  November  27,1802. 

General  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A., 

New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

Dear  Sir  : During  tlie  march  of  the  army  under  your  command  u 
the  valley  of  the  Eoanoke  Eiver,  in  the  early  part  of  this  month,  man 
wanton  acts  of  destruction  of  private  property  and  many  depredation! 
were  committed  by  the  troops  under  your  command. 

Negroes  were  forcibly  abducted  from  their  owners ; many  isolate 
houses  in  the  villages  of  Hamilton  and  Williamston  were  willfull 
burned : ])aiiors  of  private  residences  were  used  for  stables ; family  ca 
riages  were  taken  to  your  camps,  abandoned,  and  destro^^ed  houses  ( 
peaceful  citizens  were  forcibly  entered,  doors  and  windows  broken  an 
all  the  furniture  destroyed  ; bedding  was  carried  into  the  streets  an 
burned  : women  were  insulted  by  your  soldiers  and  robbed  of  all  tl 
money  and  valuables  on  their  persons,  and  all  their  clothing  and  tin 
of  their  children,  except  what  they  had  on,  was  cast  into  the  fire  or  toi 

to  pieces.  , , . 

In  general  terms,  your  soldiers  committed  many  robberies  and  pra 
ticed  a wanton  and  malicious  destruction  of  private  property. 

Having  been  over  a portion  of  your  line  of  march  and  examined  the, 
evidences  of  destruction  I reported  them  to  my  Government,  and  I a. 
instructed  to  address  you  and  inform  you  that  such  outrages  are  co 
sidered  as  forfeiting  the  right  of  yourself  and  officers  to  be  treated 
prisoners  of  war,  and  to  inquire  of  you  whether  these  outrages  we 
committed  with  your  knowledge  and  sanction. 

The  action  to  be  taken  in  the  case  will  depend  on  the  answer  you  mi 
make,  and  if  no  answer  be  returned  in  ten  days  after  the  delivery 
this  letter  it  will  be  considered  by  the  Government  that  you  admit  ai 
hold  yourself  responsible  for  the  acts  charged. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  FEENOH, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  November  29, 1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va.  : 

Several  regiments  of  Pennsylvania  drafted  militia  will  be  sent  to  yi 

as  soon  as  transportation  can  be  procured.  * -r  t 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 
Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  November  29,  1862 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  AV.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

General:  I received  the  day  before  yesterday  a letter  from  Maj'- 
General  Foster,  dated  the  14th  instant,  at  New  Berne,  in  reply  to  me 
suggesting  a co-operation  between  his  forces  and  mine  in  a movem 
against  the  enemy,  and  I immediately  sent  an  officer  to  him  in  ordeio 


Jhap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


467 


)reveiit  any  further  delay  in  communicating  with  him.  I find  myself 
auch  hampered  for  want  of  the  means  of  crossing  the  Blackwater.  The 
mdps  are  all  destooyed  from  Zuni  to  Franklin,  and  the  fords  blocked 
)y  slashing  and  other  obstructions.  The  river  is  narrow  and  deep  and 
Ne  are  m want  of  pontoons.  ^ 

I sent  Mr.  Joseph  Francis,  the  inventor  of  the  metallic  life-boat,  to 
he  Qnartermaster-Gepral  yesterday  with  a model  of  his  corrngated- 
ron  iiontoon  wagon.  It  is  a wagon,  pontoon,  and  boat,  dispensing  with 
he  cumbersonie  pontoon  train  which  carries  nothing,  and  enables  an 
irmy  to  cross  streams  with  its  baggage  train  without  delay  and  to  pass 
with  rapidity  and  safety.  The  pwitoon  wagon 
loats  witn  ^,400  pounds  in  it  and  holds  up  its  carriage.  I am  verv  de- 
irous  of  having  twenty  of  these  wagons.  They  can  be  fitted  as  bodies 
niwa  e the  common  wooden  wagons  which  we  have  here,  and 

nple  to  accoinphsh  all  our  objects  without  adding  to  our  baggage 

^Ptnrv  *1’®  meps  of  constructing  them  at  once  at  the 

jotory  of  the  corriigated-iron  life  boats  at  Greenpoint,  N.  T.  He  has 
ist  returned  from  Russia,  and  has  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  his 
ontoon  wagon,  after  long- continued  and  severe  tests,  adopted  by  Great 
.ritain  and  all  the  German  States.  I am  satisfied  that  I can  with  twenty 

“this  quarter,  and  at  the  same  time 
lake  a trial  which  will  save  the  Government  millions  of  dollars  and 
lousands  of  lives  by  dispensing  entirely  with  the  heavy  and  eSensive 

giving  our  armies  the  means  of  crossing  cur- 
mts  when  pursued  or  pursuing,  without  delay.  ^ 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHI^  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


)8tractfrom  Beturn  of  the  Department  of  Virginia,  Maj.  Gen.  John  A 

for  November  30,  1862. 


Dix  commanding, 


Command. 


-t  i^nroe.  Col.  S.  M.  Alford 
ap  namilton,  Col.  A Conk. 

Gen.  E.  L.  Yiele 
■ folk,  Bng.  Gen.  J.  J.  Peck. . 
rktown.  Maj.  Gen.  E.  I 
‘Cyes. 


Total, 


Present  for 
duty. 

4-3 

<D 

m 

<D 

45 

<v 

05 

a 

(KS 

Officers. 

<0 

tA 

U 

£ 

tJO 

<1 

Aggregate  j 
and  absei 

05 

© 

<I> 

Remarks. 

22 

620 

819 

857 

43 

1,112 

1,331 

1,  390 

12 

131 

2,  599 

3,  227 

3,  809 

6 

476 

9,  431 

12,  027 

14,  224 

20 

242 

4,  784 

6,  285 

7,  809 

28 

Outposts  at  Gloucester  Point 
and  Williamsburg. 

914 

18,  546 

23,  689 

28,  089  1 

66 

408  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX] 

Troops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia.,  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  comman^\ 
ing,  November  30,  1862. 


Fort  Monroe. 

Col.  Samuel  M.  Alford. 

3d  New  York. 

Camp  Hamilton. 

Col.  Anthony  Conk. 

139tli  New  York. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  C. 
BatPn  Pennsylvania  Heavy  Arty.,  Co.  C. 
2d  and  4th  Wisconsin  Batteries. 

Norfolk  and  vicbnty. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele. 

99th  New  York. 

148th  New  York. 

158th  New  York. 

19th  Wisconsin. 

1 Uh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  M. 
7th  New  York  Battery. 


Suffolk  and  vicinity.'^ 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck. 

Ferry’s  brigade,  Fourth  Corps. 
Wessells’  brigade,  Fourth  Corps. 
Foster’s  brigade,  Seventh  Corps. 
Spinola’s  brigade,  Seventh  Corps. 

1st  New  York  Mounted  Rifles. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

7th  Massachusetts  Battery. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  D and  L. 
99th  New  York,  Company  I (detac) 
ment). 


Yorktown  and  vicinity. 

Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 

Naglee’s  brigade,  Fourth  Corps.* 
Reserve  Artillery,  Fourth  Corps. 

6th  New  York  Cavalry  (battalion). 

5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

1st  New  York  Artillery,  Batteries  F and " 


AUtrmi  from  Itetm-n  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  Maj.  Gen.  John  O.  Foster  eo 
manding,  for  November  30,  1862. 


Command. 


First  Brigade  (Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory) . 
Second  Brigade  (Col.  T.  G.  Stevenson) 
Third  Brigade  (Col.  Horace  C.  Lee)... 
Unassigned 

Total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

C 

li 

0 

Ssi 

<A 

W. 

«• 

tt 

<; 

Officers. 

Mon. 

137 

3, 456 

4,417 

4,-’ 

113 

3,083 

3.  802 

4,1 

148 

3,408 

4, 141 

O 

101 

2, 426 

3,  209 

1 

499 

12,  373 

1 15,569 

1 17.3 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Maj.  G . 
John  G.  Foster,  TJ.  8.  Army,  commanding,  November  30,  1802. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  J.  C.  AaK)RY. 

17th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  Fel- 
lows. 

23d  Massachusetts,  Maj.  J.  G.  Chambers. 

43d  Massachusetts,  Col.  Charles  L.  Hol- 
brook. 

45th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Charles  R.  Cod- 
man. 

51  St  Massachusetts,  Col.  A.  B.  R.  Sprague. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  G.  Stevenson. 

10th  Connecticut,  Maj.  Robert  Legget 
8th  Massachusetts  Militia,  Col.  F.  • 
Coffin. 

24th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  A.  '* 
born. 

44th  Massachusetts  Militia,  Col.  1 . - 
Lee. 

5th  Rhode  Island,  Maj.  George  W.  Te^ 


Composition  of  brigades  not  indicated  on  original  return. 


3hap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


469 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Horace  C.  Lee. 

3(1  Massacliii setts,  Col.  S.  P.  Richmond. 
5th  Massachusetts,  Col.  G.  H.  Peirson. 
27th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Luke  Ly- 
man. 

46th  Massachusetts,  Col.  George  Bowler. 
9th  New  Jersey,  Col.  C.  A.  Heckman. 


Un  assigned. 

25th  Massachusetts,  Maj.  Josiah  Pickett. 
3d  New  York  Cavalry,  Col.  S.  H.  Mix. 
3d  New  York  Artillery,  Col.  J.  H.  Ledlie. 
23d  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  A.  Ransom. 
24th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  J.  E.  Lee. 
1st  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Battery  F, 
Capt.  James  Belger. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C,  Lieut.  C. 
Hook. 


Fortress  Monroe,  Va.,  December  1, 1862. 
leneral  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander-in- Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  G.  : 

General  : I have  just  arrived  here  to  confer  with  General  Dix  in  re- 
gard to  co-operating  in  offensive  movements  against  the  enemy.  I shall 
•eturn  early  to-morrow  morning  unless  you  wish  me  to  remain  longer  to 
pve  me  some  special  orders. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Volunteers . 


JaJ.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 


War  Department, 
Washington,  December  1,  1862. 


I have  no  special  instructions  to  give.  Possibly  the  Secretary  of  War 
Qay  have  to-morrow. 

' H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Yorktown,  December  1,  1862. 

lajor-General  Peck,  Suffolk : 

I expect  an  officer  from  General  Foster  to-night.  If  not  too  late  you 
ad  better  defer  any  strong  demonstration  till  he  arrives. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


' . Suffolk,  December  2,  1862. 

lajor-General  Dix,  Fort  2Ionroe : 

i The  interview  with  General  Foster  to-day  was  all  that  could  be  de- 
irecl.  He  is  an  old  friend,  and  we  canvassed  matters  fully.  Have 
lemoranda  which  will  govern  moves  for  some  days.  I proposed  to 
emonstrate  strongly  on  a given  day,  which  he  did  not  expect,  and 
ffiicli  pleased  him  very  much. 

1 very  much  desire  that  the  new  troops  should  arrive  before  Wes- 
ll^ls’  brigade  moves. 

L L JOHN  J.  PECI^, 

Major-General. 


470 


I 

NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  1 

Fort  Monroe,  December  3, 1862. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk : 

With  Jourdau’s  regiment  you  will  have  five  new  ones  and  over  3,000i 
additional  troops.  The  Pennsylvania  regiments  are  of  the  very  best 
material.  Has  Colonel  Spear  returned  Hid  he  command  the  expe-i 
dition*?  How  many  men  had  he How  many  prisoners  have  you  taken 
When  was  the  rocket  battery  taken  from  our*army  ? Give  me  details 
at  once ; I wish  to  write  General  Halleck. 

^ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Port  Monroe,  December  4,  1862. 


Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk: 

The  new  regiments  are  designed  to  be  a part  of  your  command.  Make 
requisitions  for  all  they  need.  They  did  not  land  here,  and  I supposed 
them  fully  supplied.  The  shoes,  &c.,  wanted  by  General  Wessells  were 
sent  early  this  morning  by  steamer  Arago.  Make  requisitions  for  better 
tents.  I have  been  promised  arms  from  Washington,  but  cannot  get 


them. 


JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina,- 
New  Berne,  N.  G.,  December  4,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Va.: 

General  : Your  favor  of  November  27  1 have  the  honor  to  acknowl 
edge.  I had  previously  received  from  General  Martin  a letter  on  tb( 
same  subject,  and  as  my  answer  to  him  covers  most  of  the  ground  ii 
yours  I beg  leave  to  inclose  a copy.  I beg  to  say  in  relation  to  • post 
script  of  your  letter  that  not  a negro,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  wa: 
forcibly  abducted  from  his  owner,  and  indeed  I only  suffered  thos< 
to  follow  who  insisted  upon  so  doing.  There  were  fifteen  houses  (say: 
General  Martin)  burned  at  Hamilton ; the  fact  I deplore.  At  Williams 
ton  two  were  burned  from  a defect  in  the  flue  of  the  chimney,  as  showi 
by  investigation,  and  one  small  house  pulled  down  to  prevent  tin 
spread  of  the  fire.  Members  of  my  staff  were  in  each  house  and  non* 
of  them  saw  horses  in  the  parlors,  though  in  one  or  two  instances  oi 
piazzas ; family  carriages  (not  over  three)  may  have  been  taken  to  trans 
port  sick  meu,*not  to  destroy  or  abandon.  That  houses  of  peaceful  cit 
izens  with  the  families  in  occupancy  were  entered,  women  and  childrei 
insulted  and  robbed,  I do  not  believe,  as  the  provost-marshal  hean 
nothing  of  the  kind  so  gross  as  you  report.  In  respect  to  that  part  o 
your  letter  as  to  the  treatment  of  any  officers  not  as  prisoners  of  war, 
would  say  that  if  after  my  letter  your  Government  proposes  to  act  or 
that  principle  I beg  that  you  will  have  me  informed  for  the  regulatioi 
of  my  own  course. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


See  p.  36. 


:HAr.  XXX.]  COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  471 

[Indorsement.] 

Eichmond,  Va.,  December  10,  1862. 

Eespectfally  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War  Department. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

♦ [In  closure] 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

^^eiv  Berne,  W.  C.,  December  4,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Martin, 

Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : Your  letter  -of  November  25,*  inclosing  an  extract  from 
he  Boston  Traveller,  describing  the  alleged  depredations  of  the  army 
inder  m^  command  in  their  late  march  up  the  country,  I have  received 
u reply  to  your  request  to  know  whether  these  things  were  done  by  my 
>rdei  I have  to  state  that  draught  animals,  and  in  some  cases  carriages 
0 be  used  as  ambulances,  beeves  and  pigs  to  subsist  ‘my  men  when 
hort  ot  provisions,  and  forage  to  subsist  cavalry  horses  and  draught 
uimals  were  taken  by  my  order.  Every  other  species  of  depredation 
pas  not  only  not  done  by  my  orders  but  against  them  and  against  the 
trongest  efforts  to  prevent  them.  On  the  march  we  found  all  the 
owns  almost  entirely  abandoned  by  their  inhabitants,  the  houses  in 
ome  cases  cleared  of  their  furniture,  in  others  partly,  and  in  some  not 
t all.  1 quartered  my  troops  in  the  abandoned  houses  only.  The 
rincipal^  cause  of  the  depredations  which  I know  were  committed 
'as,  I think,  that  so  many  houses  contained  apple  brandy,  and  which 
scaped  the  eye  of  the  provost-marshal.  I trust  sincerely  that  in  the 
ituie  marches  in  this  State  you  will  be  pleased  to  find  a marked  im- 
rovemeut  in  all  these  respects,  and  I earnestly  recommend  that  you 
rge  all  peaceable  citizens  to  remain  on  their  estates,  as  that  course 
'ill  aid  me  greatly  in  protecting  their  property. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


ENERAL  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

) New  Berne,  December  4,  1862. 

A portion  of  the  Marine  Artillery  having  forfeited  their  right  to  any 
enetits  from  the  investigating  court  now  sitting  on  their  case  by  their 
isgraceful  and  mutinous  conduct  in  refusing  work,  threatening  to  seize 
a armed  United  States  boat,  threatening  to  abandon  a post  of  the 
I mted  States  left  under  their  care,  and  other  conduct  most  subversive 
> good  order  and  military  discipline,  it  is  ordered  that  these  men  be 
istributed  as  follows  : To  Battery  0,  First  United  States  Artillery,  at 
ort  Macon,. 50  men;  to  Third  New  York  Volunteer  Artillery,  to  be 
istributed  by  Colonel  Ledlie,  100  men,  the  balance,  as  may  be  hereafter 
aered,  to  the  volunteer  regiments  in  this  department.  They  will  be 
iKl,  clothed,  and  fed  according  to  the  army  regulations  for  the  corps 
winch  they  are  assigned,  and  it  is  hoped  by  the  commanding  general 
lilt  the  opportunity  thus  given  them  to  redeem  themselves  by  good 
•tier  and  honorable  service  under  the  flag  of  the  United  States  will 


*Not  found. 


472 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 

be  appreciated  by  the  men  and  induce  them  to  endeavor  to  become  pro- 
ficient, orderly,  and  efficient,  as  they  are  brave  men. 

II.  That  portion  of  the  regiment  which  have  not  supported  this  rebell- 
ious movement  but  have  stood  to  their  duty  will  be  retained  under 
their  present  organization,  and  will  be  distributed  to  the  difierent armed 
transports.  They  will  receive,  in  addition  to  the  pay  of  infantry  sol- 
diers, rations,  and  clothing,  the  following  extra-duty  pay : To  those  rated 
as  experts  or  mechanics  (including  petty  officers,  engineers,  and  sucli 
other  especially  meritorious  men  as  may  be  so  rated),  40  cents  a day 
extra ; able  seamen  and  all  first-class  men,  25  cents  per  day  extra.  Those 
men  not  able  to  do  seamen's  duty,  boys,  landsmen,  &c.,  will  receive  no 
extra  pay.  Recruiting  for  the  regiment  will  cease  until  further  orders. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Foster : a xt 

SOUTHARD  HOFFMAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


December  4, 1862. 


General  Orders,  ) 

No.  65.  ( 

General  Orders,  No.  63,*  is  hereby  amended  so  as  to  read:  ‘‘All  the 
artillery  in  the  department"— consisting  of  the  Third  Regiment  Nev 
York  Volunteer  Artillery  ; Company  0,  First  United  States  Artillery^ 
Battery  F,  First  Rhode  Island  Artillery ; Twenty-third  Independent  Bat 
tery  NeAV  York  Volanteer  Artillery 5 Twenty-fourth  Independent  Bat 
tery  New  York  Volunteer  Artillery— “ is  hereby  formed  mto  an  artillery 
brigade,  and  will  be  under  command  of  Col.  James  H.  Ledlie,  linn 
New  York  Volunteer  Artillery.” 

By  command  of  Major-General  nOFFMA^f, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  5,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

If  Col  D A.  Russell,  of  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  is  appointed  ; 
brigadier  I would  be  glad  to  have  him  in  my  comm^d;  is  l»ply  f 
sponsible,  and  I have  but  one  general  graduate  ot  West  ^ , 

have  loaned  him  to  General  Foster  with  his  brigade,  an  ofiicer  witl 
whom  I co-operate  most  heartily.  Unless  I can  have  experienced  iim 
I would  rather  have  uoue,  preferring  to  extemporize.  Ihe  aflan  nca 
Franklin  on  the  2d  was  very  fine.  No  part  of  the  army  has  workc 
harder  than  this,  and  1 have  been  able  to  make  the  authorities  at  Kiel 
mond  believe  that  my  force  was  from  25,000  to  50,000  men.  Ivichmon 
Whig,  of  November  27,  numbers  it  at  33,000.  ^ pECK, 

Major-Oeneral. 


Washington,  D.  0.,  December  C,  1802. 


Major-General  Dix: 

Wlio  is  now  in  command  at  Norfolk  1 


EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


• Of  December  2, 1862.  The  above  differs  from  that  only  in  enumerating  the  organ 
zatioHs  embraced  in  the  brigade. 


Chap.  XXIX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


473 


War  Department, 
Washington,  December  6,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 

The  Adjutant-General  informs  me  that  Jourdan  has  been  restored. 
You  speak  of  sending  a brigade  of  your  troops  to  General  Foster  j by 
whose  authority  is  this  done  % General  Foster  asked  for  more  troops, 
but  they  were  refused  by  the  War  Department.  All  available  troops 
will  immediately  be  wanted  in  your  department. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief, 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  6, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

When  in  Washington,  on  October  30,  you  desired  me  to  communi- 
:;ate  with  General  Foster  and  to  co-operate  with  him  in  harassing  the 
memy.  I wrote  to  him,  but  he  being  absent  did  not  receive  my  letter 
for  some  time  and  his  answer  did  not  reach  me  till  November  27.  I 
idvised  you  of  these  circumstances  by  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  and 
Fat  I had  sent  an  officer  to  him.  He  came  here  immediately,  and  on 
3onferring  with  him  I agreed  to  let  him  have  a brigade  for  ten  days  ta 
ittack  Goldsborough  and  cut  the  railroad  at  that  place.  I directed 
leneral  Peck  to  meet  him  at  Norfolk  and  arrange  the  time.  The  bri- 
,^ade  under  General  Wessells  left  Suffolk  yesterday  to  march  to  Gates’" 
B'erry,  near  Gatesville,  where  transports  will  be  ready  to  receive  it.  I 
Fall  regret  greatly  if  in  this  I have  mistaken  your  wishes  or  exceeded 
ny  authority.  It  is  not  too  late  to  recall  General  Wessells,  if  it  be 
bought  best  and  if  I receive  your  order  at  once.  I did  not  know  Gen- 
eral Foster  had  been  refused  troops  by  the  Secretary  of  War. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  December  7,  1862. 

laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.: 

The  temporary  detachment  of  the  brigade  to  assist  General  Foster  is 
pproved.  Have  all  your  other  troops  ready  to  move  by  the  time  the 
►rigade  returns  or  before.  The  transportation  will  be  mainly  by  water. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  7,  1862. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

General  : The  officer  who  returned  with  the  flag-of- truce  boat  from 
Fty  Point  last  evening  reports  great  activity  on  the  part  of  the  enemy 
i the  whole  district  of  country  lying  between  Petersburg  and  Eich- 
lond.  This  accords  with  other  advices.  Numerous  works  are  in 
rocess  of  construction  between  these  points.  He  lay  two  days  at  City 


474 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


(Chap.  XXX. 


Point  awaiting  the  movements  of  Mr.  Quid,  the  commissioner  for  the 
exchange  of  prisoners,  and  distinctly  heard  the  trains  moving  on  tlie 
railroad  both  by  night  and  day.  It  may  be  that  the  enemy  are  concen- 
trating troops  at  Petersburg  in  anticipation  of  a landing  on  our  part  on 
the  south  side  of  James  Kiver.  I feel  a good  deal  of  confidence  that  I 
shall  in  case  of  an  offensive  movement  in  the  direction  of  Norfolk  re- 
ceive timely  ad\dces  unless  my  agent  is  detected  and  arrested. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ ’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Mninr- Gf>n  eral. 


Suffolk,  December  7,  1862. 

Oeneral  Dix: 

Wessells  arrived  at  noon  on  the  6th ; reports  no  transports  there;  a 
barren  waste,  stripped  of  almost  everytliing ; no  cattle  there.  He  will 
get  along  without  difficulty  through  the  7th.  P.  [Flusser?]  will  be  there 

to-day  unless  some  terrible  storm  sweeps  the  coast. 

JOHN  J.  i HOlvj 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  December  7, 1862. 

Major  General  Dix: 

Colonel  Spear’s  estimate  was  between  7,000  and  8,000  at  and  m the 
Ticinity  of  Franklin,  along  the  river.  To-day  an  old  contraband  came 
in  from  a plantation  just  this  side  of  Franklin  to  get  his  liberty.  He 
says  two  regiments  have  arrived  by  the  engine  from  Weldon  and  some 
artillery  recently;  also  that  the  Nottoway  bridge  is  comj^ete. 

J Oxi-N  J • 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 
December  8,  1862 — 1 p.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Your  inouiry  in  regard  to  the  commander  at  Norfolk  induces  me  t( 
inform  you  that  I have  ordered  an  election  of  a inember  ot  Congress  ir 
that  district  and  have  charged  General  Yiele  with  some  of  the  neces 
sary  arrangements.  I will  write  by  mail  ^ DIX 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  December  8,  1862. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

I have  but  one  old  regiment  here,  and  that  is  the  only  force  in  tb< 
fort.  You  must  do  your  best  with  the  troops  you  have.  Have  all  you 
forces  ready  to  move  on  short  notice.  Have  a thorough  inspection  o 
arms,  clothing,  and  equipage.  Have  also  an  abundant  supply  ot  am 
munition.  Make  requisitions  for  all  deficiencies  as  soon  as  po^ible. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  Geyieral. 

* Correspondence  in  relation  to  that  election  will  appear  in  Series  III. 


^HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


• 475 


United  States  Steamer  Cambridge, 

Beaufort^  JST,  0.,  December  8,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Comdg.  JJ.  tS.  Army  Forces,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina  : 

General:  I glean  the  following  information  from  the  masters  of  the 
ately  seized  schooners  Brilliant  and  J.  C.  Roker,  to  wit : There  is  at 
S^assaii  intending  to  run  the  blockade  a small  screw  steamer,  the  Lizzie, 
jelonging  to  Wilmington.  Said  steamer  would  be  ready  about  the  last 
)f  November  or  soon  after. 

Fort  Fisher,  at  New  Inlet,  is  considered  the  stronger  fort  compared 
vith  Caswell.  There  are  forty  guns  mounted,  including  one  8-inch 
Jolumbiad  (rifled)  and  two  Whitworth  guns.  The  fort  is  built  of  cab- 
lage-wood,  filled  in  with  sand  14  feet  thick.  At  Brunswick,  up  Cape 
?ear  River,  there  is  a strong  work,  and  some  5 miles  below  Wilmington 
here  is  a stronger  fortification  in  process  of  building. 

The  channels  are  all  obstructed,  with  only  a narrow  passage,  which 
s reported  easily  stopped  when  necessity  requires,  being  defended  by 
latteries  on  either  side. 

The  irou-clads  are  to  be  perfected  whenever  iron  is  landed,  intended 
oainly  for  river  defense. 

In  my  opinion  the  present  moment  is  the  best  time  to  attack  Wil- 
Qington  and  the  adjacent  forts.  The  longer  the  enterprise  is  delayed 
be  more  difficult  it  will  prove  to  be,  as  a large  number  of  men  are  kept 
,t  work  strengthening  the  fortifications.  I believe  the  troops  should 
te  landed  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Caswell,  although  Masonborough 
Diet  should  be  examined  in  this  connection,  but  a military  reconnais- 
ance  will  determine  the  relative  advantages  of  the  two  places. 

At  the  last  accounts  there  were  about  4,000  troops  in  the  vicinity  of 
Vilmington.  The  yellow  fever  has  entirely  disappeared. 

Salt  is  selling  at  $150  (Confederate  money)  per  sack,  or  about  $60  per 
•ushel,  and  everything  else  in  proportion,  which  is  a proof  that  the 
lockade  has  been  effectual.  Gold  is  exchanged  at  the  rate  of  $2.25 
!oufederate  scrip  for  $1  in  gold. 

Let  me  repeat  that  the  golden  moment  for  action  has  arrived. 

About  700  persons  died  from  yellow  fever  in  October  and  November 
ut  of  a population  of  about  2,500. 

The  impression  is  that  if  Fort  Caswell  is  taken  Fort  Fisher  will  be 
baudoned. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  A.  PARKER, 

Commander, 


rENERAL  ORDERS,  ) [DECEMBER  9,  1862.?! 

No.  76.  } ' 

Being  about  to  move  once  more  the  general  commanding  must  again 
all  attention  to  the  conduct  of  the  troops  in  pillaging,  straying  from 
le  ranks,  &c.,  and  further  orders  that  no  one  leave  the  ranks  j that  all 
)raging,  unless  by  special  order  [from]  division  headquarters,  and  pil- 
iging  is  strictly  prohibited  j and  brigade,  regimental,  and  company 
)mmanders  will  see  that  the  orders  are  carried  out,  and  that  no  scenes 
f disgrace  like  those  of  Hamilton  be  permitted. 

Major  Frankie  is  provost-marshal  for  the  march. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Foster : 

• SOUTHARD  HOFFMAN, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


476  • 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXZSI. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seyenth  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  Becemher  10,1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  0.  Meigs, 

Quartermaster • General,  U.  8.  A. : 

GENERA.L:  The  gunboat  was  launched  to-day  at  Norfolk  and  was 
named  General  Jesup,  after  one  of  your  predecessors.  Captain  Lud- 
low thinks  he  can  complete  her  in  forty  days.  I will  see  that  she  is 
properly  armed  and  manned.  She  is  a beautiful,  and  I trust  will  be  a 

^^T^e  aSnt  (about  $6,000)  expended  .on  her  before  she  came  ip  to 
our  hands  was  contributed  by  the  ladies  of  Norfolk  under  the  regime 
of  the  insurgents.  , 

lam,  very  respectfully,  jour  obedient  serva^, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Becemher  10, 1862. 

Major-General  Dix : 

I am  sorry  that  a move  is  expected  so  soon.  Unless  I have  some 
rest  I fear  1 shall  break  down  altogether  and  be  of  no  use.  Foster  will 
be  at  the  place  designated  on  the  20th.  He  said  he  expected  to  keep 
Wessells  for  a move  to  Wilmington.  If  so  he  will  be  gone  till  January. 
Troops  are  being  inspected,  requisitions  made,  and  e^rything  supplied. 
The  instruction  is  crowded  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Ferry  knows  all  my 
views  and  plans  and  what  kind  of  transportation  will  be  needed  on 

moving  from  here.  JOH>^  .T.  PECK, 

Major-  General 


Fort  Monroe,  Becemher  10,  1862. 

Major-General  Peck: 

What  can  I do  if  you  go  away  ? You  are  entitled  to  go,  and  per 
mission  wrhl  be  granted  if  yon  aik  it.  General  Halleck  advises  .a. 
that  my  command  must  be  ready  to  move  the  moment  Wessells  re 
turns,  perhaps  before,  say  by  the  20th.  I send  you  twenty  iron  wagoas 
They  are  not  the  improved  pattern.  They  are  intended  to  flout  <i"i 
hold  up  their  running  gear.  When  detached  irom  the  carriages  the. 
are  pontoons.  Try  them  in  the  Kansemond.  ^ 

Major-General 


Headquarters  Departovient  of  North  Carolina, 
Neiv  Berne,  JV.  0.,  Becemher  10, 1802. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  . r.  ^ . 

Commander-in- Chief  TJ.  8.  Army,  Washington,  B.  C. . 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I am  about  to  take  tli 
field  acrain  against  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  Goldsborough. 

Th^information  that  I have  received  is  to  the  effect  that  the  encm^ 
Government  is  turning  its  attention  to  the  importance  of  guardmg 
lines  of  communication  to  the  south,  and,  if  possible,  of 
portion  of  the  eastern  portion  of  this  State,  the 
would  at  this  time  be  very  valuable  as  supplies  to  their  commiss 


CiiAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


477 


Two  brigades  have  already  arrived  to  re  eDforce  the  troops  already 
jin  the  State  for  this  purpose.  I think  by  timely  action  I may  disap- 
I point  their  expectation,  and  shall  therefore  move  on  Kinston  to-morrow 
I morning  at  daybreak.  I hope  to  defeat  two  brigades  that  are  known  to 
:be  there  before  assistance  can  arrive  from  Wilmington  or  Weldon  or 
Tarborough.  Succeeding  in  this,  1 shall  push  on  to  Goldsborough,  de- 
stroy its  railroad  bridge,  and  another  bridge  across  a swamp  10  miles 
south  of  Goldsborough,  and  then  return  to  New  Berne  to  prei)are  for 
an  immediate  attack  on  Wilmington. 

1 sincerely  trust  that  the  re-enforcements  asked  for  in  my  letter  of 
I the  18th  November,  together  with  the  officers  of  experience  required  to 
command  brigades,  may  be  sent  me  as  soon  as  the  exigencies  of  the 
service  will  permit. 

My  present  force  of  infantry,  consisting  of  9,000  men  capable  of 
marching  and  fighting,  6,000  of  whom  are  new — nine  months’  men — is 
too  weak  to  give  a good  support  to  my  forty  pieces  of  artillery  and  to 
afibrd  a fair  chance  of  success  against  the  older  troops  of  the  enemy  in 
front  of  us.  I have  therefore  found  it  necessary  to  borrow  from  General 
Dix  the  services  for  a time  of  General  Wessells’  brigade,  consisting  of 
six  regiments  (2,200  men).  These  regiments  were  kindly  iiromised  me 
at  the  time  1 telegraphed  to  you  from  Old  Point  Comf(?rt,  and  met  me 
according  to  appointment  on  the  night  of  the  6th  instant  on  the  Chowan 
River,  where  I received  them  on  board  my  transports  and  brought  them 
to  this  place,  arriving  yesterday. 

General  Peck  has  agreed  to  make  a simultaneous  attack  on  the 
Blackwater,  from  Suffolk,  in  which  our  gunboats  are  to  co-operate. 

Even  if  I do  not  succeed  in  my  expectations  I hope  ray  movement 
may  be  useful  as  a demonstration  in  favor  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  POSTER, 

Major- General^  Commanding, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  11,  1862. 
Major-General  Halleck:,  General-in-Chief : 

Major-General  Peck  is  in  great  danger  of  breaking  down  unless  he 
can  have  rest  for  twenty  days.  None  can  feel  his  loss  at  this  time  half 
so  much  as  myself,  for  he  has  been  all  that  I could  ask  in  putting 
Sufiblk  in  a state  of  defense  and  in  preparing  the  troops  tor  the  field. 
But,  feeling  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  him  to  have  a respite,  I 
respectfully  ask  it  for  him,  and  I telegraph  in  order  that  it  may  com- 
mence at  once,  if  approved. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  December  12,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Will  end  it  here ; will  remain.  We  are  very  thin  in  numbers  here. 
Ferry  left  at  noon  yesterday  for  Zuni,  &c.  Was  to  have  been  across  at 
daylight.  Writes  the  roads  are  in  horrible  condition.  Was  five  hours 
moving  4 miles  near  Windsor.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  move  in  this 

country  for  the  swamps  and roads. 

Any  particulars  from  Fredericksburg  ? Captain  Flusser  writes  that 
the  enemy  burned  about  two-thirds  of  Plymouth. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


478 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  12,  1862. 

Major-Geueral  Halleck  : 

Maior-General  Peck  telegraphs  that  his  expedition  to  Zuni  found  the 
roads  very  bad.  Our  troops  have  not  succeeded  in  crossing.  The 
enemy  has  been  strongly  re-enforced.  Sharp  firiug  has  been  going  on 
all  day  across  the  river.  General  Peck  says  the  demonstration  is  hav- 
ing the  effect  of  drawing  troops  to  this  quarter,  so  that  on  the  whole 
line  we  shall  greatly  benefit  General  Poster.  I have  a dispatch  Irorn 
General  Poster  this  morning  informing  me  that  he  should  leave  New 
Berne  at  daybreak  yesterday.  Wessells  was  with  him.  He  says  the 
enemy  in  his  front  has  been  strengthened,  and  he  expects  a hard  fight. 
The  Pennsylvania  regiments  are  arriving  with  wretched  arms. 

• JOHN  A.  HIX, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Suffolk,  December  12,  1862. 

Major-General  Hix: 

We  have  captured  a rebel  captain  and  12  men;  wounded  and  killed 
a good  many  of  the  enemy.  The  cars  are  running  actively  on  the 

Petersburg  road.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Port  Monroe,  December  12, 1862. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

I have  twenty  days’  leave  for  you.  Please  come  to  me  as  soon  as  you 
can  safely  in  reference  to  movements  on  the  Blackwater. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Port  Monroe,  December  12,  1862. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk : 

Nothin «•  new  from  Fredericksburg.  Burnside  is  in  possession. 

Have  you  received  my  dispatcli  notifying  you  of  your  leave  of  absence' 
You  say  tbe  cars  are  running  actively  on  the  Petersburg  road.  ^oi 
mean  the'  enemy,  of  course.  Cannot  we  use  the  road  irom  Suffolk  dowr 
to  the  river  at  Windsor  ? 

Maior-General. 


Suffolk,  December  12,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix: 

If  all  is  favorable  through  the  night  from  the  Blackwater  I will  rm 
down  in  the  morning  and  see  you,  as  per  your  telegram  ot  this  date. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


479 


Suffolk,  December  12,  18(52. 

Major-General  Dix : 

Your  telegram  in  respect  to  leave  is  received.  You  requested  me  ta 
come  down  as  soon  as  I could  safely,  which  I construed  as  business  rel- 
ative to  which  you  desired  to  see  me  before  I availed  myself  of  the 
leave.  Is  this  right,  or  did  you  wish  me  to  stop  as  I passed  North? 

We  have  drawn  a large  force  to  the  river  since  the  arrangement  with 
General  Foster.  If  all  is  quiet  I will  visit  you  and  return  here  to-mor- 
row. W^e  cannot  use  the  road  much  beyond  Windsor.  I meant  the 
enemy’s  cars. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  Peck,  Snfolk : 


Fort  Monroe,  December  12,  1862. 


I did  not  wish  you  to  come  here  till  you  are  on  your  way  home.  It 
would  be  a loss  of  time  to  come  and  go  back  to  Suffolk.  But  I am  anx- 
ious that  you  should  take  your  leave  as  soon  as  you  safely  can.  How 
long  do  you  propose  to  let  Ferry  remain  at  the  river?  Yfhere  were  the 
captain  and  wounded  men  captured?  Foster  left  New  Berne  yesterday 
morning.  The  enemy  have  retired  behind  their  breastworks  at  Fred- 
ericksburg. Burnside’s  main  force  is  over  and  a fight  is  expected  to- 
morrow. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  December  13,  1862. 
Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

A severe  battle  all  day  near  Fredericksburg.  A part  of  the  enemy’s 
line  carried.  Can  you  not  make  a diversion  by  a demonstration  on 
Richmond  ? If  so,  no  time  should  be  lost. 


H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


^ Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  13,  1862. 

Major-General  Halleck  : ’ 

In  view  of  General  Burnside’s  movements,  as  well  as  General  Foster’s, 
L am  doing  all  my  means  will  allow  to  make  a diversion.  On  Tuesday 
l went  to  Gloucester  and  reviewed  the  troops.  Having  been  at  Y^ork- 
town  last  week  I arranged  with  General  Naglee  to  make  a demonstra- 
uon  m (Gloucester  County  as  far  as  the  court-house,  and  farther  on  if 
lie  found  It  safe  to  do  so.  I have  this  moment  received  the  followin<^ 
lispatchfrom  him,  dated  in  King  and  Queen  County  : 


scat^red  the  King  and  Queen  County  cavalry  and  burned  their  har- 

intended  for  the  rebel 

namissariat.  Shall  be  to-morrow  at  Saluda,  near  Urbana. 


My  only  fear  is  that  he  is  going  too  far,  as  the  insurgents  use  their 
Pichmond  to  the  White  House.  He  has  four  regiments 
R mtantry,  a battery,  and  three  squadrons  of  cavalry.  Major-General 
‘CK  has  just  left  here,  and  will  see  you  to-morrow  morning.  The  en- 


480  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  ) 

emy  has  a larger  force  on  the  Blackwater  than  we  have  at  Siifi'olk.  The 
Pennsylvania  troops  are  perfectly  raw,  and  have  arms  that  are  unfit  for 
use.  It  would  not  do  to  put  them  in  the  field  at  present.  General  Peck 
will  explain  more  fully.  I will  do  all  I can  to  keep  the  enemy  occupied 
in  this  quarter.  With  the  exception  of  the  Pennsylvania  Militia,  my 
force  fit  for  duty  is  only  about  19,000,  in  the  absence  of  Wessells’  bri- 
^rade,  and  I have  a line' of  70  miles  in  extent  to  protect. 

^ JOHiSr  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  13,  18G2. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton: 

Sir:  Complaints  have  been  made  by  those  who  take  a strong  interest 
in  the  condition  of  fugitives  from  service  here,  usually  denominated 
^‘contrabands,”  that  their  labor  since  they  have  been  employed  by  tue 
United  States  has  not  been  fully  paid  for.  There  are  other  grounds  ol 
complaint  also,  and  with  a view^  to  remove  them  1 desire  to  make  the 

following  suggestions,  viz : i i 

1st.  The  labor  of  these  persons  was  not  paid  for  until  iSovember  l.: 
1861,  at  which  time  a system  of  compensation  was  adopted  under  Major 
General  Wool.  Before  that  time  a large  number  of  them  had  been  em 
ployed  and  supplied  with  food  and  clothing.  If  the  x^ayment  of  wages 
was  right  after  November  1 it  would  have  been  equally  right  befon 
that  time.  The  only  difficulty  is  in  ascertaining  the  exact  amount  o 
labor  performed.  Up  to  July  4, 1861,  an  accurate  account  was  kepb  am 
at  the  rate  of  $10  per  month  per  man  they  were  then  entitled  to 
From  July  4 to  November  1,  1861,  no  rolls  were  kept,  and  the  amoun 
of  labor  performed  during  the  interval  is  uncertain.  There  are,  how 
ever,  some  data  for  an  estimate.  The  numbers  employed  July  4 anc 
November  1 are  known,  and  by  assuming  a mean  number  a proxima 
tion  to  the  truth  may  be  reached.  I do  not  iiut  this  mean 
200.  At  the  above  rate  of  compensation  they  would  have  earned  $J,0U» 
per  month  for  the  respective  months  of  July,  August,  September,  am 
October — deducting  four  days  from  the  first-named  month — and  amount 
ing  in  the  aggregate  to  $7,741.95. 

While  Captain  Tallmadge,  quartermaster  (recently  deceased),  wa 
charged  with  the  employment  and  compensation  of  these  persons  som 
arrearages  accumulated,  which,  for  reasons  that  need  not  be  mentioned 
remain  unpaid.  On  the  1st  of  March,  1862,  there  was  due  to  them  tb 
sum  of  $1,171.75.  Their  earnings  during  the  month  of  March  amoun 
to  the  sum  of  $2,450.  Both  these  sums  should  be  paid.  Many  of  tii 
persons  who  performed  the  labor  on  account  of  which  these  arrears  a( 
crued  are  no  longer  here  and  many  of  them  will  not  be  found,  it  i 
therefore  respectfully  suggested  that  after  waiting  a reasonable  tini 
(say  six  months)  for  the  claimants  to  present  themselyes,  the  balanc 
unclaimed  shall  become  a fund  for  the  relief  and  support  of  the  poc 
who  are  fugitiyes  from  service. 

There  is  admitted  to  be  due  from  the  subsistence 
There  is  also  due  from  the  hospital  department  the  sum  of  $880  tor  u 
services  of  220  colored  nurses  during  the  months  of  November  ana  D' 
cember,  1861,  and  January  and  February,  1862.  In  these  two  cases  tuei 
will  be  the  same  difficulty  in  ascertaining  the  persons  to  whom  the  mom 
is  due,  and  the  same  disposition  is  recommended.  The  payment  ot  tue. 
amounts  requiring  the  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  as  do 
three  bills  forwarded  with  an  explanatory  letter  by  the  commanun 


HAP.  XXX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


481 


;eiieral  of  tins  department  October  9,  18G2,  said  three  bills  amouutim^ 
11  the  aggregate  to  $1,479.34,  I respectfully  ask  for  such  an  order.  "" 
There  are  arrears  now  due  for  several  months,  which,  like  those  that 
lave  accrued  in  the  military  service,  are  unpaid;  but  they  are  within 
he  authority  of  the  quartermaster  and  will  be  paid  when  he  is  in  funds 
nthout  any  further  order.  The  amount  of  these  arrears,  December  1 
s about  $16,590.91,  making,  with  the  sums  before  mentioned,  an  aa’irre- 
;ate  of  $31,435.95  now  due  for  contraband  labor. 

2(1.  In  order  to  remove  tbe  contraband  women  and  children  from  con- 
iict  witli  tlie  cami)S— a contact  injurious  to  both— they  have  been  trans- 
jrred  to  Oran(3y  Island,  where  quarters  are  in  preparation  for  them,  and 
here  they  will  oe  required  to  furnish  such  labor  as  they  are  able  to 
eriorm  in  picking  oakum.  Ashing,  &c.  It  is  respectfully  asked  that 
be  needful  authority  be  given  to  supply  rooms  for  schools  and  iilaces 
f worship  at  moderate  expense  for  them.  The  Government  having 
dopted  the  policy  of  receiving  these  fugitives,  and,  by  implication, 
roimsed  them  prote(3tiou  and  security,  it  is  respectfullv  submitted  that 
line  provision  should  be  made  for  their  intellectual  and  religious  as 
ell  as  for  their  physical  wants. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  oe  North  Carolina, 

. • T r-  -n  Petersburg,  Va.,  December  13,  isb. 

aj.  Ceil.  J.  G.  Foster,  ’ 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces,  Neio  Berne,  N.  C. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  4th  instant,  inclosing  a copy  of  one  ad- 
essed  by  you  to  General  J.  G.  Martin,  has  been  received 
Yar,  even  when  conducted  by  the  acknowledged  rules  of  Christian 
itions,  iuAicts  so  many  evils  on  society  that  they  should  not  be  in- 
cased by  the  lawless  acts  of  soldiers.  u non  oe  in 

It  attOTds  me  much  gratiAcation  to  learn  that  the  acts  of  depredation 
ferred  to  in  my  letter  “were  not  only  not  done  by  your  Sdeis  Ct 
fs  tn*hP^7“  '‘“i^  agaiimt  your  strongest  efforts  to  prevent  them,”  and 
rws  ^ future  cause  for  complaints  will  be  given  by  your 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

8.  G.  TEENOH, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


^i.i.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  Washington,  December  14,  18G2. 

Commanding,  &c.,  Department  of  ]PortU  Carolina : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  10th  is  just  received.  At  the  present 

n shoulTbr^noh^t  re-enforcements  asked.  If 

-ior  I if  f unable  to  make  any  considerable  advances  into  the  in- 

■ce  of  yo"  J^eep  employed  a lace 

ce  of  the  enemy  by  your  demonstrations.  Later  in  the  season  it e 

ist  d’eff'ml  ^ "If  ® additional  troops.  That,  however 

ist  deimud  upon  the  condition  of  afiairs  elsewhere  ’ 

Very  respectfully, 

n.  W.  HALLECK, 

31  u R-voL  xvm  GenoraUn-Chief. 


482 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  14,  1862.  ' 
.P.  H.  Watson,  Assistant  Secretary  of  War: 

The  arms  brought  here  by  the  Pennsylvania  drafted  militia  are  fo) 
the  most  i^art  the  altered  flint-lock  musket,  caliber  .69.  They  wen 
reported  to  me  unfit  for  service.  Lieutenant  Baylor  will  inspect  thos( 
at  Newport  News  to-day  and  at  {Sufl:blk  to-morrow,  aud  a special  icpor 
will  be  made.  I do  not  desire  any  fancy  arms,  or  even  rifled  muskets: 
Safe  and  serviceable  rifled  Springfield  smooth-bores,  caliber  .69,  are  per 

fectly  satisfactory.  JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  December  14,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 

Have  fully  talked  over  with  General  Halleck  affairs,  as  you  desireq 
lie  says  he  wants  us  to  occupy  the  enemy  on  the  Blackwater  and  kee 
as  many  of  them  there  as  possible.  He  thinks  we  have  done  all  w 
could  with  the  means  there.  Attacks  and  demonstrations  so  as  to  kee 
the  enemy  busy  and  alarmed.  The  four  regiments  you  spoke  of  li 
wishes  me  to  say  are  for  you,  aud  to  make  such  disposition  as  you  deei 


best.  , . 

If  you  decide  to  give  them  to  me  I would  suggest  that  their  removi 
to  Suffolk  will  be  much  to  their  advantage. 

At  Willard’s  until  morning. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Colonel  Van  Buren: 


Torktown,  Ya.,  December  15,  1862. 


I completed  my  reconnaissance  yesterday. 

Dispersed  the  rangers  in  Middlesex.  Destroyed  a large  tannery  eir 
ployed  by  the  rebel  government,  and  returned  with  15  prisoners  at 


this  a.  m. 


NAG  LEE. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
No.  394.  S Washington,  December  15,  1862. 

% ^ * * ♦ * • * * 
lY.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  Biisteed,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  immediately  reix)' 
for  duty  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  at  Fort  Monroe,  A 
By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General 


AVAR  Department, 
Washington,  December  16,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fcn't  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General  Banks  organized  his  own  command  and  it  was  supposed 
had  taken  Corcoran’s  brigade.  He  failed  to  report  what  troops  lie  to( 
with  him.  As  the  brigade  is  in  your  department  it  will  be  consider 

un,lcr  yonr  command.  HALLECK,  . 

General-in-Chief 


IIAP.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


483 


, . ^ Washinoton,  December  16,  1862. 

tlajor-General  Dix:  - ’ 

General  Burnside^s  army  recrossed  the  Eappahanuock  during  the 
here  ^ pontoon  bridges  have  been  taken  np.  Eaining  hard 

tar  A.  STAGEE. 


, 1 ^ Monroe,  December  17, 1862. 

General  Ferry,  Suffolk : ’ 

Have  you  tried  the  iron  wagon-bodies  to  ascertain  if  they  will  an- 
jver  the  purpose  of  pontoons  % I have  ordered  four  new  regiments  of 
'enusylvania  Militia  to  you. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

^ Major-General. 

• n 1 SuFEOLK,'  Dece7nber  17,  1862. 

ajor-Geueral  Dix:  ’ 

Have  tried  the  pontoons.  They  will  not  work.  Will  make  full  re- 
nt by  messenger  to-morrow. 

O.  S.  FEEEY, 
Brigadier- General. 


n 1 Monroe,  December  18,  1862. 

fi gad ler- General  Ferry:  ’ 

I sent  for  Colonel  Spear  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  reports  in  reo-ard  to 

SrtXm  H -"t  •/  ‘'""t  and  capture  or 

stCT  tiH,  ?4nf. rr,  f witli  me  send 

stci  with  O,400  cavalry,  Spear’s  regiment,  and  300  of  Dodge’s  rifles 

® nf  ^ ® artillery,  with  a section  of  Davis’.  As  soon 

' Smfoll  ^ s'  ^y^^iersion  above  Smithfield.  Spear  left  at  ] 1 

-Hi  ffl®  f ®®  Inm  as  to  details  of  proposed  movement.  I did  not 
iim  yom  ' ^ ^0“  leave  Suffolk.  Let  me  hear 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


dor-General  Dix:  ' Suffolk,  Jbecm&rr  18, 1802. 

I hH.'h  ‘'•®  proposed  by  you  might  now  succeed,  and  un- 

-n  w n 'f'*®  y«'‘  W'll  se“<l  out  the  expedition  to-morrow 

Mill  get  reports  from  me  this  afternoon  of  the  last  scouting  parties 

■ O.  S.  DERltY, 

Jirigadier-Oemral. 


bulier.General  Feeky  : 

ir<Vin'p®'''’®n^‘ t"  to-morrow  night.  If  there  is  time  I will  land 
' West  Kmraf  ®“ithfield,  to-morrow  night.  Send  me 

■row  night.  ^ to-night  if  you  can  get  ready  to- 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

3Iaj or-General, 


484  NORTU  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

Suffolk,  December  18,  1862. 

Maior-Geiienil  Bix:  ^ 

The  West  End  has  j^one  to  Norfolk  for  coal  and  wdl  arrive  there 

about  this  time  or  a little  later.  ^ ^ rEEE-Y 

Brigadier- General. 


Suffolk,  December  18, 1862. 

Major-General  Dix : , ^.i 

I liave  this  evening  a report  from  my  post  at  ’J 

tbe  enejnv  are  this  side  the  Blackwater,  near  Isle  of  Wight  Con  t 

House  in  force.  I am  sending  out  a detachment  to  recouuoitei.  Id' 

not  think  it  advisable  to  undertake  the  other  expedition  till  the  detach 

meiit  returns  and  reports  the  facts.  ^ ^ FEEKY 

Brigadier- General. 


Suffolk,  December  18,  1862. 

Major-General  Dix:  ^ p a 

The  report  about  a rebel  force  at  Isle  of  Wight  is  not  well  foiiudei 
I have  examined  tlie  parties  from  whom  it  ®khi 

has  not  returned  yet..  I based  my  opinion  of  the 
Franklin  upon  his  former  reports.  I have  this  evening  ta 
Colonel  Foster,  who  was  out  with  Wessells.  I think  you  should  si 
him  before  ordering  an  expedition.  I will  send  him  to  the  fort  touuo 
row  if  you  think  best.  He  is  a brave,  experienced, 

Brinadier-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  December  19, 1862. 

Brigadier-General  Ferry  : 

Let  me  know  if  Colonel  Foster  is  coming  here;  if  not,  when  you  sei 
out  the  expedition.  No  time  should  be  lost,  as  30  J' 

Lee’s  army  at  liberty,  and  in  a tew  days  you  may  have  20,000  or  30, U 
men  on  the  Blackwater.  My  force  is  ready.  ^ 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  December  10, 1862. 

Major-Genernl  Dix: 

Colonel  Foster  is  on  the  way  to  you  now  ’ 

Brigadier- General 


Fort  Monroe.  December  10, 1862 

Major-General  Peck:  ^ a nnnrwi 

Colonel  Spear  is  confident  be  can  cross  2 mdes  above  South  ^ c 
SoO^Mantry,  1,000  cavalry,  and  eight  pieces  ®f 
hVnnkliu.  General  Ferry  thinks  5,000  intantry  necessary.  ^ j 

you  ? Answer  immediately.  I shall  make  a diversion  tioin  Smith 

the  day  before,  JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-Genera 


'rrAr. 


cokki^ ftPoiN D PMcV:,  eTc. — t miON. 


485 


ilajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  19,  18G2. 


The  expedition  talked  of,  to  be  successful,  should  have  six  good  pon- 
oons,  .5,000  infantry,  two  batteries  of  artillery,  and  1,000  cavalry.  The 
ords  are  not  to  be  relied  on ; making  bridges  of  felled  trees  will  not  do 
or  artillery.  We  cannot  spare  the  above  number  of  inhintry  suitable 
or  the  undertaking  at  present  and  have  not  the  pontoons.  I will  write 
ou  my  views  to-morrow. 

O.  S.  FEREY, 

Brigadier- General, 


Fort  Monroe,  December  20,  18G2. 

Irigadier-General  Ferry  : 

Can  you  not  improvise  some  pontoons  ? There  should  be  no  delay, 
will  be  very  glad  to  have  you  lead  the  expedition,  but  no  time  should 
e lost  in  moving. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  [Washinoton,]  December  20,  18G2. 

[ajor-General  Dix : 

Spear  reported  12,000  about  Franklin.  If  Foster  and  Burnside  have 
dieved  the  recent  excess  on  our  front,  an  attack  is  desirable  j would 
azard  nothing.  Not  less  than  5,000  ought  to  be  sent;  7,000  would  be 
etter.  As  the  troops  are  benefited  by  such  duty  we  should  always 
end]  enough.  McClenna’s  Crossing  is  about  the  point.  Great  excite- 
leut  in  public  mind  since  the  late  disaster. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


( Fort  Monroe,  December  20,  18G2. 

rigadier-General  Ferry  : 

How  many  infantry  have  you  fit  for  the  expedition  ? I can  give  you 
»me  from  this  post  and  Yorktown,  but  in  that  case  I must  send  you 
1 ofiicer  ranking  Colonel  Foster,  and  abandon  the  diversion  toward 
imi  and  Wakefield. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  Dccemher  20,  18G2. 

uj or  General  Dix: 

I can  furnish  1,000  cavalry;  tliat  is  enough.  I can  make  the  5,000 
tantry  by  j)utting  in  two  of  the  newest  regiments.  I can  put  General 
miola  in  command  with  Foster  to  lead  tlie  advance.  I can  issue  my 
ders  at  9 o’clock  forenoon  and  luive  the  column  in  march  at  3 o’clock 
xernoon  of  the  same  day,  which  is  the  usual  hour. 

O.  S.  FEREY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


4B6 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S..E.  VIRGINIA, 


[OiiAi*.  XXX..: 

Fort  Monroe,  Decemher  20,  18G2. 

Brigadier- General  Ferry  : 

The  expedition 'is  one  of  importance  and  great  delicacy,  and  if  bm 
forces  succeed  in  crossing  will  need  a commanding  officer  experienced 
in  the  management  of  troops.  1 will  give  General  Spinola  an  earl' 
opportunity  of  seeing  active  service,  but  think  another  occasion  wil 
be  better  for  him  and  us. 

JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Major-  General. 


Abstract  from  Tri-monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  {Seventh  Army  Corps] 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding , for  Decemher  20,  1862  {headquarters  Fort  Monroe 

Va.).  ‘ 


1 

Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 
absent. 

Aggregate  last  return. 

1 Pieces  of  field  artillery,  j 

Present  for  duty  equipped. 

Difantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillen 

U 

<D 

O 

m 

o 

§ 

a 

05 

0 

0 

sa 

0 

i 

ro 

0 

« 

0 

§ 

05 

0 

fg 

0 

1 

Headquarters  Fort  Monroe. — 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A,  Dix 

17 

17 

17 

17 

Fort  Monroe. — Col.  S.  M.  Al- 
ford : 

3d  New  York  Infantry 

26 

633 

805 

27 

858 

27 

831 

27 



29 

711 

Total 

26 

633 

832 

885 

858 

---■ 

29 

711 

Camp  namilton. — Col.  An- 
thony Conk : 

34 

3 

16 

723 

76 

415 

831 

85 

497 

855 

86 

584 

856 

83 

433 



35 

764 

i ^OTTolTXr 

3 

76 

Vy  cli  V ciii  y . 

Artillery 

12 

17 

4:1 

Total 

53  ‘ 

1 1,214 

1,413 

1,  525 

1,  372 

12 

35 

764 

3 

76 

17 

4; 

Newport  News. — Brig.  Gen.  M. 
Corcoran: 

Infantry 

110 

2,  542 

1 3,004 

3, 108 

2,  702 

112 

2,  644 

Norfolk. — Brig.  Gen.  E.  L.  Yiele : 

Infantry  

Cavalry 

Artillery  

132 

1 

1 4 

1 

O A{\£* 

^ O A'TO 

3,584 

82 

195 

3,  583 
82 
197 

— 

1 

130 

2,  523 

ii,  ‘±UU  Of  \Jt  ^ 

361  55 

140  151 

j 1 

36 

6 

4 

1 

Total 

1 

137 

2,  582  3,  278 

3,  861 

3,  862 

6 

130 

2,  523 

, 1 

30 

! ^ 

1 

!— -f 

Suffolk. — Mnj.  Gen.  J.  J.  Peck: 

554 

69 

9 

1 1 

10,  581 12,  889 
1,467|  2,  099 
393  452 

15,  790 
2,  344 
495 

12,  059 
2,  351 
497 

"4’ 

18 

568 

11, 100 

1 

L 

liitcintry. - 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

71 

1,745 

i..... 

9 

! ^ 

Total 

632 

12,  441 

15,  440 

18,  629 

14,  907 

22 

568 

11, 100 

1,  745 

_9_l 

u 

Yorktown. — Maj.  Gen.  E.  I). 
Keyes : 

285 

36 

17 

5,  504 
947 
394 

1 6,979 
1,  060 
477 

8,  886 
1, 168 
678 

5,  897 
; 1,174 
, 679 



303 

6,  039 

1 

1 

j 

J 11 1 <111  try 

^ ' tl  ^7'0  lT*^r 

36 

858 

A liify 

28 

i 19  , 

, 19 

I 

4i 

Total - 

338 

6,  845 

, 8,516 

10,  732 

7,750 

28 

303 

6,039  36  1 858 

Gi'and  total .............. 



t,  313 

1 

26,  257 

32,  500 

38,  757 

31,  468 

68 

1, 177 

23.781111  |2,715  j 49 

I i 

/ 


uAP.xxx.]  correspondence,  etc.— union.  ' 487 

yoops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia^  commanded  by  MaJ.  Gen.  John  A. 
Dix,  Deeember  20, 1862. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va. 

3d  New  York  Infantry. 

Newport  News,  Va. 

mil  New  York  [N.  G.  A.]. 

55tli  New  York. 

34tli  New  York. 
rOtli  New  York. 
rStli  New  York  (detachment). 

Suffolk,  Va. 

I3th  Indiana. 

19th  Illinois. 

6th  Massachusetts. 

I2th  New  York. 

10th  New  York. 

12d  New  York. 

58th  New  York. 

)2d  Ohio. 

)7th  Ohio. 

)8th  Pennsylvania. 

15th  Pennsylvania  (battalion  of). 

)8th  Pennsylvania. 

)5th  Pennsylvania. 

)6th  Pennsylvania. 

)7th  Pennsylvania. 
i8th  Pennsylvania. 

'1st  Pennsylvania. 

4th  Pennsylvania. 

'5th  Pennsylvania. 

'6th  Pennsylvania. 

7th  Pennsylvania. 

Ist  New  York  Mounted  Rifles. 

1th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry  (ten  com- 
jianies). 

7th  Massachusetts  Battery. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  D. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  L. 


Camp  Hamilton,  Va. 

139th  New  York. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  C. 
Roberts’  Pennsylvania  Heavy  Artillery 
(three  companies). 

2d  Wisconsin  Battery. 

4th  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Norfolk,  Va. 

99th  New  York. 

148th  New  York. 

173d  Pennsylvania. 

19th  Wisconsin. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  CompanvM. 
7th  New  York  Battery. 

Yorktown,  Va. 

11th  Maine. 

56th  New  York. 

81st  New  York. 

98th  New  York. 

100th  New  York. 

Independent  Battalion,  New  York  (En- 
fans  Perdus). 

52d  Pennsylvania. 

104th  Pennsylvania. 

169th  Pennsylvania. 

172d  Pennsylvania. 

178th  Pennsylvania. 

179th  Pennsylvania. 

6th  New  York  Cavalry  (twocom2>anies). 
5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

1st  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Battery 

Ft 

1st  Now  York  Light  Artillery,  Battery 

H. 

8th  New  York  Battery. 

1st  Pennsylvania  Light  Artillery,  Bat- 
tery E. 

1st  Pennsylvania  Light  Artillery,  Bat- 
tery H. 

5th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  M. 


DETACHED. 

Wessons’  Brigade. 

85th  New  York. 
92d  New  York. 
96th  New  York. 
85th  Pennsylvania. 
101st  Pennsylvania. 
103d  Pennsylvania. 


I Fort  Monroe,  December  21,  1862. 

»jor-Geiieral  ITalleck,  General-in- Glief : 

Two  sailing  vessels  have  arrived  liere  from  New  York  to  take  Cor- 
Taiis  brigade  to  General  Banks.  Two  more,  I learn,  are  coming. 

f turn.— Belongs  to  the  command  at  Sufiblk,  but  is  noAv  on  detached 

Vice  in  North  Carolina. 


488  hOUTK  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CiiAt. 

Two  of  them  will  be  needed — one  to  take  the  sick  and  convalescents  lelH 
here  and  another  to  take  horses  now  here  belonging  to  the  expedition 
As  Corcoran  is  not  to  go,  what  shall  be  done  with  the  two  other  tram 
ports  when  they  arrived 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  December  21, 18G2.  ' 
Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

The  convalescents,  stores,  horses,  &c.,  belonging  to  General  Bank  i 
expedition  wall  be  sent  forward.  It  will  be  determined  in  the  coui\‘ 
of  two  or  three  days  w^hether  Corcoran’s  brigade  will  go  or  not.  1 
the  mean  time  the  two  transports  for  that  purpdse  will  await  order 
Give  us  all  the  information  you  can  about  the  enemy’s  movements. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  21,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.‘  Halleok,  General-in-Chief: 

My  man  has  arrived  from  Eichmond.  General  Anderson’s  divisio 
reported  13,000  strong,  from  Hanover  County ; the  division  of  one  of  tl 
Hill’s,  from  the  direction  of  Fredericksburg,  9,000  strong,  and  Hood' 
from  Eichmond  Fair  Grounds,  about  8,000  strong,  have  all  gone  sou 
from  Eichmond  since  Monday,  the  15th.  Fifty-three  pieces  of  artiller 
some  of  which  came  from  the  direction  of  Fredericksburg,  were  sc: 
across  Mayo’s  Bridge  toward  Petersburg  on  Wednesday  night.  It  w;' 
reported  at  Eichmond  that  a large  force  was  coming  up  the  Jam 
Eiver  to  land  at  City  Point,  and  this  may  have  led  to  the  movement 
artillery.  On  Wednesday  night  the  Eichmond  iron-clad  got  her  coi 
missary  stores  on  board.  There  has  been  great  activity  in  Eichmoi 
the  last  week  in  the  movement  of  troojis  through  the  city  in  a souther 
direction,  but  my  informant  could  not  say  where  they  wrent  after  lea 
ing  the  city ; heard  that  one  brigade  went  toward  the  Blackwate 
thinks  the  rest  went  to  Weldon.  He  left  Eichmond  Thursday.  I ha 
found  his  former  statements  accurate. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  December  21,  1862.' 

Major-General  Dix: 

Give  me  the  pontoons  and  I will  take  command  ot  theex})edition  aif 
leave  General  Spinola  in  command  here  during  my  absence,  or  1 w 
see  the  colonels  and  get  them  to  volunteer  to  serve  under  Colonel  r(' 

ter  cheerfully.  

O.  S.  FEEEY, 
Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Yorldown,  December  21,  1862. 

Col.  I).  T.  Van  AsKistant  Adjutant- General  : ' 

Sir  : Since  my  return  I have  sent  three  reconnoitering  parties,  oue 
which  captured  three  horses  and  some  prisoners.  Captain  Parker 


lAf.XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


489 


ien  up  at  West  Poiut  and  sent  a scout  to  the  White  House:  The 
lemy  has  not  been  discovered  in  force,  but  there  are  indications  of  an 
tention  to  attack  Williamsburg*.  I have  taken  precautions  to  bar  the 
ovements  of  the  enemy,  and  I would  like  to  have  the  opinion  of  Major 
eneral  Dix  as  to  the  propriety  of  posting  a regiment  of  infantry  at 
ort  Magruder,  below  Williamsburg. 

I have  made  two  thorough  inspections  of  the  four  regiments  of  Penn- 
Ivania  drafted  militia,  which  have  just  arrived  here,  and  found  them 
1 perfectly  green.  One  of  those  regiments,  the  One  hundred  and 
iventy-second,  I have  assigned  to  duty  at  the  heavy  guns  on  the  ram- 
irts,  and  will  lose  no  time  in  fitting  all  for  service.  At  the  present 
me  none  of  them  are  in  a condition  to  meet  the  enemy. 

It  is  reported  to  me  that  the  destruction  of  the  salt- works  in  Mat- 
lews  County  was  not  complete.  I have  arranged  with  Captain  Parker 
go  with  a gunboat  and  100  infantry  and  50  cavalry  on  Wednesday 
)xt  and  complete  that  work. 

I am  much  in  want  of  an  energetic  brigadier,  who  understands 
ctics. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  H.  KEYES, 

Major-General^  Commanding  Fourth  Corps. 


, United  States  Flag  ship  Philadelphia, 

Hampton  Foads,  December  21,  1862. 

aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps: 

General:  The  department  directs  that  the  complement  of  the 
►lorado  shall  be  filled  up  with  contrabands,  owing  to  the  impossibility 
shipping  men.  It  will  advance  the  public  interest  if  you  will  be  so 
od  as  to  give  such  orders  as  will  enable  Captain  Goldsborough,  of  the 
dorado,  to  receive  and  ship  thirty-two  able-bodied  contrabands. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

. i^ee, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.F.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  23,  1862. 

y.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

I have  just  arrived  from  Kew  Berne.  My  expedition  was  a perfect 
3cess.*  I burned  the  railroad  bridge  at  Goldsborough  and  Mount 
lye  and  tore  up  several  miles  of  the  track  of  the  Wilmington  and 
Sidon  Eailroa^  We  fought  four  engagements,  viz,  at  Southwest 
eek,  Kinston,  White  Hall,  and  Goldsborough,  and  whipped  the  en- 
y handsomely  each  time.  The  force  of  the  enemy  is  now  largely  in- 
cased in  North  Carolina  from  Fredericksburg,  rendering  the  second 
p in  mj/  plan  of  operations  of  doubtful  execution  unless  I am  pretty 
gely  re-enforced.  Can  I communicate  freely  on  this  point  by  tele- 
tph  or  shall  I come  to  W ashington  for  the  purpose  ? I have  a steamer 
re  and  can  be  there  in  ten  hours. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

• Major-General. 

|See  “Expedition  from  New  Berne  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C.”,  December  11-20,  1862^ 


490 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[ciiAi>.  xx4 


Washington,  D.  0.,  December  23, 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  Fort  Monroe : 

Consult  fully  with  General  Dix  and  then  come  to  Washington. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


United  States  Flag-steamer  Philadelphia, 

Hampton  Eoads,  Va.^  December  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps.,  Fortress  Monroe  : 

General  : The  Belvidere,  steamer,  with  supplies  for  the  army,  w 
stopped  by  the  guard  vessel  below  INorfolk  because  she  was  not  on  t\ 
certihed  list  of  the  army  steamers  furnished  by  you  and  had  not  tl 
certificate  from  the  quartermaster.  Colonel  Thomas,  as  proposed  by  yc 
and  agreed  to  by  me.  On  learning  the  facts  I ordered  that  the  Beb 
dere  should  pass  up  to  Norfolk.  Will  you  be  good  enough  to  iss: 
such' instructions  as  will  prevent  a recurrence  of  the  inconvenience  ar 
ing  from  the  omission  to  comply  with  the  simple  and  easy  arrangeme. 
made  at  your  instance  and  which  the  guard  vessels  have  been  instructi 
to  comply  with 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Eear-Admiral,  Comdg.  A.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  December  24, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 

It  is  decided  that  you  send  12,000  men  to  General  Foster’s  commai. 
Those  for  whom  you  have  transports  will  be  sent  to  Beaufort  and  U 
others  marched  across  to  the  Ghowan.  Please  answer  immediate 
how  many  you  can  send  by  sea.  The  troops  should  be  good  ones,  let- 
ing  the  new  ones  in  the  forts.  I hope  to  send  you  a couple  of  regimen 
from  here.  This  movement  must  be  made  in  all  haste.  As  soon  as  G(- 
eral  Foster  comes  in  I will  telegraph  again. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  24, 1862 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege. 

General-in-  Chief : 

If  I can  take  the  two  sailing  vessels  intended  to  carry  Corcoran’s  I- 
gade  to  General  Banks  I can  send  3,500  men  to  Beaufort  by  sea.  1 
also  send  1,800  by  barges  through  the  canal  to  Albemarle  Sound. 
force  from  Suffolk  can  move  to-morrow,  if  necessary,  but  it  shah  n 
reach  the  Chowan  Biver  till  the  means  of  transportation  are  t lie- 
The  steamers  here  are,  with  two  exceptions,  riyer  crafts  and  not  lit 
go  to  sea.  There  will  be  no  inconvenience  in  using  the  two  trauspo 
of  Banks’  expedition  temporarily,  as  I can  retain  his  convalescent  a' 
sick  at  present.  The  troops  will  take  tents  and  camp  equipage, 
those  which  go  by  water  take  rations  ? 

JOHN  A.  DIA., 

Major-General 


VP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  EPC. — UNION. 


491 


War  Department, 
Washington^  December  24,  1862. 
ijor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Va. : 

Greneral  Foster  thinks  that  the  troops  which  go  by  land  should  go  to 
des’  Ferry,  on  tiie  Chowan  Eiver,  the  place  where  Wessells’  brigade 
barked. 


H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


War  Department, 

^ Washington^  December  24,  1862. 

tjor-General  Burnside,  Falmouth^  Ya. : 

leueral  Foster  wishes  a brigadier-general— a regular  officer  of  expe- 
nce.  Can  you  give  him  one?  Please  answer.  Troops  that  fought  at 
idericksburg  are  now  in  North  Carolina. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief, 


Fort  Monroe,  December  24,  1862. 


gadier-General  Ferry;  ’ 

lave  your  brigades— Spinola’s  and  Gibbs’— ready  to  march  at  a mo 
fit’s  warning. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 


Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  December  24,  1862. 


jor-General  Keyes,  YorUown : 

lave  li^aglee’s  brigade  ready  to  move  by  water  at  a moment’s  warn- 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


lor-General  Dix; 


Suffolk,  December  24,  1862. 


Brigadier-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  December  24,  1862. 


Major-  General. 


492 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VlRGlNiA.  [Ohav.  Nx 


General  Orders,  ) War  Department,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office,  ' 
No.  214.  i Washington^  December  24,  1802. 

By  direction  of  the  President  the  troops  in  North  Carolina  will  co 
stitute  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  and  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster  is  a 
signed  to  the  command. 

"Bv  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  GeneraL 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
No.  410.  1 Washington,  December  24, 1802.: 

******* 
lY.  Brig.  Gen.  I.  N.  Palmer,  XT.  S.  Volunteers,  is  assigned  to  di.- 
with  the  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  Depa-* 
ment  of  North  Carolina,  and  will  report  in  person  without  delay. 

* * ' * * * * ^ * 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : ^ iqwNSEND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


War  Department, 
Washington,  December  25, 1802 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va.: 

General  Foster  left  here  last  evening,  and,  if  not  detained  by  the  f', 
will  be  with  yon  this  forenoon  to  arrange  details.  He  saw  the  Co- 
missary-General  yesterday  about  rations.  The  troops  sent  to  Beaiil  t 
should  take  supplies  with  them  unless  he  directs  differently. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chiej 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  25, 1801; 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief  : 

As  you  wished  me  to  make  the  movement  in  haste  I am  gettiug^^ 
the  transportation  I can  find.  The  Cahawba  arrived  this  naoining  ku 
New  York  with  provisions /or  Alexandria.  She  will  carry  l,o0()  tro(- 
I am  transferring  her  cargo  to  two  river  steamers  and  shall  seiii 
wit  hout  delay  to  Alexandria.  I have  transportatioif  enough  for  at 
G 000  troops  ready.  The  International,  one  of  the  sailing-vessel 
ports  from  New  York,  got  aground  on  Smith’s  Island  Shoal 
I sent  out  a strong  tug  to  her  last  night.  If  she  can  be  got  off  sue 
carry  1,000  more  troops.  General  Foster  not  arrived. 

JOHjN  a.  DiA., 

Major- Genero 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Yorhtown,  Va.,  December  25,  lo(» 

Col.  D.  T.  Van  Buren, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  Yirgima,  lorktown,  fa. : 
Colonel  : In  replv  to  the  circular  of  December  22, 18G2,  from  ^ 
quarters  Department  of  Virginia,  I have  the  honor  to  report  tuai«’ 


IP.XXX.I 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


493 


rth works  at  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  Point  have  never  been  author- 
tively  named.  The  officers  at  Gloucester  Point,  however,  have  called 
3 work  after  myself;  Fort  Keyes,  and  I would  beg  leave  to  suggest 
• the  work  here  the  name  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  de- 
rtment.  May  I be  informed  if  these  names  will  be  recognized  ? 
Besides  the  work  at  Yorktown  and  Gloucrester  the  only  other  work 
Fort  Magruder,  about  or  2 miles  below  Williamsburg,  garrisoned 
a company  of  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry, 
fbe  armament  of  these  works  is  as  follows  : 

Fort  Magruder.— One  24-pounder  howitzer,  four  12-pounder  howitzers, 
0 6-pounder  (iron)  carriage,  one  coffee-mill  (Union  repeating). 

4/  Yorlctown. — Nine  8-inch  columbiads,  fifteen  20-pounder  Parrotts, 
0 8-inch  siege  howitzer,  eight  32-pounders,  iron  (smooth),  four  10-inch 
rtars,  five  12-pounder  howitzers  (brass),  ten  3-inch  ordnance  guns 
,ffit  batteries),  two  100-pounder  Parrotts,  one  coffee-mill  (Union  re- 
iting),  fourteen  12-pounder  brass  Napoleons  (light  batteries),  one  42- 
inder,  iron  (smooth),  five  30-pounder  Parrotts,  one  32-pounder  car- 
lade,  one  32-pounder  (light  ship  gun),  one  10-inch  columbiad. 
it  Gloucester  Point. — The  only  armament  consists  of  one  battery  (four 
Qs)  of  3-inch  ordnance  guns. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  U.  KEYES, 

Major -General.,  Commanding  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Fh.,  December  26,  1862. 

5 Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

hR : In  your  order  authorizing  me  to  permit  the  people  of  Norfolk 
5end  to  the  loyal  States  the  products  of  their  labor  the  Nanseuioud 
^er  was  not  included.  Suffolk  is  at  the  head  of  navigation,  and  the 
8r  is  used  by  us  in  transporting  our  supplies  to  our  troops  there. 
Me  are  oysters,  shingles,  and  other  articles  on  the  river  belonging 
Jlorthern  people  as  well  as  to  the  people  of  Norfolk,  and  wanted  in 
loyal  States.  May  I ask  the  extension  of  my  authority  to  permit 
se  articles  to  go  North,  by  a new  order  from  you,  that  of  November 
not  being  construed  by  Admiral  Lee  to  cover  these  cases. 

Olie  inclosed  x)apers,  which  I beg  to  have  returned  to  me,  show  the 
dship  of  the  cases  referred  to.*  I take  the  liberty  to  annex  the 
er  1 need  for  your  consideration,  and  am,  very  respectful Ij^,  your 
dient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 

[Inclosuro.] 

Executive  Mansion. 

hderedy  That  the  order  of  the  12th  of  November,  in  regard  to  trade 
li  Norfolk,  be  extended  to  Suffolk  and  the  Nansemond  liiver,  so  far 
tlio  commander  of  the  department  shall  deem  necessary  for  military 
'Eposes. 


* found. 


494 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CtiAi*.  xx| 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  26, 1862. , 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


General  Foster  left  last  evening  for  New  Berne.  The  troops  coi( 
nience  emhaiidng  at  Yorktown  to-day.  The  transports  will  be  obligy 
to  return  from  Beaufort  and  take  another  load,  as  General  Foster  cji 
only  take  4,000  from  the  Chowan.  The  International  is  lost  ue[ 
Smith’s  Island.  Her  cargo  will  be  saved.  My  force  fit  for  duty  is  lej 
than  25,000  men.  I shall  have  but  12,000  left.  I shall  have  but  5,0* 
at  Suffolk  and  2,500  at  Yorktown.  On  the  Blackwater  there  is  a lar-, 
force,  anil  since  Naglee’s  expedition  the  rebels  have  occupied  Gloucest; 
County,  and  General  Keyes  writes-  me  they  are  menacing  Gloucesf 
Point.  Twenty  thousand  men  is  the  smallest  number  that  can  be  relii 
on  to  hold  Williamsburg,  Yorktown,  Gloucester,  this  fort,  Norfolk,  aii 
Suffolk.  I earnestly  request  that  I may  be  re  enforced  before  the  trooj 
for  General  Foster’s  command  get  away.  They  embrace  nearly  eve.' 
regiment  that  has  been  under  fire.  I lose,  also,  GeneraPNaglee  ail 
General  Ferry,  my  only  brigadiers  who  have  had  any  experience  in  t^ 
field,  except  General  Viele,  who  cannot  at  this  moment  be  spared  fra 
Norfolk.  I asked  for  the  promotion  of  Colonel  Alford,  of  the  Thijl 
New  York  Volunteers,  to  the  rank  of  brigadier.  He  will  be  needed  c 
once.  If  General  Lockwood  can  be  spared  from  the  Eastern  Shorefc 
Virginia  I should  like  to  have  him.  My  new  troops  need  experiencl 


generals. 


JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General 


Suffolk,  Deeemher  26,  1862, 

Major-General  Hix,  Fort  Monroe: 

There  are  reported  for  duty  this  morning  in  my  brigade,  3,324;  i 
Spinola’s,  3,411;  in,  Gibbs’  (including  250  of  Wessells’  men)  3,0.;. 
Hence  it  appears  that  by  adding  one  regiment  to  either  of  the  U- 
gades  the  7,000  ordered  will  take  but  two  brigades.  Which  two  slil 
I send  ? Please  answer  soon  as  possible. 

O.  S.  FEEEY, 

Brigadier-  General 


Fort  Monroe,  December  26,  1862 


Brigadier-General  Ferry  : 

Take  Spinola’s  and  add  to 
sells’  men  in  your  brigade. 
7,500  from  your  command. 


it  a regiment  of  600  men,  and  put  V • 
Naglee  has  many  sick,  and  1 must  tai 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major- General 


Si-EOIAI,  Okdkus,  ) Udqks.  of  the  Aemy,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  OyricE,  ^ 


No.  414. 


Washingtonj  December  26,  1802' 

. ^ =5,  ' ♦ * * » 

VI.  Brig.  Gen.  H.  D.  Terry,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  report  for  dutyo 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  Fort  IMonroe,  Va. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : ^ ^ TOWNSEND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


IP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


495 


ijor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Uecemher  27,  1862. 


Reports  are  reaching  me  from  Carrsville  and  Windsor  of  the  appear- 
ce  of  the  enemy  in  force  on  this  side  the  river.  I have  sent  out 
>iiting  parties  with  orders  to  report  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

O.  S.  FEEEY, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Eiohteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  27,  1862. 

j.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina^  Petersburg,  Va.: 

iENERAL  : Your  favor  of  [13th]  instant  I received  to-day.  I most 
y agree  with  you  that  war  is  most  horrible  in  the  misery  and  ruin  it 
st  cause,  even  when  carried  on  according  to  the  acknowledged  rules 
Firistian  nations,  and  therefore  beg  to  call  your  attention  to  and  ask 
: was  by  your  approval  that  in  the  recent  attack  on  Plvmouth  many 
ises  and  other  buildings  were  tired,  and  to  that  extent  tWilies  rained 
I rendered  homeless ; that  only  want  of  time  prevented  other  damage 
ng  done.  I would  also  call  your  attention  to  the  case  of  Mrs.  Phelps, 
3 was  shot  dead  by  a Confederate  soldier.  On  occupying  the  town 
Kinston  recently  the  streets  were  found  in  many  cases  full  of  burning 
;on,  naval  stores,  &c.,  a destruction  of  propertv  which  I do  not  know 
r approval  or  disapproval  of.  The  effect  was  that  one  house  was  set 
ire,  and  that  it  was  only  by  the  greatest  effort  of  officers  and  soldiers 
fc  a large  portion  of  the  town  was  saved  from  destruction, 
rusting  that  by  our  united  efforts  the  war  within  our  departments 
be  robbed  of  some  of  its  horrors,  I am,  general,  very  respectfullv, 
r obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Port  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  29,  1862. 

. Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

LNERAL : lour  thousand  troops  left  Suffolk  yesterday  morning  for 
ineld ; they  will  arrive  to-day.  Four  thousand  live  hundred  left  and 
leave  within  twenty-four  hours,  commencing  at  sunset  last  evening, 
^ater.  The  remaining  3,500  will  be  sent  as  rapidly  as  transports 
ve— part  to-morrow  and  the  rest,  I think,  by  the  2d  of  January;  per- 
8 before.  1 send  you  every  old  regiment  I have  except  one,  which 
I this  fort. 

lie  hundred  tons  ammunition  leave  to-morrow  for  Beaufort.  Two 
*«arid  shovels  and  spades  and  the  sand-bags  are  here  and  will  go 
I the  ammunition.  Part  of  the  wagons  and  ambulances  go  with  the 
ps ; the  rest  will  be  sent  in  time. 

•elieve  nothing  has  been  left  undone.  The  bearer  will  receive  any 


496 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX: 


coiiiniaiuls  you  uiay  luive  for  Wasliiiigtoii  or  me.  Let  me  know  if  1 cii 

do  anything  here.  , , r 

Wishing  you  a success  equal  to  that  at  Cioldsborough,  i am,  lespet 


fully  and  truly,  yours, 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


P.  s._i  found  a change  in  the  troops  at  Suflolk  necessary.  You  w 
get— 

1.  Ferry’s  brigade,  iucludiiig  300  of  Wessells’  men 3,0 

2.  Spinola’s  brigade 

3.  Naglee’s  brigade h' 

4.  Index)endent  Battalion,  New  York 

!!,» 


Some  convalescents  will  carry  the  number,  I think,  above  12,000. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  20, 1802, 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

General  Foster’s  arrangement  with  me  was  to  have  everything  i 
North  Carolina  bv  the  4th  proximo,  before  which  day  lie  could  not  5 
ready  to  land  and"  prepare  the  troops  to  march.  The  day  for  marclne 
was  lixed  for  the  8th.  I think  it  proper  to  advise  you  of  these  arraii- 
ments  and  of  what  I have  done.  I have  just  sent  a special  messeng 
to  him  with  the  following  information : 


Four  thousand  troops  left  Suffolk  for  Chowan  River  yesteiahy  morning ; 4,500  1 


and  to  leave  by  water  yesterday  and  to-day;  remaining  3,500  leave  as  fast  as  to 
- , ,,  .1  T o One  bun(ii 


norts  arrive — part  to-morrow  and  the  rest  by  January  2 at  farthest, 
tons  ammunition,  2,000  spades  and  shovels,  and  10,000  sand-bags  leave  to-morr'. 
Part  of  wagons  and  ambulances  go  with  troops ; the  rest  in  time. 


JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  December  29, 1802 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : 

Colonel  Gibbs  was  sent  out  early  yesterday  morning  toward  tke  Bl^ 
water  to  occupy  the  attention  of  the  enemy  while  a force  ot  4,000 
for  General  Foster  went  down  to  the  Chowan.  The  colonel  tell  in  vn 
the  enemy’s  scouts  a short  distance  from  our  pickets,  drove  them,  iju 
captured  9.  They  report  Pryor  4 miles  on  this  side  of  the  BlackwiJi 
with  two  brigades  of  infantry,  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  nme  puf^ 
of  artillery.  I send  Corcoran’s  brigade  from  Newport  News  to  buliK 
to-day.  General  Feny  will  leave  Suffolk  with  3,500  men  as  fast  as  tn^ 
portation  can  be  furnished,  commencing  this  evening.  The  Fourth  J> 
aware  and  One  hundred  and  fifteenth  New  York  have  arrived  at  < 
town,  where  my  infantry  was  reduced  to  1,700  by  the  withdrawa  ' 
Xaglee’s  brigade.  Two  or  three  good  regiments  in  addition  to  the  ^ 
have  would  enable  me  to  drive  Pryor  across  the  Blackwater, 
is  re-eiiforceil.  To  give  success  to  General  Poster’s  nioveineuts  1 . 
to  suggest  that  General  Burnsitle  sliould  press  tbe  enemy  inwssaT^ 


Major-Gcnen 


fAP.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


497 


Washington^  D.  0.,  Becemher  30, 1862. 
njor-General  Burnside,  Falmouth: 

General  Dix  telegraphs  that  in  order  to  succeed  in  his  own  and  Fos- 
5Us  operations  it  will  be  necessary  that  you  occupy  and  press  the 
lemy  so  as  to  prevent  large  detachments. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief, 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  December  30,  1862. 
aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

When  I telegraphed  you  in  regard  to  my  force  I had  before  me  the 
st  return  from  Suffolk,  which  did  not  embrace  the  four  last-arrived 
mnsylvania  regiments,  so  that  after  sending  12,000  men  to  Foster  my 
jgregate  for  duty  was  15,500  instead  of  12,000.  The  addition  of  the 
)urth  Delaware  and  One  hundred  and  fifteenth  Kew  York,  now  here, 
ves  me  an  effective  force  of  16,900. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


December  30, 1862. 

ajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Mo7iroe  : 

The  ship  at  Norfolk  draws  14J  feet  of  water.  No  vessel  drawing 
ore  than  9 feet  can  enter  the  harbor  of  my  destination.  The  captain 
the  ship  has  sealed  orders  and  no  other.  I fear  he  will  carry  my 
?iment  away  from  its  destination.  My  men  have  but  three  days’  ra- 
ms from  this  morning.  If  the  vessel  is  to  sail,  much  more  will  be 
eded  j if  to  be  towed  by  steam-tugs,  they  will  still  require  more  than 
ey  have. 

O.  S.  FEREY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


December  30, 1862. 

ijor-General  Dix,  Fortress  Monroe : 

I have  turned  over  the  command  of  this  post  to  General  Corcoran, 
10  ranks  me.  I have  sent  the  Sixty-seventh  Ohio  Regiment,  610  men, 
d the  convalescent  sick,  and  officers  of  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
mt  of  Spinola’s  brigade,  numbering  in  all  nearly  200  more,  together 
th  the  ammunition  and  camp  and  garrison  equipage  of  the  Sixty-sev- 
jth  Ohio,  to  Norfolk  this  morning  to  embark  on  the  transport  expected 
3re  this  morning  according  to  your  dispatch  of  yesterday.  When  can 
expect  more  transports,  and  how  many  % 

O.  S.  FERRY, 

Brigadier-  General. 


\ Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

' . ^ New  Berne,  N.  C.,  December  31, 1862. 

►j.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Ya.: 

&Ep:RAL ; I have  the  lioiior  to  inclose  copy  of  a letter  addressed  to  me 
: His  Excellency  Edward  Stanly,  Military  Governor  of  North  Caro- 

i 32  R u — VOL  XVIII 


498 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XXJ 


liua.  The  letter  explains  itself,  and  I have  merely  to  request  an  aiiswt 
from  you  whether  the  acts  complained  of  by  the  Governor  have  you 
sanction  ; and  whether,  as  he  desires  to  know,  the  negroes  mentione 
will  be  returned  to  their  master I also  beg  leave  to  inclose  a slip  froi 
the  Kaleigh  Standard  in  relation  to  the  prisoners  recently  paroled  an 
released  by  me  at  Kinston  and  other  places  between  here  and  Gold; 
borough,  and  request  to  know  whether  these  men  are  compelled  to  pej 
form  the  duties  therein  stated  contrary  to  their  parole  of  honor.  Som 
time  during  the  latter  part  of  November  Surgeon  Hunt,  post  surgeo: 
at  Washington,  N.  0.,  while  taking  a ride  outside  of  our  lines,  was  lire^ 
upon  by  parties  in  ambush  and  killed  immediately.  His  person  wii 
rifled,  and,  among  other  things,  a watch  was  taken  from  him  which  h 
relatives  are  very  anxious  to  obtain  possession  of.  If  it  is  within  yoi 
power  will  you  please  have  this  watch  returned  1 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne j N.  0.,  December  29, 18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding.,  &c. : 

General  : I have  been  informed  that  a i)ortion  of  the  forces  of  tl 
enemies  of  the  United  States  recently  invaded  the  county  of  Washin 
ton  and,  among  other  deiiredations  committed  upon  innocent  citizen 
they  seized  and  carried  away  against  their  consent  and  against  tl 
consent  of  their  owners  a large  number  of  slaves.  From  the  home 
Mr.  M.  Bowen  they  took  away  several  of  his  negroes  who  had  be( 
faithful  to  him,  and  whom  he  protected  and  humanely  supported.  Tli 
outrage  has  not  the  defense  attempted  for  the  African  slave  trade,  ‘-tli 
it  brought  uncivilized  beings  under  the  influence  of  Christianity  ai 
civilization.”  This  robbery  takes  civilized  beings  from  their  fainili 
and  homes;  it  deprives  a kind  master  of  his  property  and  puuisli 
slaves  for  their  fidelity  to  him.  I cannot  believe  the  good  people  ' 
North  Carolina  will  justify  such  conduct.  To  the  barbarous  and  wi 
ful  burning  of  the  town  of  Plymouth  by  the  enemy  your  attention  li 
already  been  called,  and  of  that  nothing  more  need  be  said.  As  t 
voice  of  civil  authority  outside  of  our  lines  has  no  longer  any  poteiic 
I solicit  your  intervention  with  those  commanding  the  forces  of  t 
so-called  Confederate  States,  that  we  may  ascertain  by  what  rules  tl 
war  is  to  be  conducted,  and  whether  those  negroes  to  wbom  I lia 
referred  are  to  be  delivered  uj)  to  those  to  whom  their  services  may 
due. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

ED.  STANLY, 
Military  Governor,  cU 


499 


:HAl^XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


Ihstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  of  Virginia,  Maj.  Gen.  John  A Dix  commandinn 
for  the  month  ofDeeemher,  1862  (headquartis  Pa.) 


Command. 


Present  for 
duty. 


ort  Monroe,  Fa.— Maj.  Gen.  J.  A.  Dix  and  staff. . . . 
ort  Monroe.— Col.  S.  M.  Alford : ' 

3d  New  York  Infantry 

Attacked  garrison * 

.tt»p  Hamilton.— Col.  A.  Conk : 

139tk  New  York  Infantry 

Two  batteries  and  three  companies  artiilery.”."!* 

One  company  cavalry f 

orfolk,  Va. — Brig.  Gen.  E.  L.  Viele  and  staff 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 

tffoU:,  Ya. — Major-General  Peck  and  staff. 

Brigadier-General  Corcoran’s  brigade 

Col.  E.  8.  Foster,  First  Provisional  Brigade * ! 1 1 

Col.  A.  Gibbs,  Second  Provisional  Brigade. . . 

Lieut.  D.J.  Bailey,  detachment  Company  I,  Ninety- 
ninth  New  York  Infantry.  ^ 

Brigadier-General  Ferry’s  brigade 

Brigadier-General  Wessells’  brigade * 

Brigadier-General  Spinola’s  brigade 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

tr^wn. — Maj. Gen. E. D. Keyes  and  staff..  . 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry 


643 


Grand  total. 


128 

3 

1 


124 

173 


704 

455 

75 


2,579 

131 


10 

10 

182 

18 

36 


2, 630 
3, 158 
1,  906 
50 


1, 569 
396 


3, 175 
403 
843 


945  18, 759 


20 


27 


817 

537 

84 


150 

55 


2,952 
3,  830 
2,430 
57 


2,097 
456 
10 
3, 819 
.478 
1,054 


22, 787 


836 

27 

854 

669 

85 

7 

3, 487 
195 
82 

8 

3, 050 
4,572 
2,  870 


2, 169 
494 
10 
4,568 
674 
1,162 


25,  898 


‘3 


S-a  S 
txa  § 

bccs  9 


20 

830 

27 

872 

433 

85 

8 

3,  520 
199 
82 
7 


1,  979 

""59 


3, 723 
3,  959 
1, 792 
2, 188 
517 
10 
5,933 
686 
1. 180 


28, 109 


2 

"S  . 

0--I 

CD 

<0 

o 

2 


12 


28 


SUMMAEY. 


neral,  and  staff  officers,  &c. 

'antry 

tillery 

v'alry 

Total 


39 
. 756 

47 
103 

3 

14, 845 

1,  385 

2,  526 

42 
17,  807 
1,648 
3,  290 

45 
20,  296 

2,  059 

3,  498 

45 
22,  667 
1,862 
3,  535 

64 

4 

945 

18,  759 

22,  787 

25,  898 

28, 109 

68 

‘'“’V ■'ospective  brigades,  were  trass- 

One  hundred  and  Department  of  North  Carolina,  and  replaced  by 


500  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S..E.  VIRGINIA.  [Ciiai.  XXiJ 

Abstract  from  Motithly  Return  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Maj.  Gen.  John  (jj 
Foster  commanding,  for  the  month  of  December,  1862  {headguarters  New  Berne,  N.  C.). 


Command. 


Eighteenth  Army  Corps  (Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster) 

First  Division  (Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  W essells) 

Naglee’s  brigade 

lleckman’s  brigade 

Amory’s  brigade 

Lee’s  brigade 

Artillery 

Cavalry  (Mix’s) 

Total 


Present  for 
duty. 

4^ 

D 

CO 

4^ 

1 , 

45  45 

C ® : 
OJ  cc  , 

02 

u 

o 

o 

o 

Men. 

P4 

1 

M 

S) 

blj 

ci 

WW 
£ § 
fcJO 

E r 
-SJiri 

tn  f- 

ua 

btcs 

<1 

15 

201 

3, 996 

5,  962 

7,  087 

3.‘ji 

195 

3, 700 

4,380 

5,  802 

96 

2, 236 

2, 847 

3,  759 

'”3,' 8 

120 

2,  850 

3, 510 

3,683 

108 

2,  802 

3,  .526 

3,  879 

3,  !i 

58 

1,400 

1,  732 

2, 230 

2,]i 

43 

658 

860 

930 

( 

821 

17,  642 

21,  917 

27,  385 

17,1 

OTganizdtion  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  North  Cctrolincc  [Eighteen 
Army  Corps),  Maj.  Gen.  J.  O.  Foster,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding^  Dece) 
her  31, 1802.* 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells. 


Fh'st  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  C.  Hunt. 

85tli  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  J.  Well- 
man. 

92d  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Hiram  An- 
derson, jr. 

96tli  New  York,  Capt.  George  W.  Hinds. 

85th  Penusylvania,  Col.  J.  B.  Howell. 

101st  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  D.  M.  Ar- 
mor. 

103d  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  C. 
Maxwell. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson. 

10th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  Robert  Lt 
gett. 

24th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  A.  ( 
born. 

44th  Massachusetts,  Col.  F.  L.  Lee. 

5th  Rhode  Island,  Maj.  George  W.Tei 


UNATTACHED. 


Amory’s  Brigade. 


Beds  Brigade. 


Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amoky. 


Col.  H.  C.  Lee. 


17th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  Fel- 
lows. 

43d  Massachusetts,  Col.  C.  L.Holbrook. 
45th  Massachusetts,  Col.  C.  R.  Codman. 
51st  Massachusetts,  Col.  A.  B.  R.  Sprague. 


5th  Massachusetts,  Col.  George  H.  Pc- 
son. 

25th  Massachusetts,  Maj.  Josiah  Picke. 
27th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Luke  1- 
man.  ' 

46th  Massachusetts,  Col.  George  Bowlo 


* The  division  and  unattached  brigades  were  organized  and  the  commanders  , 
sio-ued  by  General  Orders,  No.  84,  Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Decern 
2i^  1862.  The  regimental  commanders  in  First  Division  are  given  as  stated  in 


order. 


3AP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


501 


Seekman’s  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Charles  A.  Heckman. 

5d  Massachusetts,  Col.  Silas  P.  Rich- 
ujoud. 

3th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Fred.  J.  Coffin, 
{d  Massachusetts,  Maj.  John  G.  Cham- 
bers. 

Ith  New  Jersey,  Maj.  Abram  Zabriskie. 


Artillery. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Ledlie. 

3d  New  York  (eleven  companies),  Maj.' 
H.  M.  Stone. 

23d  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  A.  Ransom. 
24th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  J.  E.  Lee. 
1st  Rhode  Island,  Battery  F,  Capt.  J. 
Belger. 

1st  U.  S.,  Battery  C,  Lieut.  C.  Hook. 


CAVALRY. 


Third  New  York,  Col.  S.  H.  Mix. 

DETACHMENT  FOURTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Naglee^s  Brigade."^ 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee. 

1th  Maine,  Col.  H.  M.  Plaisted. 

(ith  NewYork,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  ,J.  Wheeler. 

1st  New  York,  Col.  J.  J.  De  Forest. 

8th  New  York,  Col.  Charles  Durkee. 

0th  NeAv  York,  Col.  George  B.  Dandy. 


inaependent  New  York  Battalion,  Lieut, 
Col.  Felix  Comfort. 

52d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  JohnC.  Dodge. 
104th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  D. 
Hart. 


Headquarters  First  Brigade, 
Morehead  City,  N.  €.,  January  1,  18G3. 
eut.  Col.  H.  T.  Yan  Buren,  Fortress  Monroe  : 

Colonel  : I would  respectfully  report  the  arrival  at  this  port  of  the 
earner  Cahawba,  with  the  Eleventh  Maine  and  Ninety-eighth  New 
ork.  We  found  entering  the  harbor  just  before  us  the  Kennebec 
ith  the  Eighty-first  New  York,  and  that  the  Belvidere  had  discharged 
lO  One  himdredth  New  York.  Off  Hatteras  we  parted  our  hawser  and 
ft  the  ship  Montebello.  Soon  thereafter  the  wind  shifted  to  the  west 
jid  afterward  to  the  northwest,  whicli  will  insure  her  prompt  arrival 
le  two  monitors  behaved  admirably,  and  although  we  had  quite  a 
'avy  blow  they  stood  it  with  no  apparent  difficultv.  At  daylight  of 
e 31st,  when  we  saw  them  last,  the  storm  had  abated  and  the  indica- 
ms were  all  very  favorable. 

I have  to  report  to  General  Foster  at  1 p.  m. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

HENBY  M.  NAGLEE, 

Brigadier- Qeneral, 


: , ^ Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  1, 1863. 

Mineral  Yiele,  Norfollc : ? ? j ? 

: I learn  that  a leading  citizen  of  Norfolk  has  been  trying  to  incite  the 
ilchers  of  the  Ninety-ninth  New  York  to  murder  negroes.  If  there  is 
|ch  a feeling  existing  the  procession  which  is  to  take  place  to-day 
1st  be  watched  and,  if  necessary,  stopped,  not  only  on  account  of  the 
iiing  referred  to  but  for  the  security  of  the  negroes  themselves. 

JOHN  A.  BIX, 

_ Major-General. 


First  Brigade,  Peck’s  division. 


502 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Norfolk,  January  1,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

I have  taken  every  precaution  to  prevent  disturbances  to-day.  ]' 
know  the  procession  will  be  a source  of  deep  mortification  to  the  inso 
lent  secessionists  here,  but  I have  not  felt  like  pleasing  them  by  stop 
ping  it.  It  will  be  certainly  very  harmless  as  far  as  the  negroes  ar« 
concerned.  If  I knew  the  name  of  the  person  you  refer  to  I would  ar 
rest  him. 

EGBEET  L.  YIELE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Norfolk,  January  1,  1863. 


Major-General  Dix: 

The  procession  passed  off  without  any  disturbance.  There  were  abou 
4,000  persons  in  it. 

EGBEET  L.  YIELE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

January  2,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 

Major-General  Halleok,  General-in- Chief and 
General  M.  O.  Meigs,  Quartermaster-General: 

I have  been  exceedingly  unlucky  in  regard  to  transports  for  troop 
to  North  Carolina.  The  New  York  and  Georgia,  after  being  loaded 
were  given  up  as  unseawoi  thy.  The  Belvidere  returned  from  Beanfoi 
the  day  before  yesterday  for  a second  load,  broken  down,  and  has  goiM 
to  Baltimore  for  repairs.  The  Connecticut  was  loaded  with  wagon 
and  horses,  and  came  down  from  Yorktown  this  morning,  but  her  crev 
refused  to  go  to  sea.  On  examination  she  also  proves  unseawortby 
and  I am  now  trying  to  get  the  John  Brooks  to  take  them.  She  lia 
just  arrived  for  service  at  Washington,  and  her  captain  objects  to  goiu^ 
to  sea,  as  her  boilers  are  on  her  guards.  The  weather  is  very  fine  am 
I think  she  will  go.  In  that  case  the  Connecticut  will  take  Iier  place  a 
Washington.  Ten  thousand  troops  have  gone;  there  are  2,000  to  gc 
The  Cahawba  should  have  been  back  last  night  with  a transport  sailin; 
vessel  in  tow.  If  they  get  in  to-night  there  will  be  time  to  meet  Genera 
Fosters  arrangements.  I thought  you  ought  to  know  the  insufficiency 
of  your  steamboats  for  emergencies. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yirginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe.)  January  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

General  : We  have  been  very  unfortunate  in  transports.  WeiiaV 
liad  to  unload  two,  and  two  others  returned  here  from  Beaufort  broke’ 
down.  To-night  I send  you  1,000  men  in  the  Cahawba;  to-morrow,  80 
in  the  Expounder.  There  will  be  but  100  or  200  left;  these  I expect  t 
send  to-morrow  night. 

The  aggregate  force  I have  set  apart  for  you  is  14,000.  You  wi 
have  12,000  efiectives.  I retain  the  sick. 


tlAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— ^UNION. 


503 


I believe  everything  has  been  done  that  was  possible.  If  our  trans- 
orts  had  not  failed  every  man  would  have  been  with  you  to-day.  As 
, is,  the  last  will  only  be  two  days  behind. 

Wishing  you  every  success,  I am,  yours,  truly, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


NOFFICIAL.J  HdQRS.  DePT.  OF  YlROINIA,  SEVENTH  A.  O., 

Fort  Monroe j January  3,  1863. 

lajor-General  Halleck  :] 

My  Dear  General  : When  I came  here  I undertook  to  examine  all 
ises  of  disloyalty  and  misdemeanors  of  all  sorts,  but  I was  compelled 
> give  it  up.  To  relieve  myself  of  this  labor,  impossible  for  me  to 
Brform,  1 appointed  a provost  judge,  who  has  tried  all  such  cases  and 
‘utenced  to  punishment.  All  capital  cases  have  been  referred  to  mil- 
ary commissions.  Those  which  have  been  brought  before  him  are 
ises  of  theft,  rioting,  &c.  The  criminals  were  both  black  and  white, 
be  highest  penalty  he  has  ever  inflicted  is  imprisonment  for  sixty 
lys.  My  authority  to  issue  such  an  order  has  been  questioned.  To 
e it  seems  very  clear.  There  is  no  civil  magistrate  in  this  county,  or, 
deed,  in  any  part  of  the  territory  constituting  my  department.  I 
lould  be  glad,  if  I am  right,  to  be  fortified  by  your  opinion,  which  I 
ily  ask  for  my  own  satisfaction.  A single  word  in  reply  will  oblige  me. 

I am,  dear  sir,  truly,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

[In  closure.] 

ENERAL  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Army  Corps, 

6.  ) Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  June  "11,  1802. 

Capt.  John  A.  Bolles,  aide-de-camp,  is  hereby  appointed  provost  judge, 
id  as  such  authorized  and  ordered  to  hold  a court  for  the  trial  of  all 
ses,  civil  and  criminal  (not  military),  that  may  arise  within  the  limits 
this  command  and  be  brought  before  him,  under  such  rules  and  regu- 
tions  as  he  may  establish  j said  court  to  be  held  at  such  times  and 
aces  within  this  command  as  he  msiy  designate. 

Captain  Bolles  will  appoint  one  or  more  provost  clerks,  whose  duty 
will  be,  under  his  direction,  to  issue  all  orders,  writs,  and  processes 
quisite  to  the  prompt  and  efficient  administration  of  justice,  and  also 
preserve  full  and  accurate  records  of  the  proceedings  of  said  court, 
le  several  provost-marshals  and  their  deputies  to  whom  such  orders. 
Its,  and  processes  are  directed  will  execute  the  same,  without  delay, 
accordance  with  the  precepts  therein  contained,  and  the  same  will  be 
q)ected  and  obeyed  as  orders  from  these  headquarters. 

Full  authority  is  given  to  Captain  Bolles  as  provost  judge  to  hear  and 
y all  causes,  civil  and  criminal  (not  military),  which  may  come  before 
in,  and  to  determine  and  decide  the  same  as  far  as  may  be  conform a- 
a with  the  established  laws  of  the  United  States  and’ of  the  several 
ates  applicable  thereto,  and  where  such  laws  are  not  applicable  or 
e not  sufficient  for  the  ends  of  justice,  according  to  his  best  judgment 
,d  understanding  of  the  principles  of  justice,  equity,  and  good  con- 
,ience,  subject  in  all  cases  to  appeal  from  his  decisions  to  the  major- 
neral  of  the  army  corps. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Dix: 

D.  T.  VAX  BUBEX, 
Assistant- A dju  tant-  Genera  1. 


I 


504 


NORTti  CAROLim  An!)  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  3, 18C3. 
M.  C.  Meigs,  Quartermaster- General : 

The  Expounder  has  just  returned  in  good  order  and  leaves  again  to 
morrow.  If  I can  have  the  Spaulding  by  to-morrow  night  I can  c]os(j 
up  in  time  for  General  Foster,  leaving  nothing  undone.  The  storui 
which  destroyed  the  monitor  and  crippled  twm  of  our  steamers  took  tw( 
of  our  sailing-vessel  transports  from  their  tugs.  One  was  recoverec 
and  the  other  is  no  doubt  safe.  Over  10,000  troops  have  reached  thei' 
destination.  One  thousand  go  to-morrow  morning  and  800  to-morrov 
night. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  January  3,  1863. 

Major-General  Fort  Monroe : 

Ferry  reports  an  increase  of  field  artillery  on  the  Blackwater  to  fou 
full  batteries.  He  says  they  have  a shot-proof  battery  of  two  heav;| 
guns  at  Franklin,  made  of  railroad  iron ; also  a four-gun  work  at  Black 
water  Bridge,  on  each  side  of  the  river,  from  which  point  they  can  flan' 
and  threaten  our  columns  moving  on  Franklin  or  Zuni.  Have  you  an, 
sand-bags  to  spare  for  our  works  ^ 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  January  4,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffollc: 

General  Foster’s  transports  are  at  Winfield.  If  it  is  thought  best  k 
the  rest  of  the  troops  march  there  with  three  days’  rations.  If  not,  sen 
down  one  or  two  companies  of  cavalry  with  an  order  to  the  transport 
to  return  to  New  Berne.  In  the  latter  case  advise  me,  that  I may  sen 
a topographical  officer  to  take  some  notes. 

^ ^ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  January  4, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 

After  consultation,  Ferry  will  march  in  the  morning  to  the  point  ind 
cated  in  your  telegram.  I deem  it  best  to  send  a squadron  along.  Wi 
send  more  w'omen  [cavalry ‘?]  if  you  think  best. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  January  4, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffollc: 

I think  a squadron  enough.  You  are  the  best  judge  from  the  infc 
mation  you  possess.  General  Foster  passed  through  here  to-day 
Washington,  and  will  be  at  New  Berne  on  Wednesday  night.  He  sa. 
the  road  to  Winfield  is  not  through  Gatesville,  but  through  Sunbu 
and  Mintonsville.* 

#**#**♦ 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


COEEESPONDENCfe,  ETC. UNIOJT. 


505 


[Jhap.  XXX. j 


Foet  Moneoe,  January  4,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk: 

How  many  men  have  been  sent  from  Suffolk,  including  Spinola’s  com- 
mand, which  marched  to  the  Chowan,  and  the  Fifty-eighth  Pennsyl- 
vania, which  went  to  Norfolk  this  morning  ? 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  January  4,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 

Six  thousand  seven  hundred  and  four  have  gone,  independent  of  Wes- 
sellsj  1,200  to  go. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquaetees  Eighteenth  Aemy  Coeps, 

New  Berne,  N.  (7.,  January  5,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Dejyartment  of  Virginia : 

Geneeal:  Your  dispatch  to  Major-General  Foster,  who  is  absent, 
^as  delivered  this  10  a.  m. 

The  troops  referred  to  by  you,  ^‘Naglee’s  brigade,”  have  all  arrived, 
bhe  only  loss  being  one  mule  that  jumped  overboard  on  the  night  of  the 
storm  of  December  30.  Of  General  Ferry^s  brigade,  the  One  hundred 
ind  seventy-fourth  Pennsylvania  and  the  Sixty-second  Ohio  have  ar- 
rived. The  Passaic,  although  badly  strained,  is  under  repair,  and  the 
prospects  of  rendering  her  immediately  serviceable  are  entirely  satis- 
factory. 

The  Montauk  arrived  off  the  harbor  of  Beaufort  yesterday  morning, 
when  the  coast  pilot,  in  foolishly  attemx^ting  to  enter,  ran  aground  upon 
Che  outer  bar.  I am  most  happy  to  advise  you  that  the  vessel  floated 
IS  the  tide  flooded  and  came  in  without  harm,  having  made  the  voyage 
:n  the  most  satisfactory  manner. 

I am,  truly,  yours, 

HENEY  M.  NAGLEE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Suffolk,  January  7,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

General  Ferry  is  at  Holly  Springs,  near  Winfield.  No  transports 
ire  there,  and  he  is  out  of  rations,  which  I am  sending  him.  The  trans- 
ports sailed  for  New  Berne  Monday.  What  shall  he  do  % 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Weldon,  N.  O.,  January  7 [6],  1863. 
Haj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Fostee,  IT.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

Geneeal  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
Jluiiication  of  the  31st  ultimo  and  a copy  of  a letter  addnvssed  to  you 
By  Edward  Stanly,  who  signs  himself  Military  Governor  of  North  Car- 


506 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


olina.  In  relation  to  prisoners  of  war  when  they  have  been  paroled  1 
can  say  that  never  to  my  knowledge  have  they  been,  nor  have  I ever 
heard  of  their  having  been,  employed  in  the  performance  of  any  duty 
lor  the  Government.  As  my  Government  has  so  faithfully  respected 
the  parole  of  prisoners  I am  the  more  astonished  that  you  should  have 
brought  a merely  hearsay  rumor  that  came  to  the  ears  of  tlie  editor  of 
tlje  Italeigh  Standard  to  my  notice,  when  an  order  was  issued  from  the 
War  Department  of  the  United  States  requiring,  as  I remember,  paroled 
l)nsoners  to  instruct  recruits,  garrison  fortresses  in  the  rear  of  the  army, 
CiikI  guard  prisoners.  While  our  press — as  the  extract  you  send  me 
sliows — would  denounce  such  violations  of  a parole  of  honor,  I have 
seen  yours  teeming  with  the  demand  that  the  prisoners  you  have  cap- 
tured and  paroled  should  be  sent  to  Minnesota  to  repel  the  Indians  then 
at  war  with  your  people.  You  ask  me  to  answer  whether  the  acts  com- 
plained  of  by  Governor  Stanly  have  my  sanction,  “ and  whether,  as  he 
desires  to  know,  the  negroes  mentioned  will  be  returned  to  their  mas- 
ter U’  His  allegation  is  that  our  forces  recently  invaded  the  county  of 
Washington  and,  among  other  depredations  committed  upon  innocent 
citizens,  we  seized,  carried  away,  against  the  consent  of  their  owners,  a 
large  number  of  slaves ; that  from  the  house  of  Mr.  M.  Bowen  we  took 
away  several  of  his  negroes  who  had  been  faithful  to  him  and  whom  he 
protected  and  humanely  supported  5 that  this  outrage  has  not  the  de- 
fense attempted  for  the  African  slave  trade — “ that  it  brought  uncivilized 
beings  under  the  influence  of  Christianity  and  civilization  ; that  this 
robbery  takes  civilized  beings  from  their  families  and  homes ; it  de- 
jirives  a kind  master  of  his  property  and  punishes  slaves  for  their 
fidelity  to  him.  It  is  true  our  forces  did  invade  the  county  of  Wash- 
ington, and  the  officer  in  command  did  report  to  me  that  he  brought 
out  with  him  some  negroes.  Mr.  Stauly  is  a representative  of  the 
United  States  Government,  and  I take  it  for  granted  speaks  by  au- 
thority, and  if  it  be  the  determination  of  your  Government  to  deliver 
uj)  to  their  owmers  the  100,000  slaves  you  have  stolen  from  their  kind 
and  humane  masters  I am  sure  my  Government  will  immediately  cause 
this  one  little  act  of  ‘‘robbery”  to  be  discountenanced  and  cause  the 
negroes  to  be  restored,  and  thus  return  to  their  kind  masters  their 
property;  and  to  this  end  I will  transmit  to  the  proper  authority  your 
communication  and  Mr.  Stanly’s  letter. 

As  it  is  an  acknowledged  principle  among  Christian  nations  to  re- 
spect private  property  on  land  I am  sure  my  Government  will  hail  this 
as  an  evidence  that  hereafter  you  will  cease  to  deprive  private  citizens 
of  their  private  property.  I deplore  as  much  as  Mr.  Stanly  does  this 
taking  of  civilized  beings  from  their  families  and  homes  and  depriving 
owners  of  their  i)roperty,  and  I would  it  wxue  the  only  robbery  of  the 
kind  that  has  occurred ; but  so  many  have  been  committed  by  the  forces 
of  the  United  States  tliat  it  is  now  regarded  as  legitimate  and  propei’, 
“fit  and  necessary  war  measure.”  As  IMr.  Stanly  says  the  voice  of  civil 
authority  outside  your  lines  has  no  longer  any  i)otency,  you  may  rest 
assured  I wall  do  all  in  my  power  to  have  those  negroes  delivered  up  to 
those  to  whom  their  services  may  be  due,  and  wall  in  every  way  dis- 
countenance and  forbid  negro  stealing,  and  in  this  I am  sure  both  you 
and  the  good  people  of  North  Carolina  wall  justify  me. 

I do  not  think  the  town  of  Plymouth  was  barbarously  and  wallfully 
burned,  but,  as  reported  to  me,  a house  was  fired  in  which  your  troopt" 
made  a stand  and  from  which  they  fired  on  our  troops.  Such  thing? 
wall  happen  in  wair,  and  often  for  no  cause  except  the  spirit  of  destruc 
tion,  as  seen  on  the  banks  of  tlM‘  ]\iississippi,  the  Potomac,  Boanoke, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


507 


RappabanDock,  and  the  James  Ewers,  where  cities,  towns,  and  private 
residences,  as  a rule,  have  been  burned  or  battered  down  by  your  land 
and  naval  forces. 

I regret  very  much  that  in  this  street  fight  a woman  was  killed.  It 
was  first  brought  to  my  knowledge  by  a letter  which  was  received  from 
you,  and  it  should  be  regretted  that  accidents  of  the  same  kind  occurred 
trom  the  batteries  of  General  Burnside  when  they  opened  on  the  city  of 
Fredericksburg. 

Surgeon  Hunt  was  riding  with  a party  of  soldiers  when  he  was  killed, 
and  in  the  official  report  to  me  he  was  called  and  believed  to  be  a lieu- 
tenant in  command  of  a scouting  party.  I will  at  once,  general,  write 
to  the  captain  of  the  company  to  which  the  attacking  force  belonged 
and  do  all  in  my  power  to  find  the  watch,  and  if  successful  will  send  it 
to  you  that  you  may  place  it  in  the  hands  of  his  relatives. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  FEENOH, 

Major- General j Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  January  7,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk: 


General  Foster  is  here  and  is  leaving  for  I^ew  Berne.  Will  send  the 
transports  back  immediately.  The  officer  in  charge  was  to  have  awaited 
rour  orders.  I fear  they  cannot  be  back  till  Saturday.  If  you  cannot 
ieep  Ferry  supplied  with  rations  he  must  forage  on  the  country.  Send 
lim  a courier.  It  may  be  necessary  to  keep  the  enemy^s  attention  oc- 
cupied in  the  direction  of  Franklin  so  that  Ferry  may  not  be  molested. 
[ expect  to  send  you  more  troops  shortly.  Eosecrans’  victory  is  com- 
)lete. 


Major-General  Dix: 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Suffolk,  January  8,  1863. 


Spear  was  still  near  Holland’s  at  6 p.  m.,  and  reports  a very  lar^-e  force 
)f  the  enemy  going  down  toward  Windsor  to-day. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  January  8, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe: 


General:  I have  to  acquaint  you  with  the  fact  that  I was  prevented 
rom  entering  the  gate  in  front  of  headquarters  this  evening  by  the  sen- 
tinel on  post  there.  I complain  not  of  the  sentinel,  but  of  the  order  un- 
ler  which  he  represented  that  he  acted  after  I had  announced  my  name 
incl  station. 


I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 


Aetg. 


S.  P.  LEE, 

Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


508 


NORTH  CAROLNA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CuAv.XXX.  |J 

Eort  Monroe,  Ya.,  January  9,  1863. 

Maj.  GeD.  H.  W.  Hallecic, 

General-in-Chief  : 

The  enemy  appeared  yesterday  in  considerable  force  on  this  side  of  ■ 
the  Blackwater,  and  has  been  attacking  our  pickets  about  12  miles  from 
Suffolk  with  all  arms  since  morning.  The  Kichmond  papers  mention 
that  a large  number  of  our  troops  have  been  withdrawn  and  sent  to 
North  Carolina,  and  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  the  enemy  should  con- 
centrate a heavy  force  and  attack  us,  unless  the  Army  of  the  Potomac 
can  keep  him  busy. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  January  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Genera  l-in-  Chief: 

The  One  hundred  and  fifteenth  New  York,  which  you  sent  me  last 
week,  is  ordered  to  the  Department  of  the  South  by  Secretary  of  War, 
for  burning  the  barracks  at  Chicago.*  The  regiment  is  at  Yorktowii, 
where  I am  weak,  and  I do  not  wish  to  take  any  troops  from  Suffolk  to 
supply  its  place.  Can  you  not  send  me  another  regiment  % 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 
Major- General.,  Commanding. 


New  Berne,  N.  C.,  January  9,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assista>nt  Adjutant- General^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  report  ot  Maj.  George 
W.  Cole,  of  this  regiment,  of  a reconnaissance  made  by  him  toward 
Core  Creek ; also  in  regard  to  the  alarm  at  our  picket^  station  at  the: 
brick-yard,  near  railroad  bridge,  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  instant. 

' I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

' » ^ ^ SIMON  H.  MIX, 

Colonel.,  Commanding  Third  New  Yorlc  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


[Inclosures.l 

New  Berne,  January  8, 1863. 


Col.  S.  H.  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  Netv  Yorlc  Volunteer  Cavalry : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  having  obeyed  the  order  and 
proceeded  to  the  fork  of  the  Dover  and  Neuse  roads.  I sent  detacb-; 
ments  to  the  bridges  on  Core  Creek,  and  also  to  Streets  Ferry.  Lieu- 
tenant Hall,  of  Company  G,  went  within  30  feet  of  the  bridge  on  tlie 
Dover  road,  learning  that  a company  of  Whitford’s  were  holding  the 
rifle-pits  beyond  and  were  daily  coming  across — several  yesterday. 

Captain  Pierce  went  within  300  yards,  or  near  it,  of  the  bridge  on  the 
Neitse  road;  found  no  ])ickets  in  sight,  but  learned  that  Ca])tain  Avi-^ 
rett,  of  Alabama,  with  about  90  men,  was  holding  the  pits  on  the  Neuse, 
and  that  some  20  of  his  men  were  passing  the  road  a few  hours  before, 


Cipher. 


iHAr.XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


509 


Sergeaut  Garrett,  with  a squad  of  men,  went  to  Street^s  Ferry  and  ex- 
•lianged  thirty  or  forty  shots  across  the  river  with  some  of  the  enemy 
)Osted  there.  He  also  burned  a picket  station  on  this  side  of  the  river 
)ut  destroyed  no  boats.  Meanwhile  I thoroughly  scoured  the  country 
)u  the  right  of  the  railroad,  from  Core  Creek  to  BatcheldeFs,  finding 
lone  of  the  enemy  or  any  sign  of  their  being  encamped.  Having  accom- 
)lished  the  order,  and  having  no  forage  to  last  over  night,  I marched 
after  feeding  at  the  bridge)  my  command  to  their  respective  camps, 
vhere  they  are  at  5 p.  m.  this  day  in  excellent  condition.  I believe 
rom  what  I can  learn  there  are  less  than  500  of  the  enemy  holding 
he  country  at  and  beyond  Core  Creek.  Found  the  roads  beyond 
3atchelder’s  Creek  very  good,  but  this  side  very  bad  indeed. 

Eespectfully, 

GEO.  W.  COLE, 

»>  Major^  Third  New  York  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


NTew  Berne,  January  9,  [1863.] 

lol.  S.  H.  Mix, 

Commanding  Third  New  York  Volunteer  Cavalry  : 


Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  obedience  to  orders,  in 
egard  to  the  alarm  at  the  brick-yard  picket  camp  near  railroad  bridge, 
11  charge  of  Captain  Hoane,  Forty-third  Massachusetts  Eegiment,  on 
he  night  of  January  7 : 

I was  with  my  command  at  the  railroad  bridge,  and  at  about  10 
•’clock  several  muskets  were  fired  at  the  station  of  Captain  Hoane, 
tnd  messengers  sent  to  find  the  cause  stated,  through  Captain  Whytal, 
ommanding  post,  that  Captain  Hoane  ‘^had  seen  the  enemy” — saw 
layonets  glisten  j they  were  coming  out  in  the  open  field — and  that 
laptain  Hoane  requested  the  cavalry  sent  down,  &c.  Having  been 
onsulted  by  Captain  Wfiytal  in  regard  to  firing  the  monitor,  I thought 
t not  worth  while,  but  he,  knowing  the  parties,  must  judge.  Presently 
heard  her  four  shots  j one  shell  exploded.  I then  sent  Lieutenant 
)lieldon.  Company  K,  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  Captain  Pond, 
loiiipanj^  M,  to  make  personal  examination,  and  they  reported  no 
ign  of  an  enemy,”  as  I supposed  at  first  from  the  character  of  the 
iringj  about  thirty  or  forty  shots  in  all.  All  was  then  quiet. 

Eespectfully, 

GEO.  W.  COLE, 

Major j Third  New  York  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  10, 1863. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I have  sent  the  following  to  General  Peck  at  Suffolk : 

I have  reliable  information  from  Richmond  that  10,000  infantry,  600  cavalry,  and 
wo  batteries  of  artillery,  with  from  150  to  200  wagons  left  Richmond  on  Tuesday  last, 
rossing  the  James  River.  The  wagons  would  indicate  that  they  were  not  going  far 
outh.  It  will  bo  well  to  set  inquiries  on  foot  in  the  direction  of  the  Blackwater.  and 
^ am  Colonel  Spear  of  the  possibility  of  his  being  assailed  by  a superior  force. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


510 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.) 


Suffolk,  Va.,  January  10,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe: 

Eeports  from  the  front  state  the  enemy’s  force  in  the  region  of  Wind 
sor  at  6,000,  with  six  pieces— probably  from  four  to  six.  Spear  ad 
vanced  so  far  toward  Somerton  yesterday  that  he  could  not  possibl} 
o'et  to  the  position  indicated  until  ten  or  twelve  hours  after  the  time 
He  must  now  be  near  Windsor  with  4,000,  and  ten  pieces. 

JOHH  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Plag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  Va.,  January  10,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps.  Fortress  M6nroe,  Va.  : 

General  : Y our  reply  to  my  communication  of  Thursday  evenin: 
was  received  yesterday,  and  I am  very  much  gratified  by  the  kind  term 
in  which  you  express  your  regret  at  the  occurrence  referred  to. 

1 desire  to  thank  you  for  referring  to  me  the  letter  of  the  master 
the  steamer  Champion  on  the  31st  ultimo,  and  to  state  that  Oommaude 
Foxhall  A.  Parker,  senior  naval  officer  in  York  Eiver  and  vicinity,  n 
ported  to  me  in  reply  to  my  inquiries  with  regard  to  the  suppose 
violation  of  the  blockade  at  Mob  Jack  Pay,  as  observed  bj^  Captai 
Low  that  vessels  in  heavy  weather  or  when  wind-bound  have  beei 
accustomed  to  make  a harbor  of  that  bay  under  the  protection  of  th 
suns  of  the  United  States  steamer  Crusader.  Hence  probably  the  errc^ 
of  Captain  Low.  Commander  Parker  is  confident  from  liis  kuowledg 
of  the  blockade  in  that  vicinity  that  nothing  larger  than  a canoe  hii 
succeeded  in  running  that  blockade  since  November  19,  and  even  the 

under  favor  of  night  or  thick  weather.  . i ^ 4.1 

I will  always  be  glad  to  hear  of  any  attempt  to  evade  or  violate  tt 
blockade.  In  this  spirit  I beg  to  inform  you  that  the  ofdcer  coinmam 
ing  the  United  States  steamer  Stepping  Stones  reported  to  me  undt 
date  of  the  3d  as  follows : 


The  most  popular  route  for  transportation  of  goods  aud  mformation  from  Norfo 
and  Portsmouth  appears  to  he  by  the  Dismal  Swamp  road  and  Chowan,  aud  by  tb 
route  a surprising  quantity  of  goods  are  smuggled  into  the  enemy  s lines. 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Fear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  10,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

General  Pryor  is  in  command.  We  have  caiitured  messengers  wi 
a dispatch  for  him  from  Franklin,  informing  him  that  a column  of  6,0* 
was  approachiug,  referring  to  our  moves  j pjjoK 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  10, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix:  n • r. 

The  following  is  correct : Pryor  has  on  this  side  14  pieces,  7,000  lula^ 
try,  and  1,500  cavalry.  He  crossed  at  Franklin,  learning  that  we  we 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


511 


moving  there  with  about  the  same  force.  He  told  his  friends  that  lie 
would  be  in  Suffolk  by  the  middle  of  the  week. 

Those  batteries  ought  to  be  here  at  once.  When  may  I look  for  them 

JOHN  J.  PP]OK, 

Major-  General. 


Major-General  Dix, 

Seventh  Army  Corps : 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  10, 1863. 


Our  main  column  reached  Windsor  about  11  a.  m.  and  has  been  joined 
by  a portion  of  New  York  Mounted  Eifles  by  way  of  Providence  Church 
The  enemy  falling  back  j our  troops  in  pursuit. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  January  10,  1863. 
Jajor-General  Burnside,  Falmouth.  Ya. : 

General  Dix  reports  that  a large  force  of  the  enemy  has  crossed  the 
ffackwater  and  attacked  his  pickets  at  Suffolk. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 
January  11,  1863—7.30  p.  m. 


Major-General  Foster  desires  me  to  say  that  he  requires  the  services 
t a company  of  Sappers  and  Miners,  regulars,  if  possible,  and  when 
eady  to  embark,  if  it  is  not  generally  known  where  they  are  destined, 
e would  like  to  have  them  sent  to  Beaufort  to  report  to  the  command- 
ig  officer  for  orders. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


f.  C.  Meigs,  Quartermaster- General : 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 
January  11,  1863—8  p.  m. 


Major-General  Foster  desires  me  to  say  that  on  consultation  with  Ad- 
iiral  Lee  it  was  found  that  the  naval  vessels  would  be  fully  occupied 
I towing  the  monitors,  and  that  they  could  not  be  relied  on  for  the 
•ansportation  of  troops.  He  had  therefore  requested  Colonel  Thomas 
tncially  to  take  up  any  transportation  he  thought  proper  to  replace 
le  navy  transports,  and  it  would  have  your  sanction.  He  says  he  will 
;‘quire  -^0,000  sand-bags  and  2,000  shovels  and  spades  in  addition  to 
lOse  sent  ^ him.  He  wishes  them  sent  to  the.  quartermaster  or  com- 
anding  officer  at  Beaufort. 


JOHN  A,  DIX, 

Major-General. 


512 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  IChai’.  XXS 


.1 


Suffolk,  Jamuiry  11,  18(i3 

Mai.  Geu.  John  A.  Dix,  Fort  Monroe; 

A Union  man,  wlio  gives  information  from  tlie 
Prvor  had  12,000  and  that  another  general  was  with  him.  ibe  ni| 
pression  is  that  he  designed  an  attack  here  at  night,  when  a poitiop 
was  absent.  Our  line  is,  by  survey,  over  9 miie^^^  ^ , 

Major-General.  1) 


Special  Orders 
No.  11. 


Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  ^ 

New  Berne^  Jamtarxj  11,  1863.  , 

******* 

ITT  General  Naglee,  commanding  Second  Division,  will  take  tlie  ne<| 
essarV  Ss  to  kave  his  command  prepared  to  move.  The  division  w. 
pfoSifto  Beaufort.  N.  0.;  by  rail,  and  will 

Ivio  o-op-e  and  camp  equipage  of  the  command  will  he  taken  to  Eeauioi 
by'tiie^troops.  Twelve  hours’  notice  will  be  given,  when  the  division 

‘“rv^General  Wessells,  commanding  Fourth  Divismn, 

Tiecessarv  steps  to  have  his  command  prepared  to  mo\e.  the  an  ^ ^ 
will  proceed  to  Beaufort,  K.  by  rail,  and  wdl  there  e m^ 

The  baggage  and  camp  equipage  of  the  command  will  be  bxke"  ^ ‘ ' 

fort  by  the  troops.  Twelve  hours’  notice  will  be  given  when  the 
ion  is  to  start.  ^ * * * 


By  command  of  Maj.  Geu.  J.  G.  nOFFMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjiitant- General. 


General  Orders,  > 
No.  14.  ( 


Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

^ New  Berne,  January  12,  1863. ; 

The  following-named  ofdcers^^  are  announced  as  constituting 
of  the  major-general  commanding,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  . 

‘"“Brb^Gen.  Edward  E.  Potter,  chief  of  the  staff;  Lieut.  Col.  Soiithini 
Hoftinan,  assistant  adjutant- general;  Capt.  James  H.  Strong^  anl- 
canip  and  assistant  adjutant  and  inspector  genei  al , M-b-  J-  L- 

inapl- advocate-  Mai.  John E.  Anderson,  senior  aide-de-camp  , M.ij. 

wanl  K.  Strong:  aide-de-camp ; Capt.  George  E. 

Cant  Louis  Fitzgerald,  aide-de-camp  ; Capt.  Daniel  IMcssin^c  , i 
r-olt-marshal;  Lieut.  Col.  Herman  f'S'S". 

J C.  Slaght,  assistant  quartermaster;  Capt.  Hcni>  j \ ^ 

quartermaster;  Capt.  William  Holden,  assistant  qua^mi^  U I., 
J.  J.  Bowen,  a?si« taut  quartermaster;  ^ 


ordnance  officer.  ^ 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  hOFI-^MAN,] 

^ Assistant  Adjutant- General 


* Anieiided  in  General  Orders,  No,  30,  January,  15^1863,  BO 
Taylor  as  cliiof.  signal  officer. 


as  to  include.  Cai)t.  1^* 


FTAP.  XXX.  I 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


513 


Foet  Moneoe,  Ya.,  January  13,  1863. 

[aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

The  flag  of  truee  just  arrived  from  City  Point  reports  great  activity 
n the  railroad  south  of  Eichmond.  Oars  were  heard  running  all  Sun- 
ay  night  5 whether  on  the  road  to  the  Blackwater  or  Weldon  is  not 
uite  certain.  I have  reports  from  two  sources  of  the  arrival  of  a heavy 
)rce  at  Zuni  and  of  12,000  men  near  Smithfield,  on  the  James  Eiver. 
reneral  Peck  is  trying  to  ascertain  the  truth. 

JOHN^  A.  DIX, 

Major-  G eneral. 


Foet  Moneoe,  Ya.,  January  13, 1863. 

[aji.  Gen.  H.  W.  Haeleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I have  just  received  the  following : 

^ ’Suffolk,  Va.,  January  13,  1863. 

We  haYe  just  learned  from  ^elial)l€^■wolllen  wkose  friends  from  tke  country  liave 
sen  in  since  Saturday  that  Pryor  had  12,000  men,  and  that  he  was  oxpectin^r  more 
oops;  that  they  would  have  Suffolk  anyhow.  Generally  these  reports  do  not  dis- 
rb  my  attention,  hut  now  it  is  proper  to  notice  them. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major  General. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major- General j Commanding. 


ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  13, 1863. 


Spear  reports  Pryor  to  have  reorossed,  strengthening  the  river  front, 
hich  is  the  weakest  by  far  now.  In  all  probability  the  gunboats  would 
i crippled  early. 


JOHX  J.  P.EOK, 

Major-  General. 


ajor-General  Peck,  Suffolh  : 


Foet  Moneoe,  January  13, 1863. 


1 understand  from  your  dispatch  that  Pryor  is  on  the  other  side  of 
e Blackwater.  But  I do  not  understand  what  you  mean  when  you 
y the  gunboats  would  in  all  probability  be  crippled  early. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  Jcmua/ry  1863. 


1 intended  saying  that  our  water  front  is  the  weakest,  and  that  I am 
lengthening  it,  lest  the  boats  should  be  crippled  early  in  case  of  a 
!avy  attack.  Their  machinery  is,  of  course,  exposed. 

JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


3%  E E — VOL  xvin 


514 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXXi 


HdQRS.  riFTY-EIGHTU  llEGlMENT,  PA.  YoLS.,  U.  S.  A., 

Camp  Batelielder'’s  Station^  January  13,  1803. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  while  examining  in  person  yes 
terday  the  position  at  Tuscarora  ’Station  I discovered  a small  party  o 
rebel  guerrilias  in  the  neighborhood.  As  soon  as  practicable  I sen 
one  of  my  companies  (K,  under  Lieutenant  Clay)  with  orders  to  movt; 
in  the  woods  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy  and  punish  them  for  their  i\x\ 
dacity.  Unfortunately  my  men  were  discovered  too  soon,  upon  whicll 
the  guerrillas  formed  (to  the  number  of  about  50),  but  broke  and  rai 
before  Lieutenant  Olay  could  approach  nearer  than  a quarter  of  a uiilti 
It  being  almost  dusk,  pursuit  through  the  woods  was  impracticable. 

On  the  facts  being  reported  to  me  1 ordered  two  companies  to  b 
ready  to  move  at  2 a.  m.  ^(when  the  moon  would  be  up)  and  a third  con 
pauy  at  4 a.  m.  The  former  (Companies  B and  I,  Captains  Mtdcif 
and  Buyers)  were  directed  to  move  through  the  woods,  a half  mile  0i 
the  hank  of  the  railroad,  some  5 or  G miles,  until  in  the  rear  of  the  pos 
tion  where  the  rebels  were  probably  bivouacked,  then  to  sweep  tli 
woods  backwards  to  that  position.  The  other  company  (A,  Captai 
Brown)  was  directed  to  take  post  near  the  station,  so  as  to  intercjei 
fugitives  seeking  the  Tuscarora  road.  The  officers  were  also  directe 
in  case  the  guerrillas  should  be  seen  anywhere  to  follow  them  rapidJi 
as  far  as  Core  Creek. 

My  men  have  not  yet  returned,  but  haying  no  guide  and  bein 
obliged  to  move  by  the  compass,  their  success  in  catching  those  pc 
fectly  acquainted  with  the  country  is  doubtful. 

At  dusk  and  until  about  10  p.  m.  there  was  a large  fire  on  the  ral 
road  at  some  miles  distance  beyond  Tuscarora  ; whether  a signal  or  tl 
burning  of  a culvert  I have  no  means  as  yet  of  detecting. 

In  connection  with  my  duties  here  I also  report  that  on  examinatic 
and  inquiry  I find  the  Trent  road  good  now  and  likely  to  contiiii 
practicable  for  transportation.  Also  that  I could  post  another  infanti 
regiment  advantageously  on  that  line,  not  o<dy  on  account  of  the  ii 
portance  of  the  line  itself  but  also  in  order  to  allow  me  gradually  : 
cover  the  country  in  my  front  and  encourage  and  protect  the  traiispo 
tation  of  turpentine  to  and  within  our  lines.  With  the  same  view 
propose  as  soon  as  practicable  to  rebuild  the  bridge  on  the  Neuse  roa 
over  Batchelder^s  Creek,  stationing  there  a strong  infantry  ])icket. 

On  the  whole  I think  a few  days  will  suffice  to  teach  the  enemy  tli. 
they  have  no  business  east  of  Core  Creek,  and  cannot  safely  ventu 
across. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BICHTEB  JONES, 

Col.  Fifty -eighth  Regiment  Pa.  Vols.^  Comdg.  Fichet  Line,  A,e. 


Special  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

No.  13.  ) New  Berne,  January  13,  1863. 

* * #.  * * * * 

XX.  General  Ferry,  commanding  division,  will  take  the  7i(j(*/eflsa 
st(‘])s  to  liave  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Osborn  prepared  to  move.  T) 
brigade  will  proceed  to  Beaufort,  N.  C.,  by  rail,  and  wi],!  there  be  ei 


:hai'.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


515 


)arked.  The  baggage  aud  camp  equipage  of  the  command  will  be 
;aken  to  Beaufort  by  the  troops.  • Twelve  hours^  notice  will  be  given 
vhen  the  brigade  is  to  start. 


# 


# 


* 


By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

[SOUTHARD  HOFFMANT,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


United  States  Feao-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  Va.,  January  13,  1863. 
laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va,  : 

General  : Under  the  condition  of  my  instructions  from  the  Navy 
)cpartment  I have  instructed  the  commanding  officer  of  the  guard  ves- 
el  offi  F ortress  Monroe  to  give  permits  to  loyal  citizens  who  will  give  secu- 
ity  not  to  go  up  the  creeks  in,  or  to  violate  the  rules  of,  this  blockade  to 
ike  up  oysters  in  Willoughby^s  Bay,  Elizabeth  River  below  Norfolk, 
irauey  Island  Flats,  Hampton  Bar,  and  York  River  below  the  guard 
essel.  My  instructions  necessarily  prohibit  oystering  in  Back  River 
,ansemond  River,  James  River  above  Newport  News,  Western  Branch 
f Elizabeth  River,  and  all  the  creeks  in  this  blockade.  With  the  last 
oarding  returns  from  the  Mystic  is  your  permit  to  the  schooner  Frank- 
n to  ship  oysters  from  Back  River  to  Baltimore.  I have  called  Lieu- 
mant-Oommander  Arnold^s  attention  to  this  as  being  in  conflict  with 
is  instructions,  and  I respectfully  request  that  you  will  not  give  per- 
iits  to  vessels  to  ship  oysters  except  within  the  limits  specified. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
January  14,  1863—3.30  p.  m. 


[aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


A transport  is  on  the  way  here  to  take  the  One  hundred  and  fifteenth 
ew  York  Volunteers,  now  at  Yorktown,  to  the  Department  of  the 
3ath.  I renew  the  request  for  another  regiment  in  its  place.  I should 
lie  very  much  two  or  three  regiments  more  at  Suftblk,  and  they  will  be 
dispensable  if  the  enemy  should  attack  with  a large  force. 


Jofe  A.  DIX, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


ajor-General  Dix, 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Yorktown,  January  14,  1863. 


Commanding  Department : 


Yesterday  I went  to  West  Point  in  the  gunboat  Mahaska  to 


iiove  West  Point. 


E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General, 


516 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CnAP.  XXX. J 


Special  Orders,  ) ‘ Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

14.  ) Netv  Berne.,  January  14,  18G3. 

I.  The  following  rules  and  regulatious  for  the  embarkation  of  tht 
troops  under  marching  orders  will  be  observed,  and  commanding  officers 
of  divisions,  brigades,  and  regiments  will  see  that  the  same  are  strictly 

adhered  to.  ^ i , 

The  order  of  embarkation  will  be  as  follows;  First,  General  ISagleeV 
division;  second,  General  Wessells’  division;  third,  General  FerryV 

division.  i , 

The  vessel  will  be  ordered  to  the  wharf,  and  immediately  on  her  ar 
rival  the  troops,  baggage,  and  camp  equipage  destined  for  her  will  U 
placed  on  board  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  when  the  vessel  wil 
immediately  leave  the  dock  and  anchor  in  the  harbor.  The  baggaj^n 
and  camp  equipage  of  the  regiments  will  be  placed  on  board  the  saiia 
vessel  with  the  troops.  The  baggage  for  the  men  will  consist  only  o 
their  tents  (shelter  tents,  if  possible),  knapsacks,  and  cooking  uteiisibi 
(camp  kettles) ; that  of  the  officers  of  only  one  trunk,  valise,  or  carpet 
bag  and  mess  kit ; no  heavy  mess  chests  will  be  allowed.  The  men  wiL 
be  provided  with  three  days’  cooked  rations,  in  haversacks,  and  4i 
rounds  of  ammunition,  in  cartridge-boxes,  before  leaving  New  Berne 
40  rounds  of  additional  ammunition  for  each  man,  in  boxes,  will  also  b( 
placed  on  the  vessel. 

After  embarkation  the  inclosed  extracts  from  the  Army  Eegulatioii; 
will  be  strictly  enforced,  and  in  addition  a guard  must  be  placed  ove 
the  fresh  water,  so  that  it  may  only  be  used  for  cooking  (by  order  of  tie) 
proper  authority)  and  for  drinkiug.  Officers  and  men  must  alike  iisi 
salt  water  for  washing  purposes.  Signal  officers  will  be  sent  to  eacl 
division  and  brigade  headquarters.  The  flag  designating  the  headquai 
ters  of  the  conunandiiig  general  will  be  a white  castle  on  a blue  ground 
The  Union-jack  at  foremast,  with  the  corps  flag  underneath  (or  divi.< 
ion  or  brigade  flag  underneath,  in  case  of  division  or  brigade  signals) 
shall  be  the  signal  for  weighing  anchor  and  starting  in  the  follow  inj. 
order:  General  Naglee’s  division.  General  Wessells’  division,  Geiieia 

Ferry’s  division.  ^ i i 

Steamers  will  tow  such  sailing  vessels  as  may  be  designated  by  tii 
quartermaster.  The  signal  for  anchoring  will  be  the  American  flag  a 
the  fore ; if  in  a fog,  two  whistles  from  the  flag-ship,  repeated  at  intei 
vals  of  one  minute  each.  This  signal  will  be  repeated  by  the  flag-ship 
of  each  division  and  brigade.  At  this  signal  the  vessels  will  near  eac 

other  and  anchor  in  line.  . , -n  u 

In  case  stranding  or  an.v  other  case  of  distress  the  signal  will  be  tu 
American  flag.  Union  down  ; at  this  signal  the  light-draught  boats  aiK 
tugs  will  be  at  once  sent  to  the  aid  of  the  vessel  in  distress. 

As  far  as  practicable  the  vessels  will  keep  together,  but  if  separate 
will  obey  their  sealed  orders. 


By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

[SOUTHARD  HOFFMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Suffolk,  January  15, 1803. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Nearly  every  person  at  the  North,  including  officers,  except  at  Arm 
headquarters,  rates  us  at  from  twice  to  thrice  our  present  numbers,  an 


jHAi\  XXX.] 


COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


517 


3xpects  results  proportionally.  The  detachment  of  Corcoran’s  will  be 
'cady  to  leave  when  required.  It  has  been  in  one  of  the  forts.  What 
lo  you  think  of  the  map  I sent  you  ? 

JOHN^  J.  PECK, 

Major-  Genera  1. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  15,  18G3. 
laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

I have  just  received  the  following  from  Suffolk : 

A large  force  of  t he  euemy  left  Carrsville  during  the  day.  They  reported  they  were 
ulf  troops.  The  people  there  said  they  were  goi ng  to  Suffolk.  ' Have 

^rtft  Mnnpf  movements.  A deserter  from  Weldon  has  just  arrived, 

ayiln^t  wfek  for  FriLS  P'-^sscd  tLrough  on  Ibree 

Also  from  Yorktown : 

I send  the  following  telegram,  just  received  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lewis  • “Can 

?a1nrod1s-  ol  infantry  at  once?  If  I can,  I will  hold  Fort  Magruder 

,ainst  odds , it  not,  I must  continue  to  hold  it  as  an  outpost  as  long  as  1 can.’’ 

E.  D.  KEYES, 
Major-General. 


JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  January  15,  18G3. 
ajor-General  Keyes,  YorUown : 

1 have  nothing  to  give  you.  Ton  must  do  the  best  you  can.  If  your 
rce  18  not  sufiScient  to  hold  Fort  Magruder  it  should  be  abandoned 
Qcn  the  proper  time  comes.  I am  ordered  to  send  one  of  your  retri- 
ents  away,  but  shall  retain  it  till  another  comes.  ' 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 
ajor-General  Dix,  rorlctr>wn.  Va.,  January  15,  1863. 

Commanding. Department  of  Virginia: 

SiE:  The  new.s  contained  in  the  telegram  wliicli  1 forwai’ded  you  to- 
accordance  with  the  oiiinion  exi>ressed  iii  my  last  letter 
shortly  attack  Williamsburg  and  the 
mp  of  the  pfth  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  4 miles  below  that  town. 

S m command  of  conscript  regiments  of  infantry,  mostly 
med  with  flint-lock  muskets  altered  to  iierciissiou,  will  not  allow  me 
« a strong  force  at  Fort  Magruder.  I must  there- 

wregard  that  and  all  the  positions  held  by  the  Fifth  Pennsylvania 
ivauy  as  outposts  to  be  given  up  on  the  aiiproach  of  a large  mass  ot 
another  full  regiment  of  infantry  I could  hold 
^ Magruder)  long  enough  to  inflict  much  greater  dam- 

fo  ® enough  to  balance  the  advantages  they  would 

ipr  ^ cannot  do  so  now.  I trust,  therefore,  that  an- 

ler  regiment  will  be  sent  me  if  possible. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

I E.  D.  KEYES, 

I Major- General. 


518 


NORTH  CAROLINA.  AND  S,  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  op  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  Fa.,  January  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 

General  : I send  my  aide-de-camp,  Major  Dix,  to  you,  to  advise  you 
that  20,000  sand-bags  and  2,000  shovels  and  spades  have  been  ordered 
to  you  from  New  York.  Major-General  Halleck  advises  me  that  there 
is  no  company  of  Sappers  and  Miners  which  you  can  have.  Everything 
has  been  sent  to  you  except  a few  ambulances.  I trust  the  steamer 
Convoy  has  arrived.  It  is  the  only  one  that  has  come  here  suitable  to 
the  service.  From  her  light  draught  and  great  capacity  I trust  you  will 
find  her  just  what  you  want.  If  anything  more  is  required  I shall  be 
happy  to  forward  it. 

With  my  best  wishes  for  your  success,  I am,  respectfully,  your  obe- 
dient servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Maior- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

22.  1 Few  Berne ^ January  15,  1863. 

The  commanding  general  learns  with  deep  regret  of  the  insubordi- 
nate conduct  of  the  Ninety-sixth  New  York  Volunteers  on  the  night 
of  the  13th  instant.  It  is  the  duty  of  commanding  officers  to  use  every 
effort  to  promote  the  comfort  of  the  troops,  their  prompt  payment,  &('. 
This  has  been  done.  The  commanding  general  has  asked  for,  and  is  in 
hourly  expectation  of  receiving,  funds  to  pay  those  who  have  not  been 
paid  for  a long  time.  The  course  of  the  soldier,  if  any  neglect  is  shown 
in  his  case,  is  to  make  a respectful  petition  or  remonstrance  on  the 
matter,  but  to  obey.  The  recent  acts  of  the  Ninety-sixth  were  muti- 
nous, and  such  as  all  good  soldiers  should  be  ashamed  to  have  shared 
in.  The  only  effect  can  be  to  lay  the  men  open  to  trial  for  mutiny  and 
consequent  punishment,  aud  cannot  hasten,  certainly,  their  desires. 
The  duty  of  a regimental  officer  is  to  use  his  efforts  to  put  down  any 
attempt  at  insubordination,  mildly  if  he  can,  by  force  and  arms  if  he 
must.  The  officers  of  the  Ninety-sixth  and  those  regiments  to  which 
the  mutineers  Avent  lamentably  tailed  in  their  duties  as  commanders, 
or  the  breach  of  discipline  referred  to  would  have  been  promptly  pun- 

The  commanding  general  hopes  that  no  officer  or  soldier  will  again 
so  fail  in  his  duty.  Another  offense  will  surely  meet  its  punishment. 

Bv  command  of  Major-General  Foster: 

[SOUTHARD  HOFFMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
January  16,  1863 — 7.30  p.  ni. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army: 

Colonel  Ludlow  just  returned  from  City  Point.  He  learned  that  sin 
reo-iments  were  sent  from  Petersburg  to  the  Blackwater  on  Monday  am 
Tuesday  last.  General  Pryor  is  7 miles  this  side,  and  there  is  no  donoi 
that  he  has  been  strongly  re-enforced. 

JOHN  A.  DIN, 

Major-General 


Chai*.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. —UNION. 


519 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  16,  1863. 

Actg.  Eear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : There  are  indications  of  activity  on  the  part  of  the  en- 
emy above  Yorktown  and  also  on  the  Blackwater.  General  Pryor  has 
crossed  the  river  and  is  7 miles  on  this  side.  I am  so  weakened  by  re- 
enforcing General  Foster  in  North  Carolina  that  I can  only  act  on  the 
defensive.  There  are  rumors  in  Norfolk  of  a raid  from  the  direction  of 
the  Dismal  Swamp,  and  General  Peck  telegraphs  me  this  evening  that 
our  pickets  have  been  fired  on  between  Suffolk  and  Deep  Creek.  Gen- 
eral Viele  is  very  anxious  to  have  a small  gunboat,  or,  as  he  says,  ‘‘an 
additional  small  gunboat  sent  up  to  remain  near  the  draw-bridge,”  that 
he  may  look  after  the  threatened  raid  in  other  directions.  You  will 
oblige  me  if  you  can  comply  with  'his  request.  Thp  secessionists  in 
Norfolk  have  been  in  high  spirits  for  several  days,  and  we  hear  in  many 
quarters  that  some  movement  against  us  is  intended. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  January  16,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix : 


General  : I have  sent  another 
ditional  gunboat  to  spare  for  that 
Respectfully,  yours, 


gunboat  to  Norfolk  and  have  no  ad- 
or  any  other  purpose. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral,  &c. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  16,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

A severe  storm  of  wind  and  rain  has  continued  from  last  night  and 
little  can  be  done  of  any  variety  of  work.  Parties  of  cavalry  are  out  on 
all  the  avenues  of  approach.  Nothing  has  been  reported  since  ray  last 
telegram.  General  Viele  advised  of  rumors  prevailing  there  of  "raids 
upon  the  railway  and  I sent  out  a party  on  the' track  last  night. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  January  16,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

The  guerrillas  attacked  the  pickets  about  4.30  ]).  m.,  wounding  2. 
They  were  driven  some  miles  and  dispersed.  I do  not  think  they  will 
repeat  the  experiment.  Doubtless  they  acted  under  instructions'  from 
1 ryor.  Pryor  moved  away  and  we  do  not  know  his  ])osition  5 supposed 
^ be  near  Holy  Neck  Church.  We  captured  two  of  his  men,  of  the 
mftieth  Virginia.  He  has  several  old  regiments  from  Northwestern 
Virginia. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

* Major-  General. 


520 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  H.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  NXX 


Fort  Monroe,  January  16,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk : 

It  seems  difficult  to  believe  that  tliere  are  between  j^ou  and  Deej 
Creek  any  except  guerrillas  belonging  to  the  counties  of  Virginia  aiu 
North  Carolina  ,to  the  east  and  south  of  you.  If  you  think  otherwise  i 
is  imi)ortant  to  ascertain.  There  is  no  doubt  a very  bad  feeling  in  tha 
direction  growing  out  of  the  trouble  at  Elizabeth  City,  where,  I am  told! 
the  officer  in  command  of  the  North  Carolina  native  troops  has  arme(i 
200  negroes. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


■ Suffolk,  Va.,  January  16,  1863. 

Major  General  I3iX: 

Mr.  Nash,  Federal  surveyor  from  -Norfolk  County,  represents  that 
force  of  20,000  or  25,000  is  on  the  Blackwater;  that  3,000  of  StuarL 
cavalry  will  make  a raid  through  the  swamp  and  attack  Portsmontl 
and  Norfolk.  He  says  his  information  is  from  a reliable  source.  H; 
stated  that  he  had  communicated  this  matter  to  General  Viele.  Wh 
is  Mr.  Nash  ? I give  it  as  it  com-es  to  me. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


' Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne j January  17,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army.,  Washington.,  B.  C.: 

General  : I regret  to  say  I have  not  been  able  to  embark  as  sooi 
as  I expected,  owing  to  the  non-arrival  of  siege  ammunition  and  wate, 
but  am  now  embarking,  and  I'will  continue  until  I am  all  ready  and  the 
start  at  once. 

I shall  leave  everything  in  safe  condition  hereunder  General  Princ* 
with  at  least  12,000  inffintry,  artillery,  and  cavalry.  I consider  th 
ample,  for  a short  time  at  least. 

1 consider  it  necessary  that  I should  go  with  the  force  going,  as  mac 
of  the  troops  are  old  men  with  me,  and  my  experience  in  disembarkinj 
&c.,  is  extensive,  so  I can  see  them  disembarked  safely.  I shall  cop 
mum  cate  the  result  of  this  as  soon  as  possible. 

If  it  is  found  that  the  work  is  heavier  than  I now  anticipate  I sha 
leave  my  troops  safe  and  return  at  once  to  Hampton  Eoads  for  re-ei 
forcements.  Ido  not  think  it  safe  to  leave  less  than  12,000  men  in  th 
department  at  present. 

I am,  however,  confident  of  success,  and  shall  do  everything  in  w 
power  to  insure  an  early  and  satisfactory  result.  , 

The  amount  of  solid  shot  for  the  siege  guns  arrived  up  to  this  tim 
is  not  sufficient,  and  I have  written  to  General  Iii])ley  on  this  subjec 
urging  him  to  hurry  it  forward. 

1 remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ■ 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. : 


Chap.  XlXX] 


CORIJESJPOKDENCE^  etc. — ■UNlOK’. 


621 


Major-General  Peck,  Suffollc : 

, Mr.  Nash  is  a very  good  man.  Ascertain,  if  you  can  sneciflenllv  whit 
his  reliable  information  was,  from  whom  deri^d,  '^hat 

Colonel  Ludlow  returned  last  night  from  City  Point  Eenorts  tbai- 

cLTll  BlacLater  on  Sat  and 

fr'+uf  S possible  that  Pryor  is  trying  to  get  around  bv  wav 

of  the  Dismal  Swamp  to  cut  off  your  connection  with  Norfolk  ? It  would 
be  a very  dangerous  experiment  for  him.  ^ 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

IT  • ^ Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  17,  1863. 

Vlajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : ^ 

Your  telegram  relating  to  six  regiments  leaving  for  Black  water  on 

noticed.  Deserters  say  that  several  reo-in^ents 
)assed  from  Weldon  to  Franklin  fV  Je^iments 

ubsistence  and  forage  induces  the  belief  of  additions  Mr  Nasriefi 
lefore  your  telegram  arrived.  I wish  you  couldTe  him. 

JOH17  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

r t:^  TIT  Monboe,  January  17, 1863 

[on.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : . 

I have  Just  received  the  following : 

ken  to  remove  the  cause  of  compL^^  I^^  families.  Unless  steps  are 

ff  be  materially  impaired.  Will  you  pleaae  eommu^mcitethro^tZm 

JOHN  J.  PECK. 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


: ajor-General  Peck,  Suffolh  ■ 18.  1863. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

iyor-Generai  Dix : Suffolk,  Va.,  January  18, 1863. 

'm*  which  w?«®'r  Pryor  recrossed  Blackwater  during  the  late, 
i‘morninl  u ^«7«®^e>-e.  Patrols  report  nothing  of  L mot  es 
iirabTe  ParHe?am  ’"''f  contradictory  and  not  as  satisfactory  as  is 
» the  Swamp!  watching  the  avenues  leading  toward  Edeutou 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


1 


522 


NOETH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


United  States  Ulag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  Va.,  January  19,  18G3. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A.,  ^ -ir 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General:  1 respectfully  refer  to  yon  the  inclosed  extracts  from  a 
rei)ort  from  Lieutenant  Flnsser,  commanding  United  States 
Commodore  Perry,  dated  at  Winfield,  Chowan  Kwer,  January  6, 186V 
and  relating  to  an  extensive  illicit  trade  carried  on  between  iNorfolk  and 
R chmond.  This  mischievous  trade  ought  to  be  discontinued. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully ^youg^^ 

Aetg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  January  19,  IbM. 

Mai.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  at  YorUown : 

General:  It  j^ave  much  pleasure  to  receive  yours  of  the  14th  aD( 
to  learn  from  it  tKat  you  apprecia  te  Oommander  Parker  s character  lo 
caution  and  enterprise— qualities  so  valuahle  and  possessed  by  him  i 
such  Teg  "ee  as  to  claim  my  confidence  in  what  he 
einergencv  and  there  is  not  rime  to  confer  previousl>  uith  me.  Uc  , 
there  to  cooperate  with  you  in  measures  for  the  advancement  ot  th 
public  interest,  and  in  this  regard  needs  no  new 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfidly^youjs^ 

Aetg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  January  19,  1863. 

Maior-Geiieral  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : . 

Our  parties  have  been  over  all  the  roads  and  report  “o  force  in  the 
routes.^  Their  pickets  were  found  at  Windsor  . ' 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  19,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : . . .p  ( 

1 send  a letter  from  General  Foster.  I sent  Major  Dix,  ° 

aides  two  days  ago  with  latest  intelligence.  A dispatch  goes  to  Ge 
erariipley  Everything  here  for  General  Poster  has  been  sent: 

occupy  three  or  four  days,  aud  then  I shall  sail.  ^ ^ FOSTER, 

Ma jor-  General 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-General 


Not  found. 


HAP.  XXX.] 


tEneral  Orders, 
1^0.  26. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

I 


523 


Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Bertie,  January  19,  1863. 
is  liereby  announced  as  chief  commissary  of 

be  obeyed  mul 

Ey  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

SOUTHAPvD  HOFFMAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps 

. T>  . , Monroe,  Va.,  January  20,  isb. 

ctg.  Eear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron: 

.^MIR^ : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 

■ /e  goods  teWed  and  the 

smuggling  them  within  the  Confederate  lines  ? If  he  will  hereafter 
ke  into  custody  and  deliver  to  the  officer  in- cominaniTat  Eoanol  e 

May  bo  sent  to 

1!,  I will  see  that  they  are  punished;  or  if  he  will  advise  von  of  a,, v 
v.h  arrests  I will  send  for  the  parties  wherever  thev  may  be  The 
.St  rigid  rules  have  been  adopted  at  Norfolk  in  regS  to  goods  per 
itted  to  leave  the  city.  Not  a sack  of  salt  is  allowed  to  go  out  wffib 
■td  ^ Thf  ’ person  to  whom  it  is  given  is  re4t 

- case  *^3  000“worth  article.s.  '’in 

e of  goods  were  allowed  to  be  taken  into  Princess 

P™  to  whom  the  permit  was  iZ  to 
lation  of  his  engagement,  took  them  to  North  Carolina.  We  fol- 

*!nK  him  and  the  property  a few  miles  from  the 

t on  the  Chowan  from  which  Lieutenant-Commaiidor  Plusser  writes 
_is  now  111  Fort  Norfolk,  where  I shall  keep  him,  and  the  property 
1 be  sold  at  auction  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor.  1 P 

““‘‘te  to  prevent  illicit  traffic;  but  in  view  of 
lawlessness  of  a large  number  of  the  parties  engaged  in  trade  in 

V the  oath  of  aUeg“e - 

....fixssxnh*:  si^rh.nzr"‘“ 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

United  States  Flag-ship  Minne.sota 
|.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  J-unmiry  20, 1863. 

^ Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe: 

for  your  further  information  regard- 
h...  t 'ifflc  between  Norfolk  and  Kfchmond  a,  copy  of  the  report  to 
f 111  Lieutenant  Flusser,  eommamling  United  States  steamer  Com- 


524 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.' 

1 

modore  Perry,  dated  Elizabetli  City,  January  13,  and  an  extract  tVoini 
another  report  of  his  of  the  same  date  respecting  further  trade  from 
Norlolk. 

I have  the  honor  to  be.  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  January  20,  1863. 


Major-General  Dix: 

Major  Stratton  made  a fine  reconnaissance  toward  Blackwater.  At 
Carrsville  he  found  a picket  of  9 men,  capturing  2 of  them.  Thinks 
the  enemy’s  main  force  on  the  other  side.  Prisoners  are  on  the  wiu 
in.  A good  deal  of  signaling  on  the  Somerton.  Shall  have  that  quar 
ter  examined  very  closely  to-morrow.  Pickets  of  some  strength  toinr 


at  Windsor. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

J^ctc  Berne,  A.  G.,  January  20,  18G3. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  . 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

General  : The  transports  from  this  place  have  all  lett,  but  are  dd 
laved  by  the  low  water  on  the  Swash,  at  Hatteras.  ...  . ' 

Nu^dee’s  division  is  embarked  at  Beaufort.  The  other  divisions  wil 
embark  as  soon  as  their  transports  reach  Beaufort.  1 shall  sail  as  sooi 
as  all  are  on  board,  probably  by  Friday  or  Saturday.  I Imve  just  re 
ceived  information  from  a spy,  who  has  been  within  the  enemy  s line, 
and  conversed  with  their  soldiers,  to  the  efiect  that  the  rebel  torce  n 
this  State  has  been  largely  increased  from  the  army  in  Virgmia;  tUa 
Wilmington  has  been  re-enforced ; that  the  main  body  intemKd  to  l)* 
tlirown  by  railroad  either  to  Weldon  or  Wilmington  is  at  Goldslx.r 
ough,  ami  that  Weldon  is  not  strongly  guarded,  the  rebels  relying  oi 
the  force  in  fronton  the  Blackwater,  under  Pryor,  and  on  the  proxiniit: 


of  the  reserve  at  Goldsborough. 

The  rebels  report  their  force  in  the  State  to  be  200,000,  whicli  i 
manifestly  grossly  exaggerated.  The  rebel  soldiers  reported  totnes]\, 
that  75,000  men  were  at  Goldsborough.  I think  this  also  is  exaggtu 
ated : that  there  may  be  75,000  men  all  told  in  the  State  is  probaliltl 
since  they  could  venture  to  withdraw  even  more  than  that  number  non 
the  Army  of  Virginia,  in  consequence  of  the  presumed  inactivity  ot  on 
army  on  the  Eappahannock.  They  have  full  information  of  the  coikU, 
tion  of  the  army  on  the  Eappahannock  from  our  own  newspapeiN, 
are  much  cheered  by  the  reports  and  evidently  do  not  fear  any  ino\ej 
ments  from  that  quarter. 

Colonel  Amory’s  brigade  is  now  out  on  a strong  reconnaissance  o 
the  south  bank  of  the  Trent  Elver.  This  advance  was  impeded  b 
felled  trees  and  burnt  bridges.  The  rebels  burnt  all  the  bridges  me 
the  Trent  Eiver  and  all  over  the  creeks  on  the  south  route  troiii  irei 
ton  to  Jacksonville  (or  Onslow).  The  cavalry  ^liird  pw 
sweeping  all  the  country  between  the  White  Oak  and  Neav  Ki 
boiling  to  capture  some  of  the  rebel  cavalry.  ^ lat 

Contrabands  report  that  the  enemy  fell  back  from  Onslow  on  the  lot 


Chap.  XXX. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


, 525 

in  tlie  direction  of  Wilmington.  The  destruction  of  bridges  and  ob- 
struction of  roads  indicates  an  apprehension  of  our  forces  being  on  the 
1(1  van ce  in  that  direction.  ” 

I shall  take  every  precaution  in  my  power  to  leave  everything  safe  at 
his  place  and  shall  spare  no  efforts  to  make  the  expedition  a perfect 
success.  I think  I can  assure  you  that  there  will  be  no  failure  if  you 
.vill  give  me  further  re-enforcements  in  case  1 find  them  indispensable. 
^ I am  not  apprehensive  about  the  reported  concentration  of  forces  at 
aoldsborough  for  I hardly  think  that  the  rebels  will  venture  on  an 
iittack  while  their  own  towns  are  in  danger,  and  certainly  not  if  any 
|igiis  of  movement  are  made  by  the  Army  of  the  Eappahannock.  ' 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient 
' crvant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Headc^uarters  Department  of  N^orth  Carolina, 

New  Berne ^ January  20,  1863. 
laj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  Commanding^  (&c. : 

General:  l am  informed  by  several  gentlemen,  residents  of  Eiiza- 
etR  City,  ttot  there  are  in  that  town  about  250  negroes  armed  and  daily 
rilled  by  officers  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States.  - 1 also  learn  that 
aptam  Sanders  is  in  command. 

Uthe  President  commands  this,  officers  of  the  Army  are  expected  to 

In  his  proclamation  “that  such  persons  (slaves)  of  suitable  condition 
111  be  received  into  the  armed  service  of  the  United  States,  to  garrison 
I'fte,  positions,  stations,  and  other  places,  and  to  man  vessels  of  all 
seyice^’  he  has  not  ordered,  as  far  as  I can  hear,  that 
. J subordinate  officer  at  every  post  can  receive  negroes  into  the 
I Vice  without  some  regulations  from  headquarters. 

ii^^Se^negroLT^^^  captain  to  judge  of  the  ^‘suitable  condi- 
Are  no  instructions  to  be  given  that  they  are  not  to  be  sent  out  into 
Id  rotomy  at  dlLrettonV"  excursions,  committing  pillage 

My  atteiitioii  has  been  called  already  to  several  instances  of  this  kind 
cm?  f*?  '“‘J  ^c.'^'cke  your  assistance  to  prevent  if  possible 

|io,r  1 , to  vn?.  T will  fall  upon  our  loyal  citizLs  and 

them  ^ ^ superior  discretion  anti  experience  do  not  now  con- 

te  this  matter,  and  that  I may 

'bZ  mt;  toll"  T T tellow-citizens  that  no  inexperienced 
lainate  shall  without  your  sanction,  and  until  proper  restraints 
• t pioyided,  incur  the  danger  of  a servile  war. 

V ery  respectfully,  &c., 

ED.  STANLY, 

Military  Governor. 


Department  of  North  Carolina, 

tior  X r.  ^ New  Berne,  January  20,  1863. 

-Iior-Geiieral  Foster,  Commanding,  ; 

1 infv^  ‘ ^ rtHJcivcd  a letter  from  Edenton  of  dat('.  the  6th 

mlormiug  me  that  a band  of  negroes  and  soldiers,  armed,  vlsifod 


526 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


the  premises  of  a Mrs.  Page,  of  that  towo,  and  carried  away  severa 
negroes  and  a parcel  of  bedding  and  other  furniture  j that  they  wen 
very  insolent  in  their  conduct  and  threatened  to  have  the  town  shellec 

if  they  were  interfered  with.  , , , x-  v 

My  correspondent  says  that  they  came,  as  he  heard,  from  on  boan 

the  Ocean  Wave.  , , t j 

A negro  man,  formerly  living  on  the  plantation  of  the  venerable  Jame., 
(3.  Johnston,  named  Matthew  was  the  person  commanding  the  party- 
This  negro  is  one  of  desperate  character. 

The  citizens  of  Edenton  beg  your  protection  from  outrages  ot  thi:, 
kind.  They  desire  to  know  whether  it  can  be  afforded  them,  or  mus 
they  take  redress  into  their  own  hands  ? 

I have  written  and  informed  my  correspondent,  a gentleman  ot  th( 
highest  character,  that  I would  call  your  attention  to  this  case  and  hav. 
no  doubt  you  will,  as  heretofore,  take  effectual  steps  to  protect  iieact 
able  citizens  and  punish  such  outrages. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c., 

Militar'ij  Governor. 


[Addenda,] 

W.  W.  Tuttle,  captain  Ocean  Wave;  lauded  at  Edenton  on  or  abou 
the  (itli,  with  written  orders  from  Captain  Slaght  to  do  so  (order  aj 
pended).  Arrived  there  about  8 o’clock;  gave  the  steward  permission  t 
go  ashore  for  his  wife  and  children;  allowed  others  to  go  with  him 
can’t  say  positively  who  went  ashore;  believe  Lieutenant  Lriggs  sen 
ant  and  Matthew,  a deck-hand,  went  with  him ; do  not  know  who  hi 
sides.  They  were  gone  about  three-quarters  ot  an  hour,  so  the  pik; 
says.  I didn’t  notice  what  they  brought  back,  but  believed  they  brough 
a Couple  of  beds  and  the  wife  and  three  children  of  the  steward.  Coui 
not  have  brought  much  of  anything  more  on  account  ot  the  size  ot  tii 
boat.  Steward  reported  that  they  threatened  to  shoot  him  aMiore. 

Alexander  Collins,  steward  of  the  Ocean  Wave,  on  the  above-mei 
tinned  expedition;  now  lives  in  the  house  of  Major  Eolson,  paymaste 
with  his  wife  and  three  children;  took  these  from  Edenton;  also 
feather  bed  and  straw  mattress,  one  skillet,  and  such  wearing  a])pan 
as  could  be  collected ; four  plates,  three  cups,  and  four  saucers,  oi 
large  dish,  all  belonging  to  his  wife.  Four  of  us  went  ashore,  my se 
Matthew  (deck-hand  on  the  Ocean  Wave),  a soldier,  and  another  co 
ored  man  whose  name  T do  no  know.  Went  ashore  just  alter  siinris 
Went  to  Mrs.  Page’s;  found  my  wife  asleep;  waked  her  up;  tojd  htr 
had  come  for  her  and  her  children  by  Captain  Slaght’s  order;  took  ii 
aboard.  Went  ashore  a second  time  and  met  Mr.  Norcom,  the  inayor  f 
the  town,  who  said  if  I had  gone  in  his  yard  he  would  have  shot  m 
Keplied  that  I had  not  gone  in  his  yard,  but  in  Mrs.  Page’s,  to  get  m 
wife  and  children,  by  Captain  Slaght’s  older,  lie  said  Ca])tain  SnU 
had  no  right  to  give  an  order  of  the  kind— that  General  I'oster  ti 
only  person  who  could  give  such  an  order.  We  were  afraid  t<) 
again,  and  left  behiml  onr  bedsteads,  potware,  wash-tubs, 
no  threats  of  any  kind,  and  heard  none  made  by  any  one.  vVliat 
brought  to  town  is  in  Major  Folsom’s  kitchen. 

Matthew  (colored);  deck-hand  on  the  Ocean  Wave  since  August  i ' 
formerly  belonged  to  Mv.  Johnston;  went  ashore  with  the  stewaia  ai 


;HAP.xxx.i 


COliBESPONUENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


527 


wo  otliei's;  remained  with  the  boat  wiiile  the  steward  went  for  Ids  wiie 
ud  children;  helped  him  put  his  family,  &c.,  on  board  theOcean  Wave; 
iade  no  threats  inyselt  and  heard  none  except  from  the  mayor  Mr 
>orcom;  am  stdl  deck-hand  on  the  Ocean  Wave  ’ 


[Inclosure.] 

'aptain  Tuttle: 

You  may  stop  at  Edenton  and  bring 
lerne. 


January  5,  1863. 
the  steward's  family  to  New 


JAMES  O.  SLAGHT. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Eighteenth  A.  0., 

New  Berne^  N,  (7.,  January  21,  1863. 
lent.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

A.  A,  (t.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps j New  Berne,  N.  €.: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  orders 
iceived  from  the  general  commanding  I marched  with  three  regiments 
f my  brigade  and  a battery  under  Captain  Eansom,  Twenty-third  New 
ork  Independent  Artillery,  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant  for 
ollocksville,  reaching  that  place  the  same  evening,  after  rebuildiiu>^ 
le  bridge  over  Mill  Creek,  which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  enemy. 
The  road  leading  from  Pollock sville  to  Trenton  we  found  blockaded 
ith  felled  trees  at  Pollocksville  for  some  500  yards.  This  was  siieedily 
It  away  by  Mr.  Wilson,  chief  of  the  civil  pioneer  corps. 

The  Third  New^  York  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Mix,  remained  with  my 
mimand  at  Pollocksville  and  preceded  it  next  morning  to  Trenton 
•evious  to  which  movement  we  eflectually  destroyed  the  bridge  over 
e lient  at  Pollocksville.  Leaving  at  this  place  five  companies  of  the 
ifty-first  Massachusetts,  with  the  remainder  of  my  command  and  the 
valry  1 occupied  Trenton  on  the  night  of  the  18th,  burning  the  bridge 
er  Tient  Eiver  at  this  place  and  also  the  mill  and  all  the  timber  and 
auks  available  for  its  speedy  reconstruction.  Colonel  Mix,  with  his 
giment,  proceeded  to  the  bridge  5 miles  above  for  the  pnri)ose  of  de- 
roying  it,  but  found  the  bridge  already  on  fire,  the  enemy  having  an- 
apated  us  after  crossing  on  the  road  to  Kinston.  On  his  return 
)lonel  Mix  reported  the  route  to  Onslow  via  Comfort  heavily  block- 
ed with  felled  trees ; so  abandoning  that  route  proceeded  directly  to 
)ung’s  Cross-Eoads,  which  place  as  well  as  Pollocksville  I also  occu- 
ed  with  my  infantry,  remaining  at  the  former  idace  with  the  larger 
It  of  my  infantry  and  all  the  artillery  during  the  day  and  the  night 
lilowing  the  20th  instant,  while  Colonel  Mix  proceeded  to  scout  the 
ad  to  Onslow.  Colonel  Mix’s  own  report  will  doubtless  detail  the  re- 
It  ot  this  scout.  I returned  with  my  command  to  this  place  on  the 
St  instant.  Our  advance  on  the  southern  route  in  force  seems  to  have 
eii  anticipated  by  the  enemy.  The  iilantations  were  generally  de- 
nted and  frequent  obstructions  placed  in  the  roads,  brid«-es  de- 
coyed, &c.  ^ ^ 

The  energy,  activity,  and  general  efficiency  of  Mr.  Wilson  deserve 
Tocial  mention.  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  call  the  attention  of  the 
. neral  commanding  to  the  valuable  assistance  he  afforded  us  durin«* 
ft  entire  march.  ^ 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfuUy,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ^ , THOS.  J.  0.  AMOEY, 

Colonel  Seventeenth  A[ass»  Vols.^  Acting  Brigadier-General, 


528 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX 


Suffolk,  Va.,  January  21,  1863. 

‘ Major-General  Dix : 

The  prisoners  say  that  large  additions  have  been  made  to  the  force  c 
Blackwater — several  new  Virginia  regiments  and  some  Louisiana  ar 
Tennessee;  that  the  force  is  larger  than  ever  before;  a camp  of  fi 
regiments  at  Jernsalein.  It  accords  with  the  general  tenor  of  repor 
from  prisoners,  deserters,  &c. 

^ ’ JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General 


Suffolk,  Va.,  January  22, 1863.  fl 
Major-General  Dix:  H 

It  has  seemed  to  me  that  the  Confederates  have  thrown  some  ext:; 
force  on  the  Blackwater,  with  a view  of  holding  as  much  force  here 
])ossible  and  then  of  sending  it  to  North  Carolina,  it  called  for.  1 canii' 
believe  that  they  will  at  this  wet  season  undertake  a movement  by  wi 
of  South  Mills  on  Portsmouth.  Pryor’s  command  has  been  somewli:i 
increased  and  materially  improved  by  exchanges  of  his  new  regiment 
for  old  ones.  This  may  explain  the  departure  from  Petersburg  of  tl 
troops  reported  by  Colonel  Ludlow,  and  also  a statement  of  one  of  tl 
deserters  from  Weldon  that  trooi^s  were  passing  both  ways  on  tl 
Seaboard  road.  Having  these  views  I have  not  asked  for  any  troop 
reserving  that  action  until  something  positive  reaches  me,  but  all  tl 
time  adding  to  the  strength  of  the  position. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  January  23,  1863. 

Major-General  Hix: 

Major  Stratton  with  a suitable  force,  will  leave  in  the  morning,  unle, 
very  stormy,  to  make  a thorough  examination  of  the  Dismal  Swam 
l)as"sing  in  at  Deep  Creek  and  going  out  at  South  Mills.  He  will  1 
four  or  five  days,  and  will  procure  information.  ’ 

’ JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General.  \ 


Suffolk,  January  21,  1863. 

Major-Generfil  Dix : 

About  Monday  I propose  sending  some  4,000  or  5,000  to  Black watei 
under  Corcoran  or  Foster,  if  weather  favors.  It  leaves  this  place  vei 
weak,  but  1 want  to  feel  of  them  in  some  manner. 

JOHN  d.  'PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

January  26,  1863 — 9 a.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  G eneral-in- Chief : 

One  of  my  aides  returned  late  last  night  from  General  Foster.  I 
was  detained  on  his  way  back  by  violent  gales.  Left  New  Berue  a 
the  20th.  Naglee’s  brigade  was  embarked  at  Beaufort ; other  divisioi 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


529 


[ap.  XXX.] 


vuitiug  transports  expected  to  move  on  the  23d  or  24th.  Eebels  in 
iorth  Carolina  had  been  largely  re-enforced  from  the  army  in  Virginia, 
id  Wilmington  has  been  re-enforced.  Main  body  of  the  enemy  was  at 
j jldsborough.  Weldon  was  not  strongly  guarded,  the  rebels  relying 
li  Prj^or’s  force  on  the  Blackwater  to  protect  that  point.  General 
DSter  thinks  there  may  be  75,000  rebel  troops  in  North  Carolina.  This 
I the  substance  of  a dispatch  from  him,  which  will  go  to  you  by  this 
ening^s  mail. 

I have  reason  to  believe  that  a portion  of  the  force  on  the  Blackwater 
a days  ago  has  been  sent  to  Goldsborough  by  way  of  Weldon. 

Some  4,000  or  5,000  men  will  be  sent  to-day  from  Suffolk  to  the  Black- 
iter  to  reconnoiter,  and  ascertain,  if  possible,  what  force  Pryor  has. 
lie  One  hundred  and  fifteenth  New  York  has  been  sent  to  the  Depart- 
imt  of  the  South  from  Yorktown. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  27,  1863. 
Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  ^ 

General-in-  Chief: 

The  Eichmond  Inquirer  of  this  morning  has  the  following : 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  January  25,  1863. 
.respectable  refugee, just  arrived  from  Beaufort,  reports  tbe  Abolitiouists’  fleet, 
ety-two  sail,  including  two  monitors  and  six  other  iron-clads,  in  Beaufort  Harbor. 
! 0 that  52,000  Abolitionists  are  encamped  at  Morebead  City  and  Carolina  City.  Gen- 
ii Robertson  has  just  returned  to  Kinston  from  a reconnoitering  expedition  through 
Fies  and  Onslow  Counties.  He  reports  that  a company  of  cavalry,  Captain  Perkins, 
I prised  a party  of  Abolitionists  last  Friday  at  Big  Northeast  Bridge,  near  Jackson- 
i e,  Onslow  Comrt-House,  killing  1 captain  and  5 privates  and  routing  the  balance. 
' loss  on  our  side. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-  General. 


*jor-General  Dix: 


Yorktown,  January  27, 1863. 


Jolonel  Lewis  telegraphs  an  attempt  was  made  this  morning  to  cap- 
^ e our  pickets.  About  12  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy,  but  no  one 
ctor  captured.  All  is  again  quiet,  the  enemy  having  retired.  Last 
rht  at  about  9 p.  m.  it  was  reported  from  Gloucester  Point  that  the 
‘|‘my  was  approaching  our  pickets  there.  Nothing  further  this  morn- 
I’.  1 respectfully  call  your  attention  again  to  the  increase  of  my  force, 
'ich  is  necessary. 


E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Fifty-eighth  Eegt.  Pennsylvania  Vols., 
Camp  at  BatcJielder^s  Creeh,  January  27,  1863. 

- utenant-Coldnel  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

IR : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  immediately  on  receiving  the 
^ers  to  ig’iiore  passes  and  close  our  lines  1 made  arrangements  and 
1 e directions  for  carrying  them  into  effect. 

34  R R— VOL  XVIII 


i 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  Xi:. 


530 


Also  to-day  I have  pat  stroiijr  parties  on  the  Kease,  the  Trent,  al 
the  railroad  with  instructions  to  stop  all  passengers. 

From  information  received  yesterday  I believe  the  enemy  have  w 
turned  from  Gore  Greek-,  on  the'  railroad  and  N^euse  road,  but  I sh|l 

verify  that  fact  to-day.  i 

I learn  also  that  the  enemy  at  Goldsborough  are  apprehensive  of  q 
advance  from  New  Berne  simultaneous  with  our  naval  expedition,  i 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ’ J.  BIGHTER  JONES,  , 

Commanding  Outposts 


Majbr-General  Dix : 


Suffolk,  January  29, 1863 


Major  Strivtton  has  returned.  He  seized  and  brought  in  42vla:e 
sacks  of  salt.  The  other  capture  by  Dodge\s  men  is  large;  it  is  sW 
there  are  many  loads.  Have  just  ordered  out  fifteen  teams  and  a to;€ 
to  protect  them.  Pryor  came  over  Sunday  night  perhaps  with  a vi^ 
to  the  securing  of  this  property.  ' 

Major- Oenera 


Beaufort,  N.  Cj,  January^^SO — lliJO  a.  m., 
Via  Fori  Monroe^  Va,\  February  8,  1863 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok, 

General-in-  Chief : 

The  constant  aiid  strong  southerly  winds  (amounting  at  times  to  ga  ^ 
that  have  prevailed  for  the,  past  ten  or  fifteen  days  have  prevented  ii 
sailing,  altnough  most  of  the  troops  have  been  on  board  ready  to  ii 
more  than  a week.  Yesterday  the  wind  shifted  to  the  northwest,  h 
as  everything  looked  favorable  I started  the  fleet;  Nearly  all  got  o?i 
the  bar  before  dark,,  with  a fair  start  down  the  eo^ast.  The  wind,  h* 
ever,  shifted  back  to  the  southwest  after  dark,  and  blew  strongly,  p 
venting  the  few  remaining  vessels  going  to  sea.  It  is  stdl  blowing  li^ 
(11.30  a.  ni).  This  will  interfere  very  much  with  the  iirop'ess  ot  • 

n j_  A U JCAmi  l^.Si  WlTKl  Will*  DtJl 


fleet,  and  may  scatter  it  considerably.  As  soon,  ^s  the  wind  will  peii 
1 shall  start  with  the  remaining  vessels.  So  long  a ( 


j continuance  of  soi  > 


erly  gales  is  very  unusual. 


J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major- Genero^Jf,  Commandm 


Fort  Monroe,  30,  186^ 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Linc'oln^ 

President  United  States : 


No  iron-dads  have  left  for  two  days.  The  Weehawkeu  is  • 

the  Patapsco  is  here,  waiting  for  fiivorable  weather,  ^ ^ 

at  Newport  News.  1 have  just' telegraphed  to  General  Halleck  oui  - 
cess  in  a fight  with  Pryor. 

Major-Genera 


HAP.  XXX.]  ' 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


531 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  January  30,  1863. 
,Iaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in- Chief : 

I General  Peck  telegraphs  that  our  victory  is  complete,  and  that  Pryor 
: assed  through  Carrsvillein  full  retreat  at  3 p.  m.,  6 miles  from  the  De- 
prted  House,  where  our  forces  attacked  him  just  before  daylight. 

JOHKA.  DIX,  * 

Major-  General, 


! Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  January  30, 1863. 

[ajor-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief: 

Following  just  received  from  Suffolk: 
ajor-General  Dix: 

i ***  corrected  by  later  dispatchea.  As  yet  he  says  the  enemy 

; JOHN  J.  PECK, 

! Major-General. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major- General^  Commanding, 

Poet  Moneoe,  Va.,  January  30,  1863. 
ajor-General  Halleck,  Oeneral-in- Chief : 

fell  back  3 or  4 miles,  contesting  the  ground  in  his  retreat, 
jneral  Peck  gives  me  no  details,  but  thinks  we  have  a victory,  and 
lat  we  shall  secure  some  of  the  enemy’s  guns.  Our  loss  about  100.* 

1 rough  them  **^'^*^  ^ getting 

1 JOHN  A.  DIX, 

I Major-General, 


(Oor-General  Dix: 

a report  from  a party  I sent  out  to  the  vicinity  of 
information  to  the  effect  that  the  cars  have  been  running 
. skly  to  Franklin  since  afternoon.  ® 


JOHX  J.  PEOK, 

Major-General. 


Hdqes.  Dept,  oe  Yirginla.,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Monroe,  Va.,  January  31,  isfe. 

tg.  Eear- Admiral  8.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron : 

: Will  you  oblige  me  by  sending  an  officer  to  confer  with 
idfnt  Norfolk,  in  regard  to  iUicit  trade?  The  privilege  of 

f been  abused,  and  I am  desirous  of  surrounding  it  with  all 
J b^ve  given  no  permits  to  introduce  goods  into 
Jrfolk  since  the  IHh  instant,  and  think  I shall  confine  commercial 
iasactions  there  hereafter  to  retail  dealers. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours 
! JOHN  A.  DIX, 

« - Major-  General. 


But 


revifaed  statement,  p.  135, 


532 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chai>.  XX2j 


Udqrs.  Dept,  of  Yirginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  January  31,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Commanding,  &c.,  YorMown,  Va. : 

General:  A limited  supply  of  efficient  arms  (Enfield  rifies)  has  bee 
received  at  the  arsenal  at  this  place.  You  will  therefore  make  propc 
requisitions  for  such  regiments  as  are  most  in  need  of  such  arms. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Dix : 

^ D.  T.  VAN  BUKEK, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Abstract  from  Tri-monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  (^Seventh  Army  Carpi 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding,  for  January  31,  1863  {headquarters  Tort  Monu 
Va.). 


Command. 


Headquarters  Fort  Monroe. — 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix 


Fort  Monroe. — Col.  S.  M.  Al- 
ford: 

Infantry 

Attached  garrison 


Present  for 
duty. 


17 


22 


Total 


Camp  Hamilton. — Col.  An- 
thony Conk : 

Infantry - 

Cavalry 

Artillery 


Total 


Norfolk.— Brig.  Gen.E.L.Yiele: 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 


Total. 


Suffolk.— Mai.  Gen.  J.  J.  Peck ; 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 


22 


618 


618 


17 


17 


789 
25  25 


8141  861 


780 
73]  80 

279  321 


41 


129 

2 

4 


135 


Total 


Torktown. — Maj.  Gen.  E.  D. 
Keyes : 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 


Total, 


Point  Lookout,  Jfd.— Maj.  J.  C. 
Brown : 

Detachment  Independent 
Battalion  New  York  Yol- 
nnteers. 


Grand  total. 


361 

67 

17 


445 


162 

43 

16 


1,011  1,181 


2,422  3, 

391  58 


135  149 


2,  596  3,  240 


7,  079 
1,  568 
620 


9,  267 


2,  505 
853 
383 


221 


3,741 


150 


8,  663 

2, 

709 


11, 457 


824 

86 

337 


17 


25 


Present  for  duty  equipped.! 


Infantry. 


28 


1, 247 


3,458 

82 

190 


3,  730 
9,  946 


825.. .. 

861-... 

422. . .. 


1.  333  .... 


3, 470 
82 
192 


3,744'  6 


10, 189| . . . 
2, 3281  2,329;  4 
761  765;  30 


13,  035 13,  283 


3,  0281  3,523;  4,444 
l,044l  1,155  1,157 
466,  663 


34 


28 


35 


35 


131 


687 


Cavalry. 


687 


700 


74 


Ai-tillei 


700i  3 


74 


131  1 2,608;  2 


361 


7,  079; 


361  1 7,079;  70 


163 


2.  650, 


45 


4,538'  5,341  6,270  28  i 103  | 2,650  45 


184  200 


200 


886  17,383  21,43124,431  25,708 


68 


1.52 


723  13,876120 


1, 773 


1,  773 


942 


10  : t 

— r£ 

10  i- 


J. 

17  i I* 


942  19 


2, 840  50  ; 


BAP.  XiS.]  COfeRESPONDiiNCE,  El’C. — HNION.  533 


ITff  {IT  Jr-'^TS'VtT  Eighteenth  Armg  Corps,  Department  of  North  Car- 
^r^,Ny6.f.  commanding,  for  Januarg  31,  1863  (headquarters  New 


Present  for 
duty. 

§ 

00 

g 

m 

<© 

h 

u 

4^ 

Present  for  duty  equipped. 

ite  pi 

absent 

CD 

Command. 

Pa 

© 

c5 

o S 

4-d  P 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Officers. 

1 Men. 

bJO 

i 

bO 

<1 

CO  ' 

© § 
bcw 
be 
< 

ce4-» 

bJD 

£ 

bC 

bo 

Officers. 

1 

Men. 

S 

c? 

59 

o 

Men. 

ghteenth  Army  Corps,  Mai. 
5en.  J.  G.  Foster. 

First  Brigade,  First  Division, 
Col.  T.  j,  C.  Amory. 

Second  Brigade,  First  Divis- 

inn  Prkl  TT  O T 

19 

19 

19 

19 

129 

2,750 

3, 454 

3,627 

3, 657 

123 

2, 776 

112 

2,751 

3,532 

3,  843 

3,851 

iUXi,  V-/01.  Xl.  L/,  ij66. 

Second  Division,  Brig,  Gen. 
n.  M.  Naglee. 

Third  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  0. 
S.  Ferry. 

Fourth  Division,  Brig.  Gen. 

H.  W Wessells. 

Fifth  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  H. 
Prince. 

Ist  North  Carolina  Union  Vol- 
unteers, Capt.  C.  A.  Lyon. 
Artille^  brigade.  Brig.  Gen. 

6,787 

6,798 

5,807 

26 

564 

711 

5, 807 

153 

3, 008 

3,653 

6,  321 

6,376 

153 

,3, 008 

4,874 

231 

4, 615 

5, 438 

7,074 

7,100 

239 

19 

432 

496 

532 

534 

26 

779 

1,  006 

2,216 

2,085 

3d  ifew  York  Cavalry,  CoL  S. 
H.  Mix, 

40 

586 

747 

933 

935 

44 

630 

Grand  total... 

755 

15,485 

19, 056 

37, 159 

37, 162 

515 

10, 658 

44 

630 

Headquarters  Eightebhth  Army  Corps, 

, . „ Beaufort,  8.  0.,  February  2,  1863. 

!>j.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok, 

Oeneral-in- Chief  JJ.  8.  Army,  Washington,  J).  G. : 

Jeneral  : I arrived  here  last  night  and  entered  the  harbor  this  morn- 
>’L  stumers  are  safe  except  one,  the  Pilot  Boy,  which  be- 

^ ne  disabled  off  Georgetown,  S.  0.,  and  was  left  at  anchor.  I have 
iit  the  tng  Freeborn  to  take  her  back  to  Beaufort,  H.  C 
UI  the  sailing  vessels  of  the  fleet  are  within  a few  leagues  of  this 
'*or,  and  will  probably  be  in  safely  to-morrow. 

1 and  W eehawken  have  not  arrived.  The  snppl y 

bTnnp  T iron-clads  is  not  snfiicient,  and  more  has  to  be  sLt 

1m?et£l  The  naval  preparations  will  not  be 

^ therefore  be  obliged 
Te  these  prepfra 

At  “a®?“  ^™®  ^ ®hall  probably  make  a move- 

“®he  a short  trip  to 

w Deme,  N.  O.,  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  affairs  there 
►a^To^^hevri+^/^rf^  ^®“  resulting  from  these  delays 

'■“e  lay^fronl*tCtime.^'^ 

have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


534 


NORtH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  February  2, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va,  : 

The  Ninth  Army  Corps  has  received  orders  to  report  to  you  at  Fort 


Monroe. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Oeneral-in-  Chief. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  February  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe  : 

General:  I have  directed  the  guard  vessel  off  Fort  Monroe  not  In 
allow  George  Bush  or  his  schooner,  Elizabeth  Bush,  to  pass  the  block-: 
ade  asain.  ^ He  has,  he  says,  been  in  the  habit,  under  a permit  froin 
YOU,  to  take  old  rags,  scrap-iron,  and  hides  from  Hampton  to  Philadel-. 
phia,  bringing  nothing  back.  By  his  own  admission  he  has  been  in  the 
habit  of  visiting  Ohuckatuck  in  his  boat  without  authority,  and  as  such 
commnnieations  are  manifest  violations  of  the  blockade  1 have  deemed 
it  advisable  to  secure  the  public  interest  by  cutting  oft  his  means  ot 
carrying  information,  letters,  or  property  in  the  manner  above  mdi- 
C3jt6cl 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  F.  BED, 
Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  February  2, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix:  - ^ ^ g,  ' w 

Unusual  activity  of  the  enemy  reported  to-day.  Two  hundred 
at  Windsor ; a large  force  at  Oarrsville,  with  an  intermediate  party 

Have  parties  out.  JOHN  J.  PHOK, 

Maior- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  February  3,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk: 

Within  a week  I expect  to  be  largely  re-enforced.  I 
Pryor  shall  not  escape  again.  If  he  advances  I suggest  'Whether  a 
the  motive  power  of  the  raproad  cannot  be  used  to  throw  a force  in  hi. 
rear  by  a sudden  movement.  ^ 

Major-  General. 


Suffolk,  February  8, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Verv  glad  to  learn  of  the  expected  troops.  When 
will  hope  to  bag  him.  He  tears  up  the  road  this  side  of  ^arrsvnlle  a 
often  as  1 repair  it,  so  that  I could  not  use  hand  cars.  Suppos^h 
was  bagged  the  other  day.  He  was  where  flanking  ""f * 
both  flanks.  Our  people  used  up  their  ammunition  before  dawn  am 
lost  time  waiting  for  more.  Meantime  enemy  J^!^®  j 

Major-General 


535 


AP.  XXX.]  CORRESI^ONDENCJ:,  ETC.  — ENIOK. 

(Jnited  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News^  Va.^  February  6,  1863. 
aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  TJ.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General:  Yours  of  tbe  31st  ultimo  was  duly  received.  Pressing 
gagements  have  prevented  an  earlier  reply  to  it.  I have  no  authority 
1 regulate  or  sanction  the  privilege  of  trading  at  Norfolk  by  surround- 
g it  with  safeguards.  It  will  be  satisfactory  to  me  to  receive  and  to 
/e  the  utmost  attention  to  any  written  communication  you  may  now 
at  any  time  make  to  me  which  will  enable  me  to  stop  illicit  trade  at 
irfolk  or  elsewhere  within  the  limits  of  the  North  Atlantic  Blockad- 
: Squadron.  The  new  fleet  captain  has  just  entered  upon  his  duties 
il  IS  not  familiar  with  the  situation  of  affairs  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  respectfully, 

^.047.  LEE, 

Actg,  Rear- Admiral,  Comdg.N.  Atlantic  Blocicading  Squadron, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,. of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  February  7,  1863. 

i:g.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee,^ 

Commanding  N orth  Atlantic  Rlochading  Squadron  : 

.dmiral  : It  wa^  at  General  Yiele’s  request  that  I asked  you  to  send 
i an  officer  with  whom  he  might  confer  in  regard  to  some  additional 
•guards  in  reprd  to  trade.  The  general  thought  he  might  obtain 
i s^pestions  from  an  officer  of  the  Navy.  That  was  all  he  had 
passed  ^ conference  desirable  has 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


■ or-General  Djx : Suffolk,  Ya.,  February  8, 1863. 

y scouting  party  went  to  Carrsrille  in  the  night.  Captain  Roberts 
orte  he  arrival  of  a battalwn  at  Franklin  ?f  cavaRv  rmea  with 
revolvers.  Two  companies  were  at  O'arrsville  and 
land  8 yesterday,  returning  via  South  Quay.  The  contraband  savs 
le^was  much  rejoicing  at  Franklin,  and  the  troops  turned  outon  tL 

JOHN-J.  PECK, 

Major-  Oeneral. 


■ ir^General  Dix:  Suffolk,  February  8,  1863. 

rj  iiitelligent  contraband  escaped  this  morning.  Has  a familv 
Ills  master  resides  1 mile  from  Franklin  Ye^terdav  he 

^leo™ia"n,d®r’'®  re  enforced 

'eorj,ia  and  Louisiana  troops;  will  have  8,000  this  week.  Gen- 


I 


536 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap. 


eral  Colston  lias  dropped  down  to  Zuni  from  Petersburg  with  12,000 
both  are  coming  here  in  a few  days.  His  account  is  very  hoDestl; 
given.  It  looks  very  plausible.  Pryor  has  been  receiving  aid ; this  i; 

confirmatory.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  February  8,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix : 

If  there  is  any  truth  in  the  information  conveyed  in  my  last  telegrar 
the  force  under  Colston  must  be  same  reported  as  being  camped  8 mile 
from  Petersburg  last  week;  the  amounts  correspond.  Their  plan  i 
probably  a dash  for  a few  days,  while  not  imperatively  called  for  els€ 
where. 

Several  men  have  deserted  to  the  enemy.  ^ 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  February  8,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

The  Ninth  Army  Corps  is  ordered  here.  One  brigade  has  arrivec 
1 will  let  them  take  position  at  Newport  News  at  present,  ready  to  1 
thrown  in  any  direction.  Keep  up  your  reconnaissances  and  advise  ro 
of  any  hostile  movement. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  February  9,  1863 — 4 p* 

Major-General  Dix,  Fa.; 

The  Ninth  Army  Corps,  ordered  to-  your  command,  will  be  used  i 
vou  may  deem  proper.  It,  however,  should  be  kept  together  as  muc 
as  possible.  A portion  of  it  may  be  ordered  forther  ^uth  immediate! 

H.  W.  HAliLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


New  York,  February  9,  [1863.] 

General  M.  0.  Meigs  : 

I think  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  accomplishing  in  New  York  wli 
we  talked  of  Saturday,  for  any  number  of  men  less  than  12,000.  It  y(^ 
wish  I will  send  you  a detailed  report  in  cipher  early  to-morrow, 
will  take  a few  days  to  get  things  ready.  You  can  see 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
February  10,  1863—3  a.  ni. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

I send  a dispatch  just  received  from  General  Peck.  I have  te 
graphed  to  the  President  the  news  in  yesterday’s  Eichmond  pape. 
just  received.  The  Ericsson  left  two  hours  ago  with  her  three  bt 


Crap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  EtC. UNION. 


537 


marine  tows,  and  is  going  at  the  rate  of  4 miles  an  hour.  Will  you 
please  advise  Secretary  of  the  Kavy  ? Wind  west  5 weather  beautiful. 

Major-General  Dix:  Suffolk,  Va.,  February  10,  186:i. 

A contraband  from  Weldon  says  very  strong  and  exteDsive  earthworks  are  con- 
approaches.  He  heard  that  Pettigrew  contemplated  a raid  across 
the  river,  w^le  Pryor  would  occupy  us  with  his  command.  A Massachusetts  lady 
3amo  from  Weldon  yesterday  on  her  way  North.  She  said  that  the  enemy  had  50  000 
non  near  the  railroad  that  could  be  concentrated  at  Wilmington,  Gold^ioroimli  or 

connection  witli  othere  that  you  may 
lave,  that  their  proper  value  may  be  arrived  at.  ^ ^ 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Xew  York,  February  10.  1863. 
4ajor-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

I telegraphed  to  General  Meigs  yesterday  in  regard  co  obtaiiiiiie 
'essels  m New  York,  and  can  give  you  details  in  cipher  if  you  wish  it  * 

A.  E.  BUBN8IDE, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  February  11,  1863. 
faj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  New  YorJc  : 

Expedition  postponed  for  the  present. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


-ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  February  11, 1863. 


Pryor  has  been  re-enforced  somewhat, 
•rce  at  Zuni.  As  the  Xinth  Corps  is  for 
ed  forces  will  not  be  sent  at  this  time. 


I cannot  learn  of  any  heavy 
some  ulterior  end  I fear  prom- 


JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


. ^ ^ Port  Monroe,  February  11,  1863. 

ajor-General  Peck:  ^ , ^ouo. 

Ninth  Corps  will  remain  except,  it  may  be,  apart.  Can  we  do  anv- 
iiig  on  the  Xw  London  [Blackwater]  by  sending  it  to  you,  or  wouid 

its  hereafter  ^ economize  in  forces  for  great  re- 

jonx  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


^jor-Gcncral  Dix:  Suffolk,  February  12,  1863. 

Your  claim  for  the  Ninth  Corps  is  strong,  and  I hope  it  will  remain. 
I had  pontoons  I would  clear  out  Washington  t and  New  London 
lack  wa  t er]  [, ridge.  J^that  event  the  presence  of  .some  old  troops 


8omc  potsonul  multei*  omitted. 


tPrankliu,  Va. 


538 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXN. 


from  that  command  would  be  very  essential.  One  of  the  brigades  here 
would  enable  us  to  move  larger  commands  and  make  detachments  with 
safety  to  them  and  this  place.  How  strong  is  the  Ninth  Corps  ? 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  February  12, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

The  Ninth  Corps  is  15,000  strong.* 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hampton  Eoads,  February  13,  1863 — 7,30  p.  m. 
General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commander -in- Chief  U.  S.  Army.,  WaMngton^  D.  G.: 

I have  just  arrived  from  the  South  to  obtain  more  heavy  guns  and 
ammunition. 

I have  reconnoitered  the  whole  coast  from  Charleston  to  the  Ogeechee 
Kiver,  and  can  give  full  information  of  the  state  of  affairs  both  naval 
and  military.  While  the  ordnance  is  being  loaded  I can  come  to  Wash- 
ington to  report  in  person,  and  with  vour  permission  I will  do  so. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-General^  Comdg.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps. 


Fort  Monroe,  February  13,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

My  man  will  return  to  Boston  [Suffolk]  to-night.  Facilitate  him  in 
getting  through  our  pickets.  He  is  to  be  back  in  thirty  days  with  im- 
portant information. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


[February  13-18,  1863f — For  correspondence  between  Halleck  and 
Foster,  in  relation  to  return  of  the  latter  to  South  Carolina,  see  Series  I, 
Vol.  XIV,  pp.  400,  402,  403,  408.] 


February  [16,]H863. 

Major-General  Foster, 

Commanding  Eepartmefit  of  North  Carolina: 

Sir:  On  the  5th  of  January,  1863,  at  10.30  o’clock  p.  m.,  as  Lieutenant 
Sanders  was  walking  in  company  with  three  other-men  on  the  principal 
street  in  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C.,  they  were  fired  upon  by  a party  of  guer- 
rillas from  behind  some  brick  walls,  the  ruins  of  burnt  buildings.  One 
of  the  men  was  killed  instantly.  My  brother  walked  to  his  quarters 
and  died  in  half  an  hour  from  the  time  he  received  the  wounds.  Tbe 
company  immediately  turned  out  and  succeeded  in  capturing  two  of  tlie 
murderers  with  their  guns  in  their  hands.  We  captured  several  otliers, 
but  without  their  arms.  They  were  placed  in  prison  to  await  an  inves- 
tigation, which  was  held,  and  the  innocent  set  free. 


Some  details  omitted  from  this  dispatch. 


HAl*.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


539 


The  murder  of  Lieutenant  Cox  and  family  occurred  on  the  morning 
f the  9th  of  February,  1863,  in  the  following  manner : He  being  a resi- 
ient  of  Pasquotank  County,  and  living  16  miles  from  town,  went  down 
OT  the  purpose  of  moving  his  family  to  the  city.  On  his  return  he  was 
,ttacked  by  a gang  of  guerrillas,  who  came  upon  him  from  a thicket  and 
red  a volley,  killing  him  and  a girl  of  four  years  old  instantly  and 
rounding  the  wife  so  that  she  died  on  the  13th  instant.  Three  other 
len  of  my  company  were  wounded,  1 mortally,  1 badly,  1 slightly. 

The  team  ran  to  the  city,  but  without  any  one  to  tell  what  had  be- 
ome  of  its  riders,  but  the  marks  of  blood  on  the  carriage  gave  evidence 
f foul  play.  I immediately  sent  out  an  expedition,  which  returned  in 
he  evening  with  the  bodies  of  Lieutenant  Cox  and  child.  This  caused 
reat  excitement  among  the  people,  both  civil  and  military,  who  urged 
bat  something  be  done  to  avenge,  if  possible,  or  at  least  to  set  an  ex- 
raple  to  prevent  the  committing  of  such  brutal  outrages.  I was  asked 
y many  to  take  all  of  those  prisoners  who  could  be  proven  guilty  of 
eing  guerrillas  and  have  them  shot.  I was  not  myself  in  favor  of 
oiug  so  5 but  when  I thought  the  matter  over  deliberately  I ordered 
oe  prisoner,  by  the  name  of  A.  White,  to  be  brought  ouib  and  shot, 
hich  was  done  by  a brother  of  Lieutenant  Cox,  for  which  I hold  my- 
ilf  personally  responsible. 

E.  C.  SANDERS, 

Captain^  Commanding  Post  at  Elizabeth  City, 


ajor-General  Dix : 


SUPFOLK,  Ya.,  February  16,  1863. 


Major  Stratton  made  a general  reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of 
lackwater,  driving  in  the  pickets  about  Carrsville,  capturing  4 sabers 
Sharps’  carbine,  several  blankets,  and  provisions.  He  examined  con- 
abands  who  stated  Pryor’s  force  about  Franklin  at  11,000,  and  that 
000  were  at  Black  Creek  Church  with  cavalry  and  “right  smart  artil- 
ry,”  making  18,000.  These  agree  very  nearly  with  the  reports  made 
me  ten  days  since.  Major  [Stratton]  and  Captain  Loomis  credit  the 
port  as  to  the  7,000  and  place  Pryor^s  at  7,000  or  8,000  also.  Captain 
)omis  made  the  captures. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  February  16,  1863. 
ajor-General  Burnside,  Providence,  R.  I. : 

If  agreeable  to  you  to  resume  the  command  in  North  Carolina  and  of 
e Ninth  Army  Corps,  please  come  to  Washington. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


I 

1 

|aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck: 


Providence,  R.  L,  February  17,  1863. 


Your  dispatch  is  received.  I leave  for  Washington  at  once  and  will 
port  to  you  in  person.* 


A.  E.  BURNSIDE. 

Burnside  assumed  command  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  March  17,  186.3. 


540  NOKtM  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VlitGINIA.  (Chap.  XXfcj 

Fort  Moi^roe,  February  17, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck, 

Commanding  at  Suffolk: 

I learn  from  a Surry  County  man,  whom  I think  well  informed  and 
perfectly  reliable,  that  PryoPs  whole  force,  including  a cavalry  re£-! 
ment  at  Philadelphia,*  Albany,*  and  vicinity  does  not  exceed  7,00( 
men.  lie  says  there  is  no  force  between  vicinity  of  :New  York*  and 
Geor^^etown*  and  only  a small  force  at  Black  Creek  Church. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  February  18,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  of  Engineers : 

General  : In  consequence  of  some  changes  that  have  been  made  i 
will  not  be  necessary  to  send  the  pontoon  equipage  for  which  Genera 
Foster  recently  made  a requisition.  The  General-in-Chief  therefore  re 
quests  you  to  retain  it  in  New  York  untU  otherwise  called  for. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servai^,  ttat 

G.  W^.  C U LiB  U M., 

Brigadier-General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  February  18, 1863. 

General  Joseph  G.  Totten,  . -n.  rt 

Chief  Engineer  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  1).  0.  .* 

Very  recent  circumstances  will  prevent  my  going  to  the  point  whcr 
1 exnected  to  operate.  I will  therefore  withdraw  the  application  lo 
the  pontoon  bridge  to  be  sent  there.  I would,  however,  very  muci 
like  to  have  it  in  North  Carolina,  if  it  is  not 

Major-General.,  Volunteers. 


Suffolk,  February  18, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Twenty  men  have  deserted  from  Mounted  Eifles  since  payment- 

many  to  the  enemy.  .id  i 9 

What  had  better  be  done  with  goods  confisc^^l  from  ladi^  ^ 

«J.  PBL'Jx, 
Major-General. 


Hdors.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

" Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  February  18,  1863. 


Actg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron: 

Admiral:  Tlie  major-general  commanding  the  department  direc 
me  to  forward  to  you  the  inclosed  list  of  vessels  in  Government  eraplc 

pccmiar  to  cipher  used  by  Dix  and  Peck.  Their  names  not  detf 

mined. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


■HAF.  ] 


541 


kt  this  place  and  vicinity,  with  the  respective  dates  of  assignment  and 
lumbers  of  the  flags  assigned  to  such  vessels.  * 

I would  also  respectfully  state  that  the  omission  to  supply  you  with 
he  list  before  was  on  account  of  my  having  supposed  that  due  notice  was 
Jso  given  you  by  the  chief  quartermaster,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Thomas 
',t  the  same  time  he  furnished  it  to  these  headquarters.  ’ 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' D.  T.  VAN  BUEEN, 

Assistant  Adjutant’ General. 


lajor-General  Peck: 


Fort  Monroe,  February  19,  1863. 


I am  very  much  dissatisfied  with  Colonel  Dodge  and  his  management, 
le  has  allowed  his  men  to  plunder  the  country,  and  they  are  now  de- 
erting  to  the  enemy.  The  President  has  recommended  him  to  the 
ienate  for  brigadier-general.  This  ought  not  to  be. 

I think  you  had  better  sell  Mrs.  Portlock^s  goods  at  auction.  Applv 
roceeds  to  public  use. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General.  ' 


, _ _ „ Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  February  19, 1863. 

ireueral  H.  W.  Halleck,  ^ 

i Commander-in-Ghief  If.  S.  Army^  Washington^  D.  G.: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  just  had  a conver- 
sion with  Admiral  Lee,  in  which  he  informed  me  that  his  gunboats  in 
le  sounds  of  North  Carolina  will  soon  be  ready  to  operate  up  the  Eoan- 
ke,  Tar,  and  Neuse  Elvers,^  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  some  iron- 
lad  gunboats  reported  to  be  building  there. 

He  desires  my  co-operation,  which  I propose  to  give  with  all  my  avail- 
ble  force.  I can  do  this  the  more  effectively  if  the  Ninth  Armv  Corns 
B ordered  to  assist. 

If  the  disposable  transportation  be  limited  I think  I could  manage 
itb  the  few  remaining  boats  in  the  sounds  to  transport  this  force  in 
etachments  from  Winfield,  on  the  Chowan  Eiver,  to  the  point  where 
le  force  will  be  used. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  'G.  POSTEE, 
Major-General  Vohinteers. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  February  19,  i863. 
aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Gommanding  Seventh  Army  Gorps,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 
General:  I have  received  from  your  assistant  adjutant-general  a 
nnmunication  dated  February  18,  inclosing  a list  of  steamers  in  the 
npioy  ot  the  Government  at  Fortress  Monroe  and  vicinity.  I beg  to  be 
i^orined  if  these  are  to  be  considered  as  additional  to  those  included  in 
I'e  lists  sent  me  in  your  letters  of  October  20  and  23.  I fear  that  some 
ifogiiiarities  have  been  occasioned  by  my  not  having  been  promptly 

*The  list,  in  wliicli  alterations  were  frequently  made,  is  omitted. 


542 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXjI 


supplied,  agreeably  to  the  arrangement  agreed  upon  in  October,  witi 
the  names  of  steamers  as  they  were  added  to  or  taken  from  the  origiiit 
list.  Under  this  arrangement  steamers  may  enter  and  pass  out  of  tb 
Hoads  without  being  recognized  as  in  the  employ  of  your  departmen 
To  avoid  any  abuse  which  might  arise  out  of  this  custom  I have  to  rf 
quest  that  you  will  issue  orders  that  all  steamers  shall  communical 
with  the  guard  vessel  in  passing  between  the  hours  of  sunset  and  sui 
rise.  I will  instruct  the  outer  guard  vessel  accordingly. 

I have  also  to  request  that  you  will  direct  that  the  flag-of-truce  stean 
ers  shall  be  required  so  to  arrange  their  movements  as  not  to  pass  tl 
blockade  at  Newport  News  at  night,  as  by  doing  so  they  are  liable  1 
be  fired  into. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 

i 


Norfolk,  February  20, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix*: 

General  Peck’s  information  seems  to  tally  with  the  reports  broug 
to  me  that  15,000  men  will  move  in  this  direction  through  Prince 
Anne  County.  I have  examined  three  men  to-night.  They  are  ve; 
much  frightened  and  believe  all  they  say. 

EGBERT  L.  YIELE, 

Brigadier-  General 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  February  20, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 

General  Yiele  has  doubtless  communicated  the  information  receivi 
by  him  in  respect  to  a contemplated  raid  or  movement  of  the  enemy 
this  direction.  Reports  come  in  from  contrabands  of  re-enforcemen. 

from  Richmond.  . , ^ x 

Major  Stratton  will  go  to  Gatesville  and  South  Mills  to-morrow  • 

watch  that  country.  ^ 

Major-General 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  February  20, 1863. 

General  Yuele,  Norfolk : 

Major  Stratton  will  start  in  the  morning  for  Gatesville  and  Soiu 
Mills  and  will  watch  that  section.  JOHN  J PECK 

Major-General 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yirginta,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
For/  Monroe.  Va..  February  20,  1805. 


Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron: 

Admiral:  I have  just  received  your  communication  of  yesterday 
The  list  of  steamers  sent  you  by  Colonel  Yan  Buren  yesterday  suo^ 


Chai’.XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


543 


the  addit]OD8  made  to  the  list  furnished  you  in  October.  These  steam- 
ers  should  have  been  reported  to  you  at  the  time  they  were  respectively 
taken  into  the  service  ot  the  Quartermaster’s  Department;  but  through 
a misapprehension  in  the  assistant  adjutant-general’s  office,  explainid 
m Colonel  Van  Buren  s letter,  they  were  not  reported  to  me.  I will 
see  that  no  such  mistake  occurs  hereafter,  and  that  all  changes  are 
reported  the  day  they  are  made.  I think  no  inconvenience  has  resulted 
fiom  It,  as  all  these  steamers  have  a flag  number,  and  none  others  are 
passed  without  special  permits.  die 

All  steamersMn  the  service  of  the  army  commuhicate  with  the  guard 
vessel  now,  both  by  night  and  day,  when  it  is  possible.  If  they  Ire  ffi 
the  quartermaster’s  service  they  exhibit  a flag  with  a number  corre- 
sponding with  that  on  the  list  which  has  been  furnished.  If  not  in  ffis 
service  they  are  passed  under  special  permits. 

There  is  a difficulty  at  night  in  distinguishing  the  guard  vessel  from 

suggest  that  the  one  here,  as  well  as  the  one 

kniL  w ^ ”*^***’  that -our  steamers  may 

know  and  be  able  to  communicate  with  them.  ^ 

befbrrnkbt*'^h^i‘lVo^nr?V  i®  to  reach  here 

Detorc  night,  but  Colonel  Ludlow  is  sometimes  unavoidably  detained 

and  It  may  h^appen,  too,  that  our  prisoners  cannot  be  put  on  board  the 
traiisports  at  City  Point  in  time  to  reach  your  picket  boat  until  after 
dark.  The  prisoners  are  generally  miserably  provided  for,  and  a delay 
nlm  tn  Newport  News  would  be  inconvenient.  I therefore 

you  suggest  some  signal,  by  whistle  or  lights,  by  which 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


jEneral  Orders, 
No.  13. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  op  Va»  7,th  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Vaf.,  February  20,  1863. 


Pelouze,  assistant  adjutant-general,  Seventh 
having  reported  pursuant  to  orders  from  the  War  De- 
lartment,  is  assigned  to  duty  at  these  headquarters. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Dix : 

D.  T.  VAN  BUEEN, 

, Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  February  21, 1863. 
laj.  Gen.  John  A.^Dix^  Fort  Monroe  : 

routh  ‘‘pprehension  about  raids  upon  Norfolk  and  Poris- 

wuth.  Those  places  are  very  strong  by  nature.  Tanner’s  Creek  East 

rnafs®  af  f™’  Western  Branches  of  the  Elizabeth,  with  their  arms' 
nals,  and  swamps,  almost  bar  approach  at  any  time  esneciallv  whpn’ 
^eiythmg  IS  flooded.  The  rebel  lines  of  defense  arT^eTl  selecte^^^^^^^ 

rminf  “harswwm^s  ^ ^ extent-about  one-third 

Don  RIaai;,  f swanip  is  a dangerous  place  for  an  ordinary  force  basinsr 
pon  Blackwater.  Had  the  enemy  command  of  the  Albemarle  it  would 


544 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[chai>.  XXX. : 


be  another  thing.  The  enemy  must  pass  via  South  Mills.  The  bridges 
being  destroyed,  a small  redoubt  with  a regiment  and  some  artillery 

would  bar  up  the  approach.  . ^ . 

The  only  inducement  for  a cavalry  movement  by  that  line  would  arise 
from  combined  operations  against  Suffolk,  at  least  in  the  first  instance. 

F B JOHK  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  NewSj  Va.,  February  21, 1<SG3. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe : 

General  : I have  received  your  communication  of  February  20. 

Have  directed  that  the  guard  vessel  off’  Fort  Monroe  and  • Norfolli 
shall  have  a red  light  hoisted  between  sunset  and  sunrise.  When  I 
wrote  vou  about  the  flag-of-truce  boat  I had  considered  what  you  now, 
suggest  about  a signal.  The  objection  to  that  is  this ; Any  such  signal 
will  be  quickly  understood  through  informers,  and  may  be  badly  abused 
by  the  enemy.  If  the  exchanged  prisoners  pass  the  night  of  their  arri 
val  at  Old  Point  on  board  the  steamer  the  inconvenience  would  prob 
ably  be  the  same  if  the  flag-of-truce  boat  should  leave  City  Point  at 
such  an  hour  as  would  admit  of  her  passing  the  blockade  at  daylight 

If  this,  which  appears  to  me  to  be  quite  practicable,  cannot  be  car 
ried  out  I will  on  hearing  from  you  instruct  the  fleet  captain  to  arrange 
variable  signals  with  the  flag-of-truce  boat  and  the  picket  vessels. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your^ 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg,  JEtear- Admiral,  Comdg,  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  February  23,  1863. 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  JBlochading  Squadron  ; 

Admiral:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a letter  from  Captain  Edgai 
of  the  steamer  Thomas  A.  Morgan,  the  mail  boat  betw^een  this  post  au 
Yorktown,  setting  forth  a forcible  intrusion  into  his  vessel  by  Lieutci 
ant  Blake;  commanding  officer  of  the  Malmska,  the  guard  vessel  <i 
Yorktown,  and  the  arrest  of  Mr.  John  E.  Wilson,  his  clerk,  who  « 
taken  on  board  the  said  vessel  and  kept  in  irons  from  4 o clock  in  ti 
afternoon  to  10  o’clock  the  next  day.  I have  examined  Mr.  Wilson  an. 
a witness  who  saw  a part  of  the  transaction  for  which  the  lormei 
arrested,  and  their  testimony  shows  that  the  pilot,  Mr.  Green,  fiaxi 
quarrel  vdth  Mr.  Wilson  of  a private  nature,  resulting  in  blows;  an 
from  all  the  tacts  I think  there  is  no  doubt  that  Mr.  Green  was  ti 

^5ut  whatever  the  merits  of  the  case  may  be,  the  act  of  Lieuteiui 
Blake  iii  stopping  the  mail  steamer  in  the  service  of  the  army  ana  i<  i 
ing  one  of  her  officers  out  of  her  by  force,  instead  of  brinpng  the  ca, 
before  me,  was  an  outrage  which  I do  not  doubt  you  will  call  on  ni 
promi)tly  to  redress. 


lAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  545 

The  delay  in  bringing  the  case  before  you  was  caused  by  your  ab- 
mce  and  by  accidentally  mislaying  Captain  Edgar’s  letter. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General, 


United  States  Elagt-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neicport  News,,  Ya.,  February  24,  1863. 
[aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya. : 
General  : I beg  leave  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  commu- 
cation  of  February  23,  covering  a letter  from  Captain  Edgar,  of  the 
earner  Thomas  A.  Morgan,  in  regard  to  an  alleged  forcible  intrusion 
to  that  vessel  by  Lieutenant  Blake,  of  the  Navy,  and  the  seizure  and 
)ufinement  by  him  of  the  clerk  of  that  steamer. 

This  matter  will  receive  prompt  attention  and  the  result  will  be  com- 
imicated  to  you  as  soon  as  practicable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral,  Comdg,  N Atlantic  Bloclmding  Squadron. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  February  28,  1863. 
ipt.  W.  E.  Blake,  Frovost-Marshal : 

Captain  : You  will  on  receipt  of  this  send  Mr.  Newbould,  the  cor- 
spondent  of  the  New  York  Times,  out  of  the  department.  He  has 
are  than  once  misrepresented  the  condition  of  things  here.  I had 
st  evening  a dispatch  from  Major  Greneral  Peck  informing  me  that  one 
Mr.  Newbould’s  statements  in  regard  to  matters  in  his  command  was 
itrue.  Eepresentations  in  regard  to  a department  in  contact  with  the 
emy  should  not  only  be  prudent,  but  true ; and  Mr.  Newbould  in  his 
al  for  the  press  with  which  he  is  connected  has  not  taken  pains  to 
certain  the  truth  of  his  statements,  rendering  corrections  necessary, 
creating  uneasiness  which  no  correction  is  in  time  to  repair.  He  is 
viously  a sensationalist  and  this  is  no  place  for  him. 

I am,  respectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Mo7iroe,  Ya.,  February  28,  1863. 

•tg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : The  officer  in  command  of  the  guard  vessel  took  from  the 
<ptam  of  the  steamer  Planter,  which  arrived  here  this  morning  with 
'>ops,  his  original  orders,  handing  him  the  copy,  which  I inclose.  I 
Dpec^iilly  ask  that  they  maybe  returned  to  me.  They  constitute, 
the  indorsement  of  the  quartermaster  here,  the  evidence  of  the 
irformance  of  the  service  for  which  the  steamer  was  chartered,  and 
A necessary  for  the  adjustment  of  the  captain’s  account  with  the 
'larterm aster’s  Department. 

35  R R — VOL  XVIII 


546 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX] 


I respectfully  ask  that  you  will  direct  the  commander  of  the  guail 
vessel  not  to  take  from  transient  steamers  ^rfiving  here  with  trooi 
or  supplies  for  the  army  their  original  orders,  but  to  keep  copies,  if  yc 
require  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


'Abstract  from  Tri-monthhj  Eetum  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  (Seventh  Army  Corp. 
Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding,  f^^'  February  28,  1863  (headquarters  Fort  Monri 
Va.).  . : 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 
absent. 

Aggregate  last  return. 

t- 

® 

P.resent  for  duty  equipped. 

M 

O 

g 

O 

25 

o 

o 

s 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artille. 

2 

1 

0 

g 

a 

00 

g 

0 

s 

0 

CJ 

(/l 

0 

0 

0 

j 

Headquarters  Fort  Monroe.— 
Maj.  Oou.  Jolin  A.  Dix 

Fort  Monroe.— Qio\.  S.  M.  Al- 
ford : 

Infantry 

17 

17 

18 

18 

27 

629 

811 

28 

830 

28 

831 

25 

27 

629 

— k 

Total 

27 

629 

839 

858 

856 

... 

27 

629 

Gamp  Hamilton. — Col.  An- 
thony Conk: 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

34 

3 

12 

662 

75 

324 

750 

79 

373 

784 

87 

388 

786 

87 

364 

.... 

35 

689 

3 

75 

”13 

Total 

49 

1,  061 

1,  202 

1,  259 

1,  237 

.... 

35 

689 

3 

75 

13 

Norfolk-.— J^vxg.G&n.  E.  L. Viele : 
Infantry 

134 

2 

4 

2,40^ 

37 

139 

2,  981 
56 
154 

3,  311 
80 
190 

3,  418 
81 

i 187 

.... 

126 

2,  569 

2 

37 

Artillery 

6 

1 ' 

fi 

3 

=1= 

7 

'7 

■rj- 

■■jr; 

Total - - 

140 

2.  578 

3, 191 

3,  581 

3,686 

6 

126 

2,  569 

2 37 

; 4 

r 

|J7 

|J7 

Suffolk.— Gen.  J.  J.  Peck : 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillerj’^ 

380 

70 

27 

7,157 
1,  530 
818 

8,  61S 
1 2,058 
i 95C 

1 9,  68£ 
! 2,274 
( i,33e 

1 9,874 
: 2,297 
; 1,345 

"'4 

, 30 

380 

1 

7,157 

70 

1,530 
1 

Total- 

477 

9,  505 

.jll,  621 

' 13,  29£ 

) 13,  51C 

; 31 

1 V 380 

' 7,157 

70 

1,530 

Yorktown.‘ — Ma^i.  Gen.  E.  D. 
Keyes : 

Infantry - 

Cavalry. 

Artillery 

191 

48 

13 

. 2,872 

1 i,on 

1 372 

! 3,565 
i 1,24^ 
! 45; 

j 4,  201 
i 1,42] 
) 621 

f 3,35( 
L 1,141 
r 631 

L ... 

r 25 

101 

i 

2,872 

48 

! 1,014 

! 

i 13 

13 

Total 

Point  Lookout,  iHd.-^Maj.  J.  C. 
Brown : 

Infantry 

252 

! 4,255 

? 5,261 

J 6,25i 

j 5,13^ 

[ 2S  191 

.j  2,  872 

48 

.1 

, 1,014 

f 

i 15( 

) 18! 

j 

_l 

7 191 

1 

1 

r... 

i — 

5'  150 

1 . 

1 

Newport  News. — Maj. Gen. Will- 
iam F.  Smith  : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

87( 

23 

1 14,  401 
t 73! 

1 17,  82( 
),  83( 

3 25, 14; 
3 94 

3 25,  43: 
7|  95( 

! i 

L....I  825 

J,  38. 

r” 

i 14,  32£ 

) _ 

' it 

Total 

893  15, 14; 

5 18,  656  26,  090  26,  381  38  825 

3 14,  32! 

) 

, J8 

Grand  total 

. 1,861  33,321 

3 40,981  51,557  51,025,  106  1,59: 

i 1 1 1 ' 

3|28,  385 

5 2,056  75  I'*' 

AP.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNIOlSr. 


547 


stractfromlleturn  of  the  Department  of  Norik  Carolina,  Maj.  Gen.  John  G Footer  com 
manchna,  Jor  the  month  of  Febrnanj,  1863  (headejnarters.  Now  Berne,  N.  C. ). 


Present  for 
duty. 

0/ 

OQ 

P 

P 

<v 

ITj  . 

O 4^ 

ft  s 

present 

it  last  j 

Turn. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Couiiuaiid. 

02 

1 ^ 

1 ® 

bJO 

m 

s « 

(— 1 a ^ 
(U  M 

S.S 

o 

a 

<D 

O 

f-i 

tf) 

bJO 

<V  Ci 

br 

brp  § 

bccj  a 

ce 

s 

o 

<! 

<1 

w 

s 

7 Berne,  X.  C.,  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster, 
ighteenth  Army  Corps. 

/ Berne,  X.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  I.  X.  Palmer 
rst  Division.  ’ 

10 

10 

19 

19 

241 

5,  251 

6,  621 

7,  368 

7,  453 

b Eoyal,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  M.  Xaglee 
cond  Division. 

Koyal,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  0.  S.  Ferry,  Third 
ivision. 

6,  653 

5,  721 

6,  778 

5,  794 

27 

585 

706 

Berne,  X.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  U.  W.  Vessells 
mrth  Division. 

194 

2,  802 

3,  649 

6,116 

6,  321 

ci-FT?-'®’  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince, 

ith  Division. 

220 

4,422 

5,183 

6,  472 

7,  069 

Itoyal,  S.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Ledlie,  Artil- 
■y  Brigade. 

3(i 

940 

1, 131 

2,206 

2;  210 

98 

62 

Benie,  X.C.,  Col.  S.  H.  Mix,  Third  Xew 

CuiVilli’y, 

38 

620 

762 

031 

927 

2 

liington,  X.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  Potter, 
'.‘st  rjortli  Carolina  (Union)  Volunteers. 

16 

406 

486 

536 

538 





Grand  total 

782  1 

15,  026  1 

18,  548 

36,  022 

37, 109 

98 

64 

United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  March  1,  isiiS. 

. Geii.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

ENEEAL  : I received  this  eveuing  your  communication  dated  28tli 
necessary  that  the  guard  vessel  should  have  an  original 

■r  tfsliow  /“  * r®  w eekly  return  from  the  department  in 

to  Mlow  tlic  character  of  a vessel  and  carao  passing  the  blockade 
I certihcate  of  the  quartermaster  at  Fortress  Monroe  will  answer  this 
)ose  which  I respectfully  request  you  will  have  given  iT  all  cases 
re  It  IS  desirable  that  the  vessel  should  retain  her  original  order 

fml  h^?f*  to  which  yZre; 

ns  on  uf  ^ «t'the  transport  having 

li  wn  it  get  a certificate  from  the  quartermaster! 

r ..t  ii  ri?/*'®’'''®''-’'®^  to  detain  the  troops  even  to  copy  the 

er  hot  H,  crli^®  ''®''T  ’“?e“''e“‘ent  to  the  guard  vessel,  in  addition 

nt  in^Tso  ^fl  ®team-tug  to  assist  her-to  do  tl.is 

mvenfent  iftn?  ^''®"  ®‘''*®  t*’®”!'  transports  it  would 

the  certhcntl  Xf  ^-t  his  command,  would 

me  certmeate  oft  to  the  guard  vessel. 

f have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S IjEF 

Actg.  Eear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic Bloclcading  Sqtiadron. 


548 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


rcuAP.  xx: 


Organization  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  commanded  hy  Maj.Oen.  Jol 
G.  Foster  (headquarters  Few  Berne^  F.  C.),  Fehriianj^  1803. 


FIRST  DIVISION. 


Brif.  Gen.  I.  N.  Palmer  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory  commanding. 

17th  Massachusetts. 

43d  Massachusetts. 

45th  Massachusetts. 

Slst  Massachusetts. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  H.  C.  Lee  commanding. 

5th  Massachusetts. 

25th  Massachusetts. 

27th  Massachusetts. 

46th  Massachusetts. 


SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  C.  A.  Heckman  commanding. 

23d  Massachusetts. 

9th  New  Jersey. 

81st  New  York. 

98th  Now  York. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  W.  W.  H.  Davis  commanding.* 

11th  Maine. 

100th  New  York. 

52d  Pennsylvania. 

104th  Pennsylvania. 

Independent  New  York  Battalion. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  O.  S.  Ferry  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 


Second  Brigade. 


Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn  commandiug. 

39th  Illinois. 

62d  Ohio. 

67th  Ohio. 

176th  Pennsylvania. 


Col.  J.  B.  Howell  commandiug. 

56th  New  York. 

58th  Pennsylvania. 

85th  Pennsylvania. 

174th  Pennsylvania. 


fourth  division. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  Wessells  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  L.  C.  Hunt  commanding. 

85th  New  York. 

92d  Now  York. 

96th  New  York. 

101st  Pennsylvania. 

103d  Pennsylvania. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  G.  Stevenson  comuiaudij 

10th  Connecticut. 

24th  Massachusetts. 

44th  Massachusetts. 

5th  Rhode  Island. 


FIFTH  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  H.  Prince  commandiug. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  F.  B.  Spinola  commanding. 

132d  New  York. 

158th  Pennsylvania. 

171st  Pennsylvania. 

175th  Pennsylvania. 


Secand  Brigade. 

Col.  Jaimes  Jourdan  commaiidin 

3d  Massachusetts  Militia. 

8th  Massachusetts  Militia. 

158th  New  York. 

168th  Pennsylvania. 


At.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


549 


ARTILLERY  BRIGADE.  . 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Lkdlie  commanding. 

3d  New  York  Artillerv  . 

23d  Independent  ISew  York  Battery. 

24 th  New  York  Battery. 

1st  Rhode  Island  Artillery  Battery  F. 
Ist  U.  S.  Artillery,  Company  C. 

CAVALRY. 

Col.  S.  H.  Mix  commanding. 

3d  New  York  Cavalry. 
ENATTACnED. 

Bi  ig.  Gen.  Edward  E.  Potter, 

Ist  North  Carolina  (Union)  Volunteers. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  March  2,  1863. 
aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  Chief  of  Staff : 

A demonstration  was  made  on  the  enemy’s  lines  yesterday  which 
ought  out  a considerable  force.  An  attack  was  to  have  been  made 
one  of  his  batteries  last  night,  but  was  probably  postponed  for  want 
boats,  to  be  brought  from  ^^orfolk.  Every  effort  will  be  made  to 
certain  promptly  his  strength.  I telegraphed  General  Peck  on  the 
bject  last  night,  after  my  return  from  Suffolk,  in  consequence  of  a 
spatch  from  General  Butterfield  stating  that  Hood’s  and  Pickett’s 
visions  were  reported  in  Hooker’s  front.  I have  just  received  a dis- 
tcli  from  General  Peck  in  which  he  says  deserters  from  Pickett’s 
rision  state  that  they  saw  Pickett  yesterday  and  that  no  brigades 
ve  gone  from  Longstreet’s  command.  They  received  orders  to  be 
idy  to  move  last  night,  but  the  orders  were  countermanded.  One  of 
e deserters,  a Texan,  says  that  Hood  was  there  yesterday.  Jenkins’ 

' nsion  is  before  Suffolk.  I will  direct  General  Peck  to  make  a recou- 
issance  in  force,  and  will  be  ready  to  make  the  movement  referred  to 
you  promptly. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General j Commanding. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army^  Corps, 

Neiv  Berne.,  March  2,  1863. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army.,  Washingt07i,  D.  C\ : 

General:  I have  received  information  that  the  corps  cVarmee  of 
ij.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill  is  within  the  limits  of  this  State  and  that  he 
'minands  this  department.  General  Lougstreet’s  corps,  it  is  thought, 

' « gone  either  to  the  southwest  or  to  the  vicinity  of  Charleston. 

1 referred  in  my  last  letter  to  some  iron-dads  beirig  constructed 
' the  Tar  and  Boanoke  Pi  vers.  It  is  understood  tliat  the  on(‘.  on  the 
oanoke  River  is  nearly  completed,  and  to  ])revent  its  being  destroyed 
our  gunboats  before  it  is  ready  for  sei  vice  th(^  enemy  have  assem- 


550 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 

1 

bled  a large  force  at  Hamilton,  said  to  be  7,000  infantry,  1,000  cavalry 
and  seven  batteries  of  between  six  and  eight  pieces  each. 

The  fortifications  at  Eainbow  Bluff,  just  below  Hamilton,  destroyed  h, 
me  last  November,  are  being  repaired  and  heavy  guns  being  mounted 
from  Weldon.  A considerable  force  is  at  Weldon  and  the  enemy  an 
busily  engaged  in  fortifying  that  ])oint.  ! 

My  present  force  of  artillery  and  the  fact  that  my  best  troops  liavl 
been  sent  to  the  Department  of  the  South  will  not  allow  me  to  attaef 
Hamilton  with  any  reasonable  prospect  of  success. 

To  prevent  the  enemy  from  putting  their  threat  into  execution  o 
taking  the  town  of  Plymouth,  taking  the  gunboats,  or  driving  them  on 
of  the  river,  I propose  to  re-enforce  that  point,  and  at  the  same  time 
have  x)repared  a strong  reconnaissance,  under  General  Prince,  to  niov 
in  the  direction  of  Wilmington,  and  so  prevent  too  great  an  accumuki 
tion  of  force  on  the  Koanoke  until  such  time  as  I shall  be  strong  enoiig 
. to  attack  with  advantage.  The  command  is  only  waiting  for  a suitabl 
condition  of  the  roads  to  move,  the  recent  rains  having  rendered  tliei 

almost  impassable.  , ^ 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ ’ J.  G.  POSTEE, 

M ajor- General^  Comm anding. 


United  States  Elag-ship  Minnesota, 

Neivpo7't  HeivSj  March  3,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps^  Fort  Monroe,  \a.: 
General:  I inclose  Lieutenant  Blake’s  explanation  for  your  perusa 
when  please  return  it  to  me.  You  will  see  that  the  circumstances  ( 
the  case  had  not  been  fully  and  correctly  represented  to  you.  Still  tli 
course  pursued  by  this  young  officer,  then  in  temporary  command  ( 
the  Mahaska,  was  irregular  and  injudicious.  I regret  the  occurrence 
and  am  sure  that  no  official  discourtesy  was  intended. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  3,  1803. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Colonel  Spear  has  just  reported  the  result  of  a reconnaissance  towaii 
Franklin.  From  sources  that  he  says  are  entirely  reliable  the  enem 


is  reported  at  20,000. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


March  3. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk: 

It  is  re])orted  that  a company  of  the  Mounted  Eifles  have  desortcu 
the  enemy.  1 cannot  credit  the  report.  It  is  also  reported  that  tN\o 
the  companies  refused  to  go  on  xiicket  duty.  It  is  imiiortant  tlia 
should  know  the  truth  of  these  reports  at  once. 

JOHN  A.  DIA, 

Major-General. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.—XJNION. 


551 


aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix : 


Suffolk,  March  3,  1803. 


The  indorsement  of  Colonel  Dodge  is  as  follows : 

iNot  ODe  individual  member  of  the  Mounted  Rifles  has  ever  refused  to  do  any  duty 
) company  has  deserted  nor  is  there  any  possible  probability  of  such  an  occurrence. 
)ont  20  men  have  defserted  since  1st  January— 12  of  them  together:  can  satisfac- 
rily  explain  why.  The  morale  of  the  regiment  was  never  better  than  it  is  to-day 
f reasons  lor  believing  this  are  reliable,  and  will  satisfy  any  one  of  the  entire  want 


foundation  for  such  rumors  as  are  sent. 


CHARLES  C.  DODGE, 

Colonel,  4'c. 


Have  called  for  a report,  which  I will  forward. 


JOHH  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Suffolk,  March  4,  1863. 


njor-General  Dix:  ’ 

Spear  left  at  II  last  night,  with  the  most  profound  secrecy,  to  cut  off 
^Xuai’d  on  this  side  the  bridge  at  Franklin.  Two  men  deserted  thirty 
nutes  before  he  passed  the  pickets  and  carried  the  information  to 
•aiiklin.  All  was  ready  for  his  reception— artillery,  infantry,  &c.  He 
?t  none  but  captured  three.  His  ,]ast  dispatch  says  Longstreet  and 
ckson  are  there  with  re-enforcements.  Of  the  latter  there  can  be  but 
tie  doubt  j as  to  those  generals  I cannot  say.  Longstreet  has  been 
ported  in  the  West,  which  I do  not  believe. 


JOHif  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
March  4,  1863— 9.20  a.  m. 


ij.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


it  is  reported  to  me  from  Pichmond  that  nearly  all  the  insurgent 
Tiy  has  left  Fredericksburg,  and  are  moving  to  North  Carolina  and 
u on  ^ deserter  from  Eichmond  also  states  that  there  were 

4 30,000  men  at  Fredericksburg  a week  ago.  I have  just  received 
f 3 following  dispatch  from  General  Peck : 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  3,  1 863. 


' jor-General  Dix : 


xixo  dvcmiij;. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 


Major-General. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  5,  18G3. 


Iijor-General  Dix: 


-'Olonel  Snear  has  rotumArl  TTa  oo  ono  


552 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  L.  VIRGINIA. 


[OuAP.  XXl. 


week : Jackson  not  there.  Pryor  has  been  to  Eichmoiul  to  give  accoiiu 
of  his  operations  before  a court  of  inquiry  and  returned  yesterday.  Ee 
ports  are  contradictory  that  I get  from  prisoners. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Neio  Berne,  Mareh  5,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  informaiion  of  the  commam' 
ing  general  of  the  department,  the  following  facts  relative  to  the  arre.^i 
of  certain  citizens  of  Edenton  by  the  military  authorities  in  theDepau 
ment  of  Virginia,  and  of  the  carrying  away  of  certain  horses  by  the  saiu' 

authority : ^ i 

It  appears  that  after  the  tiring  upon  a party  of  Dodge's  cavalry,  an 
the  killing  of  one  of  them  by  some  guerrillas  near  Edenton,  a militar 
force  was"  sent  to  that  place  and  arrested  some  8 or  10  persons.  On  in 
recent  inspecting  tour  I had  an  interview  with  the  mayor  and  principj 
citizens  of  Edenton  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  all  the  facts  in  tL 
case.  The  citizens  appear  to  be  much  outraged  at  the  appearance  ( 
guerrilla  parties  in  their  vicinity,  as  of  course  they  must  suffer  tor  i| 
They  do  not  pretend  to  say  anything  in  favor  of  some  of  those  wlio  wei 
arrested,  and  sav  they  are  reioiced  that  they  have  been  carried  awn; 
as  they  are  troublesome,  bad  men,  and  one  or  two  of  them  are  desertei 

from  the  rebel  array.  . 

Inclosed  I send  statement  signed  by  those  citizens  concerning  Joslni 
T.  Stacy,  Moses  Hobbs,  Seth  Parker,  John  Coffield,  John  S.  Lcpr: 
and  J.  S.  Leary,  jr.,  six  of  the  persons  arrested  and  carried  to  Suttoll 
The  citizens  Aviio  make  these  statements  are  said  to  be  loyal  iiiGi 
My  belief  is  that  they  have  at  least  remained  always,  since  Edeiitt 
has  been  in  our  possession,  ])eaceable  and  quiet  and  desirous  ot  doiii 
no  act  against  the  United  States  authorities  ; and  I think  it  nothii. 
more  than  my  duty  to  request  you  to  bring  the  matter  to  the  early  a 
tention  of  ttie  commanding  officer  of  the  Department  of  Yirgima 
order  that  a fair  investigation  may  be  had  in  the  several  cases. 

I am,  sir,  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ I.  N.  PALMEE, 

Br  igadier- G en  era  I Vo  J iin  teers. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  6, 1803. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Three  very  intelligent  non-commissioned  officers  have  been  out  t 
ward  Blackwater  looking  for  deserters.  Last  night  they  passed  tliei 
selves  for  Confederates  and  had  the  freedom  of  the  house  ot  a kadu 
rebel  near  Windsor,  from  whom  they  jiicked  up  many  items.  He  sii, 
from  20,000  to  25,000  were  on  Blackwater;  that  a new  gentwal  v 
there  and  they  were  coming  over  so  soon  as  the  river  fell  sulhcicn 
It  was  high  and  some  bridges  had  been  damaged.  Their  spies  knew 
about  Suffolk  ; that  we  had  12,000,  and  two  gunboats.  These  imniiH 
agree  very  nearly  with  information  I received  from  numerous  qaaric 
and  from  "men  of  good  judgment  and  general  inforimition. 

JOHN  J.  I ELK, 

Major-General 


lAP.  XXX.] 


COllRESPONDENCE,  ETC.—tJNiON. 


653 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  March  6, 1863. 

[aj.  Geu.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army : 

Another  reconnaissance  on  the  Blackwater  puts  the  enemy’s  force  at 
),00().  It  is  commanded  hy  General  Colston.  Longstreet  is  said  to 
3 at  Petersburg,  but  I do  not  consider  it  certain.  Colonel  Spear  has 
iptnred  3 of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  2 horses,  3 rifles,  sabers,  and  other 
[•tides. 

JOU^  A.  BIX, 

Major- General. 


ajor-General  Peck,  Sufolk : 


March  7. 


Last  night  it  was  reported  to  me  through  Admiral  Lee  that  Pryor  had 
lit  a force,  probably  small,  to  Smithfield  and  Pagan  Creek  four  days 
^0.  It  would  be  well  to  ascertain.  The  guns  will  be  attended  to. 

JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Major-  General. 


United  States  Feah-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News.,  March  7,  1863. 

aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Bix, 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 


General  : The  commanding  ofScer  of  the  guard  vessel  at  Norfolk 
ports  to  me  to-day  that  the  quartermaster  at  that  post  declines  to  give 
rtificates  to  transports  returning  in  ballast  from  Norfolk  on  the  ground 
at  their  contracts  with  Government  expired  when  their  cargoes  were 
scharged  and  that  they  were  therefore  no  longer  in  Government  em- 
oy.  I beg  you  will  give  such  directions  as  will  prevent  the  inconven- 
Qces  which  arise  from  this.  I would  suggest  that  a certificate  in  each 
-se  from  the  quartermaster,  stating  that  the  vessel  had  come  as  a 
ausport  in  the  employ  of  the  army  and  was  going  out  in  ballast,  would 
5 all  that  is  necessary. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloelcading  Squadron. 


Hdqrs.  Bept.  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  March  7,  1863. 
is  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

Sir  : I am  extremely  unwilling  to  trouble  you,  amid  your  multifarious 
fl  responsible  duties,  with  a matter  which  ought  to  liave  been  settled 
'•ewhere ; but  having  failed  in  every  etfort  to  arrange  it  I, feel  it  my 
ity  to  the  public  service  to  appeal  to  yoiu  Soon  lifter  Admiral  Lee 
UR  coniinand  of  the  blockading  squadron  on  this  part  of  tlie  coast  he 
aced  a gunboat  between  Fort  Monroe  and  Fort  Wool,  a short  distance 
the  east,  and  required  all  vessels  bound  to  this  post,  even  when  laden 
th  army  stores,  to  come  to  anchor  or  heave  to  until  a permit  to  come 
the  dock  could  be  procured  from  me.  No  sucli  requirement  has  been 


554 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


iCHAl>.  XXX. 


enforced  before  since  tlie  commeBcement  of  the  war.  It  is  not  ouly  ai 
new  but  a needless  vexation,  and  has  led  in  some  instances  to  th<3  most 
serious  iuconveriience  and  loss.  The  only  pretext  under  which  it  can  ho 
made  is  to  enforce  the  blockade,  and  as  against  this  fort  it  is  an  absurd 
itv  A blockade  is  an  investment  of  an  enemy’s  port.  Admiral  Lee 
blockading  one  of  our  forts  by  one  of  our  gunboats— a novelty  in  wai 

which  is  without  precedent.  . 

I protested  against  this  proceeding  at  the  outset  as  an  indignity  to  tli( 
armv  and  to  the  commander  of  this  military  department,  whose  head 
quarters  are  here;  and  I would  have  resisted  it  but  for  an  unwilliiigiiesf 
to  present  to  the  public  the  scandal  of  a quarrel  between  the  Army  am. 
the  Navy,  when  the  cordial  co-operation  of  both  is  needed  to  maintan 

the  national  interests  and  honor.  , , -4. 

If  the  obiect  of  the  blockade  of  the  enemy’s  territory  were  pro motmj 
by  the  measure  I would  silently  acquiesce  in  it,  objectionable  as  it  is 
But  no  such  object  is  gained.  There  is  no  enemy’s  territory  to  block 
ade  within  15  miles  of  Fort  Monroe,  and  the  blockading  squadron  a 
Newport  News  and  Norfolk  shuts  out  all  ingress.  It  does  i^ot  prot^ 
to  be  a precaution  against  smuggling,  and  it  would  f 

There  is  a revenue  vessel  at  Fort  Monroe,  commimded  by  a J 

and  vigilant  officer.  There  is  also  a captani  of  the  poid, 
tent  force.  These  two  officers  examine  all  vessels  that  come  to  loi, 
Monroe,  not  only  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  their  papers  but  as  to  the 
cargoes,  opening  and  scrutinizing  every  cask  and  package. 

The  partial  objections  to  the  measure  are  these : 

1st.  It  compels  every  vessel  to  come  to  and  to  send  to  the  toit  tn 
permit,  often  at  great  inconvenience. 

2d.  It  occasions  delays,  always  vexatious  in  time  of  war, 
prompt  delivery  of  supplies  is  necessary,  and  sometimes  exceedin^^ 
annoying.  The  last  time  I visited  Washington  a commissary  e 
laden  wfth  potatoes,  of  which  we  were  greatly  m need,  was  kept  1.  n 
alongside  of  the  guard  boat  twenty-four  hours  because  I was  not  he 
to  grant  a permit  On  the  same  day  some  boats  ffiden  with  , 

came  out  of  the  Eappaliannock  and  burned  the  ship 
Avith  guano.  If  the  gunboat  had  been  employed  in  protecting  our  cor 
mercf  here  instead  of  blockading  the  army  at  Fort  Mon^e  and  kee,  m 
us  out  of  our  supplies  it  would  have  deprived  tlie  enemy  of  a succe^ 

and  spared  us  an  annoyance.  a .i.ivi 

3d.  It  is  the  source  not  only  ot  annoyance  but  f J Jr, 

iniury.  On  the  night  of  the  21st  ultimo,  in  themidst  of  a r lolenteaste 
girind  snow-stom,  a schooner  laden  with  forage  for  t he  duarte^ 
ter  in  attempting  to  enter  the  harbor  for  sl'elter  was  orde  e oil  1^  I 
guard  boat,  as  the  captain  states,  because  she  had  not  a I'ei 
Snd  ran  aground  on  the  beach.  She  was  unladen 
ience,  and  we  had  three  steamers  employed  for  “I  Vfn  SlV 

i^ether  afloat.  The  actualloss  toGovernmentcauiiot  be  less  than  Sb 

The  officer  of  the  gunboat,  as  I learn,  has  authority  to  Pass  res 
driven  into  the  harbor  by  violent  storms;  but  ■niSKPPi®''®"*!  fX) 
times  arise  and  serious  accidents  occur  in  ooosefl"e“«e.  “ *7  “"l  1„, 
were  removed  there  rvould  be  no  danger  of  misundeisUm  „ > 

These  are,  briefly,  some  of  the  inconveniences  and  the  . 

lire.  Iobjecttoit,tirst,asuseless;  seeond,asuiconvonieiitand\ t^^^ 
third,  as  producing  public  annoyance  and  nourr  ; ‘ .f  „||,i  , 

private  wrong  and  loss ; and,  littli,  as  an  iiidignity  t _ t < ■.  > ; ^ , 

these  grounds  1 ask  your  interposition  to  terminate  it.  I me 


CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. UNION. 


555 


'nAV.XXX.] 

Iiowing  the  position  of  the  gunboat  at  A,  and  I request  that  she  may 
e required  to  be  removed  and  placed  as  far  west  as  B,  and  that  this 
)rt  and  the  anchoring  ground  between  it  and  Hampton  be  left  open  to 
16  access  of  vessels,  as  it  was  under  Admirals  Goldsborough  and  Wilkes 
ot  ouly  to  such  as  have  army  supplies  but  such  as  come  here  for  shelter’ 
ibject  to  the  usual  revenue  and  military  inspection,  which  is  never 
iiitted. 

There  is  an  immense  contraband  traffic  carried  on  between  the  York 
id  Bappahannock  Eivers,  and  the  steamer  which  is  blockading  us 
ight  render  a valuable  service  in  that  quarter  instead  of  creatin«-  an- 
lyance  to  the  army  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHH  A.  mx, 

Major- General. 


. ^ ^ ^ Suffolk,  March  7,  18G3. 

ajor-General  Hix,  Fort  Monroe : 

The  proposed  exchange  reminds  me  that  the  infantry  force  here  is 
7 considering  its  very  recent  organization.  Bayonets  of  men  for 
^ 7,100  5 aggregate,  8,300.  Should  an  attack  be  made  during  stormy 

rather,  when  commimication  is  interrupted  between  Old  Point  and 
iriolk,  the  enemy  might  possibly  gain  some  advantage. 

JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


. ^ ^ Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  March  0, 18G3. 

ijor-General  Halleck,  ’ 

General-in-  Chief : 

1 have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Peck  : 

jor-Goneral  Dix  : Suffolk,  Va.,  March  9,  1863. 

Colonel  Dodge  lias  just  returned  from  Blackwater  beyond  Windsor  His  advonro 

t S follLino^own  ffiidfe  rlw 

turcd  4,  with  5 horses  and  other  equipments.  The  party  crossed  over  His  in 
Mul  n?i  all  we  liave  of  the  force  of  the  enemy.  Prisoners  o-ivo 

tHre  now  r u ^ ^^11  had  been  there,  but  thought  he  Vis 

olno^™conn.t™!l  >-«gi*nent3  arc  meDtiond  ; also  now"  batteries. 

JOHN  J.  PECK. 

JOHX  A.  HIX, 

* ( ^ Major-  General. 


»J.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-m-  Chief: 

l of  20,000  men  on  the  Blackwater  is  confirmc.l  from  many 

'■V  flw  tl fr?'  I’otersburg  and  Drewry’s  Bluff. 

A lew  tioops  at  Pichmond. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major- General. 


556 


north  CAROLINA  ANO  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX! 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  March  11, 18(33. ' 

Mai.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief  TJ.  8.  Army : 

I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Peck : 

Suffolk,  Va..,  March  11,  1863. 

General  John  A.  Dix:  ! 

The  Fifty-second  and  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  and  two  Mississippi  regiments  a; 
among  the  late  arrivals ; deserters  say  large  regiments ; that  General  Longstie 
has  command,  with  headquarters  at  Petersburg.  He  sent  a divipon  to  Charlesto, 
which  is  returning  to  Petersburg  for  Frederichsbiirg.  Two  regiments,  Virgimai; 
under  orders  for  Petersburg  from  Blackwater.  JOHN  J PECK 

Major-General. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  March  11, 1863.| 

Major-General  Dix: 

Charleston  Mercury  of  26tli  February  has  the  following. 

Longstreet’s  division  of  Lee’s  army  is  in  motion.  Some  15,000  passed  throiii 
Richmond.  They  took  the  route  pointing  to  the  south  side  of  the  James. 

This  has  been  verified  by  the  general  reports  since  about  that  tin. 
Of  late,  some  reported  a division  going  to  South  Carolina.  To-day  t* 
deserters  say  it  is  back  again,  and  will  probably  go  to  lu’etleri^ 

JOHN  J.  1 FCK, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  <^orps, 

JSTeiv  Berne,  Y.  (7.,  March  11, 1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  8.  Army,  Washington,  JJ.  6.  : 

General  : Beferring  to  my  letter  of  March  2 I have  the  honor! 
report  that  the  reconnaissance  of  General  Prince  has  _ 

ported.  General  Prince  proceeded  up  the  south  side  ot  Trent 
Trenton,  meeting  with  no  opposition;  he  found  the  bridges 
Trent  at  that  point  not  rebuilt.  He  then  retraced  his  steps  for  1 olloc  ■ 
ville;  thence  to  Young’s  Cross-Eoads;  thence  crossing  theMhite  u^ 
Eiver  to  Onslow.  The  cavalry  force  under  his  command  thoroUt, 


Kiver  to  UnsiOW.  ±uo  uciva-ny  i\ 

scouted  the  country  between  White  Oak  and  N^w  Bivers,  scatterii  g 
the  small  parties  of*  the  enemy  in  that  vicinity.  Alter  obtaining  a 
formation  possible  he  returned.  i -nl 

A reconnaissance,  under  command  of  Brigadier- General  1 ot  , * 
consisting  of  a portion  of  the  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Yolunteer  xMiii  , 
a section  of  artillerv,  and  detachment  of  cavalry,  proceeded  to  bwa 
borough,  on  White  Oak  Eiver.  They  met  with  no  opposition.  ^ 
A reconnaissance  was  sent  up  Trent  road  toward  Kinston,  consis  ^- 
of  the  Twenty-fifth  Kegiment,  under  command  ol  Colonel  1 
two  companies  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  under  GaptaiiiJ aeons. 
portion  of  tliis  command  proceeded  to  within  12  miles  ot 
prising  an  outpost  of  the  enemy  (two  companies)  at  that  point,  ( <1  . 
ing  5 prisoners,  their  camp  eqnijiage,  Ac. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


557 


,;haf.XXX.] 


Colonel  Jones,  commanding  picket  line,  pushed  a reconnaissance  to 
Oore  Creek  and  drove  the  enemy  back  in  that  direction.  A force  was 
.eot  to  Hyde  County  to  catch  certain  guerrillas  in  that  county  and  to 
)reak  up  a smuggling  trade  in  corn  and  forage.  This  party  was  ambus- 
■aded,  and  lost,  before  they  dis])ersed  the  enemy,  4 killed  and  13  wounded 
rom  the  Third  Hew  York  Cavalry.  On  their  return,  as  1 found  the 
*bject  had  not  been  thoroughly  accomplished,  I sent  a larger  force, 
mder  command  of  Colonel  Morris,  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers.  From  this  I have  not  yet  heard. 

The  information  derived  from  these  various  scouts  is,  briefly — 
Thirty-eight  thousand  rations  are  issued  daily  from  Goldsborough  to 
roops  within  drawing  distance.  This  in  all  probability  includes  the 
orces  at  Goldsborough,  Kinston,  Tarborough,  Kenansville  (west  of 
)nslow,  near  the  railroad),  and  possibly  the  force  on  the  Koanoke  Fiver, 
eaving  Weldon  and  Wilmington  as  separate  points  of  issue. 

The  information  given  in  mine  of  March  2,  as  to  the  force  on  Koanoke 
liver,  has  been  confirmed,  both  as  to  position  and  numbers.  The  iron- 
lad,  also  mentioned,  is  again  reported  as  being  now  read}^ 

Owing  to  the  dearth  of  transportation  in  this  department  at  present 
shall  have  to  await  the  return  of  the  expedition  to  Hyde  County  in 
rder  to  send  re-enforcements  to  Plymouth,  which  I propose  to  do,  and 
Iso  to  erect  a battery  there  capable  of  defending  the  town,  holding  the 
louth  of  the  river,  and  assisting  the  Havy  in  repelling  the  iron-clads. 
Owing  to  the  fact  that  so  large  a portion  of  my  light  artillery  is  now 
II  the  Department  of  the  South  (a  picked  force)  it  is  necessary  to  mount 
wo  companies  Third  Hew  York  Artillery,  and  I have  made  the  requisi- 
ions  (to  day’s  mail)  for  two  batteries  of  Hapoleon  guns,  complete,  and 
3r  the  requisite  number  of  horses.  I trust  this  will  meet  j^our  api)roval, 
nd  that  the  guns  and  horses  will  be  at  once  ordered. 

I omitted  to  mention  that  General  Dix  having  kindly  offered  to  scout 
rom  Horfolk  and  Suflblk,  with  his  cavalry,  in  the  direction  of  Edenton, 
llizabeth  City,  and  Winfield,  1 have  embraced  the  offer,  and  shall  con- 
entrate  the  forces  at  these  small  posts,  Plymouth,  and  Koanoke.  The 
mall  posts  above-named  were  difficult  to  re-enforce  or  support,  and 
et  some  force  should  be  in  this  direction,  and  this  relieves  me  of  the 
weight. 

Your  favor  of  the  4th  of  March,  on  the  subject  of  the  Maine  artillery, 
as  just  come  to  hand,  and  in  obedience  thereto  1 am  taking  the  neces- 
ary  steps  to  muster  out  such  members  of  that  organization  as  do  not 
oluntarily  join  some  other  arm  of  the  service. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEK, 

Major- General,  Comma^iding. 


laj.  Gen.  JonN  A.  Dix: 


SUEFOLK,  March  12,  18G3. 


There  has  been  some  mystery  about  Longstreet’s  moves,  but  the  fol- 
)wing  from  Charleston  Mercury  settles  all  doubt: 

Longstreet  lias  Iieon  appointed  by  tbe  President  to  the  department  made  vacant 
p tbe  resignation  of  General  Smith.  This  department  inclndes  South  Virginia  and 
lorth  Carolina.  General  Longstreet’s  headquarters  will  be  at  Petersburg. 


JOHH  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


658 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAi*.  xxx 


Suffolk,  March  12, 18G3. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Certain  letters  liave  this  moment  reached  me  to  the  effect  ^at  a: 
attack  upon  Suffolk  is  to  be  made.  One  is  from  the  signal  omccr  a 
Norfolk.  In  it  he  says  that  every  preparation  is  being  made  at  I rank] 
liu  to  render  the  affair  successful.  The  information  he  regards  as  Iroi 
oood  sources. 

Some  person  who  has  run  the  blockade  gives  it  as  the  current  repoi 
m Kichmoiul.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


Suffolk,  March  12, 18G3. 

Major-General  Dix: 

The  reported  increase  on  Blackwater  has  resulted  from  the  movemei! 
of  troops  into  your  department.  My  impression  has  been  tliat  the 
were  watching  our  moves.  Lougstreet’s  position  with  supports  nef^ 
Petersburg  wears  a threatening  appearance,  and  may  form  the  basis  (i 
the  reports  from  Norfolk. 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe,  March  12, 18G3. 

Major-General  Peok, 

Commanding  at  ^uJfoUi: 

In  view  of  reports  you  mention  I shall  send  you  5,000  men,  probabl 
2,000  to-morrow,  from  Newport  News.  a tata- 

’ ^ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General 


Suffolk,  March  12, 18G3. 


Major-General  Dix: 

Colonel  Stetzel  is  9 miles  below  Gatesville.  Eeports  an  attack  b 
guerrillas  some  days  ago,  who  were  driven  off’  by  the  troops  and  giu 

JOHN  ,T.  PECK, 

Major-General 


Fort  AIonroe,  Va., 

March  13,  18G3— 11  a.  ui. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army  : 

General  Longstreet  is  in  command  of  the  forces  at  Eichmond  and  i 
the  Blackwater,  in  place  of  General  Gustavos  W.  Smith,  ' 

view  of  the  large  re-enforcements  on  the  Blackwater  1 luu  e oruei 
Getty’s  division  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  to  Suffolk.  The  rest  are 

Newport  News.  JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


iiAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


559 


Headquarters  Outposts 

.ieut.  Col.  Southard  Hofpman,  13,  [18G3]~6.30  p.  m. 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : TLe  information  of  tlie  attack  on  our  Trent  Eiver  nosts  reacl.d 
'eriv  “J'^«‘"rn  from  an  expedition  to  Core  Creek,  Stm'fe 

xpected  evefv  mfM?e“'ton^r®  returned,  but  four  of  them  are 

t/*’  ®‘»?“gtlren  my  posts  and  wait  further  intelb-ence  anS 

- ... 

;“SHSLr“ 

Bin  ti'o  course  of  an  hour  or  so  I shall  proceed  to  the  Eed  House 
A cij  respectfully,  jmur  obedient  servant, 

J.  EICHTEE  JOEE8, 

Colonel^  Gonimanding. 


Headquarters  Outposts, 

ieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoepjman,  Mareli  14, 18G3. 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

information  received 

3 '’m^thfcT'  ^ompany  H,  whom  I sent  on  a reconnaissance 

rl  a e T learn  that  a force  of  the  enemy,  not  supposed 

fmarche  SO  tirc'l  Imv- 

all  1 fr  yesterday,  and  returned  only  at  11  p.  m,  but  I 

•ent  ( ''7  ®o“““'rud  by  the  Tuscarora  road  to  re-enforce  the 

rnfacco^r  opportunity  We  offered,  attack  the  enemy’s  flank  or 
^nt,  according  to  circumstances. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  RICHTEH  J0:NES, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Outposts. 

’■'‘St  extremitx-,  even  to  the  risk  of 


Headquarters  Outposts, 

out.  Col.  SOUTHAED  Hoffman,  !'•  ”>• 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

bnn,i  returned  from  a reconnaissance  to  Deep  Gullv  &c 

•n TobTaSwn"  n’  from  inlbnt?: 

hr  loof  ^ ^ would  seem  that  the  main  body  of  ilieir  force  moved 

prom  residue  early  this  morning,  in  full  retreat 

M behhid  the^C^il^f'^^  ^ battery  in  the 

!ve]oni,,“  m!  1 deployed, 

I 1 b ^Pid  turning  our  Heep  Gully  position  on  both  tlanks.  ^ From 


560 


NOKTH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


the  signs  on  the  ground  made  by  the  recoil  of  pieces,  &c.,  they  fired  bii 
little.  They  did  not  approach  the  Bed  House  nor  move  on  the  Rei 
House  road. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedrent 

Colonel  Fifty -eighth  Fennsylvania  Volunteers. 


Hdqrs.  Fifty-pirst  Massachusetts  Begiment, 
Beanfortj  N.  (7.,  March  15,  1803. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  A djutant- General. : 

Colonel  : No  train  arriving  yesterday,  and  receiving  intelligeiic 
last  night  at  10  o’clock  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Studley  that  New  Bern 
was  attacked,  I went  up  on  hand-car  after  midnight  to  Newport  Ba 
racks,  thinking  there  might  be  trouble  there.  Found  everything  a 
ri<dit.  No  signs  of  the  enemy  in  that  vicinity.  About  5 miles  above, 
the  signal  station,  a single  rail  was  removed  from  the  track  by  a sma| 
party  of  rebel  cavalry,  12  or  15  in  number.  The  number  is  verified  1: 
difierent  persons.  I traced  them  several  miles  trom  the  railroad.  Hu 
‘passed  down  last  night  within  2 miles  of  the  track  about  5 p.  m.  and  r 
turned  at  8 p.  m.  Our  cavalry  companies  have  been  scouting,  and  i 
enemy  is  in  that  vicinity.  Are  on  the  alert  all  along  the  line. 

\ ours,  truly,  ^ ^ ^ SPKAGUE, 

Colonel  Fifty -first  Massachusetts. 


Suffolk,  March  16, 1803. 

Major-General  Hix : 

What  will  be  done  with  General  Hodge  ? I wish  to  make  Spear  cl 
of  cavalry.  He  will  attempt  the  capture  of  the  guard  at  Washingtf, 
with  cavalry  and  infautry,  about  dawn,  although  to^ds  arc  horrible. 

JOH^  o.  X ELlv. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  Netes,  March  10,  1863. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Hix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : Commander  Creighton  has  been  informed  that  there  <3 
a number  of  wagons  at  Gloucester  Court-House  and  the  vicinit>  o ) a 
ing  forage  and  provisions  for  the  rebel  forces ; that  there  are  o(K  re 
cavalry  at  Gloucester  Court-House  and  1,000  rebel  cavalry  at  Salili 
Court-House,  and  that  their  horses  are  in  a very  bad  condition. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully, 

S.  P.  LLL, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron 


Washington,  N.  C.,  March  10, 1863 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman  : 

Colonel:  1 send  with  this  a note  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  L^mt 
giving  you  all  the  information  he  has  been  able  to  obtain.  He  see 


Jhap  XXX.] 


COEEESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


561 


ipe  no  apprehension  of  attack,  bnt  if  the  rebels  come  we  will  trv  to 
)Jantatton  ^ reception.  I have  sent  my  men  to  quarter  on  Grice’s 

Yours,  with  respect, 

,, , , ^ fea^s^cis  l.  lee, 

Colonel  Forty-fourth  Regt.  MassachuseUs  Vol  Militia. 

[Inclosnre.j 

Headquarters, 

.ieutenant-Colonel  Hoeeman  : 1^,  1863. 

Deae  Sie  : I have  to  report  that  I know  nothing  of  the  movements 
^ except  that  we  have  heard  from  the  direction  of  Plymouth 

,nd  Williamston  and  nothing  doing  in  that  direction.  I hear  of  noth- 
Qg  in  the  direction  of  Greenville  beyond  Tranter’s  Creek  upon  the  on- 
,n  ®i^er.  I hear  nothing  and  of  course  have  nothing 

^®’re  not  allowed  any  communications  across  the 

emains  SLeTs-usS'^'’^^''’ 

I am,  in  great  haste,  respectfully,  yours, 

‘ LUKE  LYMAK, 

Lieutenant-Colonel^  Commanding  Post, 


. ^ . Washington,  K.  C.,  March  16, 1863. 

iieutenant-Colonel  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Generalj  Eighteenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel  : Since  my  first  note  I am  informed  by  the  provost-marshal 

“massa  says  the  d--d 

Mkees  will  smell  hell  here  before  next  Saturday  night.” 

.Hn«  preparing  to  move  himself  and  family  out  to  a plan- 

oved  he  ^ '‘s’^ed  him  why  he 

^ family  man  to  be  in  a quiet  place 
d when  the  lightning  plays  one  can’t  tell  where  it  will  strike.”  am 
formed  several  of  the  secesh  families  are  moving  from  the  place  I 

il  colsuH  with  emigrants,  but  in  regard  to  th^t  I 

dge  ortiTat  you  perhaps  would  be  the  better 

Your  obedient  servant, 

n I 7 TIT  A ^ FEAKCIS  L.  LEE, 

Colonel  Forty-fourth  Regt.  Massachusetts  Vol.  Militia. 


I 


^jor-General  Peck  : Moneoe,  March  17,  1863. 

SuffX^  command  the  cavalry  force 

liny  commaVd^  ‘ ° '‘™oge“ient  if  he  is  put  on  duty 

JOHN  A.  DIX,  . 

36  E E-voL  XVIII  Major-General. 


562 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXl 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  March  17, 1863. 
Maj.  Geo.  John  A.  Dix,  Commanding  Seventh  Corps : 

You  will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  Lieutenant  Hill,  of  the  New  Yor 
Mounted  Eifles,  with  a patrol  of  10  men,  captured  the  noted  forage. 
Brown,  and  6 men  between  Windsor  and  the  Blackwater.  Three  of  tb 
rebels  escaped  in  the  woods.  Brown  has  managed  many  of  the  suppi 
trains  of  General  Pryor.  The  tact  and  determination  evinced  by  th 
officer  and  his  party  deserve  the  favorable  notice  of  the  Government. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquaetehs  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

JYeio  Berne^  N.  0.,  March  17,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  most  respectfully  and  earnestly  reque: 
that  the  detachment  of  the  Eighteeenth  Army  Corps  now  in  the  Depar 
ment  of  the  South  be  ordered  to  return  here.  My  reasons  for  this  reque: 
are  the  accounts  from  PortEoyal  show  that  there  is  no  immediate  prospe< 
of  a movement  from  that  place,  and  the  withdrawal  of  troops  thereto] 
would  not  be  detrimental  to  the  service;  also  the  enemy  ^e  in  lar^ 
force  in  this  State  and  becoming  aggressive.  General  D.  H.  Hill  is  i 
immediate  command,  and  the  expressed  determination  of 
Longstreet  is  to  ‘‘  clean  out  the  Yankees  from  the  State  of  North  Car 
lina.^>  Again,  with  the  detachment  of  my  troops  returned  I would  I 
able  to  make  some  important  movements  in  this  State,  cutting  the  rai 
road  again,  and,  if  a movement  on  the  Blackwater  were  made  simult 
neously,  perhaps  reaching  Weldon.  , i 

The  enemy  have  a moving  column  30,000  strong  and  with  abundain 
of  artillery.  They  should  be  met,  and  my  picked  troops  and  best  art 
lery  being  absent  I am  utterly  unable  to  do  so. 

I trust,  general,  that  the  above  reasons  given  will  be  favorably  r 
ceived  bv  you,  and  that  in  my  request  you  will  see  a desire  for  the  go( 
of  the  service.  I consider  that  we  are  perfectly  able  to  act  on  the  a 
fensive  here,  but  with  the  return  of  my  detachment,  from  the  lack 
spirit  displayed  by  the  enemy  in  their  recent  demonstration,  I leel  co 
fident  that  I can  overpower  the  enemy  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedie 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Fort  Monroe  Ya., 

March  17, 1863—4  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  Washington,  D.  C.  ; 

The  First  and  Second  Divisions  are  here.  The  Third  Division,  Ge 
eral  Getty,  has  gone  to  Suffolk,  viz,  Ninth,  Eighty-ninth,  aM  One  hu 
dred  and^ third  New  York;  Tenth  and  Thirteenth  New  Hampshir 
Eighth,  Eleventh,  Sixteeenth,  and  Twenty-first  Connecticut ; honr 
and  Seventh  Rhode  Island,  and  Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey.  The  last  l 
to-day,  except  the  Ninth  New  York,  which  leaves  to-morrow.  Genei 
Willcox  commands  the  corps ; Ferrero  the  1^*  el^Newport  .N ws. 

\V  M.  H.  rEEiNLll, 

Captain. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  563 

Speci^  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.^s  Office, 

No.  125.  / Washington,  March  17,  1863. 

* * * * # # 

, N’aglee,  TJ.  S.  Yolimteers,  will  report  for 

duty  to  Major-General  Foster,  commanding  Department  of  North  Caro- 
lina. 

******* 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck  : 

L.  THOMAS, 
Adjutant-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

March  18,  1863— 8.30  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok,  Oeneral-in- Chief  ; 

General  Pe^  has  ascertained  by  very  authentic  testimony  that  the 
forces  on  the  Blackwater  are  from  27,000  to  30,000,  corresponding  with 
my  statement  last  evening.  A portion  has  crossed  the  river  and  are 
intrenched  on  this  side.  Colonel  Spear  attacked  one  of  their  earth- 
works ^sterday,  but  did  not  succeed  in  carrying  it.  Our  loss  is  tri- 
lling. We  captured  a lieutenant,  and,  I understand,  a few  privates. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  March  18, 1863. 
^aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

My  m^  arriv^  from  Eichmond  late  last  evening.  He  was  at  Staun- 
on  on  the  7 th.  General  J ones  was  in  command  with  35,000  men.  Near 
Court-House  there  were  1,800.  He  was  at  Fredericksburg  on 
ne  yth.  The  enemy  had  one  hundred  and  seven  regiments  there, 
Qaking,  as  he  thinks,  about  85,000.  The  regiments  have  been  strength - 
ned  l^ely  by  conscripts.  At  Fort  Darling  there  are  about  7,000 ; be- 
ween  Fredericksburg  and  Eichmond  about  15,000 : below  Fredericks- 
Blackwater,  28,000.  At  Eichmond  there  are  not  over 
d Eiver,  on  the  Chickahomin v, 
t White  House,  and  Diascund  Bridge,  has  about  9,000.  The  enemv 
Powhatan,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  James  Eiver, 
nth  4,000  men,  and  is  fortifying  strongly.  This  is  a part  of  the  28,000 
etween  Fredericksburg  and  the  Blackwater.  All  my  information  con- 
rms  the  beliet  that  every  man  capable  of  bearing  arms  that  could  be 
^ached  in  the  insurgent  States  has  been  taken  up  by  the  conscription 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 


Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside: 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

March  18,  1863—10  a.  m. 


Kecewed  your  dispatch  of  yesterday.  Have  reported  to  General 
/iii  informs  me  that  Getty^s  division  has  been  sent  to  Suffolk. 
/ llcox  and  Sturgis  are  still  at  Newport  News.  Shall  I order  Getty 
iU^turgis?  It  may  cause  a little  delay  to  replace  Getty  at  Suffolk 


JNO.  G.  PAEKE, 

Major-General. 


'564  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chav.  XXX. 

Washington,  D.  C.,  March  18, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke: 

General  Halleck  says  to  take  Willcox’s  and  Sturgis’  divisions.  Tell 
Getty  he  -will  follow  very  soon.  ^ ^ BURNSIDE, 

Major- General. 


Port  Monroe,  Ya., 
March  18,  1863—8  p.  m. 


Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside: 

Willcox  will  commence  the  embarkation  to-morrow.  General  Dix 

loaned  the  command  a number  of  tents,  and  ett^  their 

■Rnih  Willcox  and  Sturgis  will  require  shelter-tents.  I will  get  tneir 
feqSns  Ld  forward  them  to  ylu.  General  Smith  is  absen  . I w.ll 
get  a list  of  the  staff  belonging  to  the  corps  now  on  duty  with  it  and 
send  it  to  you  for  disposition.  ^ PABKE, 

Manor- General 


Newport  Barracks,  N.  0.,  March  18, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman  : 

Pni  n^vT  • I have  learned  from  persons  who  have  come  from  the 
vicinitv  o^  Peletier’s  Mills,  about  17  miles  from  here,  that  there  was  f 
large  force  of  cavalry  at  that 

Sunday— some  set  the  number  as  high  as  oi 

ertson  was  in  command.  Their  wagons  were  bu 

White  Oak  Eiver.  It  is  said  there  was  a brigade  in  that  vicinity,  du 
™ng  hasSin  iieard  of  them  since  Sunday.  The  two 
cavalry  stationed  at  this  post  are  out  in  that  direction  »)  to-da. 

with  instructions  to  learn  if  possible  what  troops  they  were. 

Yours,  &c.,  ^ STUDLEY, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Post 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  March  19, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 

One  brigade  of  Pickett’s  division,  commanded  by  general  Bratton,  i 
at  Franklin  (the  First,  Fifth,  Sixth  South  Carolina,  First 
Carolina  Sharpshooters  constitute  a part  of 

Eton’s  brigade  of  North  Carolina  and  Mississippi  troops  is  ne 

all  uX  SsUeet,  who  is  near  Petersburg 

of  Pickett’s  are  near  the  rai^ay,  The  servLt  ' 

Baker’s  cavalry  came  from  Ealeigh,  1,000  strong.  T . ^ 

Colonel  Baker  says  that  General  Hill  would  attack  New  Beine 

already  done  so.  This  he  overheard.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


■ Chap.  XXX.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


665 


Fort  Monroe,  March  19,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

The  two  divisions  at  Newport  News  have  been  ordered  out  of  the 
department.  Getty^s  remains  with  you.  New  Berne  has  been  feebly 
attacked.  The  rebels  have  retired.* 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

March  19,  1863 — 5.10  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  AmRosE  B.  Burnside,  Commanding: 

One  brigade  of  Willcox’s  division  is  embarked  and  part  of  the  second; 
also  a battery  of  artillery;  but  it  is  not  proper  that  they  should  start. 
A severe  snow-storm  set  in  this  morning  and  still  continues,  and  as  the 
steamers  will  have  to  wait  until  it  is  over  I have  ordered  the  embar- 
kation to  be  postponed.  Shall  the  ammunition  and  ambulance  train  of 
the  First  Division  follow  the  division,  or  wait  until  the  Second  Division 
IS  embarked  ? General  Smith  is  still  absent.  The  chief  quartermaster 
has  not  yet  reported  for  duty;  went  west  with  General  Burns.  Cap- 
tain Van  Ness,  acting,  absent  on  leave.  Dr.  McDonald  is  absent  with 
leave;  all  others  present.  Bowen,  Coale,  and  Chambloss  were  assigned 
to  the  Ninth  Corps,  and  Babcock  to  the  Sixth,  by  orders  from  the  War 
Department  of  March  1.  It  appears  that  these  assignments  are  ordered 
by  the  President.  Should  not  therefore  those  remain  that  are  assigned 
to  the  Ninth  Corps  ? The  following  list  of  officers  composing  the  staffi 
Df  the  Ninth  Corps  was  furnished  me  by  Colonel  Bowen,  assistant  ad- 
latant-general : Lieut.  Col.  N.  Bowen,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Lieut. 
3ol.  O.  E.  Babcock,  assistant  inspector-general;  Lieut.  Col.  John  H. 
3oale,  chief  commissary;  Colonel  Chambliss,  chief  quartermaster;  Dr. 
P.  A.  O’Connell,  acting  medical  director;  Dr.  J.  E.  McDonald,  medical 
nspector;  First  Lieut.  O.  M.  Dearborn,  ordnance  officer;  First  Lieut. 
5.  N.  Benjamin,  acting  chief  of  artillery;  Capt.  T.  B.  Marsh,  chief  of 
imbalance  corps. 


JNO.  G.  PAEKE, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

March  20,  1863 — 12  noon. 

Taj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside: 

The  storm  still  continues  and  it  is  impossible  to  do  anything.  The 
ransports  cannot  leave  on  account  of  the  storm.  As  soon  as  it  subsides 
will  start  the  transports  and  continue  the  embarkation.  The  men  now 
m board  are  of  course  consuming  rations,  and  provision  should  be  made 
0 replenish  their  stock  in  Baltimore. 


(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


JNO.  G.  PAEKE, 

Major-  General. 


_ . ^ Suffolk,  March  20,  1863. 

■lajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 

The  storm  is  of  great  severity.  In  anticipation,  I did  all  I could  for 
comfort  of  Getty’s  division.  A deserter  from  Second  Mississippi 
amein  last  night;  belongs  to  General  Davis’  brigade  of  Mississippians 


Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


566 


NOETH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


which  arrived  recently  from  Goldsborough,  N,  C.  Second,  Eleventh, 
and  Forty-second  Mississippi  are  part  of  brigade.  Says  he  is  sure  of 
four  brigades.  Some  North  Carolina  regiments  are  there  also.  Has 
family  in  Pontotoc,  Miss.,  and  is  tired  of  the  war. 

Have  sent  an  order  to  Lieutenant  James,  as  requested. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Forty-fourth  Eegt.  Mass.  Yol.  Militia, 
Washington^  N.  C.,  March  20,  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Oeneraly  Eighteenth  Army  Corps : 

Colonel  : Since  my  note  of  March  16  I have  deemed  it  prudent  to 
keep  the  lines  here  closed.  The  cavalry  have  made  daily  scouts  upon 
the  Jamestown  and  Greenville  roads,  and  we  have  gathered  only  this : 
That  it  seems  to  be  a general  impression  upon  the  minds  of  all  the  in- 
habitants, white  and  black,  outside  the  rebel  lines,  that  we  are  likely  to 
be  attacked  at  any  time,  and  that  the  enemy  have  considerable  forces 
in  motion  in  this  vicinity. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyman  does  not  seem  to  think  there  is  much 
chance  of  an  attack ; still  I have  thought  best  to  make  every  preparation 
in  my  power,  and  we  will  try  to  give  them  a warm  reception  if  they  come. 

The  last  news  we  have  heard  of  the  enemy’s  movements  was  that 
Pryor’s  brigade  was  at  Greenville  on  Monday  and  that  Pettigrew’s 
brigade  was  between  Swift  Creek  and  Greenville  on  Tuesday,  moving 
slowly  up  toward  that  place,  stripping  the  country  of  provisions  of  every 
description. 

To-day  we  have  a report  of  the  supposed  presence  of  a force  (“right 
smart,”  be  that  large  or  small)  at  Tranter’s  Creek.  I will  venture  to 
suggest  that  if  you  have  any  reason  to  apprehend  any  immediate  attack 
here  a battery  of  artillery,  say  Belger’s,  and  a company  of  cavalry 
would  greatly  strengthen  the  defense.  The  rain  has  been  heavy  here 
to-day  and  yesterday,  which  it  is  thought  may  delay  their  attack  if  they 
still  contemplate  one. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANCIS  L.  LEE, 
Colonely  Commanding  Fost. 


Suffolk,  March  21, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Nothing  new.  Storm  still  continues.  Snow  4 inches.  Is  it  not  time 
for  your  peddler  [spy]  to  return?  He  will  be  able  to  report  much  in- 
formation, especially  about  matters  on  this  side  James  River. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  NewSy  Va.y  March  21,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Fortress  Monroey  Ya. : 

Reconnaissance  to-day  shows  no  occupation  of  the  old  rebel  forts  at 
Day’s  Point  and  Burwell’s  Bay  on  the  right  bank  of  James  River. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.Itear-Admiraly  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


iiAP.  XXX. 1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  567 

Fort  Monroe,  March  22, 1863. 

;ajor-General  Peck: 

My  man  has  been  here  and  has  gone  to  Baltimore.  He  says  there 
:e  28,000  men  between  New  London*  and  the  New  York.*  When  they 
ad  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  withdrawn  from  Newport  News  they  may 
jduce  their  force. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


Hdqrs.  Forty-fourth  Regt.  Mass.  Vol.  Militia., 
Washington^  N,  0.,  March  23, 1863. 

ieutenant-Colonel  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  ; On  Saturday  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyman  notified  me  that 
3 had  received  intelligence  from  what  he  considered  ‘^good  authority” 
lat  the  enemy  had  “ moved  away  from  our  front  ” ; that  a large  force 
as  10  miles  from  us  last  Monday,  but  had  disappeared. 

Of  course  that  may  or  may  not  be  correct,  but  I should  judge  by  all 
e can  learn  that  it  is  true.  Yesterday  Colonel  Lyman  learned  at  old 
r.  Griert’s  that  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  under  Hooker,  had  crossed 
e Rappahannock;  but  we  can  get  no  papers,  as  the  rebels  allow  no 
le  to  pass  through  their  lines  and  no  mail  matter  to  pass  out. 

I would  remind  you  that  we  left  New  Berne  at  two, hours’  notice  and 
ith  no  idea  of  a longer  stay  than  ten  days’  rations  implied.  You  told 
e that  you  should  probably  send  a boat  up  to  bring  us  back  on  Sun- 
ly,  the  22d.  We  not  only  had  no  time  to  pack  up  our  property  which 
3 left  behind,  but  we  brought  nothing  but  a spare  under-suit  and  the 
3n  not  even  that,  as  they  were  ordered  to  take  only  blankets.  In 
is  condition  we  are  extremely  uncomfortable,  and  the  men  will  soon 
come  sick  on  account  of  unavoidable  filth.  I would  therefore  venture 
suggest  that  to  avoid  sickness  the  regiment  should  be  recalled  when- 
er  it  may  be  thought  that  this  place  is  safe  from  attack. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANCIS  L.  LEE, 

Colonel j Commanding  Post, 

I send  by  this  boat  the  men  detailed  for  the  census  business. 

LEE, 

Colonel, 


• ’EciAL  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  136.  / Washington  March  23,  1863. 

**###*# 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  L.  Yiele,  United  States  Volunteers,  is  hereby  re- 
' ved  from  duty  in  the  Department  of  Virginia,  and  will  report  in  per- 
m without  delay  to  Maj.  Gen.  D.  Hunter,  United  States  Volunteers, 
< mmanding  Dejjartment  of  the  South,  for  duty. 

***##*# 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

L.  THOMAS, 
Adjutant-  General. 


Cipher. 


568 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Fort  Monroe,  March  26, 1863. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

General-in-Chief : 

I have  received  the  order  relieving  General  Yiele,  but  no  one  is  as 
signed  to  the  position  of  Military  Governor  of  l^orfolk.  It  is  a plac( 
alwavs,  and  especially  at  this  moment,  of  the  greatest  importance  anc 
delicacy,  and  it  needs  a man  of  promptness,  decision,  prudence,  integrity 
and  capacity  to  bear  labor  and  annoyance.  I am  trying  by  a militarv 
commission  incendiaries,  blockade  runners,  and  other  malefactors,  anc 
though  the  sentences  are  not  divulged,  it  is  understood  that  they  an 
very  severe.  I subjoin  a dispatch  from  General  Yiele,  just  received: 


Norfolk,  March  26,  1863. 

Major-General  D IX : i 

If  the  regiment  you  spoke  of  sending  here  could  come  at  once  I think  it  would  h 
well  irittack  was  made  last  night  on  the  pickets  at  Fort  Norfolk  Dj;  Green  i 
rebel  surgeon,  withdrew  his  parole  at  dark  and  requested  to  be  conhned.  This  excitei 
sCicionfand  the  pickets  wire  double!  At  the  sime  time  an  attempt  was  made  t- 
fire  tte  public  stores  in  the  city.  I have  taken  stringent  measures.  I think  the  ar 
rest  and^rial  of  Spence  and  Drummond  and  others  has  excited  their  friends  to  “rgamz 
for  their  release.*^  I have  directed  that  aU  fire-arms  shaU  be  at  once  delivered  to  th 
provost-marshal,  and  shall  allow  no  one  in  the  streets  VIELE, 

Tivi  nn/lip/r-  Crpm  PTfll. 


I Lave  in  my  possession  one  of  the  combustibles  with  which  it  wa 
attempted  to  fire  the  public  stores,  very  artistically  constructed.  TL 
theater  is  to  be  closed  to-night,  and  the  streets  ordered  to  be  cleared  a 

9 o’clock.  JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Maior- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  March  26, 1863. 

Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I will  not  leave  until  everything  is  quiet  and  until  General  Keyes  n 
turns.  It  is  very  important  that  he  should  come  back  as  soon  as  possibk 
General  Busteed  asked  my  permission  this  morning  to  burn  WilliaDR 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General 


Yorktown,  Ma7'ch  26,  1863. 
Major-General  Dix:  ^ ^ 

General:  A telegram  has  just  reached  me  that 
iamsburg  were  fired  on  this  morning  by  a number  of  the  enemy  s n 
fantrv.  A continual  warfare  of  this  character  is  ,uP ' 
and  about  the  town.  I am  of  the  deliberate  .ludgmeut  that  the  only 
of  our  immunity  lies  in  the  destruction  of  illiamsbnrg,  and 
approve  it  I would  give  the  inhabitants  notice  that  upon  a i’®P®tition 
these  attacks  the  place  should  be  destroyed.  The  town  is  a strongh 

of  rank  traitors.  RICHARD  BUSTEED, 

BrigctfUer-Oeneral,  Commandvig- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


569 


Fortress  Monroe,  Va.,  March  26, 118631 
General  Busteed,  TorTctown: 

at  Williamsburg  must  defend  themselves  as  long  as  they 
nro  oflf  assailauts.  Wc  must  not  destroy  towns  unless  they 

possession  of  by  the  enemy,  and  then  not  unless  alp 
jSolutely  necessary  for  our  own  safety. 

A.  BIX, 

I ' Major-General, 

i — — — . 

Headquarters  Third  Hew  York  Cavalry, 

'r  • * , o „ WeM)  Berne,  March  26, 1863. 

iLieut.  Ool.  Southard  Hopfman,  ’ 

! Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps: 

\ Colonel:  i havethehonortoreportthatinobediencetotheaccom- 

i c ^ yesterday  morning  at  7 o’clock  and  ar- 

! u ed  at  Mill  Creek  at  10.45  a.  m. ; finding  the  bridge  entirely  destroyed,  I 
iiwaited  the  arrival  of  the  pioneer  corps ; the  bridge  not  being  completed 
intil  night,  we  remained  m bivouac  on  this  side  of  the  creek  until  6 
clock  this  morning,  when  I moved  the  column  to  McDaniel’s  planta- 
lon,  4 miles  beyond  Pollocksville;  arriving  at  which  place  I dispatched 
squ^ron  and  one  howitzer  under  Major  Pitz  Simmons  to  Young’s 
Aoss-Eoads  and  a like  command  under  Captain  Pond  to  Trenton 
;iving  each  c^cer  instrurtions  in  compliance  with  the  order  and  verbal 
instructions  from  you.  Between  the  hours  of  11  and  12  the  officers 
ffiove  named  reported  back  to  me,  each  reporting  that  there  had  been 
!-o  vestige  of  Contederate  troops  in  that  vicinity  for  several  days  past 

oXck  Sv^elg^’  “-el^fo'-Hew'^Berne,  arriving'h^^e'at' 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  report  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  McHarv,  in 
One  hundred  and  thirty-second  and  One  hundred^and 
tty-eighth  Hew  York  ^ olunteers,  obeyed  every  request  made  by  me 
I regret,  colonel  my  inability  to  perform  the  “big  thing”  you  desired. 
Yeij'  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  LEWIS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Third  New  YorJc  Cavalry, 

[Inclosure.] 

. , ^ ^ ^ Beene,  March  24, 1863. 

leutenant-OoloDel  Lewis, 

Commanding  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry: 

received  that  a pontoon  train  is  en 
for  the  White  Oak  Eiver.  You  will  therefore  proceed  with  six 
)mpanies  cavalry  and  Allis^  battery  to-morrow  a.  m.  to  Pollocksville: 

information  you  can  of  any  movements  of  this  train 
possible,  and  endeavor  to  intercept  or  catch 
lo,  if  practicable;  if  not,  burn  it. 

^^oessarily  use  your  own  judgment  in  carrying  out  this  move- 
u ^“^^otry  regiment  will  be  sent  toward  and  to  Pollocksville 

evidence  of  trap,  is  the 

lArnx-  • secondary  one  to  ascertain  what  the  object  of  tho 

leiny  is  m sending  the  train  to  White  Oak  Eiver. 

Ly  order  of  Brigadier  General  Palmer: 

SOUTHAED  HOFFMAX, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


570 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  March  27, 1863. 

Major-General  jyix,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya,: 

General  Viele  was  ordered  south,  by  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War, 
under  impression  that  General  King  was  sufficient  at  Norfolk.  General 
Hunter  is  much  in  want  of  generals.  If  you  deem  General  Yieles 
services  so  necessary  at  present  you  can  suspend  the  execution  of  the 

H.  W.  HALLBCK, 

Oeneral-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  March  27, 1863. 

Col.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

The  regiments  and  batteries  of  the  Ninth  Corps  remaining  under  my 
command  are  as  follows,  and  compose  the  Third  Division  of  that  corps, 
now  at  Suffolk,  commanded  by  General  Getty : First  Brigade,  consist- 
ing of  Ninth  New  York,  Eighty-ninth  New  York,  One  hundred  and 
third  New  York,  and  Tenth  New  Hampshire;  Second  Brigade,  consist- 
ing of  Eighth,  Eleventh,  Fifteenth,  and  Sixteenth  Connecticut;  and 
Third  Brigade  consisting  of  Twenty-first  Connecticut,  Thirteenth  New 
Hampshire,  Twenty-fifth  New  Jersey,  and  Fourth  Ehode  Island.  Artil- 
lery consists  of  Battery  A,  Fifth  United  States,  and  A,  First  Pennsy  -i 

JOHN  A.  MX, 

Major-General, 


Hdors.  Dept,  of  Yirginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  March  28, 1863. 

Capt.  C.  B.  Wilder,  , ^ ^ . 7 ^ 

Assistant  Quartermaster,  Superintendent  of  Contrabands: 

Captain  Wilder  is  authorized  to  take  possession  of  the  farm  of  Jef- 
ferson Sinclair,  an  absentee  disloyalist,  and  the  bui  dings  thereon.  li 
the  present  occupant,  Mr.  William  H.  Lynch,  will  take  the  oath  of  alle 
glance  and  agree  to  pay  quarterly  in  advance  such  rent  as  Captain 
Wilder  may  deem  fair  for  twenty  acres  of  the  land  and  such  portion  ol 
the  dwelling  as  he  needs,  Mr.  Wilder  may  allow  him  to  do  so;  th 
same  also  of  the  Fayette  Sinclair  farm  and  its  occupant,  Mr.  Charl^ 
L Collier;  the  same  of  Messrs.  Hicks  and  Bowen,  on  the  Booker  done, 
farm  ; the  same  of  the  farms  of  Benjamin  Hudgins,  Eliza  Jones,  Johc 
and  Aelen  Moore,  Levin  Winder,  John  Winder,  William  Smith,  B^ri 
Hudgins ; the  George  Booker  farm-not,  however,  disturbing  the  How 
ard  family;  the  Lowry  farm,  the  Watts  farm,  the  form  of  B.  Howard 
called  the  Stakes  farm,  occupied  by  Mr.  Host,  and  the  Armstead  fe™ 
occupied  by  Hicks.  The  colored  persons  on  these  farms,  if  any,  mus 
come  under  Mr.  Wilder’s  system  of  labor.  The  white  tenants  who  wd 
take  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  engage  to  pay  rent  as  aforesaid  are 
to  be  expelled,  but  only  to  be  limited  to  such  portions  of  land  am 
shelter  as  they  require  for  their  comfortable  support,  and  are  to  ^ 
tified  that  any  act  of  disorder  or  outrage  will  be  visited  with  immediat 
removal  as  well  as  with  legal  penalties. 

Captain  Wilder  will  report  to  the  provost-judge  his  proceet.ing 


lAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


571 


ader  this  order  aM  will  attend  to  the  collection  and  payment  into 
)urt  of  the  rents.  He  will  take  and  report  an  inventory  of  all  personal 
roperty  belonpg  to  each  estate,  and  not  allow  any  proper^ty  t^be 
moved,  except  on  Ins  written  permit,  without  General  1)1x4  orders 
By  command  of  Major-General  Hix : oraers. 

. [JOHN  A.  BOLLES.l 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp^  Provost- Judge. 


ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  28, 1863. 


Have  just  returned  from  W estern  Branch  by  water.  Found  a deserter 
ere.  Several  came  in  this  morning.  All  agree  with  the  statempnfe 

w • ® immediately  on  the 

fh  » General  Longstreet  was  there  last  \4ek  and 

t Jenkins  came  over  at  Blackwater  Bridge  and  recrossed  near  Zuni 

oTherTegSr  force  increased  by 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


igor-General  Dix:  Suffolk,  March  28, 1863. 

concur  with  your 
expressed  in  your 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

'Major-General. 


fou  are  at  liberty  to  say  to  General  Halleok  that  I 


■ command  of  the  cattle  [cavalry?] 


as 


^ jor-General  Dix : Suffolk,  March  28,  1863. 

returned  from  below  the  Western  Branch  with  gunboat 
>terday  rode  over  the  east  side  with  my  horse,  devoting  the  dav  Can 
rnlr”®.*  Where  with  three  pontoons.  ’ SnrcommLcT;orks 
'.n  for  the  new  road.  Their  piles  were 

bridge.  We  have  removed  most  of  them.  T^e  position 

ibrivadel  nrt  0“'y  * 'ro  direct  corn  [road^l.  One 

[bngade]  or  two  regiments  there  will  make  the  line  secure.  ^ 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


or-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  30,  1863. 


engineers  deserted  Saturday  night  to  the  enemv 

IS  sZ  n^feTw  Zch  valuable^; 

non.  feharp  feUow,  and  probably  has  been  bought. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


572 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX3 


Hdors.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

^ Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  March . 30,  1863.. 

Mai.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  1 

Commanding  Department  of^orth  Carolina : 

General  : I received  your  letter  in  regard  to  occupying  ^e  Gistri( 
of  iiiorth  Carolina  north  of  Albemarle  Sound  and  east  of  the  Chowa 
River  and  forwarded  it  to  the  General-in-Chief,  not  being  authorize 
to  send  troops  out  of  this  department  except  in  cases  of  emergency  au 

for  temporary  purposes.  . 

I aiso  received  yours  of  the  25th,  dated  Chowan  River,  &c.,  and  id 
mediately  telegraphed  to  the  General-in-Chief  a summary  account  ■ 
the  expedition  of  Colonel  Brown,  of  the'  Forty-second  North  Carohi 
Eegiment,  and  its  results.  . 

It  will  afford  me  great  pleasure  to  co-operate  with  you  in  every  Wt 
possible  in  furtherance  of  the  objects  of  the  Government. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ^eyant^  ^ 

Major- GeneraLi 


Internal  and  Coastwise  Intercourse. 


•By  the  President  of  the  United  States  of  America. 


A Proclamation. 


Whereas  in  pursuance  of  the  act  of  Congress  approved  July  13, 18<, 
I did  by  proclamation,  dated  August  16, 1861,  deGare  that  the  inha- 
itants  of  the  States  of  Georgia,  South  Carolina,  Virginia^  North  Cai- 

lina,  Tennessee,  Alabama,  Louisiana,  Texas,  Arkansas,  Mississiw>i,  al 

Florida  (except  the  inhabitants  of  that  part  of  Virginia 

the  Aileghany  Mountains,  and  of  such  other  parts  of  that  State,  a 

the  other  States  hereinbefore  named,  as  might  maintain  a loyal  adliesi 

to  the  Union  and  the  Constitution,  or  might  be  from  time  to  time  oco 
pied  and  controlled  by  forces  of  the  United  States  enpged  in  the  d 
])ersion  of  said  insurgents)  were  in  a state  of 

United  States,  and  that  all  commercial  intercourse  between  the  sa* 
and  the  inhabitants  thereof,  with  the  excepUons  aforesaid,  and  the 
zens  of  other  States  and  other  parts  of  the  United 
and  would  remain  unlawful  until  such  insurrection  should  cease  ot 
suppressed,  and  that  all  goods  and  cl“^«els,  wares  and  me  chand 
coming  froPi  any  of  said  States,  with  the  exceptions  aforesaid,  into  ot 
parts  of  the  United  States  without  the  license  and  permission  of  a 
President,  through  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  or  l*^®ceediu,,  to  ^ 
of  said  States,  with  the  exceptions  aforesaid,  by  land  or  water,  to^ 
with  the  vessel  or  vehicle  conveying  the  same  to  <>'•  f[fm  said  |U 
with  the  exceptions  aforesaid,  would  be  forfeited  to  the  United  St  ^ 
And  whereas  experience  has  shown  that  the  exceptions  made  i • 
by  said  proclamation  embarrass  the  due  enforcement  ®a'^Uict  ot  J J 
13, 1861,  and  the  proper  regulation  of  the  commercial  interconr.se 
thorized  by  said  act  with  the  loyal  citizens  of  States : 

Now,  therefore,  I,  Abraham  Lincoln,  President  of  the  United  States 

hereby  revoke  the  said  exceptions,  and  deGare  that  ^einhabitan 

States  of  Georgia,  South  Carolina,  North  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Alaha 
LouXa,  Texas,’  Arkansas,  Mississippi,  Florida,  and  Virginia  ,ex(' 


;hap  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCEj  ETC. UNION. 


573 


he  forty-eight  counties  of  Virginia  designated  as  West  Virginia,  and 
except  also  the  ports  of  New  Orleans,  Key  West,  Port  Eoyal  and  Beau- 
ort  in  North  Carolina)  are  in  a state  of  insurrection  against  the  United 
states,  aod  that  all  commercial  intercourse,  not  licensed  and  conducted 
IS  provided  in  said  act,  between  the  said  States  and  the  inhabitants 
hereof,  with  the  exceptions  aforesaid,  and  the  citizens  of  other  States 
ind  other  parts  of  the  United  States,  is  unlawful  and  will  remain  un- 
awful  until  such  insurrection  shall  cease  or  has  been  suppressed,  and 
lotice  thereof  has  been  duly  given  by  proclamation;  and  all  cotton, 
obacco,  and  other  products,  and  all  other  goods  and  chattels,  wares 
ind  merchandise  coming  from  any  of  said  States,  with  the  exceptions 
iforesaid,  into  other  parts  of  the  United  States,  or  proceeding  to  any 
tf  said  States,  with  the  exceptions  aforesaid,  without  the  license  and 
)ermission  of  the  President,  through  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  will, 
ogether  with  the  vessel  or  vehicle  conveying  the  same,  be  forfeited  to 
he  United  States. 

In  witness  whereof  I have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  caused  the  seal 
if  the  United  States  to  be  affixed.  Done  at  the  city  of  Washington 
his  31st  day  of  March,  A.  D.  1863,  and  of  the  Independence  of  the 
Jnited  States  of  America  the  eighty-seventh. 

By  the  President : 


William  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State. 


A.  LINCOLN. 


lajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  March  31,  1863. 


‘ Yesterday  the  enemy  came  over  to  the  vicinity  of  Carrsville  with  one 
r two  regiments  of  infantry  for  the  purpose  of  ambuscading  our  patroll- 
ig  parties.  They  were  secreted  in  woods  on  both  roads,  about  2 miles 
'iis  side  the  place.  Major  Cornog,  with  some  160  men,  was  on  his  way 
) Carrsville  to  return  by  the  Deserted  House.  His  advance  of  20  men, 
Oder  a lieutenant,  passed  the  center  of  the  lines,  when  the  enemy  show^ed 
lemselves ; singular  to  say,  all  escaped  save  one. 

' Our  cavalry  pickets  expected  an  attack  last  night,  but  all  passed  in 
uiet. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

Yorktoicn,  March  31,  1863. 
olonel  Lewis,  Commanding  at  Williamshurg : 

Let  me  hear  at  once  all  you  know  of  the  enemy’s  present  force  and 
58ition. 

In  case  of  an  attack  in  force  send  down  the  public  property.  Hold 
ort  Magruder  and  shell  the  town  the  moment  an  armed  enemy  is 
^lown  to  be  within  it. 

Let  me  hear  from  you  frequently  so  long  as  the  enemy  remains  in 
^ur  neighborhood. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


574 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX.  '. 

V 


Abstract  from  Tri-monthly  Return  of  the  Dqmrtment  of  Virginia  {Seventh  Army  Corpt 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding^  for  March  31,  1863  {headquarters  Fort  Monri 
Fa.). 


Command* 


Headquarters  Fort  Monroe.— 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix 

Fort  Monroe. — CoL  S.  M.  Al- 
ford: 

Infantry 

Attached  garrison 

Total 

Camp  Hamilton. — Col.  An- 
thony Conk; 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

ArtiUeiy 

Total 

Norfolk.— Brig.  Gen.  E.  L.Viele: 

Infantry 

Cavalry— 

Artillery 

Total 

Suffolk. — ^Maj.  Gen.  J.  J.  Peck; 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

Total 

Yorktown.—Maiy  Gen.  B.  D. 
Keyes ; 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery — 

Total 

Independent  Battalion  Nevr 
York  Volunteers.* 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 

absent. 

Aggregate  last  return. 

& 

1 

2 

Present  for  duty  equipped-  | 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillei 

Officers. 

i 

cS 

Cm 

O 

O 

O 

o 

s 

to 

<& 

o 

o 

§ 

a 

00 

U 

§ 

s 

o 

g 

2 

o 

o 

o 

fl 

16 

16 

18 

18 











- - 

=■ 

20 

522 

710 

28 

828 

28 

828 

28 

.... 

20 

522 

20 

522 

738 

856 

856 

— 

20 

522 

1.... 





29 

3 

10 

651 

69 

314 

729 

78 

364 

777 

84 

379 

777 

86 

374 

30 

677 

3 

69 

14 

f 

42 

1, 034 

1, 171 

1, 240 

1, 237 

.... 

30 

677 

3 

69 

14 

136 

2 

4 

2,561 

49 

138 

3,090 

60 

154 

3,232 

88 

167 

3, 212 
88 
167 

— 

120 

2, 536 

2 

49 

6 

4 

1 

142 

2,748 

3, 304 

3, 487 

3, 467 

6 

120 

2, 536 

2 

49 

4 

640 

66 

28 

11,752 
1, 510 
1, 001 

14, 250 
1 2,015 
1 1,142 

17,457 
2,255 
1, 254 

17, 599 

2.257 

1. 257 

*4' 

40 

637 

11, 756 

66 

1, 510 

28 

IT 

l,il 

1'} 

734 

14,263 

1 

17,407 

20, 966 

21, 113 

44 

637 

11, 756 

66 

1,510 

199 

47 

16 

2,920 

972 

356 

3,566 

1,225 

440 

4, 168 
1, 397 
609 

4,174 
1, 408 
616 

199 

2,920 

47 

1, 067 

28 

1 

1 

262 

4,248 

5, 231 

6,174 

6, 198 

; 28 

199 

2, 920 

47 

1, 067 

16 



197 

1, 216  22, 815 

27,867 

32, 741 

33^^ 

;"78 

1, 006 

18, 411^118 

li” 

hi 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia^  Maj.  Oen.  Jo» 
A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding,  March  31,  1863. 

FORT  MONROE. 

Col.  S.  M.  Alford. 

3(1  New  York. 

CAMP  HAMILTON. 

Col.  Anthony  Conk. 

139tli  New  York,  Col.  Anthony  Conk.  i 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  C,  Capt.  John  tassels. 

3(1  Pennsylvania  Artillery  (battalion),  Maj.  John  A.  Darling. 

* Maj.  J.  C.  Brown  commanding,  left  March  30  for  Department  of  the  Sonth. 


i. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


675 


NORFOLK. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele. 

148tli  New  York,  Col.  William  Johnson. 

173d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Daniel  Nagle. 

177tli  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  H.  J.  Brady. 

19tli  Wisconsin,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  Whipple. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  F,  Capt.  B.  B.  Mitchell. 
7th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  P.  C.  Regan. 


SUFFOLK. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck. 


peck's  division. 


Corcoran’s  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran. 

69th  New  York,  Col.  M.  Murphy. 

.55th  New  York,  Col.  William  McEvily, 
64th  New  York,  Col.  J.  P.  McMahon. 
70th  New  York,  Col.  J.  P.  Mclvor. 


Terry’s  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  D.  Terry. 

99th  New  York,  Col.  D.  W.  Wardrop. 
130th  New  York,  Col.  Alfred  Gibbs. 

Ist  New  York  Battalion  Sharpshooters, 
Capt.  Thomas  Bradley. 

167th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  D. 
Davis. 


Foster’s  Brigade. 


Col.  R,  S.  Foster. 

13th  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  J.  Dobbs. 

6th  Massachusetts,  Col.  A.  S.  Follansbee, 
112th  New  York,  Col.  J.  C.  Drake. 

165th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  C.  H.  Buehler. 
166th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  A.  J.  Fulton. 


Getty's  division. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  W.  Getty. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Harrison  S.  Fairchild. 

loth  New  Hampshire,  Col.  M.  T.  Dono- 
hoe. 

9th  New  York,  Col.  R.  C.  Hawkins. 

»th  New  York,  Capt.  Joseph  Morrison. 
J3d  New  York,  Col.  B,  Ringold. 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Edward  Harland. 

8th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  John  E. 
Ward. 

ilth  Connecticut,  Col.  G.  A.  Stedman,  jr. 
i5th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel 
Tolies. 

I6th  Connecticut,  Col.  Frank  Beach. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  A.  H.  Dutton. 

21st  Connecticut,  Maj.  H.  B.  Crosby. 
13th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  A.  F.  Stevens. 
25th  New  Jersey,  Col.  A.  Derrom. 

4th  Rhode  Island,  Lieut.  Col.  M.  P.  Buf- 
fum. 

Artillery. 

Ist  Pennsylvania,  Battery  A,  Capt.  J.  G. 
Simpson. 

5th  U.  S.,  Battery  A,  Lieut.  James  Gil- 
liss. 


576 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap*  X aX* 


UNASSIGNED. 


1st  New  York  Mounted  Rifles,  Lieut.  Col.  B.  F.  Onderdouk. 
lltk  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Col.  Samuel  P.  Spear. 

7tli  Massackusetts  Battery,  Captain  P.  A.  Davis.  * m i... 

3d  Pennsylvania  Heavy  Artillery  (battalion),  Capt.  John  A.  PiaKe. 
4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batttery  D,  Capt.  F.  M.  Follett. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  L,  Lieut.  H.  C.  Hasbrouck. 

2d  Wisconsin  Battery,  Capt.  Charles  Beger. 

4th  Wisconsin  Battery,  Capt.  John  F.  VaUee. 


YORKTOWN. 


Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 


Busteed’a  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Busteed. 

4th  Delaware,  Col.  A.  H.  Grimshaw. 
168th  New  York,  Col.  William  R.  Brown. 
169th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Lewis  W . Smith. 
178th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  James  Johnson. 
179th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  William  H. 
Blair. 


Unassigned. 

172d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Charles  Kleck- 
ner. 

2d  Massachusetts  Cavalry  (First  Bat- 
talion), Maj.  C.  Crowninshield. 

6th  New  York  Cavalry  (Third  Battal- 
ion), Maj.  W.  P.  Hall. 

5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col. 
William  Lewis. 

1st  New  York  Artillery,  Batteries  F and 
H,  Capts.  W.  R.  Wilson  and  C 
E.  Mink. 

8th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  Butlei 
Fitch. 

1st  Pennsylvania  Artillery,  Batteries  I 
and  H,  Lieut.  C.  B.  Brockwaj 
and  Capt.  Andrew  Fagan. 

5th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  M,  Capt 
James  McKnight. 


Abstract  from  Monthly  Be, turn  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foste 
commandingy  for  the  month  of  March,  1863  {headquarters  New  Berne,  N.  C.). 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  pres- 

ent. 

Aggregate  pres- 

ent and  absent. 

Aggregate  last 

monthly  return. 

j 

90 

S 

0 

sa 

0 

0 

0 

Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  J . G.  Foster. 

20 

233 

20 

6,468 

20 
7, 286 
6,653 
5,708 

5,  884 

6,  220 
2, 165 

914 

561 

19 

7,368 

6,  653 

5,  721 

6, 116 

6,  472 

2,  206 

981 

586 

5,181 

Second  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  H.  M.  Naglee 

T'hiY'H  TiiTnQirtTi  'RHo*  O S Ferrv. - 

26 

154 

213 

30 

38 

12 

553 
2, 159 
4, 310 
742 
619 
382 

698 
2,  692 
5,  090 
930 
752 
455 

Fourth  Division,  Brig,  Gen.  H.  W.  wessells 

T3S T^t*i CT  H* 

X il  BQ  JJlVlolOU^  X>11^  VXOU*  AX*  X - • • - - • •••••••• 

A 1 rro  Cf  •T  H Tj^Q.  ll©  . • a a • • • 

ATTilliftry  x>IIft*  vjrcu*  u*  XX.  •••  • • • 

Q J '^OTfr  *VatV  O a VAItV  Gol  S ri*  - AIlX  ••aaa««aa«* 

qQ.  JN  ©W  X U1  Ji.  L/ci  Villi  J y V'Ul*  k7*  j-l.*  .•aaa«*aa« 

Ist  North  Carolina 

.720 

13,  946 

17, 105 

35, 411 

36, 022 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 


83  ' 


;iiAr.  XXX]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


577 


9r0imization  of  troops  m the Mghteenth  Army  Corps,  Department  of  North 
Carolina,  commanded  hy  Maj.  Gen,  J.  G.  Foster,  for  March,  1863.=^ 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Innis  N.  Palmer  commanding. 


First  Brigade.  | 

Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory  commanding.  I 

7tli  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  Fel- 
lows. 

3d  Massachusetts,  Col.  Charles  L.  Hol- 
brook. 

3th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Charles  R.  Cod- 
man. 

1st  Massachusetts,  Col.  A.  B.  R.  Sprague. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  H.  C.  Lee  commanding. 

5th  Massachusetts,  Col.  George  H.  Peir- 
son. 

25th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Josiah  Pickett. 
27th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Luke  Ly- 
man. 

46th  Massachusetts,  Col.  W.  S.  Shurtleff. 


SECOND  DIVISION.\ 

Brig.  Gen.  Charles  A.  Heckman  commanding. 


Second  Brigade. 


First  Brigade. 

’ol.  Jacob  J.  De  Forest  commanding. 

d Massachusetts,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Elwell. 

th  New  Jersey,  Col.  Abram  Zabriskie. 
st  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  William,  C. 
Raulston. 

th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  F.  Wead. 


Col.  W.  W.  H.  Davis  commanding. 

11th  Maine,  Col.  H.  M.  Plaisted. 

52d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  C.  Dodf^o 
jr.  ""  ’ 

104th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  D. 
Hart. 

Independent  New  York  Battalion,  Lieut. 
Col.  Felix  Comfort. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  Orris  S.  Ferry  commanding. 


First  Brigade.t 


Second  Brigade.t 


Col.  J.  B.  Howell  commanding. 

)th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  J.  Wheeler, 
jth  Pennsylvania,  Col.  J.  R.  Jones, 
dh  Pennsylvania,  Maj.  Edw.  Campbell, 
ith  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  Nyce. 


Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn  commanding. 

39th  Illinois,  Col.  T.  O.  Osborn. 

62d  Ohio,  Col.  F.  B.  Pond. 

67th  Ohio,  Col.  A.  C.  Voris. 

176th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  A.  A.  Lechler. 


FOURTH  DIVISION. 


Col.  T.  F.  Lehmann  commanding 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  S.  Belknap  commanding. 


Detachment  Second  Brigade. 
Col.  Fr.\ncis  L.  Lee  commanding. 


th  New  York,  Maj.  R.  V.  King, 
d New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Hiram  An- 
derson. 

th  New  York,  Maj.  Charles  H.  Bur- 
hans. 

|8t  Pennsylvania,  Col.  David  B.  Morris, 
id  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  C. 

Maxwell. 

|Com])ilcKl  from  division  and  brigade  returns.  ~ 

Detailed  in  Department  of  the  Soutli. 

1>v'(  'J'-'g-'i'den  wore  consolidated  into 

s order  of  March  2f),  180;!.  AH  those  reghneuts  except  the 
jy  i^hth  I enusylvania  detailed,  in  Dexiartment  of  the  South. 

37  R R — YOL  XVIII 


10th  Connecticut  (detachment),  Lieut 
W.  W.  Webb. 

24th  Massachusetts  (detachment),  Lieut. 
T.  F.  Edmands. 

44th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  E.  C. 
Cabot. 

5th  Rhode  Island,  Col.  H.  T.  Sisson. 


578 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


! 


FIFTH  DlVlSIOIi. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince  commanding. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  B.  Spinola  commanding. 

158tli  Pennsylvania,  Col.  D.  B.  McKibbin. 
168tli  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Joseph  JacK. 
171st  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Everard  Bierer. 
175th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Samuel  A.  Dyer. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  James  Jourdan  commanding. 

od  Massachusetts,  Col.  S.  P.  Rich- 
mond. 

8th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Hud- 
son. 

132d  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  G.  H.  Hitch- 

158th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  H.  Mc- 
Nary. 


AUTILLEBY  BRIGADE  (Eighteenth  Army  Corps). 
Lieut.  Col.  Charles  H.  Stewart  commanding. 


3d  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  H.  Stewart. 

23d  New  York  Independent  Battery,  Capt.  Alfr^l  Ransom. 
24th  New  York  Independent  Battery,  Capt.  Jay  E.  Lee. 

1st  Rhode  Island,  Battery  F,  Capt.  James  Belger. 

1st  U.  S.,  Comiiany  C,  Lieut.  William  K.  Pollock. 


IlEADQUATERS  EIGHTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS,  ^ 

Neio  Berne,  N:  G.,  April  1,  ISbo. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas,  ^ ^ . 

Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  6. . 

(xENERAL-  Being  in  temporary  command  at  this  point  I have  tlic 
that  Generil  Foster  is  at  Washington,  N.  C.,  v Inch 
Doint  is  probably  now  being  attacked  by  the  enemy  in  force. 

There  are  two  regiments  in  the  town  as  garrison,  and  three  ‘ 

and  one  battery  of  artillery  have  been  sent  to  General  Foster,  but  t 

not  been  able  yet  to  get  up,  the  enemy  sent  he 

below  the  town.  Commander  Davenport,  IT.  S.  Kavj  , has  sent  tiic 

oidv  available  gunboats  from  here  to  engage  the  battery. 

TTie  enemy  are  in  large  force  in  this  State  now  and  mean  to  act  on 
the  odensive.  I will  inform  you  whatever  may  arise. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your 

Brigadier-General,  U.  8.  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army 

Neio  Berne,  A.  €.,  April  1,  18oJ. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps  : i.  at 

General:  I have  tlio  lioiior  to  inform  you  tliat  now 

Washington,  N.  0.,  where  an  attack  in  strong  force  is 
going  on.  Ite  enlorcemcnts  have  been  started  to  him,  but  5 ‘ 

not  been  able  to  get  up  to  the  town,  the  enemy  ^ , J.^f^thi 

the  river  below  the  town.  Two  gunboats  have  gone  up  to  in„a„ 

^ISossible  an  attack  may  be  made  here  whilst  the  general  and  hit 


I 


;ap.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


579 


oops  are  kept  at  Wasliingtoii.  Our  force  is  not  very  large,  and  I may 
ive  to  call  on  you  for  a little  aid.  We  have  no  transportation. 

I write  this  for  yonr  information,  and  relying  on  your  kind  assistance 
desirable. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  PALMER, 
Brigadier-  General  Volunteers. 

P . S.— There  is  a fair  prospect  of  success  for  the  rebels  at  Washin^^- 
n,  and  if  they  succeed  this  place  ought  to  be  attacked.  I only  suS. 
!St  to  you,  general,  as  food  for  thought,'^  whether  it  would  not 
) best  to  re-enforce  this  place  with,  say,  5,000  men  temporarily  We 
e sadly  in  need  of  gunboats.  Caunot  you  prevail  upon  Admiral  Lee 
re-enforce  here  temporarily?  I have  written  to  the  admiral  or 
ther,  the  senior  naval  officer  here  has  done  so.  ’ ’ 

Very  respectfully, 

I.  PALMER. 


Port 


Monroe,  April  2,  1863. 


' the  Bditor  of  the  Neio  Yorlc  Times  : 

Your  Washington  correspondent  has  attributed  to  me  an  opinion  I 
ve  uever  expressed  to  any  one  here  or  elsewhere— that  the  enemy  is 
out  to  evacuate  Richmond.  I have  no  information  to  warrant  such 
conclusion.  I should  not  deem  it  necessary  to  contradict  the  state- 
‘Dt  it  you  had  not  made  it  the  foundation  of  an  elaborate  editorial 

JOHISr  A.  BIX, 

Major-  General. 


, . ^ ^ Berne,  X.  0.,  April  2,  1863. 

* j.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  ’ 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia,  Fort  Monroe: 

Iene^ral:  Captain  Murray,  of  the  Xavy,  who  has  been  the  senior 
1 /al  officer  here,  will  see  you  and  explain  the  situation  of  affairs  His 

• as  of  the  kind  of  re-eiiforcements  needed  coincide  with  mine  Your 

Poster,  in  which  you  state  that  you  will  be  obliged  to 
ilisult  the  commanding  general  before  sending  forces  to  Elizabeth  was 
' eived  this  morning.  I gather  from  that  letter  that  you  would  not  iirob- 
i y act  upon  my  request  of  yesterday.  Should  you  do  so,  however,  and 
•u  d the  necessity  for  the  re-enforcements  be  passed,  I shall  keep  a 
111  steamer  on  the  lookout  for  any  transports  to  turn  them  back 
^3  commodore  (Murray)  will  be  able  to  inform  you  of  matters  generally’ 
here  is  a large  force  of  the  enemy  in  this  State,  and  they  appear  to  be 
i ermined  to  assume  the  aggressive.  ^ ^ 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

I.  X.  PALMER, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Port  Monroe,  Va.,  April  3,  1863—8.30  p.  m. 
Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

1 J '‘as  f li  ve.<l  on  the  Black  water  from  Petersburg  and  another 
Sion,  under  General  Hood,  is  said  to  be  coming.  They  have  brought 


580 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


pontoous  with  them.  This  looks  like  a desigu  to  cross  the  Kansemoiul 
Eiver,  between  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  where  there  is  a weak  spot.  1: 
directed  General  Peck  to  fortify  it.  He  has  done  so,  and  besides  tli( 
troops  there  we  have  three  gunboats,  one  of  which  will  be  constanti.^ 
in  motion.  Washington,  N.  0.,  has  been  attacked.  General  Foster  ^ 
there  and  re-enforcements  are  going  to  him.  He  fears  an  attack  or 
New  Berne.  A gentleman  from  Massachusetts,  just  arrived  at  Suffolk, 
says  the  railroad  between  Goldsborongh  and  Weldon  is  lined  with  troops' 
he  thinks  30,000;  the  rebels  say  from  50,000  to  75,000.  They  say  the> 
liave  between  Blackwater  and  Wilmington  75,000  which  can  be  con 
centrated  in  a short  time.  I will  be  in  AVashington  on  Monday  morning] 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General.  ■ 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neivport  Netvs,  April  3,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Hix,  U.  S.  A., 

Conidfj.  Seventh  Armxj  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  \ a.: 

General:  Mr.  Hnme,  a citizen  of  New  York,  came  to  me  this  iiiori 
iim  presenting  a letter  from  General  Yiele  in  his  behalf,  asking  permit 
Sion  to  take  a vessel  to  Suffolk  to  carry  some  staves  thence  to  Norfoll 
Havino'  no  authority  to  give  such  a permit,  I told  him  tliat  if  he  had 
proper  permit  from  General  Hix  he  could  pass.  Since  then  I have  coi 
sidered  that  my  instructions  do  not  clearly  indicate  my  authority  t( 
pass  merchandise  to  or  from  Suffolk  under  your  permit,  and  1 have  then 
fore  instructed  the  commanding  officer  of  the  guard  vessel  in  the  Naiisc 
moud  to  allow  no  vessel  with  merchandise  to  pass,  except  under  tit 
specified  permit  from  one  of  the  three  Secretaries. 

I shall  at  once  ask  the  Hepartment  for  a definition  of  my  authority  r 
this  respect,  and  hope  that  until  I am  instructed  on  the  i)oiiit  in  (piestio 
you  will  abstain  from  giving  permits  allowing  general  traffic  to  or  froi 
Suffolk. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LFF, 

Acty.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdy.  N.  Atlantic  BloclMding  Squadron. 


General  Orders, 
No.  88 


AVAR  Dept.,  Adjutant-General’s  Office,^ 
Washington,  April  3,  1803. 

The  following  orders  in  respect  to  the  regulating  of  intercourse  wr 
the  iusurrectiouary  States,  the  collection  of  abandoned  property,  iV' 
are  published  for  the  information  and  government  of  the  Army  ami  ■ 
all  concerned : 

War  Department, 
Washington,  March  31,  186.1 

For  tbo  purpose  of  more  effectually  preveiiting  all  commercial  intercourse  Avitli  ^ 
surrectionarv  States  except  such  as  shall  he  authorized  in  piirsuauce  of  law,  an< 
securing  c^  imifoViu,  and  efficient  action  in  conducting  such  intercom^ 

shall  he  so  authorized,  and  for  Hie  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  ‘ i . 

Congress  entitled  “An  act  to  provide  for  the  collection  ot  ^ 

the  prevention  of  frauds  in  insurrectionary  States,  approved  Mai ch  12,  1 •, 

^^^1.^  That  no  officer  of  I ho  Army  of  the  United  States  nor 

therewith  shall  authorize  or  have  any  interest  in  the  transportation  ot  any  goo. 


HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


581 


■ares,  or  niercEaiidise  (except  supplies  belonging  to  or  contracted  for  by  the  United 
tales,  designed  for  tlie  military  or  naval  forces  thereof,  and  moviog  under  military 
r naval  orders,  and  except  also  sutlers’  supplies  and  other  things  necessary  for  the 
se  and  com^rt  of  the  troops  of  the  United  States,  and  moving  under  permits  of  the 
uthorized  officers  of  the  Treasury  Department)  into  any  State  declared  by  the  Presi- 
ent  to  be  in  insurrection ; nor  authorize  nor  have  any  interest  in  the  purchase  or  sale 
lerein  of  any  goods  or  chattels,  wares  or  merchandise,  cotton,  tobacco,  or  other  prod- 
ct  of  the  soil  thereof  ; nor  the  transportation  of  the  same,  except  as  aforesaid  there- 
om  or  therein;  nor  shall  any  such  officer  or  person  authorize,  prohil)it,  or ’in  any 
.tamier  interfere  with  any  such  purchase  or  sale  or  transportation  which  shall  be 
I inducted  under  the  regulations,  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  unless  under  some 
Hlierativo  military  necessity,  in  the  place  or  section  where  the  same  shall  be  con- 
leted,  or  unless  requested  by  an  agent  or  some  other  authorized  officer  of  the  Treas- 
ry  Department,  in  which  case  all  commanders  of  military  departments,  districts, 
ul  posts  will  render  such  aid  in  carrying  out  the  provisions  of  the  said  act,  and  in 
iloi'cing  due  observance  of  the  said  regulations  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasurv  as 
in  be  gi  ven  without  manifest  injury  to  the  public  service.  ’ 

11.  It  is  Inrtlier  ordered  that  every  officer  or  private  or  person  employed  in  or  with 
le  regular  or  volunteer  forces  of  the  United  States  who  may  receive  or  have  under 
s control  any  property  which  shall  have  been  abandoned  by  the  owner  or  owners 
captured  in  any  district  declared  to  be  in  insurrection  against  the  United  States’ 
chiding  all  property  seized  under  military  orders,  excepting  only  such  as  shall  be 
qnired  for  military  use  of  the  United  States  forces,  shall  ]iromptly  turn  over  all 
ch  property  to  the  agent  appointed  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  receive  the 
me,  who  shall  give  duplicate  receipts  therefor. 

And  every  such  officer  or  private,  or  person  employed  in  or  with  the  regular  or  vol- 
iteer  forces  of  the  United  States,  shall  also  promptly  turn  over  to  such  agent,  in  like 
aimer,  all  receipts,  bills  of  lading,  and  other  papers,  documents,  and  vouchers  show- 
g title  to  such  property,  or  the  right  to  the  possession,  control,  or  direction  thereof; 
id  lie  shall  make  such  order,  indorsement,  or  writing  as  he  has  power  to  make  to 
aide  such  agent  to  take  possession  of  such  property  or  the  proceeds  thereof.  Arms 
luutions  ot  war.  forage,  horses,  mules,  wagons,  beef  cattle,  and  supplies  which  are 
cessary  in  military  operations,  shall  be  turned  over  to  the  proper  officers  of  the 
iliiance  or  ot  the  quartermaster  or  of  the  commissary  departments,  respectively 
r the  use  ot  the  Army.  All  other  property  abandoned  or  captured  or  seized  L 
wsaid  shall  be  delivered  to  the  agent  appointed  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
the  officer  receiving  or  turning  over  such  property  shall  give  the  usual  and  neces- 
ry  invoices  receipts  or  vouchers  therefor,  and  shall  make  regular  returns  thereof 
prescribed  by  the  Army  Regulations.  The  receipts  of  the  agents  of  the  Treasury 
•l.aifnumt  shall  be  vouchers  for  all  property  delivered  to  them,  and  whenever  called 
i>n  )v  tlio  agent  of  the  Ireasury  Dexiartment  authorized  to  receive  such  abandoned 
captured  or  seized  property  as  aforesaid,  or  the  proceeds  thereof,  all  persons  em- 
lyed  111  the  military  service  will  give  him  full  information  in  regard  thereto,  and 
n quested  by  him  so  to  do  they  shall  give  him  duplicates  or  copies  of  the  reports 
u returns  thereof  and  of  the  receipts,  invoices,  and  vouchers  therefor. 

\nd  every  officer  of  the  Army  of  the  United  States  hereafter  receiving  abandoned 
c.iptnred  or  seized  property,  or  the  proceeds  thereof,  or  under  whose  order  it  mav 
applied  to  the  use  of  the  military  forces  as  aforesaid,  shall,  upon  request  of  a duly 
^ Ireasury  Department,  render  a written  report,  with  invoices 

u"  ^vhich  he  will  specify  the  arms,  supfdies,  or  other  munitions 

^^  al  ictained  lor  the  use  of  the  military  forces  as  aforesaid,  and  also,  separately, 
iposelFffi^^'  turned  over  to  said  agent,  or  which  may  have  been  sold  or  otherwise 

Uul  in  case  a^sale  of  any  such  property  shall  be  made  undcu'  his  authority  or  under 
. . tlmrity  of  any  one  subject  to  his  order  he  will  so  state,  and  will  describe  the 
. m.K  aiKt  Will  State  when  and  where  and  by  and  to  whom  sold,  and  the 

mt  jccinved  therefor,  and  what  disposition  was  made  of  the  proceeds. 

i Ti  i""^  ! times  render  to  the 

r rffii  J Secretary  of  the  Treasury  all  such  aid  as  may  be  necessary 

in- will.!  nf  V V'  -r  PO-ssession  of  and  transpoi  t all  such  property,  so  far  as  can  be 
IT  " jy^eut  manijest  injury  to  the  luiblic  service. 


as  will  insure  strict  ob- 
oxfieiises  of  transporting  property  herein  referred  to  Will  be  reported  by  the 


tlnoughout  their  respective  commands 


582 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  X:;. 


officers  of  tlie  Quartermaster’s  Department  'wlio  furnish  such  transportation  to  e 
ao-ents  of  the  Treasury  Department,  and  also,  through  the  ordinary  channels,  to  e 
o'^iartermaster-General  at  Washington,  in  order  that  the  said  expenses  may  he  n i- 


Quartermaster- ^ ^ 

bursed  from  the  proceeds  of  sales  of  such  transported  STANTON 

Secretary  of  Wa 


By  order  of  tlie  Secretary  of  War : 


E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
A ssistant  A djutant-  Genera 


United  States  Elag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  Neics,  Ya.^  April  4,  18G^ 

Maj.  Geu.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps^  Fort  Monroe^  I a. : 

General  : I Avas  not  aware  until  making  inquiries  on  receipt  of  yi 
letter  of  tlie  2d  instant  that  tlie  ordnance  storehouse  was  used  o : 
domicile.  I at  once  directed  Lieutenant-Commander  Phenix  to  bayen 
family  now  there  removed,  and  have  forbidden  the  use  of  any  ftri 
lights  in  the  building  except  such  lights  in  such  lanterns  as  are  actul 
necessary.  The  Bureau  of  Ordnance  has  established  its  depot  at  4 1 
ress  "jMonroe,  on  shore,  where  it  is  supposed  to  be  safe  and  most  a 
venient,  and  desires  to  add  to  it.  The  subject  of  the  purchase  of  anole 
hulk  or  sailing-ship  for  ordnance  stores  is  already  before  the  Bureai 
I have 'the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadro 


April  4,  [180; 


Major-General  Keyes, 

Commanding,  Yorhtown : 

I shall  leave  this  afternoon  for  Washington.*  I hope  not  to  be  ahi 
more  than  ten  days,  though  my  leave  is  for  fifteen.  Nothing  will 
done  in  the  department  without  your  orders  except  the  regular  dej 
of  duty.  If  in  anything  you  cannot  communicate  satisfactorily  h}  i 
graph  my  chief  of  staff  can  go  to  Yorktown,  or  if  you  are  able  to  lo 
to  come  here  my  quarters  are  at  your  service.  1 have  ^ 

Peck  in  case  he  is  attacked  to  send  for  the  Ninth  New  York  Yolniitd 
which  is  at  Camp  Hamilton  and  belongs  to  Getty’s  division. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Majot'-Genert 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 


Snffolh,  Va.,  April  4,  ISO 


Maj.  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Botomac  : 

General:  I am  honored  with  your  communication  of  the  2d  | 
the  strength  and  position  of  my  troops;  also  the  strength  and  pos 
of  the  enemy  in  my  front.  As  these  data  may  have  an  iinportant  h 
ing  upon  your  operations  I most  cheerfully  proceed  to  give  yoiiTii^ 

sired  information.  ^ i v w ni 

By  the  inclosed  map  you  will  perceive  that  a large  distiict 


Left  on  the  5th. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


583 


I my  command,  being,  in  general  terms,  all  east  of  the  Blackwater  and 
j Chowan.  Several  counties  of  NTorth  Carolina  are  nominally  in  General 
j Foster’s  department,  but  really  dependent  upon  me  for  protection 
' General  Yiele  has  a small  force  at  JN-orfolk.  My  headquarters  are  at 
I Suttolk,  where  I keep  nearly  the  whole  force,  and  from  which  point  I 
; move  my  columns  according  to  circumstances.  The  service  is  hard  and 
; tliey  are  kept  active  when  the  weather  permits.  The  enemy  occupies 
t the  Blackwater  in  force  down  to  the  Chowan  and  probably  below 
: Win  ton. 


j From  the  fact  that  some  4,000  have  been  several  weeks  fortifying 
I Fort  Powhatan,  on  the  James,  I infer  that  Chipoak  and  Birchen  Eivers, 

, With  Cypress  Swamp,  form  the  left  of  their  line.  (See  military  map  of 
; Southeastern  Virginia  from  Coast  Survey.) 

All  the  fords,  passes,  and  bridges  are  fortified  and  guarded.  He  oc- 
I copies  Surry  Court-House  and  pickets  a belt  of  5 or  6 miles  on  this  side 
ot  the  river.  The  intermediate  country  is  traversed  by  both  and  is  the 
theater  of  many  collisions. 

On  the  1st  of  March  Hood’s  and  Pickett’s  divisions  left  Fredericks- 
burg for  Petersburg,  and  General  Longstreet  assumed  command  about 
r that  time  or  a few  days  before.  One  division  started  for  Charleston, 
j blit  returned.  General  Longstreet  made  a reconnaissance,  with  Gen- 
j eral  Jenkins  commanding,  on  the  river  last  week  and  returned  to  Pe- 
I tersburg.  My  information  from  numerous  sources  has  been  that  Lon^^- 
' street  had  within  20  or  30  miles  of  this  place  15,000,  and  15,000  along 
the  railway  this  side  of  Petersburg  which  he  could  concentrate  in 
twelve  hours,  and  I was  advised  from  headquarters  a few  days  since 
; that  one  of  our  spies  had  a list  of  the  regiments  and  the  strength,  and 
they  amounted  to  28,000.  ^ 

Heserters  who  left  the  Blackwater  on  the  1st  say  that  General  Corse’s 
l)rigade  of  Virginia  troops  arrived  at  Zuni  on  the  23d : also  that  a large 
i pontoon  tram  came  by  rail.  They  state  that  Hood’s  division  was  ex- 
; follow.  A large  brigade  of  Mississippians,  under  General  J. 

h.  Havis,  arrived  recently  from  Goldsborough  j also  a brigade  of  Soutli 
Carolinians,  under  General  Bratton.  He  is  strong  in  cavalry  and  artil- 


Lver  since  my  arrival  the  enemy  has  been  impressed  with  the  idea 
that  an  army  would  attempt  this  route,  and  they  have  watched  very 
I closely.  Much  of  the  time  their  force  has  been  greatly  in  excess  of 
' ^ haen  in  part  due  to  the  demonstrations  I have  made 

My  force  been  greatly  magnified  by  our  people,  and  the  rebels’  was 
. rated  from  30,000  to  50,000,  when  I had  less  than  12,000. 

i Total  infantry  for  duty .on 

lotal  cavalry 

l,6b;l 

893 


Total  artillery. 


Two  divisions,  total  for  duty 15  166 

i Four  of  my  batteries  are  good  and  three  are  indifierent. 

RichmMid  for  the  report  of  an  intended  evacuation  of 

It  will  give  me  pleasure  to  advise  you  from  time  to  tijno  of  any  im- 
portant changes  made  by  the  enemy  and  of  the  information  brought  to 
me  from  creditable  sources.  ‘ 

’If success  in  your  very  responsible  command,  I remain, 

' cry  truly,  yours,  - ’ 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


584  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Citai*.  XXX.! 

New  Berne,  Simday,  April  5,  1863—4  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

My  Dear  General  : Your  letter  of  the  4tli,  dated  1 a.  m.,  was  re- 
ceived about  two  hours  since,  and  I am  delighted  to  inform  yon  that! 
everything  mentioned  in  that  letter  has  been  anticipated.  Yon  speak 
first  of  the  matter  of  th<3  ammunition — of  the  need  of  G-poniider  Wiard 
that  was  sent  yesterday  by  the  Northerner,  and  a further  supply  goesj 
in  about  one  hour  from  this  time  by  the  Farina.  You  next  inquire 
about  sending  a cavalry  force  across  the  river  to  harass  the  enemyV 
rear;  that  was  anticipated  by  me,  and  I organized  such  an  expedition 
on  the  3(1.  Major  Garrard,  with  a battalion  of  four  companies  aud  oiui 
howitzer,  has  started  with  orders  to  gain  all  the  information  possibh 
about  the  position  of  the  enemy  at  Swift  Creek,  and,  if  possible,  tq 
threaten  the  forces  at  Hill’s  Point.  By  the  time  you  receive  this  hr 
will  be  doing  his  best  in  those  parts.  He  has  also  five  companies  o; 
infantry  at  Street’s  Ferry  in  case  he  should  wish  to  return  that  way 
(He  might  find  the  enemy  in  his  rear  after  he  gets  up  the  country,  and 
he  might  wish  to  dash  across  to  the  ferry,  as  that  is  only  8 miles  froii 
Swift  Creek.)  The  flats  will  go  up  to  the  ferry  with  a small  steamer 
with  a gun  on  board. 

In  acidition  to  the  troops  of  Spinola’s  brigade  already  up  near  tin 
Hill’s  Point  Battery  the  Northerner  yesterday  took  two  regiments,  tin 
Fifth  Massachusetts  and  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania.  To-daj 
the  Farina  takes  the  Third  Massachusetts  and  One  hundred  and  thin 
New  York,  and  she  will  tow  schooners  with  the  Eighty-fifth  New  Yorl 
and  Ninety-sixth  New  York,  making  nine  regiments.  AYe  will  hole 
this  place  with  the  remainder  of  the  troops ; at  any  rate  we  will  try 
Here  we  are  only  thinking  of  you  and  the  way  of  helping  you. 

You  must  bear  in  mind  that  ever  since  you  left  here  we  have  had  tli( 
most  terrific  weather ; the  wind  has  either  blown  the  water  all  out  o 
the  river  or  it  has  been  blowing  such  a gale  that  most  of  our  transiior 
tation  could  not  do  anything.  Our  vessels  have  been  either  aground  o 
wind  bound.  Such  a time  has  never  been  known  here  since  we  tool 
the  place. 

The  Northerner  yesterday  took  up  a lot  of  small  boats.  By  my  ordc 
the  harbor-master  collected  all  these  he  could  find  to  send  up.  Then 
are  three  ship  launches  secured  to  us  by  Captain  Davenport,  which  wil 
be  sent  up  just  as  soon  as  they  can  go. 

Captain  Davenport  tells  me  that  he  has  sent  a bountiful  supply  o 
ammunition  for  all  the  gunboats. 

General  Prince  writes  to  me  by  the  same  messenger  who  brings  you 
letter.  He  read  your  letter  to  me  and  he  says  that  as  a matter  of  cours< 
he  adopts  your  ideas  and  he  will  act  upon  them. 

I am  not  surprised  that  you  think  that  there  is  a want  of  promptness 
but  you  have  no  idea  what  weather  we  have  had.  Nothing  could  1h 
done  by  Avater  for  a great  portion  of  the  time. 

Urge  General  Prince  to  send  back  all  the  steamers  he  can  siiarc  U 
this  place,  for  now  Ave  liaAm  nothing  left  here  in  the  way  of  transporta 
tion. 

I sent  to  Colonel  Pickett  at  Plymouth,  informing  him  of  the  state  o 
affairs  generally,  and  I authorized  him  to  evacuate  the  place  if  lie  Ava. 
hard  picssed  there,  but  to  hold  on  as  long  as  he  could. 

My  own  oi)inion  is  tliat  he  had  better  come  here  at  once  Avitli  all  lii 
force  and  hold  the  mouth  of  the  Poanoke  by  a gunboat  for  the  ]n’os 
ent.  I cannot,  hoAAmver,  take  the  res[)onsibiiity  of  this.  Think  of  i 
and  let  me  know  how  to  advise  liim  AAdien  I aa  rite  again. 


;hap.  XXX.1  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  585 

Captain  Farquhar  writes  that  he  is  getting  along  well  with  the  field 
sYorks.  He  knew  nothing  of  the  troubles  when  he  wrote. 

Lieutenant  Wheaton  will  tell  you  more  than  I can  write.  Everything 
that  you  can  suggest  will  be  attended  to  at  once  by  me. 

Ever  truly,  yours, 

I.  PALMEE. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  C,  1863. 
\Iaj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  Washington^  D.  G.  : 

General  Palmer,  under  date  of  April  3,  from  N'ew  Berne,  states,  sub- 
jequent  to  special  dispatch  received  here  by  Major  Anderson,  that  Gen- 
jral  Foster  feels  tolerably  strong  in  Washington  for  some  davs,  but 
)egs  for  re-enforcemeuts.  He  wants  10,000,  but  will  take  any  immber 
hat  can  be  sent. 

D.  T.  YAH  BUEEH, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  0,  1863—10  p.  m. 
fiaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

Brigadier-General  Palmer  writes,  April  3,  from  Hew  Berne,  urgently 
LSking  General  Hix  for  re-enforcements.  Says  General  Posted  is  in 
►Vashington,  H.  0.,  and  that  the  re-enforcements  are  needed  to  secure 
hat  place  and  Hew  Berne.  Wh^^  Foster  did  not  write  I know  not.  I 
an  this  moment  in  from  Suffolk.  General  Peck  thinks  the  enemy  is 
till  strong  in  front  of  him,  but  can,  he  thinks  and  I think,  spare,  say, 
bree  regiments  a short  time  if  Horth  Carolina  is  in  great  danger. 
Vhat  shall  be  done  ? I return  to  Yorktown  to-night.  I have  an  ex- 
pedition organized  to  start  early  to-morrow  morning  for  Matthews 
.ounty  to  destroy  or  bring  in  a lot  of  grain  collected  for  the  rebels.' 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-  Ge7ieral. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

^ Fort  Monroe.  TY.,  April  6,  1863. 

i^ctg.  Eear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Conimanding  North  Atla^itie  Bloehading  Squadro^i : 

Sir:  In  the  absence  of  Major-General  Dix,  commanding  the  depart- 
^leiit,  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a copy  of  a communication 
,iiis  morning  received  from  Brig.  Gen.  I.  H.  Palmer,  commanding  at 
lew  Berne,  H.  0.  ? & 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  T.  VAH  BUEEH, 

Assistant  A djutant-  Genera  1. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

^ ^ Neio  Berne,  N.  G.,  April  3,  1863. 

Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Gomdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : Since  my  communication  of  the  1st,  sent  by  Major  Ander- 
1 have  received  several  dispatches  from  General  Foster!  General 


iN- 


586 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX:X' 


Foster  feels  tolerably  strong  in  Washington  for  some  days,  but  the  iilt 
mate  safety  of  that  place  depends  on  the  batteries  on  the  river  bein 
overcome.  Our  force  to  overcome  them  is  not  sufficient,  and  I then 
fore  most  respectfully  but  earnestly  beg  that  if  at  all  within  3 our  powe 
re-enforcements  be  sent  here.  I should  wish  10,000,  but  any  will  b 
acceptable,  and  the  sooner  the  better,  to  save  General  Foster  an 
perhaps  to  save  North  Carolina  {i.  e.,  New  Berne)  by  preventing  or  rei 
dering  it  unnecessary  to  send  more  troops  from  New  Berne. 

I expect,  decidedly,  gunboats  from  Admiral  Lee,  and  trust  we  ca 
punish  the  enemy;  but  they  are  strong  and  we  are  weak. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ j 1 ^ PALMEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

A communication  through  the  canal,  informing  me  of  the  coimi^ 
troops,  will  reach  me  before  the  troops  will,  and  I can  have  such  orde* 
given  as  to  their  disposition  as  may  be  necessary.  I have  no  tran 
portation.  These  re-enforcements  are  of  course  only  as  a loan. 


Orders, 
No. 


1 Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

^ J Fort  Yorhtown^  Va..,  April  G,  18G3. 

Maior-General  Hix  being  temporarily  absent,  the  undersigned  here! 
assumes  command  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  and  ot  the  troo 

^^^AU  reports  and  returns  for  general  headquarters  will  be  addressed 
heretofore  to  the  department  staff  officers  at  Fort  Monroe,  and  the  reg 
lations  and  orders  established  by  Major-General  Dix  will  remain  in  loi' 

unless  otherwise  specially  ordered  by  the  undersign^l. 

E.  D.  KEYEb, 
Major- Generalj  Commanding. 


War  Department, 
Washington.,  April  7,  18G3 — 3.10  p.  u) 

Major-General  Keyes,  Fort  31onroe,  Ya. : 

The  instructions  to  General  Dix  were  to  co-operate  with  Gene 
Foster  as  far  as  possible,  sending  him  re-entorcemenffi  it  they  could 
spared,  he  being  the  judge  of  that.  In  the  absence  of  any  advices  tm 
North  Carolina  I can  give  you  no  more  definffie 

General-m-ChicJ 


Suffolk,  April 


ISCd 


Mai.  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomae,  Falmouth  : 

Answered  your  communication.*  Just  examined  a man 
Petersburg  on  Wednesday ; confirms  my  previous  intormatiou . J^o 
street  moving  troops  this  way  last  week.  j ppCK^-^  i 

Maior-Genera 


See  Peck  to  Hooker,  April  4, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDEKCE,'  ETC. — UNtOK. 


587 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neivport  Netcs,  April  8,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Gorys.,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General  : In  your  letter  to  me  of  April  5 you  request  that  during 
your  absence  the  signature  of  Oapt.  W.  E.  Blake,  provost-marshal, 
might  be  respected  by  the  guard  vessel  as  conveying  the  same  au- 
thority as  your  own.  Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  this  request  I re- 
I ferred  the  matter  to  the  Kavy  Department  for  instructions,  as  I am 
I especially  directed  in  passing  ships  and  merchandise  to  or  from  Norfolk 
i for  military  purposes  to  recognize  the  signature  of  Major-General  Dix, 
i “and  not  of  persons  signing  for  him.’^  Until,  therefore,  I am  enabled 
i to  communicate  the  Department’s  decision  to  you  I hope  that  such  per- 
, mits  will  not  be  given  by  Captain  Blake,  as  the  guard  vessel  must  at 
: present  act  under  their  original  instructions.  Permits  to  trade  from 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  War,  or  Navy  will  be  of  course  always 
! respected  when  presented  here. 

! I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

! ^ S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.  A.  Atlantic  Bloclading  Squadron. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

,,  . Fort  Monroe,  Ya..  April  S,  1^3. 

|Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 
i General-in-  Chief  : 


I General  : H,  A.  Gibbon,  a deserter  from  the  Fifty-seventh  Eegi- 
jineut  North  Carolina,  of  Lee’s  army,  came  into  our  lines  yesterday. 
;He  was  conscripted  from  Chapel  Hill  College,  N.  C.,  and  is  remarkably 
I intelligent.  His  relations  corroborate  many  facts  I have  gleaned  from 
less  reliable  sources,  and  seem  worthy  of  the  notice  of  the  War  Depart- 
mout.  He  says  D.  H.  Hill  with  his  division  is  in  North  Carolina  : 
I ickett  is  near  the  Blackwater,  and  Hood  near  Petersburg.  He  con- 
firms my  former  statement  that  Fitzhugh  Lee,  with  four  regiments  of 
i cavalry,  came  down  to  near  Gloucester  Point,  having  boasted  he 
i^ould  take  it.  On  his  return  he  stopped  at  a Colonel  Davis’,  where 
bibboii  learned  the  merriment  caused  by  his  failure.  Lee’s  cavalry,  he 
isays,  recently  moved  toward  the  left  of  the.  rebel  lines. 

I Gibbon  states  that  Lee  has  collected  large  pontoon  trains  and  is 
ready  to  cross  the  Eappahannock  ^ that  he  will  attack  Hooker  soon  if 
i Hooker  does  not  attack ; that  Lee’s  army  is  80,000  strong,  all  well 
armed,  and  mostly  with  Enfield  rifles.  The  men  are  in  good  condition 
and  reel  entire  confidence  that  they  will  beat  Hooker.  Provisions  are 
certainly  very  scarce,  but  there  is  no  despondency. 

Gibbon  says  the  railroads  north  from  Eichmond  are  in  a much  worse 
^^rpi  than  those  south,  and  that  railroad  iron  is  very  scarce. 
f 1 generals  from  an  army  of  80,000  can  keeji  more  men  in  line 

f Hooker  and  his  generals  can  keep  in  line  from  an  army 

0 iUO,000,  and  if  Hooker  has  not  more  than  that  number  he  is  in  dan- 
ger of  being  whipped. 

I have  not  yet  made  a sufficiently  close  examination  of  this  depart- 
ment to  venture  a positive  opinion  ; but  from  the  glance  I took  at  Suf- 
toik  and  the  neighboring  country  I could  see  nothing  there  to  tempt 
D ie  enemy  to  make  great  sacrifices  in  that  quarter  wdiich  w ould  w eaken 
Uis  attack  on  Hooker.  I think  I shall  advise  that  with  the  works  about 
auflolk  and  the  gunboats  on  the  Nansemond  Peck  can  hold  the  position 


588 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


with  about  half  his  present  foree.  The  railroads  being  in  a bad  conch- . 
tion  north  of  Richmond  Lee  must  guard  them  carefully.  I would 
therefore  collect  every  man  not  necessary  to  retain  the  strongholds  in 
North  Carolina  and  in  this  department  into  one  body  to  threaten  the 
railroads  north  of  Kichmond. 

As  the  supplies  of  provisions  in  Matthews  County,  Gloucester  County, 
and  above  are  still  plentiful,  and  as  the  rebels  are  taking  steps  to  trans- 
l)ort  them  to  their  army,  I am  doing  all  in  my  power  to  thwart  their' 
purpose.  Eight  hundred  of  my  men  came  in  last  night  after  destroying 
a large  amount  of  grain  and  bringing  in  many  sheep  and  cattle  and  mules. 
1 left"  York  town  too  early  this  morning  to  collect  the  figures.  I havei 
still  200  men  out  with  the  gunboats,  and  by  the  last  accoinits  they  were! 
hard  at  work  over  in  Matthews  County.  We  have  certainly  destroyed] 
about  30,000  bushels  of  grain  within  a week  past.  The  enemy  is  nn-j 
■ doubtedly  busy  about  our  picket  lines,  but  I infer  they  are  only  maskingi 
other  movements.  My  lines  are  so  strong  that  I have  no  tear  of  small 
bodies,  and  can  do  more  damage  to  large  bodies  than  tliey  can  do  to 
me.  1 shall  therefore  continue  to  hunt  for  his  supplies. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  1).  KEYEb, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neivpo7't  JSFeics,  Va.,  April  -0,  18C3. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Conidg.  Seventh  Arm])  Corps,  Fortress  Alonroe,  Va. : 

" General  : The  bark  Edisto,  from  Boston  to  Baltimore,  claims  demur 
rage  for  detention  here  while  receiving  repairs  at  the  Gosport  Navy 
Yard,  rendered  necessary  by  a collision  which  took  place  on  the  ..1st  o 
ATarch  between  her  and  the  Wyandotte  in  Ilampton  Koads.^  It  has  becM: 
reported  to  me  that  this  vessel,  by  your  order  of  Alarch  17  to  Captaii 
Alillward,  was  sent  to  Hampton  Loads  and  there  detained. 

I would  be  obliged  if  you  would  inform  me,  if  practicable,  of  the  cir 
cumstances  which  justified  her  being  so  ordered  within  the  lines  ot  tbr 
blockade,  as  in  presenting  the  case  to  the  Jlepartment  it  would  be  neces 
sary  to  account  for  her  iiresence  here. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  verj'  respectfully,  jouis,^ 

S.  1*.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  A.  Atlantic  BlocMding  Squadron. 


Fort  AIonroe,  Ya.,  Ainil  0,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  II.  W.  Ualleck, 

General-in-Chief: 

No  conimnnicatiou  lias  been  received  from  General  Foster,  who,  wd 
1,200  men,  is  .shut  up  in  Washington,  N.  0.  Below  him  the  If'  ' 
is  closed,  I learn,  by  fourteen  rebel  batteries,  against  the  possibility 
our  gunboats  reaching  him.  He  cannot  be  lebeved  exceiit  bj  »»  ox] 
ditioii  bv  land.  I’almer  asks  from  New  Berne  for  10,000  men.  <^'>l't;d 
IMurrav;  of  the  Navy,  left  here  last  night  for  Washington.  Jle  ‘“s  t 
latest  information  from  Foster’s  department.  I will  e.xaimiie  the  s 
ject  further,  and  il'  I lind  it  expedient  will  send  such  re  enlorcemcnts . 
can  bo  spareil.  , ^ 

Major-General 


ICHAr.  XXX.] 

i 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


589 


War  Department, 
Washington^  April  0,  1863 — 3 p.  m. 

Major-General  Keyes,  Fort  Mo7iroe,  Va.  : 

If  you  can  possibly  assist  General  Foster  do  so  in  preference  to  any- 
thing else.  Let  me  know  what  you  have  determined  on. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-m-  Chief. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe.,  F«.,  April  9,  1863. 

Major-General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Co7nmanding  TJ.  8.  Army : 

Sir  : In  consequence  of  the  appeals  of  General  Foster  for  relief  (his 
letter  of  the  5th  instant  to  you  was  forwarded)  I have  ready  to  move 
nigh  4,000  men— all  that  can  be  spared  prudently  from  this  department 
at  the  present  moment.  I have  a rumor  that  VAshington,  K.  O.,  has 
been  burned  and  that  the  transports  carrying  troops  from  Kew  Berne, 
not  being  able  to  reach  Foster,  had  returned.  I do  not  see  the  wisdom 
of  General  Foster’s  proposal  to  make  a demonstration  from  Plymouth 
toward  Washington  with  such  a force  as  can  be  assembled  there. 
Troops  from  Suffolk  could  only  march  to  Gatesville,  and  I don’t  know 
of  any  transports  to  receive  them  there  for  Plymouth.  1 shall  there- 
ifore  limit  myself,  unless  otherwise  instructed,  to  sending  re-enforce- 
jiuents  to  NTew  Berne  as  transports  can  be  had.  None  are  here  at  pres- 
jent,  and  Colonel  Thomas  is  not  able  to  tell  me  when  to  anticipate  them. 
T have  this  moment  received  a telegram  from  General  Peck  to  state  his 
■ working  party  at  the  ferry  on  the  Western  Branch  of  the  Nansemond 
had  been  attacked.  His  people  have  had  a successful  skirmish  near 
lisle  of  Wight,  capturing  4 men,  9 horses,  &c.  The  enemy  on  the  Black- 
water  are  reported  ready  to  march ; are  building  bridges,  &c. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  KEYES, 
Major-General.,  Coinmanding. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  A.  C.,  April  9,  1863. 

.3rig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  8.  Ariny,  Washingto7i,  I).  C.: 

^ Genehial  : The  last  steamer  from  here  carried  a letter  from  General 
li’oster  to  General  Halleck  informing  him  of  the  situation  of  affairs  in 
I Ill's  department. 

! By  referring  to  that  letter  you  will  see  that  the  enemy  had  erected 
batteries  on  the  river  below  the  town  of  Washington  and  thus  prevented 
•e-enforcements  or  supplies  from  iiassing  up.  General  Foster’s  lirst 
(lea  was  to  attempt,  in  conjunction  with  the  naval  forces,  to  take  the 
latteries,  but  after  a careful  consideration  of  the  matter  he  decided  to 
lave  the  forces  which  had  already  gone  up  to  these  batteries  returned 

0 this  place,  and  with  all  the  rest  of  the  available  force  from  here  to 
iiarch  across  the  country  to  his  relief.  The  expedition  was  by  General 
mster’s  order  to  be  conducted  by  General  Prince,  but  just  at  the  point 

1 starting  (yesterday  morning)  General  Prince  was  taken  sick  and  the 
olimm  started  under  the  commaiul  of  Brigadier-General  Spinola. 

Ihis  expedition  consists  of  all  the  force  that  can  possibly  be  spared 


590 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XXX. 


from  this  place,  and  will  number  in  the  vicinity  of  8,000  men.  The 
force  of  the  enemv  around  Washington  and  on  the  road  between  here 
and  that  place  is  estimated  at  something  more  than  20,000,  under  the 
command  of  Generals  D.  H.  Hill,  Pettigrew,  and  Garnett.  There  are 
roads  leading  into  the  route  from  here  to  Washington,  down  which  the 
enemy  can  pour  any  number  of  troops,  and  several  points  on  the  route 
are  fortified.  A great  portion  of  the  country  is  swamp  and  exceedingly 

difficult  to  get  over.  _ i o • i / i i 

111  a dispatch  received  this  morning  trom  General  Spinola  (who  has 
proved  himself,  I think,  an  officer  of  energy,  discretion,  and  good  judg- 
ment) he  informed  me  that  from  all  the  information  he  can  get  he  con- 
cludes it  impossible  to  force  his  way  through  to  Washington  without 
first  taking  the  battery  at  Hill’s  Point,  and  he  proposes  to  try  that  to- 
day. A success  will  place  him  in  a better  position,  as  he  can  then 
communicate  with  the  gunboats  on  the  river.  Should  he  not  liave 
sufficient  force,  however,  to  take  that  position  he  will  return  here  if  he 
can.  I have  not  given  him  orders  to  that  effect,  as  I have  only  directed 
him*  to  carry  out"  the  instructions  of  General  Poster  to  tbe  letter,  if 
possible.  Hew  Berne,  which  should  be  held  at  all  hazards,  is  threat- 
ened, and  I have  scarcely  3,000  men  here. 

There  is  no  general  officer  with  me,  and  the  troops  are  mostly  new— 

nine-months’  men.  i 

Of  General  Poster’s  policy  in  abandoning  everything  to  the  saving  ot 
Washington  1 have  nothing  to  say,  except  that  it  meets  with  no  favor 
from  the  military  and  naval  officers  who  consider  themselves  privileged 
to  speak  of  the  matter.  I obey  General  Poster’s  orders  implicitly,  trust- 
ing to  holding  this  place.  _ 1 

Should  the  forces  now  en  route  get  to  Washington  they  will  be  there 
without  supplies.  It  will  take  a large  army  to  keep  the  road  between 
that  place  and  this.  The  river  is  lined  with  batteries,  and  the  senior 
naval  officer  at  the  lower  batteries,  who  has  some  of  the  finest  gunboats 
iu  these  waters  under  his  control,  informed  me  that  he  can  make  no  im- 
pression on  them.  n • 1 1 • 1 

I informed  General  Hix  of  the  condition  of  affairs  here  by  a siiecial 
messenger,  requesting  a re-enforcement.  I have  only  heard  by  the  re- 
turn of  the  officer  sent  that  we  could  expect  no  re-enforcements  here 
from  the  Army  of  Virginia,  as  they  are  now  fully  occupied  there. 

Admiral  Lee  has  sent  a small  re-enforcement  of  gunboats,  winch  iii 
the  absence  of  the  troops  make  this  place,  of  course,  more  secure. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your 

Brigadier -General  TJ.  S.  Volunteers. 


Headquarters  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

^ SuffollCj  April  0,  1803. 

Major-General  “Poster, 

Department  of  North  Carolina  : 

General  : Although  you  have  received  more  than  10,000  of  my  old 
and  best  trooiis  within  a few  months  without  returiiiiig  them,  I am  again 
contributing  for  your  benefit.  General  Terry  will  join  you  with  a com^ 
siderable  force,  of  which  3,000  from  this  point  are  the  flower  ot  my  com- 

General  Longstreet  has  been  in  my  front  with  not  less  than  28,000,  lor 
some  weeks,  that  he  could  concentrate  in  a few  hours  of  this  place,  -'or 


IP.  XXX.] 


COEKESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


591 


luy  days  everything  has  indicated  the  offensive  on  his  part,  and  I 
ve  confidently  expected  an  attack.  Up  to  this  time  my  own  opinion 
d that  of  my  commanders  has  been  that  no  troops  ought  to  leave  this 
int,  and  you  are  indebted  to  me  for  them. 

On  the  reading  of  Palmer’s  letter,  in  the  hands  of  Major-General  Keyes, 
the  6th,  I said  send  a strong  brigade  from  this  point  at  once  and  as 
my  more  as  there  was  a probability  of  being  replaced  at  short  notice, 
e troops  have  been  ready,  waiting  transportation  and  the  orders  of 
department  commander. 

[f  Longstreet  does  not  advance  by  the  12th  I shall  conclude  that  the 
gencies  at  Charleston  and  other  points  have  called  for  his  reserves. 
yVishing  you  all  success  in  your  contests  with  the  rebels,  I am,  in 
ste,  truly,  yours,  ‘ 

JOHK  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  10,  1863. 
pt.  C.  B.  Wilder,  ^ ^ ± ? 

Asst.  Quartermaster  and  Superintendent  of  Contrabands : 
hR : In  answer  to  your  letter  of  March  31,  which  I answered  orally 
I the  time,  and  have  since  partially  answered  in  writing,  I would  say  : 
st.  Ko  rent  need  be  exacted  from  tenants  of  farms  under  your  care 
I il  the  harvest  is  made. 

Id.  No  oath  is  to  be  required  of  female  tenants  on  such  farms, 
d.  Men  holding  as  tenants  under  absentee  disloyalists  who  will  not 
: e the  oath  of  allegiance  are  not  entitled  to  possession, 
th.  No  loyal  tenant  agreeing  to  pay  a reasonable  rent  is  to  be  dis- 
hed. 

th.  Very  moderate  rents  only  are  in  any  case  to  be  required,  and 
^ere  you  and  the  tenant  differ  as  to  the  amount  please  come  with 
I tenant  to  me  to  fix  the  rate. 

n conclusion  I would  say,  generally,  that  it  is  very  desirable  that  no 
ion  man  be  subjected  to  inconvenience,  and  that  a spirit  of  both  fair- 
s and  kindness  should  be  perfectly  manifest  in  all  the  arrangements 
' cerning  the  farms  which  are  used  in  whole  or  in  part  by  the  Gov- 
inent. 

Eespectfully,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  BOLLES, 

Major  and  Aide-de-Camp,  Frovost-Judge. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  10, 1863. 

1|.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Ge7ieral-in-  Chief : 

oip  telegram  urging  re-enforcements  for  Foster  was  received  here 
* night  at  0 o’clock  and  by  me  at  Yorktown  at  11.  I gave  immedi- 
I orders,  and  troops  are  now  moving  from  Suffolk.  I can  only  send 
dO  or  2,000  at  once,  and  that  number  every  five  days,  by  canal.  I 
i Q no  means  of  transportation  by  sea,  and  the  lack  of  such  trans- 
udation prevented  my  sending  aid  to  Foster  on  the  8th  instant,  Avhen 
■St  learned  his  situation,  though  the  enemy  was  then  attacking  my 
Peck  says  he  is  now  threatened  by  a large  force  of  rebels. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


1 


592 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  | 
April  10,  1863 — 1 p.  m.  i 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-Chief : 

A great  variety  of  information  from  prisoners,  deserters,  and  fron 
intercepted  letters  confirms  the  fact  that  the  rebels  are  in  great  force 
on  the  Blackwater.  They  have  built  several  bridges,  issued  four  days 
cooked  rations,  &c.  An  officer  from  City  Point  brought  news  tliat 
great  quantity  of  material  had  been  sent  down  to  the  Blackwater.  Tin 
testimony  is  too  strong  to  be  disregarded.  I countermanded  the  orderi 
for  re-enibreements  for  Foster  before  any  got  off.  I shall  go  to  Suffoll 

E.  H.  KEYES, 
Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  10, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

No  news  from  Cliaiieston  since  telegram  of  this  morning  referring  t( 
disaster  to  iron-clad  Keokuk.  No  requisition  for  transports  was  made 
Shortly  after  I concluded  to  re-enforce  Foster  a steamer  came  iu;  other 
were  expected,  aud  by  diverting  from  fair-weather  steamers  I coiih 
send  as  niaiiv  troops  as  I could  spare.  I telegraphed  you  that  the  m 
formation  obtained  to-day  induced  me  to  withhold  all  re-entorcemeiit 
from  Foster.  Upon  Peck’s  urgent  call  I have  sent  the  Hawkins’  Zouave 
to  Suffolk  to-day.  ^ ^ 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia,^ 

Fort  MonroOy  Fn.,  April  10,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  or 
Brig.  Gen.  I.  N.  Palmer  : 

Sir  : In  consequence  of  your  application  for  re-enforcements  I hav 
detached  Brigadier-General  Terry  with  a brigade  of  about  3,000  uieii- 
all  that  can  possibly  be  spared  from  this  department— with  orders  t< 
proceed  bv  sea  to  New  Berne.  A deficiency  of  vessels  is  causing  dehq 
in  the  departure  of  the  troops.  I would  have  sent  them  yesterday  i 
possible,  and  the  first  installments  are  now  embarking  on  steamers  ft 
only  for  calm  waters.  I send  these  troops,  which  are  so  much  needei 
ill  this  department,  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  General  1 oster  at  V\  asli 
iiudon,  N.  G.  If  General  Foster  shall  have  been  relieved  or  released 
or'lf  Washington  shall  have  fallen  on  the  arrival  of  General  Terry  a. 
New  Berne,  1 have  directed  him  to  return  with  his  brigade  forthwit: 
to  this  place.  In  any  event  I shall  anticipate  their  return  in  a ver 
short  time,  as  the  enemy  now  threaten  us  on  the  Blackwater  and  else 


where  in  great  force.  . , 

One  of  the  steamers  sent  is  the  Thomas  A.  Morgan,  the 
and  transport  between  Fort  Monroe  and  Yorktown.  I desire  that  in 
JMorgan  may  be  returned  here  in  the  least  possible  tinie. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  KEYEo, 
Major- General^  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXX.) 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


593 


Headquarters  Hepajitment  of  Virginia 
Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk : 

Halleck  directs  me  to  assist  Foster  if  possible:  so  we  will 
send  Terry^  brigade  of  3,000,  and  I will,  when  the  enemy  advLTL  on 
you,  send  Hawkins  Zouaves  and  other  aid  nearly  equivalent.  I shall 

Sosef  of  ^°«ter  is  i^leased  or 

E.  H.  KEYES, 

Major-General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia 
Major-General  Peck: 

-h  will  go  by  sea.  I have  directed 

.he  quarterma;Ster  to  keep  you  advised  of  the  arrival  of  the  transports 

» SrSfyt'Srelr 

I will  direct  the  quartermaster  to  send  coal  for  your  gunboats 

E.  D.  KEYES,’ 
Major-General, 

.lajor-General  Peck,  Suffolk:  April  10, 1863. 

ivybihWs  material  for 

ive  Dlaefs  ^Thf«?  f*  in  crossing  the  Blackwater  in 

t Ohl  Point.^^  information  is  quite  reliable.  General  Keyes  is  now 

D.  T.  VAK  BUREK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Steamer  Escort,  Amil  10, 1863 
-leut.  Col.  W.  H.  Ludlow: 

Colonel  : By  direction  of  General  Palmer  I beg  leave  to  sav  in  an- 

'egeof  WasWnfffn*^^  expedition  sent  to  raise  the 

t Blonuil  Pri  t*  ’ consisting  of  about  8,000  men,  were  repulsed 
c Eiount’s  Creek,  near  the  battery  on  Hill’s  Point. 

.4  22,000,  and  strongly  posted  An  ef- 

^ reglm^enrpast  the  bat- 
f that  place.  ^ Eoster,  so  that  he  can  make  a more  protracted  defense 

ifflctenf  for  a^ono^^®  transportation  that  can  be  sent  to  Gatesville  is 
11a  3»000  men  j that  amount  of  transportation  Tvill  be  at  Gates- 

SnJSoopl'^'  forty- ei|hthou?s. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

r-  . . ^ V SOGTHAED  HOFFMAK 

Ineutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

S’aTS  MoZe^"*^’”^  ‘’^®  ®®“>“^nding 

Very  respectfully, 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Deparfmmi  ^^t/^^folina. 

38  R R— YOL  xvni 


594 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Washington,  10, 1863 — G p.  m. 

Brigadier-General  Palmer, 

Commanding  Forces,  New  Berne  : 

General  : Your  dispatches  arrived  this  morning  at  2 a.  m.  by  the 
hands  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  McOhesney,  who  will  return  to-night. 

I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  say  that  he  could 
have  wished  that  you  had  yourself  come  in  command  of  the  forces  which 
moved  yesterday  from  New  Berne  under  General  Spinola,  notwith- 
standing the  confidence  you  express  in  his  activity  and  intelligence. 

If  General  Wessells  has  arrived  General  Foster  wishes  you  to  take 
command  in  person  of  the  advancing  forces.  Should  General  Naglee 
arrive  he  will  be  sent  forward  at  once  to  take  command. 

In  case  you  are  not  sufficiently  strong  at  New  Berne  you  will  send: 
for  tlie  regiment  at  Plymouth,  leaving  at  that  post  three  companies 
with  three  pieces  of  artillery  as  garrison  for  the  fort  if  it  be  suflaciently 

completed.  , ...  . , 

The  general  wishes  that  a light-draught  steamer,  with  her  sides  pro- 
tected by  hay-bales,  should  be  sent  here  at  once  loaded  with  ammiini 
tion  and  provisions.  Send  also  several  schooners  of  light  draught,  pro 

tected  and  loaded  in  the  same  way.  , 

The  enemy  have  opened  fire  to-day  from  five  batteries  on  the  crest 
of  the  rising  ground  in  rear  of  town.  Their  fire  for  a short  time  was 
very  sharp,  but  no  damage  has  yet  been  done.  , . , , . ^ 

The  general  expects,  even  if  the  expedition  which  has  started  b( 
successful,  that  you  will  continue  to  make  persistent  efforts  to  send  £ 
force  across  to  our  relief. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ EDWARD  E.  POTTER, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


If  anything  goes  to  Washington  before  we  return,  a few  thousam 
rations,  some  hay,  and  some  32-pound  and  6-pound  (Wiard)  ammnni 
tion  had  better  be  sent  if  our  supply  is  large  at  New  Berne.  McLnes 
ney  says  General  Foster  is  in  high  spirits,  &c.  I K P 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  April  10,  1863. 

Col.  J.  Pickett, 

Commanding  Post,  Plymouth,  N.  C. : 

Colonel  : I am  instructed  by  General  Palmer  to  inform  you  of  t 
situation  of  affairs  at  present  in  this  vicinity  and  at  Washington. 

Washington  is  completely  or  nearly  invested  by  the  enemy,  so  ttia 
it  is  impossible  for  the  gunboats  to  proceed  to  General  Foster  s assis 
ance.  The  attempt  to  re-enforce  General  Foster  by  sending  troop 
him  by  water  had  in  consequence  to  be  abandoned.  The  expedit 
sent  from  here  across  the  country  by  way  of  Swift  Creek  has  oe 
obliged  to  return  to  this  place  on  account  of  the  greatly  siiperu 

strength  of  the  enemy.  ^ , 

The  effective  force  at  this  place  consists  of  about  9,000  men,  and  abo 
12,000  at  Washington.  The  enemy’s  force  is  supposed  to  be  aoov 
20’,000  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Washington. 

I am,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servau^, 

Aidede-Comp. 


/IP,.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.-^UNION. 


595 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Neicport  News,  April  10,  1863. 

ajor-Geueral  Peck, 

Commanding  at  Suffolk,  Va.  : 

Sir  : Herewith  I respectfully  return  to  you  a permit  given  from  your 
jadquarters,  December  29,  to  Edward  Bust,  to  carry  oysters  in  his 
')op  Jacob  Marten  to  Suffolk,  subject  to  the  regulations  of  the  naval 
thorities. 

Edward  Bust,  with  his  sailing  sloop  and  a large  boat,  was  found  in  the 
(wer  Nansemond  day  before  yesterday  morning  by  the  picket  boat 
/ert  and  brought  on  board  this  ship.  As  that  region  is  infested  by 
jiugglers  and  rebel  mail  carriers  I have  found  it  necessary  not  only  to 
[ohibit  the  gathering  of  oysters  in  the  ISTansemond  but  to  allow  no 
fats  there  day  or  night  where  such  illicit  operations  can  be  carried 
I,  and  to  instruct  the  guard  vessels  to  recognize  no  oyster  permits  after 
;iy  1 and  until  then  only  in  open  boats. 

Edward  Bust  was  sent  back  to  the  guard  vessel  to  be  released  with 
b boats,  with  a warning  in  accordance  with  the  above. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  April  11, 1863 — 11.24  a.  m. 

hjor-General  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.: 

iTour  position  should  not  be  so  weakened  as  to  endanger  its  security, 
1 you  find  the  enemy  in  your  front  too  strong  to  permit  you  to  re-enforce 
imeral  Foster  you  are  right  in  not  doing  so ; but  you  should  not  act 
:on  mere  rumors,  which  are  always  gotten  up  to  influence  the  move- 
[iiits  of  troops  on  such  occasions.  Means  should  be  taken  to  ascertain 
yond  doubt  the  strength  of  the  enemy  before  you.  You  remember 
Ei-poleon’s  maxim,  that  no  general  should  be  ignorant  of  the  strength 
ii  position  of  his  enemy. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


'ij.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

April  11,  1863 — 12  noon. 


General-in-  Chief: 

four  telegram  just  received.  My  front  is  so  extensive,  the  enemy  are 
j busy,  and  the  calls  for  assistance  so  general  that  I have  not  had 
^le  to  examine  Peck’s  position  carefully.  I have  to  rely  on  his  and 
^3le’s  opinions  to  some  extent  more  than  my  own.  There  is  no  doubt 
t!  enemy  are  pushing  us  all  along  from  North  Carolina  to  York  Eiver. 
k soon  as  I can  look  around  I shall  feel  certain,  and  I will  give  no 
Wwd  counsels.  Our  troops  below  Williamsburg  were  attacked  by  a 
ge  force  this  morning— 4,000,  5,000,  or  6,000.  They  have  got  below 
rt  Magruder  and  cut  off  communication  with  Colonel  West,  who  has 
lOne  hundred  and  thirty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  Fifth  Penn- 
puia  Cavalry,  and  one  battery  of  field  artillery.  This  moment  they 
[graph  that  Fort  Magruder  is  safe  and  the  enemy  are  retreating. 


596 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX 


Two  little  forts  on  the  right  and  left  of  it  are  occupied,  and  I hai 
ordered  them  to  hold  the  line  agaiust  10,000  rebels.  Admiral  Lee  hj 
ordered  the  Commodore  Morris  away  from  Yorktown.  Her  armamenti 
only  fit  for  service  there,  and  I have  urged  the  admiral  to  send  her  ba : 
from  here  at  once  to  Yorktown. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 
Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
April  11, 1863 — 6 p.  m. 


General  Peck,  at  Suffolk,  telegraphs  just  now  enemy  in  large  for^ 
are  attempting  to  flank  us  on  both  sides  j deserters  say  50,000.  Ge- 
era!  Keyes  has  just  started  for  Suffolk.  Williamsburg  appears  to 
quiet.  Our  forces  retain  possession  of  Fort  Magruder  and  have  a 
vanced  pickets  to  outskirts  of  Williamsburg.  The  telegraph  operat’ 
reports  enemy  are  hanging  around  Williamsburg. 

D.  T.  VAK  BUREN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  April  11,  1863 — 11.30  a.  m. 

Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

On  hoard  Minnesota : 

Our  troops  near  Williamsburg  have  been  driven  by  a large  force  ‘ 
rebels  down  toward  the  mouth  of  Queen’s  Creek,  and  Colonel  We 
calls  for  the  aid  of  gunboats.  The  Crusader’s  armament  will  not  a 
swer,  and  I earnestly  request  that  you  will  send  the  Commodore  Mon 
back  at  once.  If  the  gunboats  are  taken  away  even  Yorktown  may 
lost.  The  enemy  are  now  within  5 miles  of  Yorktown. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  11, 1863. 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron : 

Admiral:  The  enemy  attacked  Williamsburg  early  this  mornin 
and  by  the  last  accounts  were  moving  with  a heavy  force  upon  Fo 
Magruder,  which  is  a mile  and  more  below  the  city.  They  have  also 
force  this  side  of  Fort  Magruder  and  have  burned  the  camp  of  tbe  Fif 
Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

It  is  possible  the  enemy  have  crossed  troops  from  the  south  side  of  tl 
James  River;  if  so,  and  to  ascertain  the  fact,  I would  be  glad  if 
could  send  a gunboat  up  as  far  as  Jamestown  Island.  Such  a moy 
ment  would  also  tend  to  diminish  the  pressure  on  our  lines  below  Wi 
iamsburg. 

The  wires  between  Yorktown  and  Williamsburg  have  been  cut.  Tl 
enemy  are  represented  as  being  in  large  force.  The  gunboats  shoo 


:ip.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


597 


Ijrefore  move  up  and  down  between  Yorktown  and  Queen’s  Creek, 
jrktown  * gunboats  to  keep  in  sight  of 

I I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  KEYES, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  11,  1863. 
i miral  S.  P . Lee,  Newport  News : 

:he  following  just  received  from  General  Peck,  at  Suffolk,  5.35  p.  m. : 

ueniy  is  flanking  us  in  large  force  on  both  sides. 

urthSsem^iMl®  gunboats  to  mouth 

D.  T.  VAK  BUEEK, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


United  States  Feag-ship  Minnesota 

OffNewportmws.Va.,  April  11,  1863. 

I . Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes,  U.  S.  A.,  > p , 

Comdg.  Department  of  Virginia,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

of  this  date  is  received.  With  the  force  at  my  dis- 
iLm  n partial  support  in  James  Eiverto  your  output  at 

iS  the  two  flag-of-truce  boats  arrived  to-day  from  City  Point  do  not 
t any  rebel  vessels  in  James  Eiver  it  is  not  probable  that  the  enemv 
crossed  from  the  right  to  the  left  bank  of^the  river  “isS 

; i^efb^She  4^ans 

in  “-"P^«on  of  several  posi- 

lo^n  crossing  the  Kansemond  and  wish  to 

IQ  force,  under  cover  of  their  artillery,  the  two  small  navv  and  fhp 

i ierTml®®®?*®  ®^*'®  u g““boats  (which  are  frail  little  river  or  harbor 
nnoia  but  a few  pieces  of  fixed  artillery)  should  not 

► e the  wf  1®“®“#''  to  prevent  it.  The  Kansemond  if  i^me?e  creek 
' drive  frmnf  tuusketry  alone  can  command  the  decks 

i«  tn®K*  ®i“  *^,®f  ^be  crews  of  these  little  crafts,  which  are 

I ‘T  » '•* 

2earth  wif  “ • *.*1®  *“?“**?“  of  General  Dix  to  the  policy  of  leveling 
of ttrsubieft  “y  conveLtion  wEh 

day  I rSetfnPv  ®“  board  this  ship  the 

otheT’force  ?f  f“g§;estlon  that  the  contrabands 

jout  delay.  ’ “ “®®®®®‘‘'^y>  ®bould  be  employed  to  raze  these  works 

itarto  ttTo^nffn  fbe  inclosed  extract*  from  a re- 

bw  last  immertfif  ® ®ooFe.t'‘ry  of  the  Navy  on  the  24th  of 
J ^t,  immediately  after  my  visit  to  Yorktown,  referring  to  the 

* See  p.  442.  ~ ^ 


598 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  X2, 


destruction  of  all  military  works  in  the  vicinity  of  Norfolk  and  Yo:' 
town  wkicli  might  encourage  further  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  enei; 
to  reoccupy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg,  Bear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  BlocJcading  Squadron 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  April  11,  1863 — 5 p.  m 

Major-General  Peck, 

Commanding,  Swffolk : 

I have  this  moment  received  your  telegram  announcing  that  the  ene^ 
is  moving  upon  you  in  large  force. 

I suppose  the  Hawkins’  Zouaves  are  now  with  you.  I shall  start : 
Norfolk  in  a few  minutes. 

Major- Genera^ 


Headquarters  Depart]vient  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe,  April  11, 186" 

Major-General  Peck, 

Commanding,  SuffolJc : 

Wise  and  his  whole  command  are  at  Williamsburg.  The  eiie; 
got  past  Port  Magruder,  destroyed  the  camp  of  thePifth  Pennsylvm 
Cavalry,  and  came  down  with  a portion  of  their  force  to  within  5 nu 
ofYorktown.  I have  ordered  Colonel  West  to  hold  the  line  of  rc 
Magruder  at  all  hazards.  I may  be  obliged  to  send  him  re-enfo.t 
ments  and  may  have  to  recall  Hawkins’  Zouaves.  I must  look  at  yii 
position  to  judge  by  comparison.  How  much  time  will  I require  to  i 

your  lines?  KEYES, 

Major-  Genera 


General  Orders, 
Ko.  54. 


» Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

} New  Berne,  April  11, 186 

It  is  hereby  ordered  that  the  divisions  and  brigades  of  the  Eighteet 
Army  Corps  now  in  this  department  resume  their  original  orgamzal'i 
and  designation,  agreeably  to  the  provisions  of  General  Orders,  x 
Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  and  all  reports  will  he  renu.- 
SjCcordin  V# 

The  senior  officers  present  will  command  in  order  of  their  semoi: 
and  absent  regiments  will  be  accounted  for  as  on  detached  serv. 

The  organization  will  be  as  follows : . 

The  Pirst,  or  General  Palmer’s,  Division  will  consist  of  the  brigaa 
Colonel  Amory:  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  ^^’^^^“teers,  lorty- 
Massachi«etts  Volunteer  Militia,  Porty-fifth  Massachusetts  \ olun; 
Militia,  Pifty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia  ; and  the 
Col.  H.  C.  Lee:  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volimteers, 
fifth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Pifth  Massachusetts  ^ olunteer  . 

Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia. 

The  Fourth,  or  General  Wessells’,  Division  will  consist  of  the  Dii,.^^ 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


59^ 


of  General  Hunt:  Eighty-fifth  New  York  State  Volunteers,  Ninety- 
second  New  York  State  Volunteers,  Ninety-sixth  New  York  State  Vol- 
unteers, One  hundred  and  first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  One  hundred 
and  third  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  j and  the  brigade  of  General  Ste- 
venson: Fifth  Ehode  Island  Volunteers,  Forty-fourth  Massachusetts 
Volunteer  Militia. 

The  Fifth,  or  General  Prince’s,  Division  will  consist  of  the  brigade  of 
General  Spinola:  One  hundred  and  thirty-second  New  York  State  Vol- 
unteers, One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Militia,  One  hun- 
dred and  seventy-first  Pennsylvania  Militia,  One  hundred  and  seventy- 
fifth  Pennsylvania  Militia;  and  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Jourdan : Third 
Massachusetts  Volunteer  Militia,  Eighth  Massachusetts  Volunteer  Mi- 
litia, One  hundred  and  fifty-eighth  New  York  State  Volunteers,  One  hun- 
dred and  sixty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Militia. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Wessells  commanding: 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

April  12,  1863 — 12  noon. 


Major-General  Dix, 

No.  3 West  Twenty-first  street^  New  Yorlc,  N.  Y. : 

General  Peck  telegraphs  just  now,  ‘‘We  are  face  to  face.  The  attack 
is  on  the  Somerton  and  Edenton  front,  and  before  this  reaches  you  the 
fight  will  have  commenced.”  I will  have  the  Burden  for  you  at  Balti- 
more if  you  say  so.  I think  you  had  better  come  down. 

D.  T.  VAN  BUREN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

April  12,  1863—4.30  p.  m. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : 

The  following  dispatches  received  to-day  from  General  Peck  at  Suf- 
folk, at  12.30  p.  m. : 


The  two  armies  are  at  this  moment  face  to  face.  The  attack  is  on  the  Somerton 
and  Edenton  road. 


4 P.  M. 


The  enemy,  after  advancing  within  a short  distance  of  my  front,  has  fallen  hack  2 
or  3 miles,  and  is  reported  moving  from  the  Somerton  road  toward  the  Edenton  road. 


D.  T.  VAN  BUREN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Norfolk,  Va.,  April  12,  [1863.] — 7.30  p.  m. 

(Received  9.15  p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

The  enemy  approached  our  lines  at  Suffolk  to-day  and  exchanged 
some  cannon-shots  and  retired.  The  force  of  the  enemy  is  great  and  1 
think  they  will  make  a serious  attack.  General  Peck  has  just  tele- 
graphed that  he  has  reason  to  believe  Longstreet  is  receiving  re-enforce- 


600 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ments  and  heavy  artillery.  Wise  with  his  whole  force  is  certainly  in 
front  of  Williamsburg  and  Fitzhugh  Lee  is  said  to  be  approaching 
Gloucester  Point,  and  some  persons  anticipate  rebel  gunboats  down 
James  Eiver.  Information  from  all  quarters  concurs  to  establish  a 
simultaneous  movement  against  all  portions  of  our  lines.  I have  made 
the  best  disposition  in  my  power  of  our  troops  and  supplies,  but  I would 
be  glad  to  receive  heavy  re-enforcements  if  they  could  be  spared.  We 
have  seven  smalll  gunboats  on  the  Nansemond,  which  I think  renders 
Peck’s  right  flank  secure. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  op  Virginia, 

Norfolk^  Fa.,  April  12,  1863. 

The  proximity  of  the  Confederate  forces  renders  it  proper,  by  virtue 
of  the  military  and  naval  authority  of  the  United  States,  to  give  the 
following  notice : 

All  foreign  consuls  and  their  families,  all  women  and  children,  and 
all  other  persons  not  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  who  prefer 
safety  to  the  conflicts  of  war,  are  notified  that  on  the  approach  of  the 
enemy  to  any  town  or  village  within  this  department  and  the  range  of 
the  Union  guns,  such  town  or  .village  will  be  fired  on  without  further 
consideration. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major- General j Commanding  Department  of  Virginia. 


April  12, 1863. 

Major-General  Keyes: 

I believe  Longstreet  is  receiving  re-enforcements  and  heavy  artillery 
by  rail  from  Petersburg  and  Weldon. 


PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  April  12, 1863. 

Major-General  Keyes: 

A force  is  on  the  road  leading  to  the  Nansemond.  How  far  they  will 
come  down  remains  to  be  seenj  will  keep  you  advised.  The  rails  were 
removed  by  some  of  the  Ninth  Corps  men  through  a misunderstanding 
of  orders  given  by  the  commander  of  that  front.  I slept  none  in  con- 
sequence of  these  affairs  and  of  the  responsibilitv. 

PECK, 

Major-General, 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  12, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

Longstreet  is  now  before  me  with  a very  heavy  force.  The  attack  is 
on  my  front,  which  cuts  off  much  of  the  aid  of  the  gunboats  on  the 
flanks.  Prisoners  say  30,000  and  more. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


601 


JAP.  XXX. 


rigadier-General  1"’  ^^OS. 

I see  no  objection  to  the  withdrawal  of  Colonel  West’s  pickets  from 
le  town  of  Williamsburg.  Colonel  West  will,  I trust,  cause  Wise  to 
'pent  his  rashness  if  he  assails  those  forts. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major- General. 

aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Eutaw  House j Baltimore^  Md. : 

The  Henry  Burden  left  here  at  11  o’clock  this  evening  for  Baltimore 
le  captain  was  ordered  to  report  to  you  at  the  Eutaw  House. 

WM.  H.  LUDLOW, 

Ijicuf,  Oolt  und  Asst,  Insp,  Gcyi, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  12, 1863. 
iij.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok,  (Received  10.45  p.  m.) 

General-in-  Chief : 

j“®tbeen  received  from  Major-General  Palmer  statinir 
It  an  expedition  of  8,000  men  sent  to  raise  the  siege  of  Washington 
lepnlsed  at  Blount’s  Creek  near  the  batteries  on  Hill’s  Point,  ^he 
22,000,  strongly  posted.  An  effort  will  be 
^>'esiment  past  the  batteries  to  General  Foster,  so  that  he 

L sen t toT ^te^s v'in A Transportation  was 

De  sent  to  Gatesville  hoping  to  receive  re-enforcements  of  3,000  men 

iwm  w ^ dispatch  has  been  sent  to  General  Palmer 

Wnf  ^*>**“£  re-enforcements  can  be  sent  to  him  from  this  de 

tment.  General  Keyes  is  in  Norfolk. 

r-  . . ^ LUDLOW, 

Eieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Inspector-General, 


Norfolk,  April  12,  1863—5.30  p.  m. 

■ ut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General; 

'iwWw^i  ^ directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  ac- 

ineiu  C5"““«“cation  of  the  10th  instant,  this 

neui,  placed  in  my  hands,  and  to  inform  you  that  no  re-enforcements 
^ be  sent  to  Major-General  Foster  from  this  department 

beralT T”" ®'^'®  ®‘'  Blackwater,  under 
leral  Longstreet ; are  making  an  attack  upon  Suffolk.  Thev  occunv 
I country  between  Suffolk  and  Gatesville.  ^ 

•‘‘a®  ‘’5’, them  upon  Williamsburg.  Intelligence 

imv  oTaii  fhA  r • a «'?»dtaneous  movement  upon  the  part  of  the 
tuy  on  all  the  lines  in  this  department. 

iWenty  thousand  additional  troops  are  needed  here. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obeoieut  servant, 

r-  , , , WM.  H.  LUDLOW, 

Lneut.  Col.  and  Asst.  Inspector-General,  Seventh  Army  Corps. 


602 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Headquarters, 
Plymouth,  N,  C.,  April  12,  1863. 


Lieut.  W.  L.  Wheaton, 

A.  A.  A,  G.,  First  Division,  Fighteentli  Army  Corps  : 

Your  communication  of  April  10,  informing  me  of  the  situation  ( 
affairs  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Berne  and  Washington,  has  been  receive( 
I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  the  condition  of  affairs  2 

this  post:  . nxi 

The  fort  is  nearly  completed  and  is  in  condition  to  moimt  all  the  gun 
One  heavy  gun  arrived  to-day  from  Boanoke  Island  and  is  being  locate 
in  the  fort.  The  wings  of  the  fort  are  completed  and  small  works  coi 
structed  to  protect  its  left  flank.  The  woods  upon  all  the  main  roac 
leading  into  Plymouth  have  been  felled,  and  the  guns  when  monnte 

will  have  excellent  range.  . 

Prom  three  ladies,  said  and  believed  to  be  of  secession  proclivities,  tl 
following  facts  were  gleaned,  viz : On  Friday,  April  10,  they  came  fro 
Williamston  and  passed,  on  the  way  between  Williamston  and  Jame 
ville,  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry,  said  to  be  General  Kobeitsor 

T^T*1 

From  a prisoner  whom  our  North  Carolina  cavalry  took  Thursdr 
night,  April  9,  we  learn  that  11  miles  from  this  place  a squad  of  six  ca- 
airy  pickets  were  stationed,  with  intervening  couriers,  to  give  the  enen^ 
at  Washington  notice  of  any  attempted  assistpce  from  this  directio. 

From  various  sources  we  have  heard  of  an  iron-clad  ram  being  buj 
in  the  river  above.  Information  this  morning  has  been  received  to  t3 
effect  that  it  is  built  to  fit  the  prow  of  a steamer  and  that  the  eneu 
meditate  an  attack  within  a few  days  when  it  is  completed.  Apprehe 
sion  is  felt  by  the  naval  force  that  the  two  gunboats  here.  Perry  and  L- 
derwriter,  may  not  be  able  to  resist  it.  With  the  present  force  here  a I 
with  the  constructed  defenses  it  is  believed  we  can  hold  this  place  agaiit 
a large  land  force.  Should  the  ram,  however,  succeed  in  getting  opi 
site  Plymouth  the  place  would  be  untenable  except  with  feartul  Joi. 
We  have  six  or  seven  days’  provisions  on  hand.  Inclosed  I send  yoii 
consolidated  morning  report  of  the  land  forces  here. 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully^yo^ur|,^  PICKETT, 

ColoneL  Commanding  Post 


[Indorsement.] 


The  consolidated  morning  report  will  be  sent  in  to-moiTow  morm 

GEORGE  W.  BARihiidi, 
Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  Generat 


Special  Orders, 


) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  South, 

No.  190.  1 Hilton  Head,  S.  C.,  April  12, 180e 

It  having  been  officially  represented  to  the  major-g^eneral  comiual 
iiig  by  Brigadier-General  Heckman,  Maj.  Solomon 
York  Artillery,  and  Capt.  W.  V.  Hutchings,  of  the  staff  of 
General  Stevenson,  that  Major-General  Foster,  commanding  ^ P - 
ment  of  North  Carolina,  is  besieged  and  in  danger  of  being  capin 
by  the  enemy  at  Washington,  N.  C.,  Brigadier-General  Heckman, 
Volunteers,  is  hereby  ordered  to  proceed  with 
ing  of  the  following  regiments:  Ninth  New  Jersey,  Twenty-tnin  . 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


603 


sachusetts,  Eighty-first  'New  York,  and  [Ninety-eighth  New  York,  to 
New  Berne,  N.  0.,  where  he  will  report  to  Brigadier- General  Palmer,  or 
whoever  may  be  the  general  in  command,  for  service  in  the  relieving  of 
Major-General  Foster. 

This  duty  executed,  or  it  being  found  that  Major-General  Foster  has 
been  already  relieved,  Brigadier-General  Heckman  will  forthwith  re- 
turn with  his  command  to  this  department. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Hunter : 

ED.  W.  SMITH, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


Baltimore,  Md.,  Aj^ril  13,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

Learning  by  telegraph  yesterday  that  Suffolk  was  invested  I came 
on  from  New  York  by  the  night  train  and  am  waiting  for  special  boat 
to  go  to  Fort  Monroe. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


Baltimore,  Aj^ril  13, 1863. 

Col.  D.  T.  Yan  Buren  : 

I cannot  help  thinking  that  the  attack  on  the  Nansemond  and  Som- 
erton  road  is  a feint,  and  that  the  principal  movement  will  be  on  the 
Nansemond,  8 miles  from  Suffolk.  This  should  be  looked  to. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  Aj^ril  13, 1863. 
Actg.  Bear- Admiral  Lee,  Newj^ort  N'ews,  Ya, : 

General  Peck  telegraphs  11.50  a.  m. : 

Enemy  is  on  three  sides  of  us  and  advancing  to  cut  the  river  communication.  Ask 
the  admiral  to  send  light-draught  vessels  up. 

D.  T.  VAN  BUKEN, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


Via  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  13, 1863. 

(Eeceived  2.50  p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General  in-  Chief: 

I am  now  in  consultation  with  Major-General  Peck.  The  enemy  is  in 
sight,  and  not  far  off.  Artillery  firing  is  going  on  slowly.  Peekes  po- 
sition is  strong,  and  will  be  vigilantly  guarded.  The  only  fear  is  that 
the  enemy  mayoress  the  Nansemond.  To  prevent  that,  gunboats  must 
be  freely  used.  I will  try  to  examine  the  riv^er  to-day.  It  is  my  opinion 
that  the  enemy^s  campaign  is  the  recovery  of  the  whole  James  Biver, 
and  re-enforcements  are  arriving  from  various  points,  many  of  them 
from  before  Fredericksburg.  The  enemy’s  batteries  have  been  open  for 
some  time.  It  is  an  imperative  necessity  that  the  Navy  keep  the  Nanse- 
mond Biver  open. 


E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General, 


604 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


(Chap.  XXX. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  13, 1863—5  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  6 p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I have  now  completed  a thorough  examination  of  Major-General 
Peck’s  position  except  the  river,  which  I am  now  going  to  examine  to 
its  mouth.  I have  been  up  and  down  both  railroads  to  Norfolk  and 
made  the  circuit  of  the  lines.  From  every  source  it  is  made  certain 
that  upward  of  40,000  rebels  are  in  front  and  on  the  flanks  of  this  posi- 
tion. The  easiest  way  for  the  enemy  to  take  it  is  to  invest  and  starve 
us  out.  To  prevent  that  I shall  be  able  to  give  an  opinion  after  going 
down  the  river.  As  most  of  the  enemy  are  from  the  Eappahannock 
my  present  impression  is  that  two  divisions  of  Major-General  Hooker’s 
army  ought  to  be  sent  here  at  once. 


E.  H.  KEYES, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  13, 1863—11  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  14th,  12.10  a.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

I have  this  moment  returned  from  an  examination  of  the  Nansemond 
Eiver.  The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  line  the  left  bank  some  distance 
down  and  all  the  passing  steamers  have  been  pelted  to-day.  Our  pilot- 
house was  struck  seven  times.  The  gunboats  on  that  river  are  frail, 
wooden  structures,  which  the  enemy’s  fleld  batteries  can  soon  cripple  or 
burn  with  hot  shot.  He  can  then  without  much  exertion  cross  out  of 
range  of  any  of  our  works,  get  upon  Peck’s  rear,  and  seize  the  two  rail- 
roads, or  attack  his  weakest  side,  which  is  from  the  Seaboard  Eailroad 
to  the  river,  and  along  the  river  when  the  gunboats  are  out  of  the  way. 
Once  invested,  it  will  be  next  to  impossible  to  relieve  Peck,  and  he 
would  in  a short  time  be  starved  into  a surrender.  The  problem  is  a 
difficult  one  and  requires  the  most  able  attention.  Pickett’s,  Hood’s, 
and  Pryor’s  (now  Davis’)  divisions  are  there.  Pickett’s  left  the  Eappa- 
hannock February  15  and  Hood’s  shortly  after.  The  Southern  Army 
is  in  fine  health — soldiers  made  by  poverty  and  hardships — and  is  per- 
fectly armed.  They  have  about  fifty  pieces  of  artillery  and  some  cav- 
alry. All  or  nearly  all  the  horses  are  in  poor  condition.  Coming  down 
the  river  has  increased,  but  not  perfected,  my  knowledge  of  Peck’s  sib 
nation.  I will  need  to  observe  it  still  more  to-morrow.  I will  write 
more  fully. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 


Norfolk,  April  13, 1863. 

Admiral  S.  P.  Lee: 

Wise  still  threatens  an  attack  on  our  forts  just  below  Williamsburg 
and  a gunboat  on  James  Eiver  off  College  Creek  would  be  of  immense 
service  to  us.  If  a gunboat  is  not  placed.  Wise  can  be  supplied  by  water. 
If  you  have  no  other  boat  to  spare  I would  prefer  to  have  that  one  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Nansemond  sent  up  without  delay,  as  an  attack  is  an- 
ticipated. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General, 


Chap.  XXX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


605 


Norfolk,  A]^ril  13, 18^. 

Acting  Rear-Admiral  Lee  ; 

Another  request  has  come  for  a gunboat  off  Williamsburg.  The  tower 
of  the  asylum  is  visible  from  the  river;  our  line  miles  below  that 
tower  and  the  enemy^s  camp  is  above.  I earnestly  trust  a gunboat  may 
be  sent  up  immediately  if  one  has  not  gone. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General, 


United  States  Flag-ship 

Major-General  Keyes, 

Commanding  Department : 


Minnesota, 
April  13,  1863. 


Your  two  dispatches  are  received.  I have  no  gunboat  suitable  to  send 
off  Williamsburg,  and  it  would  not  be  fit  to  send  only  one  gunboat  there 
if  I had  it. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Bear- Admiral, 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  13, 1863—3.30  p.  m. 

(Received  4.20  p.  m.) 


Major-General  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief: 


Reliable  information  from  intelligent  deserters  is  to  the  effect  that  the 
enemy  have  35,000  or  40,000  in  our  front,  which  have  come  from  Fred- 
ericksburg, the  condition  of  the  roads  rendering  an  attack  there  impos- 
sible. It  is  stated  that  D.  H.  Hill  is  advancing  from  North  Carolina. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


April  13, 1863—8.30  p.  m. 

(Received  10  p.  m.) 


Longstreet’s  advance  division  arrived  in  my  front  on  Saturday  and 
was  followed  by  Pickett’s,  Hood’s,  and  Anderson’s  yesterday.  They 
advanced  on  my  front  and  right  flank  about  noon  on  the  12th,  within 
extreme  artillery  range,  and  after  much  skirmishing  fell  back  several 
miles.  Early  this  morning  they  advanced  on  my  front  and  rear  with 
one  division  on  the  right  flank.  More  or  less  artillery  Are  all  day  and 
much  skirmishing.  Colonel  Foster’s  Light  Troop  handled  the  enemy’s 
advance  roughly,  driving  them  back  and  retiring  the  picket  line  at  dark. 
Anderson’s  division  has  been  engaged  on  the  waterfront  with  our  gun- 
boats and  batteries.  The  firing  has  been  brisk,  and  the  enemy  suffered. 
The  command  is  in  good  spirits  and  will  do  its  duty. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 


606 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap;  XXX. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  A'pril  13, 1863 — 9 p.  m. 

(Received  10  p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General4n-  Chief: 

Longstreet’s  force  is  pretty  well  settled  at  35,000.  Co-operation  of 
Hill  expected.  One  division  at  least  should  be  sent  here,  as  they  are 
fighting  for  the  James  River.  He  has  one  hundred  and  twenty  pieces 

of  artillery.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  A;pril  13, 1863. 

Major-General  Keyes  : 

We  have  iiations  for  about  twelve  days,  including  to-day.  Please 
hurry  up  the  stores  as  fast  as  possible. 

JOHK  J.  PECK. 


Suffolk,  April  13, 1863. 

Admiral  S.  P.  Lee  : 

The  enemy  are  said  to  be  crossing  at  Sleepy  Hole,  below  the  mouth 
of  the  West  Branch,  where  the  river  is  wide.  The  river  was  left  un- 
protected last  night. 

General  Peek  is  at  the  front. 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  13, 1863 — 4 p.  m. 

Major-General  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

Intelligent  and  reliable  deserters  state  that  the  force  in  my  front,  of 
35,000  men,  under  Longstreet,  has  come  from  Fredericksburg  in  expec- 
tation of  inaction  on  your  part.  I).  H.  Hill  is  said  to  be  advancing 
from  North  Carolina. 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

April  13, 1863. 

General  Peck,  Suffolk  : 

All  of  Longstreet^s  forces  that  have  gone  from  here  left  in  January 
and  February  last.  None  have  left  since.  The  enemy  will  be  disap- 
pointed in  the  expectation  you  mention  in 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  13,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Major-General  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

Three  divisions  have  been  more  or  less  engaged  all  day.  Early  this 
morning  one  division  advanced  on  the  Somerton  front,  driving  m tne 
pickets,  but  was  promptly  repulsed,  and  our  picket  line  was  intact  ai 
dark.  Some  fine  skirmishing  by  Colonel  Foster’s  Light  Troop  an 


:hap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCEj  ETC. — -UNION. 


607 


Eleventh  Pennsylvania  Cavalry.  On  the  rear  or  water  line  Anderson’s 
brce  of  4,000  was  held  back  by  the  gunboats  and  land  batteries.  The 
ittack  was  vigorous  and  the  result  gratifying.  Expect  they  will  make 
igrand  attack  to-morrow.  Longstreet  has  35,000,  some  say  38,000,  and 
rom  one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  pieces  of  artillery. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 

(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


Headquarters, 
Suffolk,  Va.,  April  13,  1863. 

Admiral  Lee,  Newport  News  : 

The  gunboats  on  the  Kansemond  in  conjunction  with  the  land  bat- 
eries  have  been  engaged  through  the  day,  repulsing  Anderson’s  divis- 
Dn  very  handsomely. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 


Yorktown,  April  13, 1863 — 9.30  a.  m. 
lajor-General  Keyes,  Norfolk: 

A dispatch  just  received  from  Colonel  West  reports  all  quiet  at  front, 
'he  picket  lines  are  within  500  yards  of  each  other.  He  is  very  anx- 
3us  that  a gunboat  should  be  sent  up  James  Eiver  to  shell  the  enemy 
t Williamsburg.  He  says  that  the  asylum  tower  is  plainly  visible  from 
he  James,  and  fire  could  be  directed  by  the  tower  to  the  town ; and 
he  enemy’s  camp  is  north  of  town. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Yorktown,  April  13,  [1863] — 9 p.  m. 
lajor-General  Keyes,  Norfolk : 

I have  just  received  dispatch  from  West.  He  reports  that  a regi- 
lent  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  came  into  Williamsburg  by  Eich- 
lond  road  before  sundown.  Eumor  places  Wise’s  force  at  6,000. 
V^agons  loaded  with  furniture  have  been  moving  out  of  Williamsburg 

II  day.  The  gunboat  Morris  tried  to  shell  the  enemy  from  York  Eiver 
his  morning.  Eesult  not  known.  No  gunboat  yet  in  James  Eiver. 
lolonel  West  thinks  that  one  should  be  there  by  morning  with  direc* 
ions  to  shell  the  lower  end  of  the  town.  He  is  prepared  for  attack  at 
ny  time.  No  man  hurt  on  our  side  to-day.  Both  our  gunboats  are  off 
lueen’s  Creek  to-night  and  will  remain  there. 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General, 


Fort  Monroe,  April  13, 1863. 

kigadier-General  Cullum, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Washington : 

General  : I leave  at  12  m.  Have  you  any  orders  for  the  Eighteenth 
'orps  ? 

1 Palmer  sent  last  night  for  re-enforcements,  which  General  Keyes 
Innot  send.  Can  any  be  sent  from  the  Department  of  the  South  ? 

HENRY  M.  NAGLEE, 

Brigadier- General, 


608 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Washington,  April  13, 1863. 


Brigadier-General  Naglee  : 


Have  no  instructions, 
ment  of  the  South. 


Ko  re-enforcements  can  be  sent  from  Depart' 

G.  W.  CULLTJM, 

Chief  of  Stuff* 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  14, 1863 — 2.30  p.  m. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


I arrived  here  this  morning.  The  post  is  closely  invested  with  ovei 
30,000  men.  The  report  of  the  1st  instant,  in  the  Adjutant- General 
Office,  will  show  our  force.  Two  gunboats  in  the  Nansemond  are  dis 
abled : one  is  sunk.  Our  danger  is  that  the  enemy  will  cross  the  rivei 
and  cut  us  off  from  Norfolk.  I consider  it  necessary  that  an  army  corps 
or  at  least  two  divisions,  should  be  sent  to  Norfolk  at  once,  so  as  to  pro 
tect  the  Nansemond.  The  great  superiority  of  the  enemy  makes  it  im 
possible  to  divide  the  force  here  with  safety,*  and  we  cannot  retreat  on 
Norfolk  without  great  sacrifice  of  property  and  life.  This  place  mus 


be  held  if  possible. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 


Major-General* 


War  Department, 

Washington,  D*  (7.,  April  14, 1863 — 7.15  p.  m. 
Major-General  Heintzelman,  Washington: 

General  : You  will  immediately  dispatch  to  Norfolk,  reporting  a 
Fort  Monroe,  6,000  men  or  thereabouts.  You  will  make  requisition 
on  the  Quartermasters  Department  for  transports.  If  necessary  the. 
will  be  recalled  from  Aquia  Creek.  This  dispatch  of  troops  must  b 
made  in  preference  to  anything  else  and  must  be  pushed  with  all  po^ 

sible  haste,  without  regard  to  hours  or  to  darkness. 

H.  W.  HALLhiOiv, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  57.  ♦ 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  Washington, 

April  14,  1863. 


. ^ -IT 

VII.  The  following  troops  will  embark  at  daylight  to-morrow  mori 
ing  for  Norfolk,  reporting  at  Fort  Monroe  ; 

The  Second  Brigade,  General  Abercrombie’s  division,  with  the  excel 
tion  of  the  Sixteenth  Virginia  Volunteers ; the  Third  Brigade,  Genen 
Abercrombie’s  division:  the  One  hundred  and  seventeenth  .New  i or 
Volunteers,  of  Colonel  Haskin’s  division;  the  Eleventh  Khode  lslan 
Volunteers,  from  the  Convalescent  Camp;  the  One  hundred  and  sixt, 
ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  from  General  Martindale’s  command. 

*###♦** 

By  command  of  Major-General  Heintzelman  ^ ^ pOTTER 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


609 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

YorMoicn,  Va..  April  14,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Army  : 

Sir  : Major-General  Dix  arrived  this  morning  and  resumed  command 
of  tlie  Department  of  Virginia. 

During  the  nine  days  I was  in  temporary  command  of  the  depart- 
j ment  the  approach  of  the  enemy  in  great  force  down  the  Peninsula  and 
upon  Suffolk  gave  a serious  aspect  to  affairs,  and  this  paper  is  respect- 
fully submitted  as  the  result  of  my  examinations  and  consequent  con- 
clusions while  I was  in  command. 

Of  Peekes  position  and  the  surrounding  country  beyond  Norfolk  I 
had  no  ocular  knowledge  until  the  6th  instant,  when  I made  a hasty 
visit  to  Suffolk  by  rail.  Since  that  date  I have  made  a careful  exami- 
uation  of  his  defenses  and  passed  over  the  other  railroad  from  Norfolk 
and  down  the  Nansemond  Eiver  to  Hampton  Eoads. 

As  I stated  before  in  telegrams  I consider  our  troops  at  Suffolk  in  a 
very  critical  situation,  and  it  may  be  the  rebels^  boast  that  they  have 
another  HarpePs  Ferry  affair  on  hand  will  be  made  good, 
j I have  reflected  on  the  following  points  : 

I 1st.  Is  Peck  secure  against  an  attack,  or  is  he  able  to  resist  an  attack 
I in  his  position  ? 

I 2d.  Can  the  enemy  cut  his  communication  and  invest  him  ? 
i 3d.  If  the  enemy  should  invest  him  have  we  the  means  to  relieve 

1 him  before  he  would  be  starved  out? 

4th.  Can  he  retreat  and  take  away  his  material  ? 

; On  the  above  points  I conclude  as  follows : 

1st.  He  is  secure  against  an  attack  on  any  front  now  accessible  to  the 
enemy,  and  he  will  not  be  seriously  attacked  (feints  will  be  made)  until 
ilie  is  invested.  After  he  is  invested  he  is  not  secure  from  an  attack, 
f 2d.  The  enemy  can  cut  his  communications  and  invest  him  in  spite 
jif  anything  we  can  do  to  prevent  him  with  the  means  north  of  Albe- 
laiarle  Sound  and  south  of  Hampton  Eoads  and  James  Eiver. 

2 3d.  If  the  enemy  does  invest  him  we  could  not  break  the  investment 
ffter  it  had  existed  three  days  and  relieve  Peck  with  any  available 
neans  within  the  command  of  the  Government. 

4th.  I cannot  give  a positive  opinion  on  this  point.  I have  had  no 
ime  to  examine  the  line  of  retreat.  The  railroads  are  through  the  Dis- 
iial  Swamp  and  are  perfectly  straight  and  the  roadway  narrow,  and 
)u  either  side,  an  impracticable  morass.  ’ 

I assume  that  the  Government  knows  Peck’s  strength  and  the  amount 
>f  his  supplies  of  provisions  and  ammunition.  It  is  certain  he  has  but 
I few  days’  supply  of  forage. 

, I have  assumed  all  those  facts  of  the  last  paragraph,  and  I have  kept 
Napoleon’s  maxims  in  view  (you  called  my  attention  to  those  maxims) 
u coming  to  my  conclusions. 

In  regard  to  the  Peninsula : If  the  line  of  Fort  Magruder  below  Will- 
amsburg  is  given  up  the  enemy  can  go  to  Fort  Monroe  at  once  and 
mssess  everything  outside  the  sand-spit  on  which  the  fort  stands, 
orktown,  owing  to  the  ravines  around  it,  would  be  nearly  as  uncom- 
ortable  as  Fort  Magruder  now  is,  and  of  no  great  value  to  the  Govern - 
Qent.  If  the  upper  line  is  abandoned  I trust  this  most  sickly  place 
, Aorktown)  may  be  also  abandoned.  I recommended  its  abandonment 
a Allgust  last  when  called  on  for  my  views. 

, With  one  gunboat  on  James  Eiver,  stationed  opposite  Williamsburg, 
30  R R — VOL  XVIII 


610 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  1 


and  one  additional  regiment  of  infantry  I could  hold  the  Ime  of  Forti 
Maffruder  certainly.  There  being  no  gunboat  there  now  Wise  can 
have  his  suppbes  brought  down  there  by  water,  and  hold  his  camp, 
there  at  his  ease.  Wise  is  now  in  a position  to  be  easily  captured,  but; 
I have  not  the  force  necessary.  As  I stated  in  my  telegrams  ot  yester- 
day and  the  day  before,  I thought  re-enforcements  necessary  at  once. 

if  any  competent  officer  has  examined  and  ascertained  the  ditfaculty 
the  enemy  would  have  to  destroy  the  wooden  gunboats  and  to  cross  the 
Nansemond,  or  to  get  round  the  left  and  cut  the  railroads,  or  to  learn 
the  roads  and  their  capacity  for  retreat,  I am  \ 

did  not  simply  because  I had  not  the  time.  If  Pock  s 16,000  men  and 
4 000  horses,  more  or  less,  and  his  numerous  artillery  and  supplies  are 
surrendered  I make  no  doubt  that  inquiry  will  be  made  on  those  sub- 
iects,  but  1 shall  not  be  able  to  answer.  , , . ^ 

I haye  the  honor  to  remain,  your  most  obedient 

E.  E.  KEiEb, 

Major- GenBral^  ContTnanding  Fourth  Corps. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

April  14,  1863 — il.30  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-Chief : 

I have  iust  returned  from  Suffolk  after  going  through  the  lines; 
General  Peck  is  strong,  but  the  danger  of  interception  ot  his 
nications  with  Norfolk  is  imminent,  as  the  gunboats  are  nearly  al 
crippled.  With  two  small  divisions,  say  6,000  each,  we  could  repel  tie 
enemy.  If  we  could  have  that  number  of  men  from  the  Army  of  thi 
Potomac  we  could  send  them  back  in  two  weeks.  General 
rations  for  twenty  days  and  forage  for  ten.  More  forage  goes  up  to 
night.  He  must  be  relieved  within  twelve  days  ^ 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  April  14, 1863.  i 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : d • i -d  • ^ 

I am  just  informed  that  all  the  gunboats  exwpt  the  Smith  Bngg 
have  left  the  river,  which  is  therefore  almost  enbrdy  «“«ie|n^d. 

Ulnnnr.  QpMeral. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  14, 1863. 

Major-General  H allege,  General-in-Chief : 

Two  gunboats  have  been  disabled  upon  the  Nansemond,  and  I tear 
shall  be  unable  to  keep  the  river  open.  ^ PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  April  14,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix:  ^ 

All  the  gunboats  have  left  the  river  except  mine.  The  West  ld 
went  to  Fort  Monroe  for  ammunition.  I most  respectfully  req 
she  be  sent  back  as  soon  as  she  gets  her 

Captain,  Commanding  Smith  Briggs. 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


611 


I HAP.  XXX.] 


xeneral  Yiele,  Norfolk  : 

Send  here  at  once  every  man  you  can  spare. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  Ajyril  14,  1863. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General, 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 
Off  Newi^ort  News,  Ya,,  April  14,  1863—11  a.  m. 
lajor-General  Peck, 

Commanding  at  Suffolk,  Ya, : 


On  recmpt  of  your  dispatch  last  night  I telegraphed  the  Department 
)r  light-draught,  rifle-screened  gunboats  for  the  Nansemond,  hoping 
lere  might  be  some  of  these  in  the  Potomac  Flotilla.  The  Department 
ist  replies  that  four  boats  are  coming,  but  fear  they  cannot  go  far  into 
le  Xansemond.  I shall  apply  at  the  fort  for  Nansemond  pilots  for 
lem,  and  send  them  as  far  as  they  can  go. 

I shall  have  the  light-draught  tug  Alert,  just  returned  disabled  from 
le  Xpsemond,  repaired  in  a few  hours.  I have  sent  for  some  rifle- 
Teening,  and  hope  to  increase  to-day  and  to-morrow  the  force  in  the 


Actg,  Bear-Admiral,  Comdg,  N,  Atlantic 


S.  P.  LEE, 
Blockading  Squadron, 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Ya,,  April  14,  1863. 
aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg,  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya, : 

General  : I am  informed  that  the  army  transport  Hunter  Woodis 
nch  can  carry  four  or  five  pieces  of  field  artillery,  and  have  her  hght- 
aught,  would  be  useful  in  the  Xansemond.  The  transports  might 
rry  one  or  more  field  pieces  with  troops  to  fight  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  respectfully, 

. T . i^ee, 

Actg,  Bear- Admiral,  Comdg,  N,  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron, 


3tg.  Rear-Admiral  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic 


Yorktown,  April  14, 1863. 
Blockading  Squadron : 


General  Dix  is  as  anxious  as  myself  to  have  a gunboat  up  James 
ver  opposite  Williamsburg.  I deem  it  absolutely  necessary  to  save 
3 line  of  Fort  Magruder.  If  that  is  lost  the  whole  Peninsula  will  be 
;ento  the  enemy  down  to  Fortress  Monroe,  and  sharpshooters  can 
icier  this  place  untenable.  It  would  be  better  to  lose  two  gunboats 
, in  to  lose  the  Fort  Magruder  line.  Whatever  boat  you  send  should 
ipng-range  guns,  and  should  establish  itself  so  as  to  fire  bv  the 
6 Of  the  asylum  tower. 


E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-  General, 


^612 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Yorktown,  April  14,  1863. 

Qo]one\  Fort  Magruder : 

T ao-ree  with  you  about  the  removal  of  the  inhabitants  from  Williams, 
burg  Tilly  need  not  be  interfered  with,  nor  should  fire  be  opened  or 
•the  town  except  in  case  of  another  attack  from  that  quarter. 

I expect  General  Keyes  here  within  an  hour. 

Brigadier- General. 


Washington,  D.  0.,  April  14, 1863.  ; 


Brigadier-General  Palmbb,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

General  • Your  letter  of  the  9th  instant  is  just  received.  I ha( 
boned  that  General  Keyes  would  send  you  4,000  additional  men,  bu 
Ws  owl  condS  was  such  that  he  deemed  it  necessary  to  coun  ei 
mand  the  order.  At  the  present  time  it  is  impossible  to  send  any  otlie 
troops  to  you.  Perhaps  the  circumstances  f/l 

irs  but  you  must  not  rely  upon  receiving  troops  from  any  other  d^ 

partnient.^  Instead  of  sparing  any,  su 

troops  as  though  we  had  a cornucopia  of  men  from  which  to  suppl 

^‘"wairaccident  should  occur  to  General  Poster  you  will 
that  onerations  in  North  Carolina  should  be  strictly  defensive  and  tk 
tooops  concerted  as  much  as  possible.  New  Berne  and  Beaufo, 
are  the  points  of  greatest  importance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servMt,^^  hALLBOK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Steamer  Hunchback, 
Tuesday,  April  14,  1863—1.30  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  Washington,  N.  G. : 

General  Potter’s  letter  of  yesterday  ^ hariieen  a 

Sted  I7dint  of  labor,  coaxing,  threatening  stimulating  wu 

nromise  of  revhrd,  &c.  (to  the  pilot  and  captain  of  the  Escort),  eve  ^ 
thing  was  arranged,  and  last  night  at  tok  ^Uode  Bla  I 

here  remark  that  Colonel  Sisson  and  officers  f i- 

mind  that  the  thing  is  a perfect  success  and  \ throu  i 

my  belief  that  you  could  get  any  amount  of  “‘J  to  tb 

the  blockade.  But  I do  not  think  Captain  McCann  is  ®dBai 
position.  He  ought  to  be  above  the  blockade  to  j iCi 

“General  PottCT,  for  you,  expresses  ®"’'P'''®®  "J 

through  the  night  before,  and  that  such  lack  of  ® ,^y.  . ^ if  'i 

played  in  getting  men  and  supplies  to  you.  I would  § ‘ 
Wuld,  after  receiving  all  the  information  concerning  these  matters  n 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


613 


Colonel  Hoffman,  inform  me  where  you  think  the  blame  lies.  Don’t  spare 
me.  When  the  history  of  the  siege  of  Washington  ” is  written,  if  it  is 
a disaster,  a responsibility  will  rest  somewhere  j let  it  go  where  it 
belongs. 

Lieutenant  Wheaton  goes  immediately  to  New  Berne  for  the  North 
State,  the  shovels,  and  wheelbarrows,  &c.  He  takes  the  Phcenix. 
Captain  Gouraud  remains  here  to  perform  the  duties  delegated  to 
Colonel  Hoffman.  I hope  to  be  with  Captain  Flusser  not  many  hours 
after  you  receive  this. 

Your  dispatches  to  General  Halleck  and  General  Dix  will  be  for- 
warded immediately. 

I sent  transportation  to  Gatesville  on  the  Chowan,  to  be  there  on  the 
13th,  to  receive  any  forces  that  may  be  sent  by  General  Dix.  Where 
will  you  have  these  re-enforcements  if  they  arrive? 

If  the  Escort  returns  here  she  will  (unless  you  decide  differently)  take 
a return  cargo. 

This  is  written  hastily,  as  there  are  many  things  to  occupy  me  to-day. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  N.  PALMED, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

The  signal  officer  here  (Lieutenant  Knox)  has  tried  to  signal  to  you  to- 
day. He  was  on  a small  gunboat  and  the  motion  of  the  vessel  prevented 
him  from  seeing  properly.  He  is  now  out  with  the  Southfield  and  I hope 
tie  will  succeed.  Don’t  fail  to  make  the  signal  arrangement  as  perfect 
IS  possible. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  April  15,  1863—10.30  a.  m. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 

Six  thousand  men  have  been  ordered  to  report  to  you  at  Fort  Monroe, 
i portion  embarked  during  the  night;  two  gunboats  have  also  been 
5ent. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

April  15,  1863 — 8.30  p.  m. 


The  enemy  has  not  yet  succeeded  in  crossing  the  Nansemond,  though 
he  pressure  has  been  very  heavy  for  several  miles  below  Sufiblk.  The 
?unboats  are  holding  a large  force  in  check.  A battery  of  20-pounder 
ifled  guns,  which  caused  us  much  annoyance  yesterday,  was  silenced 
o-day.  The  Smith  Briggs,  a newly-armed  quartermaster’s  steamboat, 
'^as  attacked  in  the  river  near  General  Peck’s  headquarters  last  night, 
>ut  the  assailants  were  driven  off.  Thus  far  the  enemy  has  gained  no 
idvantage.  He  is  pressing  us  at  Williamsburg. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


614 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXXil 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  15, 1863 — 9 a.  m. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

On  Monday,  with  the  aid  of  the  gunboats,  I was  enabled  to  hold  the 
line  of  the  Nansemond,  and  things  looked  well,  as  I advised  you,  buti 
yesterday  10,000  or  11,000  attacked  the  line  of  the  river  some  miles 
down,  and,  with  the  aid  of  earthworks  thrown  up,  cut  off  the  water 
communication.  All  the  gunboats  except  one  were  crippled  and  cut 
off  many  miles  below.  The  enemy  attempted  to  cross  during  the  night; 
but  has  not  succeeded  yet.  I hope  to  hold  him,  although  the  river,  by 
the  curves,  is  some  12  miles  in  length  before  you  reach  the  wide  water, 
with  an  average  width  of  100  feet.  At  daylight  I opened  the  Jericho 
Canal  into  the  river  and  hope  to  fill  up  the  marshes  so  as  to  impede 
their  operations.  A few  troops  at  this  time  will  make  all  secure.  A 
large  force  in  reserve  is  necessary,  say  10,000,  to  take  the  initiative.  li 
General  Hill  co-operates,  more  will  be  necessary.  Prisoners  state 
Washington  has  been  taken.  ^ 

Major-General 


Port  Monroe,  April  15, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

Troops  are  on  their  way  to  relieve  you.  Shall  I order  them  to  Bowers 
Hill  as  fast  as  they  arrive  ? Some  must  be  here  to-night  unless  th( 

storm  prevents.  JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  15,  [1863]. 


General  Dix : 

Hurry  the  troops  here  that  first  arrive,  so  that  I can  have  enough  t( 
hold  the  river.  All  routes  should  be  put  in  requisition.  A day  ma: 
be  decisive.  When  their  spies  signal  from  Norfolk  their  arrival  1 tea 


they  will  attack. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  15,  [1863]. 


Brigadier- General  Yiele,  Norfolk: 

It  is  just  reported  that  the  enemy,  force  and  character  unknown,  hav* 
crossed  at  Sleepy  Hole  in  spite  of  our  gunboats.  His  attempt  to  cros 
in  the  narrow  part  of  the  river  was  defeated  and  his  battery  opposi 


silenced. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


Port  Monroe,  April  15, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Commanding.^  Suffolk  : 

If  the  report  be  true  would  it  not  be  inexpedient  to  carry  out  th 
suggestion  in  your  last  dispatch  ? JOHN  A DIX 

Major-General 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


615 


Oeneral  Yiele,  Commanding^  Norfolk : 


April  15,  1863. 


If  the  enemy  have  crossed  the  NTansemoud  they  may  make  a rapid 
^ movement  on  ITorfolk  for  supplies.  You  must  make  the  best  disposi- 
I ^on  of  your  smaU  force  you  can  to  oppose  their  entrance  into  the  city. 
You  will  have  re* enforcements  to-night  if  the  storm  does  not  prevent. 

JOH^I  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


General  Dix: 

report  be  true  the  troops  had  better  be  massed  at  some  point 
ike  that  one  mentioned  by  you.  Will  give  you  the  very  earliest  intel- 
hgence.  Sleepy  Hole  is  the  place  named,  half  way  down  to  the  James, 
m the  broad  water,  where  the  heavy  boats  go  safely.  As  it  is  some 

miles  from  the  track  some  trains  will  get  through,  especially  on  the 
Petersburg.  o ? i j 

JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  Hix: 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  A])ril  15, 1863. 


Onl^y  one  regiment  from  Norfolk ; another  should  be  sent.  We  hold 
he  Nansemond,  although  11,000  were  there  yesterday  and  drove  out 
the  boats;  much  encouraged.  Urge  on  supplies  of  forage  and  some 
leavy  guns.  One  of  my  20-pounder  rifles  burst  on  the  Nansemond ; it 
3 our  best  gun.  Can  you  send  a few  ? 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

. Major-General. 


flajor-General  Peck  : 

General  Viele  has  one  regiment  at  Deep  Creek,  which  is  more  impor- 
ant  to  you  than  to  him.  He  has  only  two  other  regiments,  with  an 
iggregate  of  1,300  men,  of  whom  a part  are  at  Bowers^  Hill,  8 miles  from 
.orinth,  on  the  Seaboard  road,  with  a section  of  artillery.  The  two 
►ther  sections  of  his  only  battery  are  scattered.  I will  send  you  an  old 
^ermont  regiment  from  here,  of  400  men,  immediately.  Telegraphed 
lalleck  last  night.  Will  send  heayy  guns. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Unitee^  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Of  Newport  News,  Va.,  April  15,  1863. 
laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Gomdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

^ dispatch  at  12.45  a.  m.,  and  wiU  act  ac- 

..  . I,  . , . , „ S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


616 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIROINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX, 


April  15,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Commanding^  Suffolk: 

I arrived  at  10  last  night  and  found  your  dispatch  in  regard  to  gun- 
boats.  I ordered  the  West  End  back  immediately  She  was  out  of 
ammunition.  I also  telegraphed  Admiral  Lee,  asking  that  his  gunboats 
might  go  back.  Keceived  his  answer  after  midnight  that  he  would  act 

as  I requested.  JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 

SUPFOLK,  Ya.,  April  15,  1863.  ^ 

General  Dix:  ^ 

Up  to  this  time  I hold  the  line  of  the  river  and  am  satisfied  nothing! 
has  passed  over  yet.  The  pressure  has  been  heavy  all  along  the  river 
down  to  the  West  Branch.  Gunboats  there  are  holding  a large  force., 

^ib^ufnoZ'wt  ineuced  the  rebel  battery  of  20-pounder  rifled  wUich 
caused  so  much  trouble  yesterday.  The  Smith  Brig^  was  attacked 
near  my  headquarters  in  the  night  but  drove  , 

Hfn/inr.  f^P.nP.ral 


Maj. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Ya.,  April  15,  1863— p.  m. 

Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  \ a. : 

General  : I sent  two  armed  tugs  into  the  Nansemond  this  morning 
where  I have  two  other  small  and  armed  vessels.  The  ? 

ton  a river  steamer  with  fixed  pieces  on  board,  was  towed  out  thn 
morning  much  disabled  from  severe  fighting  in  the  Upper  Nansemon( 

^^You^m^st  not  relv  upon  these  few  frail  and  open  ferry-boats  and  rive 

steamers,  which  you  call  gunboats,  to  keep  “feek 

TTr^r^pr  Naimpmond  which  is  long,  narrow,  and  crooked,  a mere  creek 
rudTom  wMcTwe  wire  driven  yesterday.  These  craft  are  effective  onl; 
from  the  gallantry  with  which  they  are  fought,  with 
nines  and  magazines  all  exposed  to  the  concentrated  fire  of  tl»e jehe 
batteries,  while  the  sharpshooters  pick  off  with  facility  our  unprotect 

^“St  that  these  little  vessels  go  into  such  a fight 
posed  condition  in  which  breached  forts  surrender  when  magazine 
&o.,  are  exposed.  I must  call  your  attention  to  this 
may  adapt  your  military  dispositions  to  the  necessities  of  your  situatioi 
which  is  not  suitable  to  the  operation  of  vessels.  . , rfi,| 

General  Keyes  keeps  calling  for  gunboats  off  froi 

ship  cannot  go  there,  and  my  force  is  ndt  strong  enough  to  detach  tro 

in  view  of  the  rebel  naval  force  above.  , . 

The  public  interests  here  and  even  the  communications  ot  the  aiih 
of  the  Potomac  depend  on  the  security  of  this  position. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfuUy^yo^HS^^^ 

Acf«7.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  Ak  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 

P.  S.— 4 P.  M. — Tours  of  this  date,  also  a report  from 
Cushing,  dated  1.15  p.  m.,  just  received.  Lieutenant  Cushing  < 


:hap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


617 


memy  has  not  seen  fit  to  renew  the  action  of  yesterday  j that  he  had 
ust  received  a dispatch  from  General  Peck  stating  that  the  rebels  had 
lot  crossed  as  yet,  but  believed  they  would  try  it  this  afternoon  or  to- 
light.  Lieutenant  Cushing  says  that  the  rebels  intended  to  cross  below 
he  West  Branch  yesterday,  but  were  beaten  back  by  the  fire  of  the 
,mi^oats.  I had  already  instructed  Lieutenant  Lamson  to  do  all  he 
•ould  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing  the  Nansemond.  Lieutenant 
jamson  expects  to  go  up  the  river  on  the  arrival  of  the  tug  Alert,  whose 
udder  has  been  repaired  and  is  being  shipped,  with  the  assistance  of 
I,  diver. 

Lieutenant  Cushing  surmises  that  the  rebels  may  be  masking  bat- 
eries  to  protect  their  crossing. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


Admiral  Lee: 


Suffolk,  April  15,  1863. 


There  has  been  a large  force  on  the  Upper  Nansemond  all  day,  but 
hey  have  been  prevented  from  crossing.  I fear  they  will  attempt  this 
o-mght.  If  your  boats  can  arrive  at  once  we  shall  be  able  to  hold  the 
iver. 


PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Eoanoke  Island,  April  15, 1863. 
General  : The  inclosed  letter  was  sent  open  to  me  yesterday  at  the 
lockade  below  Washington  to  be  forwarded  through  General  *Dix.  I 
nmediately  ran  here  to  have  them  forwarded  by  the  commanding 
fl^er  here.  Dispatches  for  Admiral  Lee  go  at  the  same  time. 

The  expedition  under  General  Spinola,  mentioned  in  General  Pos- 
er’s letter,  returned  to  Kew  Berne  the  third  day  after  it  left.  General 
. decided  that  his  force  was  entirely  too  small  to  attempt  to  push  its 
ay  to  Washington.  ^ 

As  soon  as  I heard  of  his  intention  to  return  I determined  that  men 
Qd  supplies  could  be  sent  through  the  blockade,  and  I placed  one  reg- 
aent,  with  a quantity  of  provisions  and  ammunition,  on  board  a river 
:eamer  and  went  with  them  myself.  After  some  little  delay  on  ac- 
3unt  of  weather  and  the  fears  of  the  pilot  I succeeded  by  threatening 
romising  pecuniary  reward,  &c.,  to  push  the  boat  through.  The  navy 
unboats  ran  up  to  the  blockade  to  assist  in  case  of  accident.  The 
.earner  went  through  safely,  I think.  She  was  lying  (as  I am  informed 
7 a signal  officer)  safely  at  the  wharf  in  Washington  yesterday. 

here  are  more  troops  and  supplies  near  the  blockade  ready  to  be 
ashed  in  if  General  Foster  wishes  them. 

General  Wessells,  who  arrived  in  New  Berne  the  day  before  I left,  in- 
>rms  me  in  a dispatch  of  yesterday  that  the  enemy  are  assembling  a 
>rce  at  Swansborough.  From  there  they  threaten  Beaufort,  Morehead 
y,  Macon,  and  the  railroad.  This,  I think,  is  only  to  prevent 
sending  too  many  of  our  forces  from  here  toward  Washington. 
weutenant-Oommander  Flusser,  a bold,  energetic  naval  officer,  has 
r.ved  to  take  command  of  the  fleet  below  the  blockade,  and  I think 
-will  be  able  to  reduce  or  cripple  the  batteries  on  the  river. 

brigade,  OTe  battery,  and  two  companies  of  cavalry)  has 
en  sent  by  General  Wessells  again  in  the  direction  of  Washington  to 
veit  the  attention  of  the  enemy  from  Washington 


618 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


The  force  at  present  at  New  Berne,  effective  strength,  is  in  the  neigh 
borhood  of  9,000.  I can  still  send  a force  to  General  Foster  and  hole 

the  place.  , , . ^ . 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  N.  PALMEE, 
Brigadier- 

[Indorsement.! 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  April  17, 1863. 

Supposed  to  be  for  Major-General  Hallech,  and  respectfully  forwarded 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Steamer  Thomas  Colyer,  April  15, 1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  IJ.  S.  Y., 

Washington^  N.  G. : 

General  : Yesterday  your  dispatches  for  Admiral  Lee  and  Genera 
Dix  were  received,  and  as  soon  as  I was  assured  of  the  safe  arrival  a 
Washington  of  the  Escort  I determined  to  run  to  Eoanoke  and  direc 
the  dispatches  forwarded  from  there.  I wrote  to  General  Dix,  inforni 
ing  him  of  what  had  occurred  since  your  letter  was  written.  I als 
notified  the  admiral  of  the  arrival  of  Lieutenant- Commander  Flussei 

I received  the  dispatch  from  General  Wessells  informing  ot  th 
assembling  of  the  enemy  of  Swansborough.  From  there  they  threate 
the  railroad,  Morehead  City,  &c.  Give  me  your  advice,  if  possible,  a 
to  the  best  mode  of  operating  in  that  direction.  It  was  my  intentio 
to  run  immediately  back  to  the  blockade,  but  I will  return  to  Ne> 
Berne  to  see  the  state  of  affairs  there,  in  order  to  get  more  men  an 
supplies  in  case  you  should  need  them. 

Please  inform  me  if  you  wish  the  forwarding  of  these  to  be  continuec 
I think  Captain  Flusser  will  change  the  affairs  at  the  blockade  som< 


The  Colyer  needs  a few  hours^  work  on  her,  which  she  can  have  don 
while  her  cargo  is  getting  ready.  It  is  my  .impression  that  any  amour 
of  men  and  supplies  can  be  sent  through. 

Four  thousand  men  were  ordered  from  the  Fourth  Army  Corps  t 
re-enforce  here,  and  I sent  transportation  to  Gatesville  for  them.  lu 
order  was  countermanded,  and  I expect  the  transports  to  return 
diately.  Fighting  at  Suffolk,  where  papers  say  that  Longstreet  m 
been  driven  back.  Nothing  positive,  however,  is  known. 

Very  hastily,  respectfully,  yours,  paLMEK, 

Brigadier-Generalj  U.  S.  Volunteers. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 
Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  April  15,  1863 — 1.30  p.  m. 

B.  B.  Foster,  ^ ^ „ Tr 

AseSt.  Adjt  Gen,  for  General  Peck,  Suffolk,  \ a. : 

Lieutenant  Cushing  reports  that  the  enemy  had  not  crossed  at 

o’clock  to-day.  .it 

The  tug  which  brought  his  report  says  all  is  quiet  on  the  Lower ^ 
semond,  and  our  boats  moving  between  Hallowing  Point  and  tu 
structions  at  Western  Branch. 


Chap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE^  ETC. UNION.  619 

The  boats  were  driven  disabled  out  of  the  Upper  li^-ansemond  yester- 
day. The  navy  boats  will  do  all  in  their  power  to  assist  you,  but  I fear 
those  1 could  send  this  morning  may  not  from  their  draught  be  able  to 
cross  the  obstructions. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Bear -Admiral. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  16,  1863—9.30  a.  m. 
Major-General  Halleok,  General-in- Chief : 

My  lines,  which  extend  along  the  Nansemond  from  mouth  of  West 
Branch  to  swamp  on  the  left,  are  occupied,  and  are  about  16  miles  in 
eagth.  The  enemy  has  failed  to  turn  either  flank  and  has  not  dared 
in  assault.  Longstreet  is  resolved  upon  getting  in  if  possible.  He  is 
cutting  out  extensive  roads,  destroyed  and  blocked.  Parties  were 
lent  to  blow  up  culverts,  but  failed.  My  roads  are  well  guarded.  If 
hold  my  flanks,  he  will  be  compelled  to  assault  after  shelling  from 
nmmanding  ^ound.  He  has  a great  preponderance  of  artillery  as 
v^ell  as  other  branches. 

JOHH  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Port  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  16,  1863—10.30  a.  m. 

(Received  11.30  a.  m.) 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief: 

General  Peck’s  dispatch,  just  forwarded,  will  inform  you  of  the  state 
I ^ave  given  him  every  man  that  can  be  spared 
jrom  Norfolk,  and  have  taken  care  of  the  army  supplies  there,  so  that 
..  the  enemy  should  succeed  in  crossing  the  river  and  should  move  on 
T T non  nothing  except  coal.  No  troops  have  arrived  vet. 

f I had  10,000  men  I could  land  at  Smithfield,  take  the  enemy  in\he 
I car,  and  make  his  movement  on  Suffolk  a very  disastrous  one  to  him. 
jQ  ^6(1,  we  should  have  that  additional  force  under  any  circumstances 
!3  tile  Dumber  of  men  and  quality  of  material  at  Suffolk  is  too  great  to 
le  put  at  hazard.  ^ 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

War  Department, 

. . Washington^  April  16,  1863—10  a.  m. 

^ajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Ya. : 

Have  reenforcements  begun  to  arrive?  Send  back  transports  as 
ipidly  as  possible;  they  are  greatly  needed  here.  ^ 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Norfolk,  April  16,  1863. 

ajor-General  Halleck  : (Received  12.10  p.  m.) 

ent  ^ Monroe.  Not  a mo- 


JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


620 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  April  16, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Every  transport  that  could  be  spared  was  sent  with  troops.  When 
any  of  the  vessels  return  it  will  be  determined  whether  more  troops  can 

be  sent  to  you.  ^ HALLECK, 

GfMeral-in- Chief. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  16, 1863. 

(Received  7.20  p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

My  lines  are  still  secure.  Only  one  gunboat  is  here.  Two  are  feel- 
ing their  way  up,  in  concert  with  my  batteries.  Deserters  say  Long- 
street  has  been  disappointed  in  his  operations  against  Suffolk.  He 
assured  his  troops  they  would  be  in  this  place  last  Monday. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  16, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A..  Dix: 

I hold  the  line  of  the  river  intact.  Have  urged  the  boats  to  feel  tbei 
way  up  under  our  protection.  All  safe  yet.  , ^ r.  -i 

The  enemy  is  cutting  out  extensive  roads  that  we  obstructed  for  mues 
and  will  perhaps  move  around  more  to  the  right.  Push  on  the  men  an( 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  April  16, 1863. 

General  Dix  and 
General  Yiele: 

I have  doubled  my  patrols  on  both  railroads..  Individuals  are  trjnn 
to  get  in  and  blow  up  the  culverts.  One  of  my  men  was  killed  whil 

guarding  the  wire.  PECK 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  ApyHl  16, 1863. 

General  Dix:  . 

Have  been  on  my  lines  all  day.  We  hold  the  enemy’s  forces  in  cbec 
and  I hope  he  will  not  be  able  to  get  over  the  river.  Only  the  bmi 
Brings  is  here.  One  or  two  boats  are  feeling  their  way  up  slowly 
connection  with  the  troops  along  the  shore.  Longstreet  must  be  wai 
ing  for  Hill,  who  can  come  by  rail  via  Weldon.  All  parties  distinct 
state  that  such  a combination  was  made.  They  want  the  whole  lin^ 
the  James  a port  for  their  iron-dlads,  and  will  ere  long  draw  m tn 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


:hap.  XXX.] 


621 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


General  Peck: 


United  States  Flao-ship  Minnesota, 

April  16,  1863 — 1 a.  m. 


Your  dispatch  is  just  received.  We  have  now  four  vessels  in  the 
Nansemond  with  orders  to  do  their  best  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
3rossing  it.  1 fear  that  but  one  of  these  will  be  able  to  get  above  the 
obstructions.  Two  of  our  lightest  draughts  have  returned  disabled. 
The  vessels  expected  from  the  Potomac  have  not  arrived. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  April  16,  1863. 

idmiral  Lee  : 


Every  disposable  man  has  been  put  on  the  river.  I have  re-enforced 
leneral  Peck  to  the  extent  of  my  ability.  If  your  gViiiboats  could  feel 
heir  way  up  we  could  protect  them  from  our  side.  The  West  End  was 
lisabled,  but  went  up  again  at  6 last  evening.  Our  line  is  intact  as 
ret.  I am  just  going  to  Norfolk  to  be  back  to-night. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General, 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  April  16,  1863. 
daj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : The  master  of  the  bark  Edisto  informed  me,  in  his  letter 
)f  March  22,  that — 

While  lying  at  anchor  in  the  mouth  of  the  Potomac  River,  with  a head  wind,  the 
aptain  of  the  port  of  Fortress  Monroe  came  up  and  boarded  my  vessel  and  demanded 
oy  papers,  as  he  suspected  contraband  goods,  and  after  a careful  overhauling  of  the 
ame  said  they  were  all  right,  but  ordered  me  into  Hampton  Roads. 

Did  Captain  Millward  order  the  Edisto  here  after  he  had  ascertained 
hat  she  was  all  right  and  had  notified  her  master  ? If  so,  was  the 
Misto  communicated  with  by  the  army  authorities  and  notified  that 
ihe  could  proceed  on  her  voyage  after  her  arrival  outside  the  guard 
ihip  and  before  she  attempted  to  run  into  the  Eoads  ? I ask  the  favor 
)f  a reply  at  your  convenience,  for  my  report  of  the  case. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  BlocMding  Squadron. 


dajor-General  Peck: 

Just  returned  from  Norfolk, 
'ver  without  delay. 


Fort  Monroe,  April  16,  1863. 
Troops  are  arriving  and  will  be  sent 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


622 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

YorMown^  April  16,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia^  Fort  Monroe  : 

The  enemy’s  pickets  are  in  Williamsburg,  and  Governor  Wise’s  troops 
have  taken  and  paroled  as  prisoners  of  v^ar  two  cavalrymen  who  were 
acting  as  nurses  to  the  insane— to  those  whom  Governor  Wise  styled 
Virginia’s  “little  ones,”  and  as  belonging  to  a “hospital  the  most  ex- 
empt of  all  from  the  least  touch  of  war.”  I have  ordered  Dr.  Wager 
and  the  two  paroled  cavalrymen  to  withdraw  from  the  asylum. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  16, 1863. 

(Received  6 p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Qeneral-in-  Chief: 

I send  a dispatch  from  General  Foster  of  the  12th.  I have  one  from 
General  Palmer  of  the  15th  saying  that  a river  steamboat,  with  supplies 
of  provisions  and  ammunition  and  a regiment,  had  run  the  blockade, 
and  was  safe  at  the  wharf  at  Washington  the  14th : 

Fort  Washington,  N.  C.,  April  12, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  no  very  material  change  in  the  position 
of  opposing  forces  around  this  town  has  taken  place  since  the  date  of  my  letter  of  the 
5th  instant.  The  enemy  has  been  constantly  at  work  erecting  batteries,  and  now  has 
in  full  operation  six  batteries,  mounting  seven  guns,  on  this  side  of  the  river,  north 
side  of  the  town,  and  three  batteries,  mounting  six  gnns,  on  the  south  side  of  the 
river  opposite  the  town.  Added  to  these  are  the  batteries  erected  to  prevent  boatt 
coming  up  the  river,  some  miles  down.  The  guns  are,  however,  mostly  rifled,  ot 
small  caliber,  none  being  larger  than  20-pounder  Parrotts,  except  one  32-ponndei 
smooth-bore.  The  works  of  the  defensive  have  kept  pace  with  the  offensive,  being 
always  a little  ahead,  and  the  result  of  each  day’s  firing  has  been  the  silencing  of  the 
enemy’s  batteries,  forcing  them  to  withdraw  their  guns  from  sight.  The  firing  on 
both  sides  is  quite  sharp  for  a short  time  each  day.  No  killed  or  wounded  since  ni\ 
last  letter.  The  force  that  I directed  to  march  for  my  relief  from  New  Berne  has  nol 
as  yet  exhibited  any  result.  General  Palmer  reports  that  the  advance  guard  letl 
New  Berne  on  Wednesday  under  General  Spinola.  The  latter  general  was  under  tli6 
impression  that  the  whole  force  in  his  front  was  16,000  men,  double  his  own  torce.  J 
have  therefore  to  renew  my  application  for  re-enforcements,  and  that  the  number  of 
increased  to  10,000  men;  also  for  General  Naglee,  who  has  been  ordered  to  report  tf 
me.  He  hurried  off  as  soon  as  possible  to  take  command  of  the  operating  force.  i 
am’ confident  that  I can  hold  out  here  provided  I am  supplied  with  ammunition  ant 
provisions  from  below.  There  is  no  great  difficulty  in  supplying  us  by  means  of  ves 
sels  and  boats  running  the  gauntlet  of  the  batteries;  and  although  the  gunboats  ape 
our  transports  have  not  as  yet  fulfilled  our  expectations  in  this  respect,  yet  I am  in 
formed  by  General  Palmer  that  arrangements  are  now  made  to  send  me  supplies  o. 
men  and  ammunition.  I do  not  intend  to  yield  one  inch  on  any  point  if  I can  in  an> 
wav  prevent  it,  and  shall  therefore  contest  the  occupation  of  this  place  until  Genera. 
Hill  is  forced  to  withdraw.  I beg  that  you  will  look  favorably  upon  my  apphcatioi 
for  re-enforcements,  unless  the  necessities  of  the  service  forbid  it,  for  without  tnen 
some  disaster  to  our  arms  may  occur  in  this  department.  The  enemy’s  numbers  an 
fully  equal  to  the  representations  in  my  letters  of  last  month,  and  from  their  move, 
ments  I am  confirmed  in  my  opinion  that  as  soon  as  the  main  army  is  mreod  to  eyac 
uate  Virginia  the  field  of  operations  will  be  this  State;  hence  their  efforts  to  ootan 
possession  of  the  eastern  counties,  which  are  the  most  fertile  in  the  State. 

^ J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


623 


lAP.  XXX.] 


New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  16, 1863. 

- . ^ -rr  ^ ^ (Received  April  17,  6.20  p.  m.) 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  i ? i ; 

Oeneral-in- Chief: 


I left  Washington,  N.  O.,  yesterday  morning  and  run  past  the  rebel 
itteries  in  the  steamer  Escort,  which  had  reached  IVashino'ton  tho 
revious  night  with  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Volunteers  and  supplies  on 
3ard.  My  object  is  to  take  the  field  at  the  head  of  the  relieving  forces 
id  to  fight  a decisive  battle,  but  I am  not  sure  of  the  result.  I have 
)ut  two  dispatches  for  re-enforcements  from  the  Department  of  Vir- 
uia,^  but  understand  none  can  be  sent.  General  Naglee  shows  me  Gen- 
•al  Oullum^s  dispatch  of  the  13th  instant  saying  none  can  be  sent  from 
le  Department  of  the  South.  1 have  to  ask  again,  very  respectfully,  to 
ive  the  detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  now  in  the  Depart- 
entot  the  South,  ordered  back  as  soon  as  possible,  inasmuch  as  the 
bel  forces  at  Charleston,  now  liberated  by  the  failure  of  the  attack,  will 
-enforce  the  already  large  force  in  this  State  against  which  I am  now 
ntending.  I left- the  troops  in  Washington  in  good  spirits,  the  de- 
ases  good,  and  everything  favorable  for  holding  out  as  long  as  may  be 


J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major- General, 


^ New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  16,  [1863]. 

^ ^ „ (Received  April  18,  11.35  a.  m.) 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Haeleck, 

General-in-Chief : 


I have  been  obliged  to  concentrate  my  forces  in  sufficient  numbers  to 
iet  the  overpowering  forces  of  the  enemy  and  to  evacuate  Elizabeth 
' ty,  Winfield,  and  Plymouth.  This  step  was  rendered  necessary  owing 
information  from  Fort  Monroe,  showing  that  no  re-enforcements  could 
expected  from  there,  and  from  the  telegram  of  General  Cullum  to 
I meral  Naglee  saying  that  no  troops  could  be  expected  from  the  Depart- 
i mt  of  the  South. 


J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  16,  1863. 

. . ^ ^ ^ (Received  April  18, 11.20  p.  m.) 

•y.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  r ^ ; 

General-in-  Chief: 

t have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  the  advance  of  Heckmaffis  brigade 
3 arrived  from  the  Department  of  the  South.  I am  very  grateful  for 
s opportune  re-enforcement,  which  will  be  of  great  service  in  the  opera- 
ns  whmh,  commencing  to-morrow,  will  culminate  in  a battle  in  a few 
ys.  May  I respectfully  urge  again  the  necessity  of  transferring  the 
I a9  ® detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  to  North  Caro- 
rii  My  reason  for  reiterating  this  request  is  that  re-enforcements  are 
-ly  to  General  D.  H.  Hill,  and  are  supposed  to  be  from  vi- 

wity  ot  Charleston,  though  one  of  these  regiments  is  known  to  be  from 
gstre^  s force  on  the  Blackwater.  General  Longstreet  was  with 
aeral  Hill  in  conference  the  other  day  in  front  of  Washington,  N.  C. 
e Object  and  purpose  of  the  consultation  is  not  known,  but  must  of 


624 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX3 


course  have  been  in  regard  to  co-operation  of  the  forces  on  the  Blact 
water  and  of  Korth  Carolina,  and  from  the  presence  of  a Virginia  brigad 
and  the  one  regiment  recently  arrived  from  the  Blackwater  I believ 
the  feint  to  be  on  the  Blackwater  and  the  real  attack  to  be  here.  Thes 
facts  are  submitted  for  your  consideration. 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  April  17, 1863. 


Major-General  Halleck: 

Is  any  general  officer  to  come  with  the  troops? 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  April  17,  1863 — 12  noon. 
Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Ya.  : 

You  already  have  a larger  proportion  of  general  officers  than  we  ha^|‘ 
here  j nevertheless,  if  possible,  I will  send  you  another.  Whether  4,0(i 
more  troops  can  be  sent  to  you  will  depend  upon  the  condition  of  affai; 
when  the  transports  return.  In  any  forward  operations  by  you  again 
the  enemy,  is  not  West  Point  the  proper  point?  I will  write  you  mo] 
fully  by  mail. 

H.  W.  HALtECK, 

Genera  l-in-  Chief. 


Washington,  D.  0.,  April  17, 1863. 
Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe.,  Ya. : 

General  : If  the  enemy  has  given  up  his  attempt  upon  Suffolk  ai 
Norfolk  it  is  probably  on  account  of  a movement  of  General  Hooke 
I think  that  Lee’s  main  army  will  be  massed  between  Richmond  ai 
the  Rappahannock.  This  would  of  course  give  you  an  opportunity 
operate  in  the  direction  of  Hicks’  Ford  or  Weldon,  to  destroy  the  ra 
roads  connecting  with  the  South.  But  would  that  be  a safe  operatioi 
Moreover,  would  it  not  be  contrary  to  principle  ? The  enemy  won 
be  between  you  and  Hooker’s  army  ready  to  strike  at  either.  Won 
he  not  in  his  central  position  have  the  same  advantage  over  you  ai 
Hooker  which  he  had  last  year  over  McClellan  and  Pope  ? It  certaini 
seems  so  to  me.  Moreover,  while  you  were  operating  south  of  Jam- 
River  might  not  the  enemy  recapture  Williamsburg  and  Yorktowi' 
Would  it  not  be  more  in  accordance  with  principles  for  you  ar 
Hooker  to  act  as  nearly  together  as  possible  and  at  the  same  time  • 
secure  your  smaller  force  from  the  enemy’s  heavy  blows?  Siippo: 
while  General  Hooker  operates  against  the  enemy’s  front  you  threat^ 
his. flank  and  rear  by  the  Pamunkey  and  Mattapony  in  such  a way  * 
to  secure  your  own  retreat,  would  there  not  be  greater  chance  of  si- 
cess  ? It  seems  to  me  that  West  Point  furnishes  you  a most  excelle 
base  for  such  an  operation.  With  the  gunboats  and  a few  heavy  gu^ 
put  in  battery  it  could  be  made  secure  against  greatly  superior  nu:- 
bers.  Moreover,  while  affording  assistance  to  Hooker’s  operations 
will  serve  as  a protection  to  your  line  by  Williamsburg  and  Yorktow. 
I am  therefore  of  opinion  that  the  moment  you  can  safely  withdn' 


IIIAI'.XXX.] 


► CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


625 


roops  from  the  south  side  of  James  Eiver  you  should  occupy  West 
^oint  and  operate  as  here  suggested.  The  movement  if  made  should 
le  prompt  and  rapid,  so  as  to  force  the  enemy  to  give  up  all  attempts 
ipon  Suifolk  and  E’orfolk. 

Please  inform  me  by  telegraph  whether  you  adopt  my  views,  but 
rithout  stating  what  they  are. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  • 

H.  w.  hallecb:, 

General-in- Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  17, 1863. 

(Received  9 p.  m.) 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  ^ ^ 

General-in-  Chief : 

We  need  field  artillery  at  Suffolk  by  reason  of  the  extent  of  our  lines, 
f you  can  send  two  or  three  batteries  it  would  be  a great  relief. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


I Fort  Monroe,  April  17, 1863. 

|[ajor-General  Halle CK,  General-in-Chief : 

Everything  quiet  last  night.  Some  fighting  yesterday.  I am  goin^- 
p the  Nansemond  this  morning.  Six  thousand  men  have  arrived"^ 
esterday  we  captured  the  equipage  of  a regiment. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


'ajor-General  Peck: 


Fort  Monroe,  April  17,  1863. 


j I know  nothing  of  the  organization  of  the  troops  that  have  come  and 
i e coming.  I have  sent  you,  with  the  Nineteenth  Wisconsin  and  Ninth 
ermont,  about  5,000  men;  more  coming.  In  order  not  to  lose  a mo- 
ent  I have  not  stopped  them  here.  You  must  use  them  as  you  think 
m.  I am  not  even  advised  whether  a general  officer  is  coming-  hone 
' learn  this  morning.  ’ 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

. Major-  General. 


Lneral  Bix : I"®"' 

We  are  safe  on  the  river.  West  End  is  probably  below.  One  of  the 
>at8  18  working  along  up  slowly  in  conjunction  with  the  troops.  I 
>ia  Rve  points  with  artillery,  and  all  the  others  are  guarded.  Gen- 
ai  Hood  cannot  force  the  river  now. 

Bjohn  j.  peck, 

Major-General. 

40  R R— VOL  XYIII 

1. 


626 


NORIH  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Fort  Monroe,  April  17,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck:  j 

There  are  eight  Kavy  gunboats  on  the  Nauseinond,  six  at  and  below; 
AVest  Branch.  The  enemy  must  cross  if  at  all  [high]  u]).  The  battery 
at  West  Branch  was  silenced  after  disabling  the  Teazer.  Lieutenant| 
Cushing  is  conMent  the  railroad  from  Philadelphia  is  reopened  and  the 
bridge  rebuilt.  If  so,  the  enemy  is  at  ease  as  to  supplies. 

^ ’ JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  17,  1803. 
Major-General  Halleck,  Washington  : 


It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  say  that  I hold  everything.  The  euem> 
maneuvered  to  throw  me  off  my  guard  on  the  river  below,  which  ha( 
the  effect  opposite  to  his  wishes.  Instead  of  withdrawing  I re-enforce(| 
considerably.  New  troops  have  just  arrived.  AA^hether  they  arrivec 
or  not,  no  yielding  or  surrender  would  be  permitted. 

’ ^ JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  17,  1803. 

Major-General  Dix: 

I have  ordered  Major  Stratton  with  a force  to  South  Mills  to  liol 
that  outlet  at  all  hazards  and  to  watch  General  Hill’s  moves.  He  i 
directed  to  communicate  with  any  troops  at  Elizabeth  City.  Aly  hn 
will  be  the  Xansemond  Eiver,  the  Dismal  Swamp  to  the  Pasquotan 
liiver  General  Viele  will  of  course  aid  all  he  can  with  his  men. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  A2)ril  17, 1803. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Longstreet  has  not  asked  for  the  women  and  children.  All  coimni 
nication  is  cut  off  for  them,  and  they  can  get  no  supplies  from  witboii 
In  a short  time  they  will  have  to  be  fed  by  us.  I believe  I shall  ca 
upon  him  to  remove  them  or  feed  them. 

PECK, 
Major-  General. 


’ Fort  AIonroe,  April  17,  1803. 

Major-General  Peck: 

Alore  troops  have  gone.  I have  now  sent  7,400.  Give  me  evei 
morning  a hiief  resume  of  the  preceding  twenty-four  hours,  and  1 w 
advise  the  General-iu-Ohief.  I think  of  going  up  the  Xansemond  tt 
morning  to  West  Branch  j perhaps  higher  up. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Cipher. 


Cjiak  XXX.  j 


COEKESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


6‘27 


Major-General  Peck  : 


Poet  Monroe,  April  17, 1863. 


Colonel  Gurney  is  in  command.  He  is  just  leaving.  It  is  a regu- 
larly organized  division.  Foster  being  re-enforced.  Hill  cannot - * 

Can  you  not  now  act  on  the  offensive?  With  your  prudence  I should 
fear  no  evil  result.  The  enemy  is  full  of  stratagem  and  will  need  care- 
tul  watching.  I am  just  off'  for  Kansemond. 


JOHK  A.  BIX, 

Major- General. 


General  Yieee  : 

We  hold  everything  up  to  this  time.  Both  my  flanks  are  threatened. 
Longstreet  IS  pressing  on  the  river.  He  is  building  batteries  at  the 
mouth  of  the  West  Branch.  Only  one  boat  is  with  me.  My  impres- 
sion is  he  cannot  force  a passage.  Much  skirmishing  on  all  the  ave- 
nues of  approach. 

Press  on  the  men.  Advise  me  of  everything  you  hear. 

JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen.  H. 


W.  Halleck, 


Xew  Berne,  X.  C.,  April  17, 1863. 


General-in- Chief : 


Being  about  to  start  with  a relieving  force  to  raise  the  siege  of  Wash- 
ington,  I learned  that  the  enemy  had  evacuated  the  batteries  in  front  of 
Vashington,  and  deserters  say  that  the  cause  was  that  they  were  or- 
iered  to  re-enforce  the  army  in  Virginia.  I shall  march  myself  with  my 
force  in  pursuit  and  endeavor  to  overtake  the  enemy. 


J.  G.  FOSTEB, 

Major-General. 


General  Hix : 


SuFEOLK,  Va.,  April  17,  1863. 


I expect  they  will  attempt  to  force  a crossing  somewhere  in  the  dark- 
less. Have  taken  great  pains  and  every  precaution.  One  of  the  rail- 
ways IS  complete,  so  deserters  say.  All  activity  along  the  river.  Their 
5liarpshooters  are  very  numerous.  Have  you  any  ? We  felt  the  enemy 
n-day  on  the  South  Quay  and  found  his  force  large.  Will  more  chil- 
iren  [cavalry]  arrive  ? 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


^a.jor.Ge„eral  Dix: 

Your  message  is  not  complete.  It  asks  if  I can  act  oflensivel  v ; also 
I pn**  result,  as  enemy  is  full  of  stratagems.  Will  you 

|epcat  It ! My  opinion  is  that  wo  shall  have  all  we  can  do  to  hold  the 
Disrnal  Swamp  and  Pasquotank.  I am  pressing  them 
*uh  liglit  troops,  and  brisk  firing  is  heard  in  several  directions. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

* Message  incomplete  as  sent.  No  recordofitas  received. 


628 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chai>.xxx.| 
Fort  Monroe,  Aj^ril  17, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

I said  through  your  prudence  there  would  be  no  evil  result  from  your 
acting  offensively,  and  that  the  enemy,  was  full  of  stratagems  and 
needed  close  watching.  I have  just  returned  from  West  Branch. 
Brought  down  General  French’s  engineer.  He  was  captured  this  morn- 
in  o-  bv  Lieutenant  Cushing’s  picket.  Will  telegraph  again. 

° JOHl<  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  A]^ril  17, 1863 — 8.50  p.  m. 

Major-General  Dix : 

Until  some  men  are  executed  in  front  of  Fort  Union  for  cowardice  1 
shall  not  feel  safe  in  my  responsible  command.  Some  companies  have 
behaved  very  badly,  and  the  example  is  highly  pernicious.  I must  trj 

them,  and  must  be  sustained  when  I act. 

’ PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  April  17, 1863. 
Major-General  Peck,  Commanding.,  Suffollc : 

You  will  be  sustained  in  any  measures  you  may  adopt  for  the  punish 
ment  of  cowardice  or  misbehavior.in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  Try  th< 
miscreants  at  once.  I have  recommended  Colonel  Foster’s  promotion 

JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Major- Ge7ieral. 


Yorktown,  April  17,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Coimnanding : 

Yesterday  I found  a rebel  battery  of  two  rifled  guns  (Lieutenan: 
Gillis  thought  they  were  Whitworths)  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Pamuii 
key,  3 miles  above  West  Point.  They  fired  some  twenty  or  thirty  shot 
at  us  which  fell  over  and  all  around  us,  but  none  struck  the  gunboat 
This  morning  at  4 o’clock  I noticed  the  glare  of  camp  fires  on  the  cloud 
on  the  Gloucester  side.  The  glare  represented  a large  camp,  but  it  wa 
probably  that  of  the  500  cavalry  over  there.  . 

Governor  Wise’s  pickets  are  now  above  Williamsburg.  His  Doasi 
iug  to  take  the  forts  has  not  yet  been  made  good. 

As  it  is  represented  the  inmates  of  the  asylum  arc  on  the  bordeis  c 
absolute  starvation  I have  ordered  up  ten  days’  rations  and  sent  bac 
the  paroled  attendants.  ' 

E.  D.  JXElEo, 

Afajor- General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Office  of  the  Assistant  Adjutant-General, 

Fort  Yorldotcn,  Va.,  April  17,  1863. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Farnsworth, 

Chief  Quartermaster  Fourth  Corps : 

Colonel:  The  commanding  general  is  informed  that  notwithstau( 
ing  the  late  occupation  of  Williamsburg  by  the  rebel  forces  under  Gei 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


629 


eral  Wise  and  the  consequent  abandoument  of  the  city  by  the  Union 
troops,  no  provision  whatever  has  been  made  for  the  support  of  the  in- 
mates of  the  lunatic  asylum,  tenanted  as  it  is  by  their  own  kith  and  kin 
and  by  a class  of  patients  demanding  of  all  the  civilized  world  the 
teuderest  care  and  solicitude. 

The  commanding  general  is  not  willing  that  the  imputation  of  inhu- 
manity and  want  of  civilization,  so  justly  chargeable  to  these  traitors  to 
their  country  and  enemies  of  their  own  blood,  should  rest,  even  with  the 
lightest  touch  of  seeming  truth,  upon  himself  or  those  in  his  command 
as  representing  in  this  section  of  the  country  the  dignity  and  care  of 
the  Government  of  the  United  States. 

^Notwithstanding,  therefore,  that  many  of  the  servants  of  the  asylum 
and  nurses  of  its  inmates  were  forcibly  carried  away  by  the  rebels  and 
the  majority  of  the  others  have,  of  their  own  will,  abandoned  their 
charge;  notwithstanding  that  two  of  our  own  soldiers  placed  as  nurses 
to  the  lunatics  were  captured  and  paroled  as  prisoners  of  war,  and  not- 
withstanding that  the  city  of  Williamsburg  and  the  asylum  are  not 
occupied  by  the  forces  of  the  United  States  and  are  beyond  the  picket 
lines  of  those  forces,  yet,  in  the  name  of  humanity  and  Christianity, 
the  commanding  general  directs  that  a ten  days^  supply  of  rations  for 
250  men  (that  being  about  the  number  of  inmates  at  present  in  the 
asylum)  be  sent  at  once  to  Williamsburg  to  be  delivered  at  once  to  the 
officer  in  charge  of  the  asylum  for  the  use  of  its  inmates. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  C.  SUYDAM, 
Assistant  Adjutant- (general. 


^ Yorktown,  Va.,  April  17,  1863. 

Col.  E.  M.  West,  . ^ . i'  i 

Commanding  Advanced  Brigade: 

Johnson’s  regiment  will  remain  with  you  for  the  present  at  least;  they 
had  better  make  camp,  and  shelter  tents  will  be  furnished  them  on 
requisition  to-morrow.  The  general  has  urged  the  matter  of  a gunboat 
near  you  on  James  Eiver,  but  Admiral  Lee  says  that  it  cannot  be  fur- 
nished ; consequently  the  whole  left  flank  on  the  river  from  a short  dis- 
tance above  Newport  News  is  open  and  will  need  constant  watching.  A 
squadron  of  the  Second  Massachusetts  Cavalry  will  report  to  you  to-mor- 
row; they  will  have  shelter  tents;  they  are  about  100  strong.  The  gen- 
eral desires  that  Mr.  Sweeny  make  an  official  written  application  for  the 
])rotection  asked  for  the  asylum,  stating  on  what  it  is  based;  he  will 
then  give  it  the  proper  consideration.  Meantime  he  desires  that  Mr. 
Sweeny  be  furnished  with  a copy  of  my  letter  to  Colonel  Farnsworth  in 
regard  to  sending  the  supplies  to  the  asylum,  that  General  Wise  may 
learn  in  what  estimation  he  is  held.  Major  Hall  has  not  seen  the  gen- 
eral, who  directs  that  you  picket  your  left  as  strongly  as  possible  with 
the  forces  wffiich  will  be  at  your  command. 

C.  C.  SUYDAM, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jaj.  Gen.  J.  Gr.  Foster: 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  17,  1863. 


My  Dear  General  : Your  dispatch  went  to  General  Halleck  last 
evening.  A letter  from  General  Palmer  three  days  later  (the  15th)  in- 


630 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


formed  us  that  you  had  received  a regiment,  with  ammunition  and  pro- 
visions, through  the  blockade. 

I am  very  sorry  I cannot  aid  you.  Suffolk  is  closely  invested  by 
Lougstreet  with  over  30,000  men.  The  left  bank  of  the  Nansemond  to 
the  West  Branch  is  occupied.  Our  gunboats  hold  the  river  and  pre- 
vent the  enemy  from  crossing,  but  he  has  disabled  several  of  them.  We 
liave  our  hands  full.  I have  just  returned  from  the  West  Branch,  where 
the  enemy  has  a battery  and  rifle-pits,  from  which  the  firing  is  incessant. 

We  captured  General  French’s  engineer  to-day. 

Thus  far  the  enemy  has  gained  no  advantage  over  us. 

Trusting  your  gallant  resistance  may  be  successful,  I am,  sincerely, 
yours, 

JOHN  A.  BIX. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Weicport  Weivs,  Va.^  April  17,  1863. 

Major-General  Foster, 

Commanding  Military  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

My  Dear  General:  I am  glad  to  hear  by  the  steamer  Spaulding 
that  you  are  at  New  Berne.  The  experience  attending  your  escape 
will  give  you  a practical  idea  of  the  difference  between  the  endurance 
and  capabilities  of  frail,  improvised  wooden  gunboats  and  earthworks. 
I saw  in  the  papers  that  a brigade  hesitated  to  land  and  attack,  but 
waited  for  the  little  Lockwood  to  silence  a battery  of  field  artillery  oc- 
cupying earthworks  which  the  enemy  had  abandoned  last  spring. 

I mention  this  now  that  you  are  in  less  trouble,  as  in  your  private 
letter  from  Washington  you  speak  of  the  gunboats  as  having  too  much 
veneration  for  such  batteries.  The  Army  places  a complimentary  but 
exaggerated  opinion  upon  the  capabilities^  of  these  gunboats. 

In  the  Mississippi  a scattered  battery *of  six  small  field  pieces  did 
great  damage  to  two  regular  Navy  gunboats  commanded  by  gallant 
officers.  Here,  at  this  time,  on  the  narrow  Upper  Nansemond,  a miser- 
able creek,  our  frail,  light-armed,  light-draught  steam-cmft,  called  gun- 
boats, with  their  powder  and  steam  magazines  and  their  machinery  nil 
so  exposed  and  so  vulnerable,  are  fighting  the  enemy’s  artillery  and 
sharpshooters  with  great  gallantry  and  sustaining  much  loss  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  injury  to  the  vessels,  which  are  much  cut  up,  grounding, 
and  having  no  water  to  work  in. 

The  combat  would  be  much  more  equal  if  our  troops  fought  theirS; 
with  like  means,  as  they  should  do,  but  somehow  they  don’t  see  it. 

The  calls  so  numerous  and  so  constant  for  gunboats  to  defend  urniy 
posts  are  distressing,  because  so  earnest  and  so  much  bejmnd  my  means 
to  supply. 

This  important  point  (Newport  News),  upon  the  i)reservation  of  which 
the  public  interests  in  this  quarter,  the  seat  of  Government,  and  even 
the  communications  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  depend,  is  weakened 
in  its  movable  force  to  assist  the  army  in  its  occupation  of  its  many 
detached  and  assailable  positions  in  the  Sounds  and  here  j but  I will 
write  you  a brief  official  letter  on  this  subject. 

As  i have  before  proposed  to  you,  these  detached  and  weak  positions’ 
should  be  abandoned  and  our  forces  concentrated,  then  Ave  can  attack 
instead  of  being  attacked  in  detail.  This  concentration  cannot  be  ef- 
fected as  respects  the  naval  force  until  it  is  done  by  the  army,  as  the 
gunboats  are  required  at  the  principal  positions  occupied  by  the  army. 
Therefore  the  change  depends  upon  you  there  and  General  Dix  here. 


Chap.  XXJ!:;.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


631 


Last  spring  we  concentrated  and  defeated  the  enemy.  Since  then  we 
liave  spread  out  and  now  the  enemy  is  attacking  us  in  detail.  If  not  too 
late,  1 suggest,  as  I did  last  fall  when  my  views  were  communicated  by 
the  Navy  to  the  War  Department,  razing  all  their  works.  Their  works 
are  numerous  in  this  vicinity,  tempting  a struggle  for  reoccupation  and 
giving  them  a great  advantage  if  reoccupied.  I have  and  shall  make 
3very  elfort  to  co-operate  with  you. 

Tbe  interest  I feel  in  this  great  subject  will  be  sufficient  to  excuse  the 
teedom  with  which  I communicate  my  views  in  reply  to  your  private 
etter  of  the  12th  instant,  which  I partly  answered  on  the  16th  instant. 

Heartily  wishing  you  success,  I am,  very  truly,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiralj  Comdg.  W.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News.  April  17,  1863. 

ilaj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 

General  : I send  you  a copy  of  a sketch  received  this  evening  by 
he  Spaulding  showing  that  the  enemy  has  reoccupied  his  old  earth- 
v'orks  at  Washington,  K 0.  This  experience  sustains  the  views  I have 
leretofore  presented  for  your  consideration. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


Near  Core  Greek,  N.  C., 

April  17,  [1863]— 1.45  p.  m. 

iieuteuant-Oolonel  Hoeeman; 

Colonel  : I have  received  your  dispatch  of  this  date,  and  shall  ob- 
erve  its  contents.  The  enemy^s  pickets  were  driven  in  on  the  railroad 
ast  night  and  at  crossing  of  Dover  road.  They  were  driven  from  their 
atrenchments  after  the  forcing  of  the  creek.  "We  have  1 man  killed 
ud  4 wounded  and  taken  4 prisoners.  The  position  on  the  railroad 
las  no  weakness  save  that  it  may  be  turned. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

HENRY  PRINCE, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


fieuteriant-Colonel  Hoeeman  : 


Near  Core  Creek,  N.  C., 

April  17,  1863—7.15  p.  m., 


Colonel  : We  have  entertained  the  enemy  very  much  to-day  j during 
he  entire  day  we 'have  occupied  his  attention.  My  best  information  is 
,hat  besides  NethercntUs  300  men  there  is  a regiment,  the  Thirtv-third 
bixty-third]  North  Carolina,  at  Wise’s  Cross-Roads;  Ransom’s  brigade 
^ mile  or  so  this  side  of  Kinston.  We  have  observed  evidences  of  a 
,orce  on  tlie  railroad,  4 miles  in  our  front,  and  we  have  rumors  of  a 
jOrce  at  Sandy  Ridge  fortitied.  We  are  encamped  on  the  cast  side  of 
oorc  Creek,  lioloing  th(‘,  railroad  crossing  and  the  Dover  Crossing  with 
uckets  beyond  the  ci’eeiv'. 

Yours,  truly, 


nVAUlV  PltlNCE. 


632 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E,  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  1 


Fort  Monroe, 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General4n-  Chief : 


Ya.,  Aj^ril  18,  1863. 
(Eeceived  1.30  p.  in.) 


Your  dispatch,  by  Lieutenant  Beaumont,  is  received.  I have  lougi 
been  in  favor  of  occupying  the  point  referred  to.  Will  write  fully  by 
mail.  May  go  to  Suffolk  to-day.  It  is  closely  invested.  I was  up  to 
the  enemy’s  batteries  on  the  Kansemond  yesterday.  They  have  re- 
opened the  railroad  from  the  Blackwater  and  are  redoubling  their 
efforts.  One  gunboat  was  disabled  yesterday. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  18, 1863—8  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  9.10  p.  m.) 

H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


I have  been  all  day  in  Suffolk.  We  have  ascertained  that  the  en 
emv’s  force  is  about  38,000.  There  are  four  divisions.  The  largest. 
General  Hood’s,  numbers  11,000.  They  have  come  for  a campaign  and 
not  for  a raid  or  a diversion.  Hill’s  force  in  North  Carolina,  numbering 
22,000,  was  to  have  joined  them.  Longstreet,  French,  Pickett,  Hood 
and  Anderson  are  before  Suffolk.  I telegraphed  General  Peck  yester 
day  to  prepare  to  act  on  the  offensive,  and  went  over  to-day  to  confei 
with  him  on  the  subject.  He  will  attack  a battery  to-night,  and  if  h( 
succeeds  he  will  attack  one  of  the  enemy’s  divisions  to-morrow  in  force 
1 will  write  you  in  full  in  a day  or  two  in  regard  to  this  department  and 
the  views  contained  in  your  letter. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  18,  1863. 

(Eeceived  11.50  p.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

Dispatches  from  General  Foster  state  that  General  Hill  has  abandonee 
Washin gton . I have  no  doubt  it  is  to  carry  out  the  plan  of  recapturing 
Suffolk  and  Norfolk.  Our  information,  from  a variety  of  sources,  show.l 
that  this  is  the  settled  purpose  of  the  enemy,  and  I am  satisfied  tha 
nothing  but  a vigorous  and  successful  movement  on  the  part  of  Genera^ 
Hooker  can  prevent  the  intended  co-operation  of  Hill  and  Longstreet, 
with  60,000  men,  on  the  Nansemond.  jqhN  A DIX 

Major-General 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  18, 1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

General  Longstreet  has  been  made  a lieutenant-general.  M^jor-Gen 
eral  French  has  joined  him,  and  is  in  command  of  Southeast  Yirginia 
His  chief  engineer  was  taken  yesterday  laying  out  works,  ^o  cliaiig 


uIIAl’.  XXX.  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


633 


in  the  enemy^s  position,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained.  He  is  still  press- 
ing my  right,  and  hopes  to  first  destroy  the  gunboats  and  then  cross 
under  his  batteries.  He  will  not  succeed. 


JOHJS^  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  April  18,  1803. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

I sent  a 12-pounder.  I expect  carriages  from  Washington  to-day  and 
will  send  you  some  Parrotts.  I have  asked  General  Halleck  for  some 
cavalry. 


JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major- General. 


Major-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  18,  1863. 


The  capture  of  Major-General  French’s  engineer  indicates  some  con- 
lection  with  North  Carolina.  General  French  ranks  many  of  these 
)fficers,  and  would  hardly  come  without  a command.  lYhat  is  the 
atest  from  North  Carolina 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Vlaj or- General  Dix; 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  18,  1863. 


Y e are  as  yesterda5^  The  enemy  is  pressing  on  the  river.  Made 
leveral  attacks  on  the  Edenton  road  last  night.  Eichmond  Sentinel 
>f  16th  says : 

Longst^et  cannot  fail.  He  is  a great  general,  and  has  all  the  means  for  nreat  siic- 
ess.  Suffolk  IS  to  fall.  ^ 

Y^e  shall  see. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


_ . Suffolk,  Va.,  April  18,  1863. 

'lajor-Geueral  Dix: 

We  still  hold  the  line  of  the  Nausemond.  During  yesterday  General 
retty  and  the  naval  officers  reported  great  activity  on  the  i)art  of  the 
neiny  in  the  lower  i)art  of  the  river,  near  West  Branch  j extensive 
vorks  were  being  erected  and  everything  indicated  a purpose  to  cross 
.inuer  fire  of  their  batteries.  I re-enforced  them  to  the  extent  of  my 
bihty,  and  sent  down  hay  for  the  protection  of  the  boats.  The  naval 
I'hcers  think  one  bridge  is  opposite  Sleepy  Hole,  and  wmrks  being 
jrected.  ? & 

i Hie  enemy  was  felt  of  smartly  on  all  the  roads  yesterday  and  found 
p superior  numbers  at  all  points.  Unless  a diversion  is  made  by  Gen- 
jUU  Hooker,  or  in  some  quarter,  Longstreet  will  fortify  a line  and  hold 
^ as  long  as  he  can.  I Avish  you  would  head  a force  at  Smithfield. 
jooker  or  Hunter  should  send  you  a corps. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


634 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Admiral  Lee,  Neicport  News  : 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  18,1863. 


Alen  wlio  have  come  in  this  evening  say  the  rebels  have  eight  ironi 
boats  in  the  James  Eiver  that  will  come  down  so  as  to  threaten  the 
Nansemond,  Norfolk,  and  other  places.  He  will  attack  me  to-morrow 
early,  and  vill  attempt  to  carryAhe  line  of  the  river.  I hope  you  will 
be  able  to  send  me  sufficient  light  boats  to  hold  it. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


UNiTFiD  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Nenport  Neics^  Fu.,  April  18,  1863. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Hix,  U.  S.  A^  ' 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe : 

Sir  : I ilo  not  see  the  propriety  of  continuing  our  small  vessels  in  thi 
Upper  Nansemoml,  which  is,  above  Western  Branch,  a mere  creek  o 
nitural  canal,  and  unlit  for  the  operation  of  vessels,  now  that  the  enemj 
is  establishing  his  artillery  and  rifle-pits  in  such  strength  as  to  commani 

**^The°Mimny  is  thus  occupying  in  force  the  left  bank  of  the  Upper  Nan 
semond  with  earthworks  for  his  artillery  and  rifle-pits. 

Our  army,  re-enforced  since  yesterday  may  now  oppose  the  enemy  b 


uuir  army,  j — j.  ^ 

occupying  in  like  manner  the  risj^L'^ank  of  that  small 


sS’nnmber  of  guns  we  now  havli  on  the  Upper  Naiisemond  would  b> 

"1“  t.  ,.=.11. 1..  a.  r,.i»  « 

semond  any  longer  than  his  communications  remain  open,  nor  so  Ion, 
“risk  his  ability  to  rejoin  Lieutenant  Cushing  in  the  Lower  Nansc 
moml.  Lieutenant  Cushing  reports  that  the  enemy  are  fortifying  helm 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Fear- Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


Hdors.  Dept,  op  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  18,  18C3— C..fO  p.  ni. 

General  Foster: 


^nerai 

General  : The  following  telegraphic  dispatch  has  just  been  received 

Washington,  D.  C.,  Jpnl  18,  1863. 


rfooueral  Foster  by  first  p®  "tTs^ilnpU  a “efeiS 

forcements  at  present,  as  none  can  be  given  to  bim.  His  part  i y 

one.  


11.  W.  HALLLCK, 

General-in-ChkJ. 


I am,  very  respectfully,  yours. 


JOHN  A.  DIN, 

Major-General 


AP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


635 


Near  Core  Creek,  N.  C., 

April  18,  1863 — 6.30  p.  m. 

eutenant-Colonel  Hofeman: 

Colonel:  My  troops  have  been  nearly  all  of  them  occupying  posi- 
3ns  in  advance  of  Core  Creek  to-day,  for  the  purpose  of  covering  the 
)eration  of  destroying  the  bridge  at  the  Neuse-road  Crossing. 

I this  moment  learn  the  operation  is  successful,  the  enemy^s  pickets 
tiring  at  all  quarters  as  our  troops  advance,  we  capturing  but  4 cav- 
ry  soldiers,  and  orders  have  gone  out  to  resume  my  position  of  last 
ght  in  all  respects.  We  have  seen  no  indications  of  force  to-day. 
Very  respectfully, 

HENEY  PEINCE. 

I think  they  expect  an  advance  on  the  railroad. 


^ . Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  Avril  19,  1863. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  ^ 

General-in-  Chief : 

The  following  dispatch  is  just  received  at  2.15  o’clock : 


ijor-General  Dix : 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  19,  1868. 


Admiral  Lee  lias  ordered  the  boats  out  of  the  river.  This  is  fatal.  It  must  he  stop- 
1 from  Washington  or  elsewhere. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Dix  has  gone  to  the  Nansemond  and  is  expected  back 
0 p.  m. 


LOUIS  H.  PELOUZE. 


Imiral  S.  P.  Lee,  Afewport  News  : 


Suffolk,  Va.,  Ajiril  10,  1863. 


The  withdrawal  of  all  the  boats  above  West  Branch  of  the  Nanse- 
md  at  this  crisis  will  be  attended  with  great  risk  and  may  result  in 
e enemy  crossing.  It  will  require  me  to  detach  many  more  regi- 
mts  and  guns,  which  I cannot  afford.  Earnest  and  continued  co- 
'eration  of  navy  and  army  will  beat  General  Longstreet  in  this  cam- 
Agn,  and  I beg  you  to  reconsider  the  proposition.  For  two  or  three 
Ary]  good  cover  is  afforded,  and  other  works  are  being  constructed 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

. , Off  Neicport  Neics,  Va.,  April  19,  1863. 

Ajor-General  Peck,  77^ 

Commanding  at  Stiff olJc,  Va. : 

four  telegraph  is  just  received.  Desire  Lieutenant  Lamson  to  await 
ther  orders  from  me.  Our  light  draughts  are  much  needed  clse- 
lere.  West  Branch  Battery  should  be  taken  or  silenced. 

A . T>  ■ S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  hear-Admtral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  JBlochading  Squadron. 


636 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX j 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  Va.,  April  19,  1863. 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  Forth  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : I have  just  received  your  letter  of  the  18th  in  regard  i 
the  withdrawal  of  the  gunboats  from  the  Upper  NTansemond.  I shoii 
very  much  regret  such  a measure  at  this  moment.  I believe  there  a 
only  three  of  your  gunboats  above  the  West  Branch,  and  their  preseu' 
is  indispensable,  for  although  I have  re-enforced  General  Peck  the 
are  7 miles  of  river  to  guard  and  we  have  not  troops  enough  to  prote 
every  part  of  it  and  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing.  I have  tv 
armed  quartermasters’  boats— the  West  End  and  the  Smith  Briggs 
above  the  West  Branch,  and  with  your  gunboats  the  defense  of  tk 
part  of  the  river  is  complete.  We  are  establishing  batteries,  but  i' 
want  of  heavy  guns  they  are  not  yet  in  readiness  Within  the  ne 
forty-eight  hours  I hope  to  have  them  prepared  for  efficient  servi(. 
General  Peck  telegraphs  me  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  gunboats  : 
this  time  would  be  fatal. 

. I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  19, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

1 have  just  returned  from  the  Nansemond.’  Was  on  board  of  two  I 
the  gunboats  which  were  engaged  in  shelling  the  enemy’s  batteri  . 
One  of  the  batteries  was  silenced  this  morning,  but  the  enemy  is  ve 
active,  and  is  casemating  another  with  heavy  timber.  He  has  coi 
here  to  stay,  if  possible,  and  will  spare  no  effort  to  regain  possession  i 
the  James  River  and  the  Nansemond. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe,  April  19,  1863 

Major-General  Peck: 

I sent  you  some  Parrott  guns  last  night;  also  over  100  artillensJ 
The  latter  are  a part  of  the  garrison  of  Fort  Monroe,  and  should  i 
sent  back  soon.  I don’t  hear  from  you. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe,  Aqyril  19, 1863; 

Major-General  Peck  : 

Three  batteries  are  here  and  will  be  with  you  to-morrow  mornr. 
Yon  will  have  three  rifled  42-pounders  the  day  after  to-morrow.  P 
platforms  will  be  made  here.  ^ 

Major-General 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


637 


IP.  XXX.] 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  19,  1863. 

ij or- General  Dix: 

General  Getty,  in  conjunction  with  Lieutenant  Lamson’s  boats,  has 
5t  stormed  the  heavy  battery  at  the  West  Branch,  and  after  severe 
hting  carried  it.  Captured  six  guns  and  200  of  the  Forty-fourth  Ala- 
ma.  Crossed  in  boats. 

eJOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 

Fort  Monroe,  April  19,  1863. 
ijor-General  Peck,  Commanding,  Suffolk : 

[ have  received  your  gratifying  dispatch.  General  Getty  and  the 
icers  and  men  engaged  in  storming  the  battery  have  my  warmest 
inks  for  their  gallant  conduct.  It  will  be  an  example  for  the  forces 
der  your  command  which  cannot  fail  to  give  us  the  happiest  results. 

! JOHN  A.  DIX, 

i Major-General. 

\ 

Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  19, 1863. 

ijor-General  Dix: 

[ see  notices  from  Admiral  Lee  of  doings  here,  but  nothing  that  I have 
)orted— the  silencing  of  the  ten-gun  battery  on  Tuesday  by  the  land 
tteries  and  the  skirmishing  of  Colonel  Foster. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

ALajor- General. 

Fort  Monroe,  April  19, 1863. 
jor-General  Peck,  Commanding,  Suffolk: 

j[  have  regularly  telegraphed  all  that  has  been  done.  I send  a sum- 
try  this  evening  to  General  Halleck,  which  I trust  will  appear  and 
!)w  that  the  army  has  not  been  idle. 

' ' JOHN  A.  DIX, 

■ Major-General. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  April  19,  1863.  (Received  8.20  p.  m.) 
ijor-General  Heintzelman, 

Commanding,  cfc.;  * 

1 jENERAL  : You  will  immediately  prepare  for  embarkation,  and  send 
^General  Dix  at  Fort  Monroe  about  4,000  infantry,  so  as  to  make  in 
\ sent  to  him  about  10,000  men.  General  Meigs  will  give  you  trans- 
Crtation  as  rapidlv  as  possible. 

f H.  W.  HALLECK, 

1'  . _ — cw. 

Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  19,  1863. 

jor-Geueral  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

JIeneral:  By  officers  just  in  from  Washington,  N.  C.,  1 learn  that 
enemy  have  all  gone  from  the  vicinity  of  that  place.  The  places 


638 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX:; 


occupied  by  tbeir  batteries  on  the  rivers  are  all  now  in  possession  of  oil 
troops,  who  are  able  to  bold  them.  There  is  now  no  difficulty  in  passis 
into  Washington  with  men  and  supplies. 

General  Foster  left  here  yesterday  with  a force  to  march  across  tl 
country.  General  Foster  informed  you  in  a letter  of  the  16th  instai 
that  he  had  directed  Plymouth,  Elizabeth  City,  and  Winfield  to  beeva 
uated.'  He  countermanded  that  order,  too  late,  however,  for  Winfieh 
that  has  been  abandoned,  but  the  troops  remain  at  the  other  places. 

At  Plymouth  they  are  well  fortified.  Winfield  is  of  little  importanc 
and  I shall  not  reoccupy  the  place,  but  leave  it  for  General  Foster 
decide  when  he  returns. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  K PALMEE, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

JSi'eiv  Berne,  April  19, 1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  : 

General  : General  Prince  himself  a few  miles  beyond  Core  Crei, 
and  carrying  out  your  instructions. 

I last  night  informed  you  of  the  arrival  of  the  other  regiments  ’ 
General  Heckmaids  brigade,  and  asking  the  disposition  to  be  made  ’ 
them.  General  Halleck  writes,  in  reply  to  my  letter  to  him  informii 
him  of  the  state  of  affairs,  that  no  re-enforcements  can  be  spared 
come  here,  and  that  if  any  accident  should  occur  to  General  Post 
you  will  bear  in  mind  that  operations  in  North  Carolina  should  1 
strictly  defensive,  and  the  troops  concentrated  as  much  as  possib; 
New  Berne  and  Beaufort  are  the  points  of  most  importance.” 

Farquhar  is  here  from  Plymouth.  He  will  wait  here  for  a day  or  tw 
to  see  you.  Winfield  was  abandoned  before  the  order  counterman 
ing  arrived.  I saw  to-day  a large  steamer  with  supplies  for  Plymout 
The  Phoenix  goes  also  with  stores  to  Washington.  I have  written 
General  Halleck  a history  of  affairs  that  have  transpired  since  y( 
Avrote  your  last  letter  to  him. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 


I.  N.  PALMEE, 
Brigadier- General 


Near  Core  Creek,  N.  C., 

April  19,  1863—10.24  a.  m.i 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoffman  : 

Colonel  : I send  by  the  train  4 iirisoners,  captured  yesterday  (wi 
their  arms  and  horses) ; all  privates.  The  information  gathered  irc 
these  prisoners  corroborates  that  I have  already  sent.  The  camp 
Llie  Sixty-third  being  at  Wise’s  Cross-Eoads  and  Eaiisom’s  brigade 
Kinston. 

Eespectfully,  yours, 


HENEY  PEINCE, 
Brigadier- General  Vol unteers. 


HAP.  XXX.] 


C0ERE8P0NDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


639 


United  States  Flac-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  Neics,  Va.,  April  20,  1803— noou. 

laj or- General  Dix, 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

Sir:  a report  from  Lieutenant  Cushing,  dated  at  8 a.  in.  to-day, 
aforins  me  that  the  enemy  has  unmasked  a new  battery,  containing 
ome  heavy  pieces,  by  which  and  some  infantry  the  Barney  was  sharply 
ttacked  yesterday.  Supposing  that  the  enemy  is  not  in  great  force 
11  the  lett  bank  of  the  Nansemond,  I respectfully  suggest  to  you  the 
Topriety  of  capturing  this  battery,  as  it  commands  the  Lower  Nanse- 
lond  and  cannot  be  materially  affected  by  the  firing  from  the  flotilla. 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Fear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclaidmg  Squadron. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  20, 1863. 
lajor-General  Peck,  SnffolJc,  Va.  : 

The  following  just  received  from  Admiral  Lee,  dated  2.40  p.  m. : 


Lieutenaut  Ciisliiug  reports  that  the  enemy  is  retreating  as  fast  as  iiossible,  and 
lat  the  army,  hy  a rapid  movement,  may  cut  off  one  of  their  brigades. 

' S.  P.  LEE, 

Admiral. 


Kespectfully, 


LOUIS  H.  PELOUZE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


eiieral  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  20,  1863. 


From  all  that  can  be  gleaned  Longstreet  has  asked  for  more  troops, 
nless  Lee  wants  them  all  he  will  get  them.  What  is  the  total  from 
[ooker  ? 


J.  PECK, 
Major- General. 


-ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  April  20,  1863. 


An  examination  shows  that  there  is  great  suffering  here  for  the  neces- 
ines  of  life.  Traders  must  be  allowed  to  bring  flour,  meat,  and  kin- 
red  articles.  They  will  buy.  Eeport  of  the  provost  has  just  reached 
le— since  your  departure.  Will  you  order  a change  ? 


PECK, 

Major-  General. 


. Suffolk,  Va.,  April  20,  1863. 

ajor-General  Dix:  ’ j p ? 

^lajor  Stratton  reports  his  visit  to  Elizabeth  City.  It  had  been  aban- 
)iied  on  18th,  and  the  gunboats  were  shelling  the  banks  as  they  moved 
)wn  the  river.  Country  full  of  guerrillas. 

iiongstrect’s  pickets  at  Sandy  Cross.  We  stormed  tbe  West  Branch 


640 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX H 


Battery  just  at  dusk,  and  bold  it  now.  One  major,  1 captain,  and  7| 
officers  were  taken,  with  6 guns,  and  between  100  and  200  soldiers. 
Eiffhtv-ninth  Kew  York  and  Eighth  Connecticut  were  the  stormers. 

^ JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Plymouth,  JST.  G.,  April  20,  1863. 

[Capt.  J.  A.  JUDSON,  A.  A.  G.i] 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com 
munication  inclosing  and  returning  a report  sent  from  here.  I have 
reason  to  think  another  document  has  been  forwarded  in  the  same 
manner  from  these  headquarters  j if  so,  will  you  please  return  it  that 
the  mistake  may  be  rectified  ? I will  see  that  the  error  is  not  repeate(- 
hereafter.  In  reporting  the  situation  here  I directed  my  adjutant  t( 
call  your  attention  to  the  necessity  of  our  having  supplies.  That  then 
should  be  no  delay  the  post  commissary  had  previously  made  his  re 
quisitions,  w'hich  were  approved  and  signed  by  me.  He  informs  mj 
they  were  sent  forward.  The  steamer  Long  Island  arrived  to-day  at . 
p.  m.  with  rations,  ammunition,  horses,  &c.  Eeceipts  will  be.duly  lor 
warded  to  headquarters.  Winfield  has  been  abandoned  and  the  work: 
destroyed;  one  company  of  the  garrison  is  here;  the  other  has  gone  t< 
New  Berne,  as  I am  informed,  by  orders  from  headquarters. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSIAH  PICKETT, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 

[Inclosure.  1 

Headquarters, 
Plymouth,  N.  G.,  April  18, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  : 

In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  114,  received  at  noon  yestei 
day  (17th),  I made  preparations  to  evacuate  this  post.  I had  mad 
arrangements  to  transport  the  Forty-sixth  Massachusetts  Yohintee' 
Militia,  two  sections  of  Lee’s  battery,  and  four  detached  companies 
under  command  of  Major  Bartholomew,  Twenty-seventh  Kegiment  'Ma.s 
sachusetts  Volunteers,  upon  the  Colyer  and  some  small  schooners 
had  taken  possession  of,  and  intended  to  hold  the  post  with  the  Twcnt\ 
fifth  Kegiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  until  the  other  transport 
arrived.  Lee’s  two  sections  were  aboard  the  transport  and  the  Fort.v 
sixth  Kegiment  had  struck  their  tents  when  the  Massasoit  aiTiveil 
Everything  has  been  disembarked  and  will  be  arranged  as  betorc.  ; 

I sent  word  to  the  post  at  Winfield  and  gave  them  orders  to  evacuat 
the  post,  destroying  block-houses,  rifle-pits,  &c.  They  had  probabl' 
done  so  long  before  the  Massasoit  arrived,  and  are  now  on  their  way  t 
Plymouth.  I desire  you  to  send  meinstructions  as  to  whether  thatpoi^ 
is  to  be  re-established. 

We  are  almost  entirely  out  of  supplies,  and  must  have  a boat  hac 
immediately  with  rations  or  the  men  will  suffer. 

Everything  is  in  good  order  here.  We  have  the  fort  nearly  finisbe( 
with  one  gun  mounted  and  the  rifle-pits  completed,  and  can,  if  callc 
upon,  make  a good  fight.  What  we  most  want  now  is  commissar 
stores,  which  I hope  you  Avill  send  at  the  earliest  possible  moment. 

I have  the  lion  or  to  be,  yours,  &c., 

JOSIAH  PICKETT, 

• Colonel.,  Commanding  Post. 


lAP.  XXX.] 


COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

[Indorsement.] 


641 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  BernCj  N.  0.,  A;pril  19,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned  to  Colonel  Pickett.  The  signature  attached  is 
7idently  not  his  own.  This  same  communication  will  be  properly 
gned  and  returned  to  this  office. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Palmer  commanding  : 

J.  A.  JUDSO^^^, 

Ca])tain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

YorMown.  April  20,  1863. 

ajor-General  Hix, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia^  Fort  Monroe  : 

It  is  reported  at  Williamsburg  that  General  Wise  has  been  retired, 
id  that  General  Hood  replaces  him  on  this  Peninsula  with  an  addi 
)nal  regiment  of  cavalry.  If  so,  I need  two  more  regiments  of  infantry 
jthout  delay  and  the  replacement  of  the  artillery  sent  from  here  to 
orfolk  two  nights  ago.  My  men  are  overworked  now. 

The  rebels  are  anxious  about  their  Merrimac  JSTo.  somethiug  seems 
have  gone  wrong  with  them  in  that  matter.  If  anything  could  add 
the  importance  of  holding  the  line  of  Fort  Magruder  it  would  be  the 
►pearance  of  the  Merrimac. 

E.  H.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  April  21,  1863. 


It  gives  pleasure  to  say  that  General  Getty  is  safe  on  this  side  witt 
1 the  material  of  war  and  without  loss.  The  prisoners  were  sent  last 
?bt,  and  attempted  to  escape  by  uncoupling  the  cars,  but  did  not  suc- 
ed.  I shall  send  out  at  once  on  the  Swamp  or  E.  road  and  assail 
ngstreet’s  right  flank  cautiously. 


PECK, 

Major-General. 


. ^ Suffolk,  Va.,  April  21,  1863. 

yor-General  Dix: 

General  Halleck  seemed  well  pleased  with  affairs  here,  and  I am  very 
id  he  made  a visit.  I hope  you  arrived  all  safe. 

JOHNT  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


\ 

j 

‘‘jor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  21,  1863. 


General  Getty  thinks  the  enemy  has  not  fallen  back.  He  thought  so 
, one  time  yesterday.  All  over  safe.  Fires  at  night  have  not  dimin- 


41  R R — VOL  XVIII 


JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


642 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[Chap.  XX 


[Fortress  Monroe,]  April  21,  [1863.] | 

Actg.  Eear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron  : 

I returned  from  Suffolk  late  last  evening.  Lieutenant  Lamson  haj 
ing  informed  General  Peck  that  you  had  ordered  him  to  leave  the  Upp 
Nansemoud  with  his  gunboats.  General  Getty  was  directed  to  aband<l 
the  left  bank,  where  we  had  captured  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  ai| 
bring  away  the  guns.  This  has  been  done.  When  I left  last  evenia 
the  enemy  was  investing  Suffolk  as  closely  as  ever,  and  there  were  | 
signs  of  his  retiring.  1 regret  exceedingly  the  withdrawal  of  the  guf 
boats.  If,  as  we  have  reason  to  believe,  the  enemy  is  very  strong  it  wf 
be  difhcult  without  their  aid  to  prevent  his  crossing.  We  shall  do  tf 
best  we  can  with  the  two  boats  armed  by  my  orders  and  manned  by 

JOHN  A.  DIX,  I 
Alajor-  General: 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News^  Fa.,  April  21,  1863; 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Gomdg,  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Fa.  : 

General  : I am  surprised  by  the  statement  in  your  dispatch  of  tt 
date,  just  received,  that  the  captured  battery  on  the  left  bank  had  bej 
abandoned  because  ‘‘Lieutenant  Lamson  had  informed  General 
that  you  (I)  had  ordered  him  to  leave  the  Upper  Eansemond  with  l5 

gunboats.”  , . xt  • 

I inclose  a copy  of  Lieutenant  Lamson’s  report,  showing  that  thisc 

Mv  letter  of  yesterday’s  date  to  General  Peck  (a  copy  of  which  p 
inclosed),  written  last  night  (but  not  sent  to  or  forwarded  by  Lieuten^l 
Lamson  until  this  morning,  after  the  battery  was  evacuated),  aflou 
no  justification  for  the  previous  abandonment  of  the  captured  br 
tery,  which  commanded  the  communications.  As  long  as  it  was  hr 
our  boats  could  pass  above  or  below  as  it  might  be  necessary. 
sponsibility  of  abandoning  this  position  rests  on  other  shoulders  ttt 
mine.  You  must  see  that  the  representation  you  make  does  me  mji 
tice,  and  is  not  sustained  by  the  facts  of  the  case. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  yours,  ^ ^ 

S.  P.  LLL, 

Actg,  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N,  Atlantic  JBlocTcading  SquadroTii 


[Inclosures.] 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Newport  News,  Fa.,  April  21,  1863. 

Actg.  Eear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron  : 

Sir  : I have  seen  with  much  surprise  the  telegram  of  General  Dix< 
yourself,  in  which  he  says  that  “Lieutenant  Lamson  having  iiitorm 
General  Peck  that  you  had  ordered  him  (me)  to  leave  the  Upper 
mond  with  the  gunboats.  General  Getty  was  directed  to  abandon  tlie 
bank,  where  he  had  captured  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries. 

General  Dix  is  laboring  under  a great  mistake,  for  just  the  reyer 
what  he  says  is  true.  After  the  capture  of  the  battery  I receiveur 


Jhap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


643 


lers  from  you  to  remain  in  the  Upper  NTansemond  with  the  flotilla 
inder  my  command,  and  so  informed  General  Getty.  I did  not  com- 
nunicate  with  General  Peck  on  the  subject,  but  yonr  order  to  me  to 
•emain  was  forwarded  through  him. 

The  only  written  orders  I received  from  you  on  the  subject  were 
lated  on  the  18th  and  20th  instant  ^ that  of  the  18th  in  these  words  : 
‘ You  will  not  remain  in  the  river  (Upper  Nansemond)  any  longer  than 
wr  communications  remain  open,  so  that  you  can  return  and  rejoin 
jieutenant  Cushing  j not  so  long  as  to  risk  your  ability  to  return.” 

On  the  20th  you  repeated  the  same  instructions. 

When  the  first  of  the  above  orders  was  received  it  was  already  so 
langerous  to  pass  the  rebel  battery  that  I should  not  have  attempted 
t unless  I had  been  forced  to  do  so,  or  had  received  positive  orders, 
nd  Generals  Peck  and  Getty  had  both  agreed  to  put  in  execution  a 
tlan  that  I had  proposed  for  capturing  the  battery,  and  which  after 
wo  miscarriages  on  the  part  of  the  army  was  successfully  accomplished. 
On  the  19th  instant  Fleet-Captain  Crosby  came  up  with  discretionary 
rders,  dated  the  18th  instant,  in  regard  to  the  gunboats  remaining  in 
he  upper  river.  That  evening  the  battery  was  captured,  and  General 
letty  said  he  would  move  over  troops  and  hold  it  if  Captain  Crosby 
rould  direct  the  gunboats  to  remain,  which  he  did.  That  evening  I 
eceived  a telegram  from  you,  through  General  Peck,  directing  me  to 
emain  on  the  upper  river  till  further  orders. 

The  next  morning  about  12  m.  General  Getty  showed  me  his  orders 
:‘om  General  Peck  to  withdraw  from  the  captured  point,  and  later  in 
he  day  an  order  to  withdraw  before  night.  I had  received  no  orders 
'om  you  which  required  me  to  withdraw  from  the  Upper  Nansemond 
Qd  so  told  General  Getty,  and  earnestly  expressed  to  him  my  entire 
isapprobation  of  the  abandoning  of  the  captured  point.  I told  him 
^peatedly  that  I would  remain  in  the  Upper  l^ansemond  as  long  as  he 
eld  the  point,  but  that  if  he  evacuated  it  I should  be  obliged  to  go 
elow  It.  My  communications  were  perfectly  safe  as  long  as  he  held 
ns  key  to  the  river.  The  position  was  an  exceedingly  strong  one,  and 
eueral  Getty  had  crossed  more  than  1,000  men  and  had  defended  the 
iar  by  several  lines  of  rifle-pits. 

There  was  nothing  in  your  instructions  to  me  or  in  my  communica- 
ons  to  Generals  Peck  or  Getty  that  rendered  it  necessary  for  them  to 
3andon  the  work,  but  their  movement  made  it  absolutely  necessarv 
T me  to  move  below. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  H.  LAMSON, 

Lieutenantj  U.  8.  Navy^  Commanding  Flotilla. 

United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  April  20;  1863. 

fajor-General  Peck:] 

General  : By  dispatch  received  to-day  from  Lieutenant  Lamson  I 
Q in  termed  that  the  captured  rebel  battery  at  West  Branch  will  be 
landoned  to-night.  I hope  that  this  work  and  all  others  on  the  left  bank 
the  Nansemond  will  be  completely  razed,  and  not  left  to  invite  reoc- 
•pation  and  allow  the  enemy  to  annoy  us  and  cut  off  our  communica- 
^ns.  If  Suffolk  is  to  be  held  I hope  the  present  opportunity  will  be 
iproved  to  construct  such  works  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Upper  Nan- 
mond  as  its  proper  defense  requires. 


644 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Our  little  gunboats,  so  much  called  for  and  relied  on  by  the  army,  ai' 
not  a suitable  defense  for  that  stream,  and  their  services  are  really  nec 
essary  elsewhere. 

I have4he  honor  to  be,  general,  yours,  respecttully, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclmding  Squadron. 


[Indorsement.] 


This  was  written  last  night  and  sent  into  the  Nansemond  under  cove! 
to  Lieutenant  Lamson  this  morning  (21st)  and  forwarded  to  him.  Thj 
battery  was  abandoned  last  night  against  the  urgent  remonstrances  c 
Lieutenant  Lamson. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  21, 1863. 

Major-General  Hooker, 

Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

General  Halleck  has  just  left  my  headquarters.  General  Longstre 
is  here,  waiting  Hill  or  other  troops.  I hold  everything  yet.  How  ( 

you  get  along?  JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


m. 


April  21, 1863 — 10  p. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk,  Ya.  : 

Am  glad  to  hear  good  tidings  from  you.  You  must  be  p^ient  wu 
me.  I must  play  with  these  devils  before  I can  spring.  Eememh 
that  my  army  is  at  the  bottom  of  a well  ^^j^g^p^^OOKEK  ^ 

3Iajor-  General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders, 
No-  60. 


) Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

J New  Berne,  April  21,  1863 

The  fort  recently  constructed  at  Plymouth, 

Williams,  after  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams,  killed  in  action  at  Ba 
Eouge,  La.,  August  5, 1862,  who  was  the  first  general  ofOcer  commai 
ing  in  this  department. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  hOFEMAX,] 

A ftsifitant  Adiutant- General 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  22, 1863 

Major-General  Hix: 

Everything  is  as  yesterday.  Since  Hooker  has  not  moved  it  vi 
requisite  for  the  greatest  caution  here.  There  are  reports  y < 
rebels  are  sending  troops  north  from  Charleston. 
street’s  pickets  on  turnpike  10  miles  this  side  ot  Sand}  Cios 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


645 


ICiiAP.  XXX.] 

Hinton’s  Toll-Gate.  He  burned  7,000  busbels  corn  going  to  rebel  army; 
knows  that  a rebel  brigade  or  more  is  to  occupy  or  move  through  Eliz- 
abeth City. 

JOHN^  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Ya.,  April  22,  1863. 

A.ctg.  Eear- Admiral  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : I received  at  midnight  your  letter  of  yesterday  in  regard 
fjo  the  battery  captured  at  the  mouth  of  the  West  Branch  of  the  Kanse- 
nond  Eiver,  inclosing  one  from  Lieutenant  Lamson,  and  cheerfully  ac- 
cept them  as  an  explanation  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  gunboats.  I 
mpposed  the  order  to  withdraw  them  was  absolute,  and  the  impression 
rt^as  continued  by  your  former  dispatches,  in  which  jon  said  I ^‘must 
lot  rely  upon  these  frail  and  open  ferry-boats  and  river  steamers,  which 
roll  (I)  call  gunboats,  to  keep  the  rebels  from  crossing  the  Upper  Nanse- 
nond,  which  is  long,  narrow,  and  crooked,  a mere  creek,  a natural 
iaual,  and  untit  for  the  operations  of  vessels,  now  that  the  enemy  is 
establishing  his  artillery  and  rifle-pits  in  such  strength  as  to  command 
hat  communication,”  and  for  this  reason  you  said  you  did  not  see  the 
propriety  of  continuing  them  there.  From  these  and  other  expres- 
dons  of  the  same  character  I supposed  their  withdrawal  was  definitely 
settled,  although  I had  opposed  it  with  all  x)roper  earnestness.  My 
;Wo  armed  steamers  are  to  remain  there.  I know  that  there  is  danger 
bat  they  will  be  fired  into,  injured,  perhaps  crippled;  but  this  hazard 
bust  be  incurred  to  prevent  the  rebels  from  crossing.  Yours  will  be 
exposed  to  no  more  danger  than  mine.  The  position  of  the  captured 
)attery,  though  a commanding  one,  gives  us  no  security  against  the 
Tossing  of  the  enemy  except  at  that  point.  It  would  have  been  no 
)bstacle  to  his  crossing  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  or  6 miles  above,  and  the  troops  we 
nust  have  kept  there  to  hold  it  would  have  been  much  more  useful  on 
he  right  bank  of  the  river  as  a movable  force  to  oppose  him  whenever 
le  should  have  made  an  attemptto  cross.  Besides,  its  occupation  would 
lot  have  removed  your  objections  to  the  employment  of  your  gunboats 
u the  narrow  channel  above.  What  we  want  is  to  have  two  or  three 
puiboats  moving  up  and  down  the  Upper  Kansemond  for  several  miles 
0 watch  the  enemy’s  movements  and  to  aid  in  destroying  his  pontoon 
iriclge  if  he  should  attempt  to  throw  one  across  the  river. 

I have  not  time  to  enter  into  explanations,  but  if  you  will  give  to 
ueutenants  Lamson  and  Cushing  (who  have  displayed  so  much  gal- 
autry)  discretionavv  power,  so  that  they  may  go  up  the  Upper  Kanse- 
uond  when  they  think  it  safe,  and  permit  them  to  act  in  conjunction 
f Getty’  who  is  charged  with  the  defense  of  the  right  bank 

the  river,  I feel  confident  we  can  defeat  the  enemy’s  jiurpose,  and 
bould  he  establish  batteries  below  your  gunboats  I have  no  doubt  they 
be  able  to  pass  them  without  loss. 

I know  you  will  be  happy  to  hear  that  the  fleet  above  Vicksburg  has 
>assed  that  stronghold,  ns  General  Halleck  informed  me  yesterday, 
nthout  the  loss  of  a single  armed  vessel,  and  I really  think  that  your 
pprehensions  in  regard  to  your  gunboats  should  be  lessened  when  you 
onsider  that  as  yet  not  one  of  them  has  been  permanent^  disabled. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHY  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


646 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Hdors.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  xVrmy  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  22,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

A.  A.  G.,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  New  Berne,  N.  C.: 

Sir:  I liave  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  communicatiopi 
from  the  commanding  general  of  this  department  of  the  21st  instant, 
and  in  reply  to  the  interrogatory- 


Whv  was  not  a large  force  sent  to  General  Prince,  in  the  Pamlico  River,  as  orderec 
in  my^etter  of  April  1,  1863,  and  why  was  not  greater  alacrity  displayed  in  getting 
troops  to  General  Prince  ? — 


I have  the  honor  to  state  that  immediately  on  the  receipt  of  the  abovs 
instructions  all  the  troops  that  could  be  possibly  transported  by  th 
vessels  then  disposable  in  this  harbor  were  put  in  readiness  to  le^e  t( 
join  General  Prince.  At  that  time  a gale  of  wind  was  prevailing  whicl 
had  blown  the  water  out  of  the  river  to  such  a degree  that  it  wa. 
almost  impossible  for  vessels  to  move  around  the  harbor.  Ihe  steame, 
Oolyer  loaded  with  troops,  was  lying  aground  between  this  place  am 
Washington,  and  the  steamer  Escort  got  fast  aground  in  coming  up  h 
the  dock  here.  However,  four  regimente  were  on  board 
about  embarking  here  to  join  General  Prince  when  the  letter  of  th( 
corlnS  general  of  April  5 was  received.  This  letter  notihed  m, 
that  he  had  changed  his  plans,  and  that  two  regiments  weie  to  be  lef 
at  the  blockade  to  be  sent  through,  if  possible,  to  Washington,  by  th 
wav  of  the  river,  and  that  all  the  remaining  force  was  to  return  to  thi 
plaL  with  General  Prince,  who  was  directed  to  take  then  all  the  avail 
able  force  from  here  and  march  across  the  country  to  Washington.  I 
was  my  intention  to  obey  the  order  or  suggestion  of  the  commandm; 
general  and  to  send  to  General  Prince  at  least  5,000  men.  The  element 
prevented  this.  There  was  no  unnecessary  delay  on  the  part  ot  an 
one.  While  waiting  for  the  water  in  the  river  to 
Marly  all  night  and  visited  the  wharf  twice  after 
the  troops  were  waiting  to  sail.  Therefore  I cannot  see  that  there  wa 
a want  of  alacrity  displayed  in  getting  troops  to  General  Prince. 

In  reply  to  the  second  interrogatory— 

When  my  plan  was  changed,  and  orders  were  sent  in  my  letter  ^ 

across  the  coLtry  to  raise  the  siege  of  Washington,  why  did  yon  notgo  in  command 

I will  respectfully  state  that  in  the  letter  referred  to,  of  Apnl,  5 th 
commanding  general  says : 

I have  therefore  ordered  General  Prince  to  send  a 

General  Prince  returned  to  this  place  on  the  6th,  fj' * r 

troops  on  the  7th,  as  the  naval  officer  in  command  at  t>ie  hlockade  sm 
it  was  impossible  to  get  any  troops  through  by  way  of  "ver. 
the  8th  all  the  available  force  was  in  readiness  to  move.  Only  (aomi 
3,000  effective  men  were  retained  here.  The  i gy 

across  the  river  was  carried  on  all  through  night  of  the  Gh  am^ 
General  Prince  was  notified  on  the  morning  of  the  “® 

were  ready,  but  he  reported  himself  unable  to  start  '^'^h  them, 
of  his  aides.  Lieutenant  Ordway,  came  to  my  headquarters  to  ask  % 
a boat  to  be  placed  at  the  disposition  of  General  h^^mce,  who 
would  follow  the  command.  The  steamer  Allison  was  ordered  to 
placed  at  his  disposition  immediately. 

^ I proceeded  across  the  river,  informed  General 

of  affairs,  and  remained  there  until  the  whole  command  had  sta 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


647 


lAP.  XXX.] 


Immediately  on  my  return  I saw  General  Prince’s  aide,  Lieutenant 
rdway,  who  gave  me  to  understand  that  General  Prince  had  made 
i^ery  preparation  to  follow  the  command.  I was  told  that  an  ambu- 
nce  with  his  baggage  was  at  his  door.  I then  believed  that  he  was 
Ding  immediately. 

I think  it  proper  for  me  to  state  here  that  even  had  I known  that 
eneral  Prince  was  not  going  to  join  the  command  I should  not  then 
ive  gone  myself,  for  I had  determined  in  my  own  mind  that  General 
oster  needed  only  men  and  supplies  of  provisions  and  ammunition, 
]d  I felt  assured  that  I could  get  them  to  him  by  the  way  of  the 
ver  while  the  demonstration  was  being  made  by  land.  I had  deter- 
ined  that  if  any  officer  should  arrive  to  take  command  of  New  Berne 
would  take  a steamer  loaded  with  men  and  supplies  and  go  to  the 
ockade  and  see  them  through.  General  Wessells  arrived  here  on  the 
jh  and  I left  with  the  Escort  on  the  next  day.  The  delay  in  getting 
ds  steamer  through  the  blockade  was  by  no  means  unavoidable,  but 
was  a delay  for  which  I was  in  no  way  responsible.  Three  times  the 
earner  was  ready  to  move  and  she  was  stopped.  The  first  time  on  the 
^ening  of  my  arrival  at  the  blockade  by  the  refusal  of  Lieutenant-Oom- 
ander  McCann  (the  senior  naval  officer  there)  to  assist,  at  night ; the 
cond  time,  on  the  next  morning,  by  the  fog,  which  was  so  dense  on  the 
^er  that  nothing  could  be  seen  at  the  proposed  hour  of  starting ; and 
e third  time,  the  next  night,  by  the  mist  and  rain,  that  prevented  any 
ovement  on  the  river. 

The  safe  arrival  eventually  of  the  steamer  at  Washington  accom- 
ished,  I was  satisfied,  more  than  could  have  been  attained  in  any  other 
ay,  and  I was  satisfied  that  my  judgment  was  correct  and  that  I had 
ted  wisely  in  the  matter. 

With  regard  to  the  third  interrogatory — 

Was  the  question  ever  raised  in  any  consultation  or  council  of  commanding  officers 
to  my  authority  to  give  orders  for  movement  of  troops;  if  so,  when,  by  whom,  and 
der  what  circumstances  ? — 

wWl  state  that  I never  presumed  to  call  any  council  or  consultation 
officers”  to  discuss  plain  orders  sent  to  me  by  the  commanding  gen- 
al.  His  orders  issued  from  Washington  were  just  as  much  obeyed 
d respected  by  me  as  they  would  have  been  had  they  been  issued  from 
is  place. 

It  is  true,  however,  that  I was  an  unwilling  listener  to  several  private 
nversationsjn  which  the  “propriety”  of  sending  too  many  troops 
^ay  from  this  place,  or  the  “policy”  of  abandoning  everything  to  the 
ving  of  Washington,  was  spoken  of,  and  doubts  expressed  as  to  who 
kler  the  circumstances  was  in  command  of  the  department.  I took  no 
rt  in  any  such  discussions  any  more  than  to  inform  every  person  that 
e orders  of  the  commanding  general  would  be  obeyed,  even  if  they 
3re  to  abandon  New  Berne  and  everything  in  it. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  N.  PALMER, 
Brigadier- General, 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne,  N.  0.,  April  22,  1863. 

^ar- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron: 

Admiral  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letter 
^ the  17th,  on  the  subject  of  the  occupation  by  our  troops  of  too  many 


648 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXXt< 


posts,  recommending  that  these  posts  be  abandoned  for  the  purpose  oh 
concentration.  This  letter  has  unfortunately  been  mislaid,  and  so  I caij 
only  answer  the  general  tenor  of  the  letter,  confining  myself  to  the  rea: 
sons  for  the  occupation  of  the  posts  and  for  continuing  to  hold  them.  i 

In  regard  to  Fort  Macon  and  the  adjoining  posts  of  Morehead  Git;; 
and  Beaufort,  there  can,  1 think,  be  no  question  as  to  the  necessity  c' 
holding  them  j likewise  the  forts  at  Hatteras,  which  hold  the  eutranc 
to  the  Sounds;  also  Koanoke  Island,  which  controls  the  navigation  c 
Albemarle  Sound.  Then  there  only  remain  the  towns  of  FTew  Berni 
Washington,  and  Plymouth.  The  former  was  occupied  March  4,  1861 
and  has  since  been  fortified  and  is  held  as  a depot  for  supplies  and  as 
basis  for  operations,  possessing  as  it  does  the  advantages  of  two  line 
of  communication,  one  by  railroad  to  Beaufort  Harbor  and  one  by  tk 
river  to  the  Sounds. 

The  history  of  the  occupation  of  Washington  and  Plymouth  is  tha 
they  were  first  held  by  gunboats  lying  opposite  the  towns.  Afterwar 
a picket  guard  of  one  company  was  sent  to  each  place,  as  a picket  guar 
for  the  gunboats  on  shore.  This  guard  was  afterward  increased  a 
demanded  by  circumstances  and  the  necessities  of  service.  Finally  tb 
importance  of  occupying  the  posts  permanently  was  seen  and  reco[ 
nized,  and  works  were  erected  for  this  purpose.  Some  of  the  reasor 
which  led  to  this  determination  were  as  follows : 

1st.  By  not  occupying  these  points — New  Berne,  Washington,  an 
Plymouth — we  permit  their  occupation  by  the  enemy  and  their  use  b 
them  as  yards  and  arsenals  in  which  to  prepare  rams  and  gunboats  t 
operate  against  our  gunboats  in  tbe  Sounds. 

2d.  To  permit  egress  of  any  lighter-draught  gunboat  that  may  I 
built  in  the  rivers  above;  and,  in  fine,  gives  our  gunboats  the  control  < 
those  rivers  for  ofiensive  operations  by  water. 

3d.  These  towns  afford  excellent  landing  places,  at  which  our  force 
could  be  quickly  and  safely  concentrated  for  offensive  operations  b 
land,  having  the  towns  as  bases.  This  advantage  is  the  more  sensibl 
felt  when  any  one  town  is  besieged. 

4th.  These  three  strategical  points  retain  within  their  power  all  tl 
counties  to  the  east  of  them,  which  is  a matter  of  some  importance,  t 
they  are  the  most  fertile  in  corn,  &c.,  of  any  in  the  State,  and  are  s 
considered  by  the  Confederate  Government,  as  shown  by  the  efforts  > 
General  Hill  to  repossess  them. 

In  conclusion,  I am  strongly  of  the  opinion  that  as  longps  I am  stror 
enough  to  hold  these  points  I should  do  so,  and  further  think  that  if  tl 
exigency  should  compel  me  to  abandon  either  that  it  would  be  a lo 
advantage,  inasmuch  as  by  holding  the  three  I can  operate  more  effec 

ively  with force  than  I could  with  the  same  force  concentrate 

at  one  or  two  of  them,  and  the  others  held  by  the  enemy. 

In  a naval  point  of  view  I of  course  yield  and  defer  to  your  Jiul 
ment,  but  it  is  my  conviction  that  were  either  of  these  points  held  1. 
the  euemj^,  a larger,  not  a smaller,  naval  force  would  be  necessary 
hold  the  Sounds,  irresi)ective  of  river  navigation  and  the  convoying 


vessels.  . .. 

These  views  are  sent  to  you  in,  I assure  you,  the  most  friendly  spir 
and  in  accordance  with  the  harmony  which  has  always  existed  betwej 
our  two  arms  of  the  service,  and  merely  that  by  exchanging  ideas  tJ 
result  most  to  the  interests  of  the  service  may  be  arrived  at. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  admiral,  very  respectfully,  your  obedie 

servant,  

. J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Major-General.  Commanding. 


Ihap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -UNION.  649 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yiroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Ffc,  April  23,  18(33. 

General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General4n-  Chief: 

General  : In  my  telegraphic  dispatch  of  the  18th  I said  that  I had 
)een  long  in  favor  of  occupying  West  Point.  I should  have  taken  pos- 
;ession  of  it  if  1 had  been  able  to  spare  5,000  men,  the  smallest  number 
•equisite  to  make  the  occupation  secure.  My  object  was  to  cut  off 
Gloucester  and  Matthews  Counties  as  sources  of  supply  to  the  insur- 
gents, and  to  break  up  the  system  of  contraband  trade  across  those 
counties,  and  from  the  Piankatank  Eiver  and  the  mouth  of  the  Eap- 
)ahannock.  In  your  letter  of  the  17th  instant  you  suggest  the  occu- 
)ation  of  that  position  as  a base  for  a movement  in  support  of  General 
looker,  who  I suppose  is  to  move  on  Eichmond  from  Fredericksburg. 

have  no  doubt  that  it  would  be  advisable  if  I could  have  a sufficient 
brce.  The  White  House  would  be  a still  better  position,  as  it  is  20 
ailes  nearer  the  enemy’s  flank,  but  portions  of  the  Pamunkey  Eiver  are 
larrow,  and  the  water  communications  might  be  interrupted  or  made 
nsecure  by  batteries  planted  on  its  banks.  Should  the  enemy  with- 
Iraw  from  Suffolk  I will  occupy  West  Point  with  all  the  force  I can 
pare. 

I agree  with  you  that  a movement  on  Weldon  would  be  hazardous, 
ind  it  would  be  of  little  advantage  unless  we  could  go  there  in  suffi- 
iieut  force  to  hold  it.  The  destruction  of  the  railroad  bridge  at  Golds- 
)orough,  which  cost  us  many  lives,  only  interrupted  the  communication 
or  about  thirty  days,  a temporary  inconvenience  but  not  a serious  dis- 
ister  to  the  enemy.  Our  great  error  has  been  in  occupying  too  many 
)Ositions.  There  was  an  excuse  for  scattering  our  forces  while  there 
vras  reason  to  believe  that  the  people  of  the  South  would  rally  around 
hem  as  nucleus  for  the  restoration  of  the  Union.  This  hope  is  now  gone, 
lud  as  our  only  chance  of  success  is  by  overpowering  them  by  prepon- 
lerance  of  force  or  wearing  them  out  by  cutting  off  their  commerce  with 
joreign  countries,  all  interior  positions,  unless  they  have  some  special 
Importance,  should  be  abandoned. 

; 111  this  department  no  useless  positions  are  occupied.  There  are  but 
I wo  points  of  great  importance— Fort  Monroe  and  IGorfolk— the  former 
Ls  a military  position  commanding  the  Chesapeake  Bay  and  the  rivers 
! hat  enter  into  it,  and  the  latter  as  a naval  station  for  the  repair  of 
!'ur  gunboats  and  transports,  which  would  otherwise  be  obliged  to  go 
jo  Baltimore  or  Washington  on  the  occurrence  of  any  ordinary  casualty, 
'juftolk  was  occupied  partly  to  cover  Norfolk  and  partly  in  pursuance 
|>f  the  purpose,  already  referred  to,  of  affording  to  the  people  a rallying 
;)omt  for  the  restoration  of  the  Union.  In  the  latter  respect  it  has 
ailed,  and  in  view  of  the  former  there  is  a better  position — the  line  of 
he  Deep  Creek  and  the  West  Branch  of  Elizabeth  Eiver — more  defensi- 
ble, and  from  which  an  army  could  retire  on  Norfolk  with  ease  and 
t‘'ffety.  I am  preparing  to  fortify  it.  Suffolk  is  weak  from  the  long 
Ind  narrow  channel  of  the  Nansemond,  running  7 miles  to  the  rear,  with 
n average  width  of  less  than  100  yards.  It  requires  a large  force  and 
incessant  vigilance  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing  and  cutting  off 
inr  communications  with  Norfolk.  But  as  it  would  be  impossible  to 
all  back  on  that  city  in  the  face  of  a superior  force  it  must  be  held  at 
; 11  hazards. 

Yorktown  is  occupied  to  keep  the  enemy  at  a distance  from  this  post, 
le  would  not  be  likely  to  pass  it  wffiile  held  by  us.  If  it  were  aban- 


[ 


650 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX 


doned  he  would  push  his  forces  down  to  Bethel  or  Hampton  and  shut 
us  up  in  the  fort.  Williamsburg  is  only  held  as  a picket  station  of 
Yorktown,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  approaching  the  latter  and  har- 
assing us  in  our  intrenchments  with  rifled  cannon  and  small-arms  of 
long  range.  The  troops  in  the  vicinity  of  Williamsburg  have  orders  to 
fall  back  on  Yorktown  if  menaced  by  superior  numbers. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  HIX, 
Major-General, 


Suffolk,  April  23, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

As  you  well  know,  I have  for  many  months  performed  more  duties 
than  is  incident  to  any  one  army  corps  in  the  service.  Xow  I am  per- 
forming more  than  the  commanders  of  two  corps  in  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac.  I cannot  do  so  longer  in  a proper  manner  without  the  rank 
and  staff  machinery.  Please  act  upon  this  matter  with  the  Secretary. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  23, 1863. 

Major-General  Bix : 

Y^esterday  was  devoted  to  exploration  in  the  Dismal  Swamp.  The 
impression  was  strong  that,  not  succeeding  in  crossing  the  river.  Long- 
street  was  cutting  a road  through  from  the  Edenton  road.  Duke  states 
there  is  a ridge  by  which  they  can  get  through  to  the  railway.  A partyj 
is  out  now.  In  consequence  of  this  and  of  the  rain  that  demonstration 
was  delayed.  It  is  reported  that  their  cars  have  been  heard.  Not  sat- 
isfied  of  its  correctness.  ^ 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  April  23,  1863. 

Major-General  DiX: 

Affairs  stand  as  yesterday.  I am  employing  all  possible  nmaiis  tc 
strengthen  the  river  line.  The  boats  of  the  Navy  are  below  the  Branch 
Have  sent  troops  into  the  swamp  along  the  canal  to  watch  the  left  flank 
Major  Stratton  says  the  people  report  a force  of  3,000  or  4,000  on  thn 
side  the  Chowan,  drawing  supplies  from  that  section.  He  sent  Mr 
Hinton,  of  Hintonsville,  in  as  a prisoner,  a man  of  means  and  influence 
Mr.  Hinton  says  there  is  a force  there,  and  that  nineteen  wagons  witt 
cavalry  were  up  after  forage.  He  says  they  are  HilFs. 

PECK, 
Major- General, 


Off  Newport  News,  April  23, 1863 — 8 a.  m. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy  : 

Lieutenant  Cushing  reports  that  yesterday  afternoon  with  90  men  an( 
a howitzer  he  went  to  the  village  of  Chuckatuck,  where  a large  cava  r 
force  was  reported  to  be.  Encountered  40  cavalry  in  the  village;  u( 


lAF.  XXX. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


651 


ated  them ; killed  2 and  captured  3 of  their  horses,  fully  equipped, 
e lost  1 man  killed.  He  thinks  that  his  reconnaissance  shows  that 
jie  enemy  are  not  in  strong  force  near  Suffolk. 

! S.  P.  LEE, 

i ■ Acting  Rear-Admiral, 


United  States  Elao-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  R'en'port  News,  Va.,  April  23,  1863. 
iaj.  Gen.  John  A.  Hix,  U.  S.  A., 

I Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya.  : 
j General  : I respectfully  inform  you  that  the  proclamation  of  the 
resident  of  the  United  States,  dated  March  31,*  and  the  accompanying 
der  of  the  Secretaries  of  Warf  and  Navy  of  the  same  date,  regarding 
I mmercial  intercourse  with  inhabitants  of  the  insurrectionary  regions, 
liich  I understand  as  superseding  the  order  of  the  President,  dated 
Dvember  12,  1862, J in  reference  to  vessels  and  merchandise  entering 
|id  departing  from  the  port  of  Norfolk,  have  been  communicated  this 
ly  to  the  guard  vessels  for  their  guidance. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P^.  LEE, 

Actg.  Eear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  April  23,  1863. 
ij.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General:  I send  herewith  4 negroes,  who  went  on  board  the  Mount 
ashington  in  the  Nansemond  on  the  15th  instant,  representing  that 
ley  were  free  negroes,  and  that  there  was  no  enemy  in  sight;  but 
ircely  a minute  had  elapsed  when  the  Mount  Washington  was  at- 
liked  and  a long  and  severe  enpgement  followed.  I respectfully  re- 
est  that  you  will  make  such  disposition  of  them  as  may  seem  proper 
I der  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron, 


, . Fort  Monroe,  April  23, 1863. 

djor-General  Keyes, 

Commanding,  Yorktown  : 

;*«^^^®been  every  day  since  you  were  here  to  the  Nansemond  or  to 
ffoik.  We  cannot  get  more  troops  for  you  at  present.  I do  not  feel 
[ij  about  our  force  at  Fort  Magruder.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to 
d It  off.  If  we  remain  there  we  must  hold  Williamsburg  with  our 
yXetiL  Please  send  the  correspondence  with  Hr.  Wager,  late  in 
jarge  of  the  asylum.  1 may  write  General  Wise.  If  we  get  rid  of  the 
s.amy  at  Suffolk  I shall  strengthen  you  for  active  work. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

- * Major-  General, 

See  p.  572.  t See  General  Orders,  No.  88,  April  3,  p.  580.  t See  p.  452.  ^ 


652 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  XXX. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

YorMown,  April  23,  1863. 

of  Yircjinia,  Fort  Monroe : 

Your  telegram  just  received.  We  have  had  time  to  make  such  ar 
raugements  on  the  line  of  Fort  Magruder  as  to  be^secure  against  surprise' 
We  occupy  seven  redoubts  in  addition  to  that  fort,  and  oui  troops  sa^ 
they  cL  and  ^vill  hold  the  line  against  any  force  the  enemy  can  bnuf 
Sst  them.  They  foiled  Wise  and  are  in  high  spirits.  I can  nov 
hold  my  ground  without  re-enforcements,  but  more  troops  are  needeo 
to  ea^e  the  great  labors  of  those  with  me.  We  have  a strong  pmke 
line  above  the  forts,  with  cavalry  vedettes  close  up  to  the  town.  It  th 
enemy  attacks  we  can  damage  him  three  or  four  times  more  than  he  cai 

*^Twm  send  the  only  letter  received  from  Dr.  Wager  since  the  attack 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Mainr- General. 


General  Orders, 


No.  62. 


Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Afew  Berne^  April  23,  1863. 


Tn  order  that  a more  constant  supervision  may  exist  at 
posts  in  this  department,  the  following  districts  are  hereby  establishei 

and  will  be  commanded  as  follows  i . , ii  a.t 
T The  first  will  be  known  as  the  District  of  the  Neuse. 
this  district  will  embrace  that  portion  of  the  department 
yond  ?he  outskle  limits  of  the  post  of  New  Berne,  t^e  f dread  ^ 
stations  pertaining  thereto,  Morehead  City,  Cajobna  ^‘tJ^B^aufo^r^u 
Fort  Macon,  and  will  be  commanded  bj  Biu,.  Gen.  He  y . » 

whose  headquarters  will  be  at  Beaufort,  N.  C.  Albemarle 

II  The  second  will  be  known  as  the  District  of  tae  Albemaile. 

This  district  will  include  the  posts  f Ved  wbhirthe  Hmi 

and  such  other  posts  as  may  be  l^ere^^er  established  inthin  the  1^^^ 

of  the  district,  and  will  be  commanded  by  Br  g.  . J 
sells  whose  headquaxters  will  be  at  Plymouth, 

Tii  The  third  will  be  known  as  the  District  of  the  Pamlico. 

This  dXkt  Will  include  the  posts  of  Washington  and  Hatteras  Ini 
and  such  other  posts  as  may  be  •‘ereajte’'  establishe^I  win 
of  the  district,  and  will  be  commanded  by  Brig.  Cen.  Ileiirj 
whose  headquarters  will  be  at  Washington,  N.  O. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  hOW.MAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.' 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  24, 1863. 

^^Major  Stratton  reports  tjie  Third  de^^^ 

and  expects  it  will  attempt  to  cut  him  oft,  but  feels  conhdeiir 

ing  the  purpose.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


653 


UAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC UNION. 


lajor-General  Dix ; 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  24,  1863. 


It  is  very  muddy  and  much  water  on  the  ground,  but  I think  it  ad- 
isable  to  make  a demonstration  on  the  swamp  flank.  Shall  be  very 
lad  to  see  you.  If  you  come  let  me  know  the  hour  of  leaving. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


lajor-General  Hix: 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  24,  1863. 


Six  prisoners  were  taken  this  afternoon.  They  state  no  troops  have 
)ft.  A rumor  was  in  circulation  that  troops  were  coming  to  both 
rmies  from  Fredericksburg.  Supplies  come  to  them  from  Franklin, 
hey  say  General  French  is  much  censured  for  losing  the  artillery, 
[ear  nothing  of  troops  leaving.  Waiting  to  strike  us  outside. 

General  Getty  just  reports  that  the  enemy  are  erecting  works  at  new 
oints  on  the  river. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  24,  1863. 

lajor-General  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

Eichmond  papers  state  that  Longstreet  has  been  re-enforced.  They 
re  despondent  about  his  campaign.  This  afternoon  I made  a demon- 
tration  on  his  right,  resting  on  the  Edenton  road.  Thus  far  my  opera- 
onshave  been  successful. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 

(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  April  24,  1863—9.30  p.  m. 
laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I went  to  Sulfolk  this  morning  and  returned  this  evening.  General 
orcoran  was  sent  with  a strong  force  at  1 o’clock.  General  Peck, 
hose  excellent  arrangements  I cannot  too  highly  commend,  just  sent 
le  following  dispatch : 


I ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  24,  1863. 


* We  made  a successful  demonstration  on  Longstreet’s  right  flank  in  a heavy  rain 
lie  enemy  was  routed  out  of  all  his  advance  rifle-pits  and  driven  back  to  his  main  de- 
■nses  at  Darden’s  Mill  Dam  in  a very  handsome  manner,  where  several  batteries  are 
siea,  and  it  is  thought  that  a large  force  is  massed  between  the  Edenton  and  Som- 
n®’  ^^®  of  the  movement  was  fullv  at- 

iJuea.  Corcoran,  I oster,  and  Spear  were  out.  The  bayonet  was  used  with  effect. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General.  ^ 


654 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXS,  : 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
Fort  Monroe^  Fa.,  April  25,  18G3. 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  FlocTcading  Sguadron  : 

Admiral  : I received  in  New  York  City  your  letter  of  the  9tli  instant 
advising  me  that  the  Navy  Department,  under  date  of  April  8,  decline 
to  authorize  certain  articles  for  the  Smith  Briggs  to  be  furnished  froi 
the  Navy  supplies,  &c. ; also  that  you  are  directed  hereafter  to  refe 
my  requisitions  for  ordnance  for  gunboats  to  the  Navy  Department,  t: 
enable  it  to  inquire  of  the  War  Department  if  such  requisitions  ar 

authorized  or  sanctioned  by  it.  , ^ ^ i ^ i u 

The  difficulty  of  procuring  from  the  Navy  gunboats  of  light  draiigh 
decided  me  some  months  ago  to  arm  one  or  two  quartermasters  boat 
for  the  defense  of  the  Upper  Nansemond.  The  propriety  of  the  meat 
ure  is  vindicated  by  the  existing  condition  of  things  there,  your  gun 
boats  being  withdrawn  and  the  Smith  Briggs,  one  of  the  boats  arrae 
by  me,  being  one  of  our  chief  supports  at  Suffolk.  These  boats  wen 
armed  by  me  by  virtue  of  my  general  authority,  as  commanding  office 
of  the  department,  to  do  whatever  is  essential  for  the  safety  of  my  coni 
mand  in  the  face  of  the  enemy. . I did  not  hesitate,  therefore,  withoh 
any  special  authority  from  the  War  Department,  to  ask  you  forcertai 
articles  required  for  the  boats  referred  to,  not  doubting  that  you  woul 
promptly  respond,  as  you  always  have  done,  to  any  requisition  tor  C( 
operation  in  maintaining  the  authority  of  the  Government  against  tb 
common  enemy.  In  the  same  spirit  our  tugs,  our  army  wagons,  ou 
ammunitioD,  and  whatever  else  you  needed  have  always  been  placed  i 
your  disposal  without  inquiring  into  your  authority  to  ask  tor  them. 

Though  the  Navy  Department  has  decided  to  respond  to  no  moi 
requisitions  from  me,  as  commander  of  the  department,  for  ordnance  h 
the  gunboats,  whatever  may  be  the  urgency  of  the  ca^,  wi^out  inqui 
ing  whether  they  are  authorized  or  sanctioned  by  the  V ar  I^partmen 
I beg  to  say  that  in  reference  to  you,  as  commanding  officer  ot  t 
blockading  squadron,  I shall  act  on  a totally  different  principle,  an 
that  any  material  of  war  of  any  sort  under  my  control  which  you  ma 
need  in'^the  discharge  of  your  responsible  duties  will  be  mostcheertuli 
furnished  on  your  requisition  without  stopping  to  inquire  whether  tlic 

are  authorized  or  approved  by  the  Navy  Department. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ser^nt, 

JOHN  A.  DIN, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  25, 1803. 

Major-General  Dix:  t / i 

The  enemy  clearly  meditated  a crossing  last  night  between 
Creek  and  Fort  Conn.  There  was  great  activity  on  his  part.  i 

shelled  from  Fort  Onondaga  and  the  vigilance  of  the  troops  deiea 

his  intentions.  ^ i 1 nU* 

Have  re-enforced  Major  Stratton,  who  is  being  cut  on. 

JOHN  J.  FBLiv, 

Major-  Genera  1. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  25, 1803. 

General  Egbert  L.  Viele  : i ti  r 

Major  Bovey  will  report  to  you.  Longstreet  is  still  at  work.  He 
a road  down  to  the  river  last  night  and  fully  intended  to  cross 


0 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


655 


\jaAP.  XXX.  J 

batteries  command  the  road.  We  made  a successful  demonstration  on 
his  right  flank  yesterday,  driving  in  all  his  advanced  parties  from  their 
rifle-pits,  nearly  three-quarters  of  a mile,  to  their  main  line  at  Darden^s 
Mill  Dam. 

JOHN-  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 


Suffolk,  April  25, 1863—4.30  p.  m. 

Major- General  Dix: 

Several  regiments  are  here  whose  terms  expire  in  a few  days.  What 
shall  1 do  with  them  ? 

Two  deserters  state  clearly  that  General  GarnetPs  brigade  has  joined 
isdthin  three  days  from  NTorth  Carolina  j also  that  troops  are  expected 
Tom  Fredericksburg. 

JOHNT  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General, 


Fort  Monroe,  April  25,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck, 

Commanding y Suffolk: 

On  Tuesday  two  heavy  guns,  drawn  each  by  10  horses,  passed  down 
he  Black  water  on  the  way  to  Suffolk. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General,- 


^ , Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  25,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix:  ^ i if  i 

It  only  goes  to  show  that  they  have  no  idea  of  leaving.  The  impres- 
sion is  that  new  troops  are  arriving.  One  brigade  is  certainly  here  from 
S^orth  Carolina.  Several  bands  of  music  were  playing  last  evening  on 
he  high  ground.  When  will  the  other  10-pounder  Parrotts  be  up? 
Ye  need  more  in  the  field-works  in  order  to  release  the  horse  batteries. 
Not  less  than  twenty  pieces  are  requisite  for  General  Getty ^s  line,  which 
'educes  our  stock.  ’ 

JOHN  J.  PECK 

Major-  General, 


leneral  Hooker: 


[April,  25, 1863.] 


One  brigade  has  just  joined  Longstreet  from  Carolina.  He  is  bring- 
Dg  very  heavy  artillery.  He  means  to  take  his  time. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General, 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 
Dept,  of  North  Carolina^  New  Berne,,  April  25,  1863. 
^aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia : 

My  Dear  General  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  24th,  and  in 
■ccordance  with  your  request  am  now  starting  as  strong  force  as  I can 
pare  to  make  an  attack  on  D.  H.  Hill,  at  Kinston. 


656 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. ; 


I shall  continue  this  demonstration  for  four  or  five  days,  and  if  in 
the  mean  time  you  do  not  defeat  Longstreet  I will  make  a new  demon- 
stration in  another  direction. 

Please  keep  me  constantly  advised  of  what  you  wish,  and  i will  aid 
you  to  the  extent  of  my  power. . If  I only  had  my  troops  back  from 
South  Carolina  I should  be  able  to  make  such  an  attack  up  the  Eoan-i 
oke  Kiver  as  would  make  Longstreet  retire  or  leave  Weldon.  I was 
half  tempted  to  run  up  to  Suffolk  and  look  at  your  defenses.  If  they 
are  properly  constructed  and  well  laid  out  General  Peck  ought  to  be 
able  to  hold  out  against  five  times  his  number.  At  W ashington  we  were 
unassailable  (after  the  first  day)  with  ten  times  our  number  around  us. 

Our  outposts  taunted  the  rebels  with  the  inquiry  why  they  did  not 
come  in  and  take  Little  Washington. 

Egotism  apart,  however,  every  line  of  defenses  should  have  at  about 
800  yards  (dependent  upon  the  natural  features  of  the  ground)  a self 
sustaining  work,  perfectly  inclosed,  which  cannot  be  taken  even  if  the 
enemy  penetrated  the  lines  on  the  right  or  left.  These  works  should  bel 
able  to  fire  even  to  the  rear.  Each  of  these  works  should  be  mounted 
with  heavy  guns  (long  32-pounders,  firing  shell,  are  very  good)  am 
completelv  manned.  The  garrisons  should  be  instructed  to  hold  theii 
works  to  the  last  extremity,  and  made  to  feel  their  entire  independence 
of  any  mishaps  to  other  portions  of  the  line. 

These  works  should  be  of  a strong  profile,  with  a wide  and  deep  ditcl 
without,  and  a palisade  in  the  middle  of  the  ditch  or  a good  abatis 
in  front  of  it.  Between  these  works  should  extend  a line  of  intantn 
intrenchments,  with  a good  ditch  and  parapet  flanked  by  the  fires  of  tin 

strong  works.  ...  , 

If  there  be  time,  the  infantry  intrenchments  (along  which  embrasure: 
for  light  field  pieces  may  be  roughly  made)  may  be  supplied  with  loop 
holes  for  infantry,  formed  of  rods  and  high  enough  to  protect  the  head 
of  those  firing.  If  you  have  any  timber  send  me,  and  at  once,  and 

will  do  all  that  I can.  , . \ i.  i n 

My  advance  toward  Kinston  are  already  in  front  of  the  rebels  at  Lor. 

Creek,  and  will  engage  them  to-morrow. 

Ever  yours,  most  truly,  j.  G.  EOSTEE, 

Major  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Dept,  of  North  Carolina.,  April  25,  1863. 

Admiral  S.  P.  Lee,  . o ^ 

Comdg.  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron, 

U.  S.  Flag-ship  Minnesota,  off  Newport  News,  Ya.  : 
Admiral  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  lettd 
of  the  24th  in  relation  to  the  occupying  of  Smith’s  Island,  at  the  mour 
of  the  Cape  Fear  Elver,  by  our  forces.  The  idea  is  a good  one,  an 
should,  in  my  opinion,  be  carried  out  as  soon  as  other  operations  wi 

permit  or  render  it  advisable.  ^ i -.ri  n? 

When  the  plan  of  operations  against  Wilmington  was  decided  o 
and  mv  preparations  were  making,  this  point  (Smith’s  Island) 
lected  as  the  hrst  point  on  which  to  land  and  make  an  establishiuei  . 
cover  a depot  of  supplies.  1 am  glad  that  Captain  Case  ^^es  the  ^ 
portance  ot  it  now,  for  there  is  no  reason  wlQ^  it  niay  not  be 
[manner]  he  suggests,  and  tlius  relieve  the  blockading  \ esse 
west  entrance  of  the  Cape  Fear  Elver. 


iiiAP.  XXX.] 


CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


657 


There  may,  however,  at  this  time  be  some  trouble  in  occupying  the 
sland,  for  1 have  heard  that  the  rebels  have  recently  planted  a battery 
|)n  the  island  to  prevent  this  very  thing.  The  island  can  nevertheless 
be  taken  by  a determined  effort  at  any  time  chat  it  is  absolutely  re- 
l|uired.  I will  be  most  happy  to  co-operate  in  any  way  as  soon  as  I 
lave  the  force. 

I If  the  8,000  men  belonging  to  this  department,  now  lying  at  Port 
(Lioyal,  were  sent  back  to  me,  with  the  abundant  supply  of  siege  guns, 
iramunition,  and  artillery  that  I took  down  with  me  to  the  Department 
|)f  the  South,  I will  at  once  engage  to  occupy  Smith’s  Island  with  bat- 
teries to  command  the  channel,  to  annoy  Port  Caswell,  and  also  as  far 
IS  practicable  to  command  the  New  Inlet  Channel.  Unless  this  return 
)f  my  troops  be  made,  which  is  now  refused  by  the  Government,  I can 
lo  nothing  to  aid  you,  inasmuch  as  nearly  1,000  of  the  two-years’  men 
lave  to  be  discharged  in  a few  weeks  and  eight  regiments  of  nine- 
nonths’  men  within  two  months.  This  will  very  seriously  deplete  my 
already  small  force,  and  although  I can  hold  my  own  I cannot  under- 
ake to  do  more  than  act  strictly  on  the  defensive. 

Whatever  may  be  decided  on  by  the  Government  you  can  rely  upon 
ny  ready  and  energetic  co-operation. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  POSTEE, 

Major -General^  Commanding, 

P.  S. — I am  now  moving  on  Kinston. 


Port  Monroe,  Va., 

Ajgril  26,  1863—7.30  p.  m. 

ylaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  : 

1 have  just  returned  from  Suffolk.  I went  to  the  top  of  the  signal 

itatiou,  80  feet  high,  and  saw  two  forts  which  the  enemy  is  building 

me  in  front  of  Port  Nansemond  and.the  other  across  the  river,  below 
xeneral  Peck’s  headquarters.  Garnett’s  brigade,  which  arrived  on 
.'riday,  consists  of  five  regiments.  One  of  my  spies,  who  arrived  last 
wening,  reports  Powhatan  not  yet  armed,  but  600  contrabands  at  work. 
Cwo  thousand  troops,  who  were  there  a fortnight  ago,  have  come  to 
kffolk.  The  Navy  could  easily  have  prevented  the  enemy  from  in- 
renching  at  Port  Powhatan.  Everything  indicates  that  the  movement 
>n  Suffolk  is  a campaign  and  looks  to  Norfolk.  The  gauge  of  the  rail- 
oad  from  Petersburg  to  the  Blackwater  has  been  altered  to  correspond 
vith  ours  this  side.  If  you  can  spare  a few  thousand  more  troops  they 
vill  no  doubt  be  needed,  and  can  be  sent  back  the  moment  the  exigency 
s over.  The  extent  of  our  river  line  absorbs  a large  number.  The 
memy  has  cut  a broad  road  down  to  the  river,  and  indicates  a deter- 
aination  to  cross. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


, . Suffolk,  Va.,  April  26, 1863. 

lajor-General  Dix,  Norfolh: 

Major  Stratton  had  some  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  yesterday : the 
•articulars  I have  not  learned. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


42  R R — VOL  XVIII 


658 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chai>.  XXX, 


Fort  Monroe,  April  26,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  ^ ^ 

Commanding^  Suffolk: 

I send  YOU  to  day  by  mail  a brigadier-general’s  commission  fo 
Oolonel  Harland.  General  Gordon  was  here  yesterday  and  has  gon. 
back  for  his  staff.  Ho  will  return  in  a few  days.  I am  not  quite  sur 
whether  I shall  bo  with  you  to-day.  The  enemy  has  no  artillery  i^er. 
General  Getty  captured  the  battery.  Lieutenant  Kowe,  of  the  esj 
End,  volunteers  to  pilot  the  Commerce  down. 

Major-  General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  26, 1863. 

Major-General  Hooker, 

Army  of  the  Potomac : 

Longstreet  is  still  here.  Heavy  artillery  is  coming  to  him  fro; 
Petersburg.  The  storm  has  ceased;  mud  drying  up.  Advise  me  i 
cipher  of  as  much  as  you  deem  proper  of 

Major-General. 


April  26,  1863. 

Major-General  Peok,  Suffollc,  Va.: 

Your  dispatch  received.  I have  been  delayed  in  my  operations  t 
the  severe  storm.  I have  commnnicated  to  no  one  what  my  intentioi 
are  If  Yon  were  here  I could  properly  and  willingly  impart  them  i 
YOii.  So  much  is  found  out  by  the  enemy  in  my  front  with  regard 

movements  that  I have  concealed  my  designs  from  my  own  staff,  ai 

I dare  not  intrust  them  to  the  wires,  knowing  as  I do  that  they  are  . 

often  tapped.  JOSEPH  HOOKER, 

Major-General 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  27, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix:  ^ ^ ^ n 

Major  Stratton  reports  that  he  destroyed  a new  feKy-boat  at  Cm 
den,  opposite  Elizabeth.  Three  hnndred  guerrillas  at  Elizabeth,  calk 
Eifty-sihh  North  Carolina.  He  is  advised  of  500  cavalry  and  four  picc. 
in  t^t  vicinity,  with  a regiment  of  infantry  at  ^ “9“ 

are  the  sources.  The  Eifth  Virginia  Infantry  has  left  Woodvillo  1 

^'A'party  attempted  to  cross  near  Sleepy 

Major-General 


Suffolk,  April  27, 1868. 

Col.  D.  T.  Van  Buren,  Fort  Monroe : 

The  engineer  and  captain  of  the  Commerce  refuse  1^ 
a payment  of  $50  to  a volunteer  engineer  be 

Major-General 


HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ,ETC. — UNION. 


659 


Fort  Monroe,  April  27,  1863. 

laj or- General  Peck: 

General  Dix  says  you  can  offer  the  $50  to  a volunteer. 


D.  T.  VAN  BUBEN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  April  27, 1863. 

lajor-General  Peck: 

The  Commerce  and  Swan  have  arrived  safely.  Somewhat  peppered, 
ut  all  right.  Lieutenant  Kowe  deserves  great  credit. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  D.  G.,  April  21^  1863. 

[ajor-General  Foster, 

Commanding^  the.,  N'ew  Berne ^ N.  G. : 

Qeneral  : The  Navy  Department  has  requested  that  your  attention 
e called  to  the  importance  of  the  military  occupation  of  Smithes  Island 
b the  mouth  of  Cape  Fear  Eiver.  It  is  said  that  by  the  occupation  of 
lis  island  both  channels  may  be  closed,  and  thus  prevent  the  entrance 
f contraband  goods  to  Wilmington. 

I informed  Mr.  Fox  that  no  additional  forces  could  be  given  to  you 
b the  present  time,  but  that  possibly  you  might  accomplish  this  object, 
liich  he  deems  most  important.  He  says  that  at  this  season,  while  the 
ater  is  smooth,  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  landing. 

If  you  should  be  able  to  occupy  this  island  as  many  contrabands  as 
ossible  should  be  used  in  fortifying  and  holding  the  position.  I un- 
erstand  from  the  Secretary  of  War  that  a Colonel  Wild,  of  Boston^ 
as  been  directed  to  report  to  you  to  organize  one  or  more  negro  regi- 
lents.  If  this  should  be  done  it  is  suggested  that  they  can  be  used  to 
le  best  advantage  on  Smith’s  Island. 

It  is  regretted  that  we  cannot  give  you  more  troops  for  active  opera- 
ons  in  the  field,  but  at  this  time  it  is  impossible  to  do  so. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  « 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


PEciAL  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  190.  j Washington^  April  27 j 1863. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  report  for  duty 
ithout  delay  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  commanding,  &c..  Fort  Mon- 
)e,  Va. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 

I Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

^o.  64.  j N'ew  Berne,  April  27, 1863. 

General  Orders,  No.  62,  are  hereby  amended  as  follows : 

The  first  district  will  be  called  the  District  of  Beaufort,  and  will  in- 
ude  the  posts  which  are  or  may  hereafter  be  established  in  that  portion 


000  north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap,  XXX. 

nf  Craven  Ivinff  south  of  a line  drawn  from  Evans’  Mil] 
Neuse  Bivef  and  including  Evans’  Mill,  and  in  tin 
counties  o^f  Jones  and  Carteret  -with  the  exception  of  the  post  of  Ports 

“Th^sccond  district,  or  the  District  of  the  Albemarle,  will  include  al 
the  nostsThich  are  or  may  hereafter  be  established  in  the^  counties  o 
Wa^hinn-ton  and  Tyrrell,  and  in  all  the  counties  of  this  State  northwes. 
of  those  counties  whose  waters  flow  into  the  Albemarle  Sound. 

The  thTr^district,  or  the  District  of  the  Pamlico,  will  include  all  tl>. 

nosts  which  are  or  may  be  hereafter  established  in  that  potion  of  Cravei 
posts  whicn  are  oimav  excepting  the  post  of  Fort  Anderson 

LTn^rcinties  of  Pitt,  Beaufort,  and  Hyde,  as  well  as  the  post  o 

Portsmouth.  ^ 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  HOEPMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  April  28,  1863 — 4.55  p.  nl. 

Maior-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

The  two  artillery  companies  at  Port  HArLEOKf 

General-in-  Chief. 


United  States  Plag-shie  M™nbsota, 

Off  Newport  Neivs,  Va.,  April  28,  l8oo. 

squadron  w^  “fithoVrrntani^ 

pliances  as  I had  at  fonrfie\d  pieces  on  lieldcarnag 


HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


661 


>ort  of  ammunition,  coal,  and  dispatches  at  the  service  of  the  vessels  in 
he  Nansemond.  The  embarrassment  thus  occasioned  here  by  the  ab- 
ence  of  tenders  was  partially  relieved  by  the  kind  loan  of  the  quarter- 
naster’s  tug  Du  Pont.  In  further  response  to  urgent  calls  from  General 
^eck  and  yourself  I applied  to  the  Department  for  an  additional  force 
if  light  draughts  to  meet  the  demands  on  the  Navy  in  these  waters, 
^'our  vessels  were  then  detached  from  the  Potomac  Flotilla,  this  being 
lalf  of  Commodore  Harwood^s  steam  force.  They  arrived  here  on  the 
6th  and  were  sent  into  the  Nansemond  the  same  evening.  Lieutenants 
pushing  and  Lamson,  who  had  in  charge  the  two  divisions  of  the  flotilla 
II  the  Nansemond,  were  instructed  to  do  everything  in  their  power  to 
ssist  the  army. 

The  upper  part  of  the  river,  in  which  most  of  the  slight  vessels  thus 
astily  equipped  were  ordered  to  operate,  is  but  a canal  or  ditch,  of 
7idth  so  insigniflcant  that  the  boats  are  obliged  to  touch  one  bank  with 
heir  bows  that  their  sterns  may  swing  clear  of  the  other.  This  narrow 
nd  tortuous  stream  winds  between  banks  covered  with  woods,  where 
ifleinen  or  artillery  can  at  any  time  conceal  themselves  and  open  a mur- 
erons  and  concentrated  fire  on  our  men  on  the  open  decks  of  the  ves- 
els  at  short  range,  shifting  from  place  to  place  or  masking  batteries 
hove  and  below,  cut  off  our  communications  at  will,  and  destroy  or 
aptnre  the  flotilla. 

Had  the  enemy  in  force  really  determined  to  cross  the  Nansemoud 
ow  long  could  such  vessels  effectually  oppose  the  movement  ? It  was 
bvious  to  me  that  the  few  light  field  pieces  we  had  (mostly  on  field 
arriages)  would  in  the  event  of  contesting  a crossing  have  done  better 
ervice  behind  earthworks  than  on  opeai  decks  over  magazines  of  powder 
nd  steam ; for  the  boilers,  machinery,  and  ammunition  of  these  light- 
raught  vessels,  unlike  those  of  regular  men-of-war,  are  near  or  above 
'ater  and  exposed  to  shot  and  shell. 

The  line  which  these  frail  and  vulnerable  vessels  Avere  called  upon  to 
rotect,  and  in  front  of  which  they  were  expected  to  patrol  and  draw 
le  enemy’s  fire,  was  purely  a military  line,  whose  natural  defenses 
iould  have  been  earthworks  on  our  side  against  earthworks  on  the 
ther — riflemen,  scouts,  communications,  and  proper  disposition  of  troops 
) oppose  similar  demonstrations  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  Was  it 
lerefore  justifiable  for  you  to  impose  or  for  me  to  undertake,  without 
word  of  warning  to  you  regarding  its  utter  impracticability,  a naval 
eiense  of  your  military  line,  which  defense,  if  fairly  tried,  must  have 
lied,  to  the  grief  of  the  nation  and  the  probable  reproach  of  the  Navy? 

1 beg  to  remind  you  that  while  thus  straining  every  effort  to  meet 
lese  demands  on  the  part  of  the  army,  though  I was  under  the  con- 
iction  that  it  was  an  anomalous  and  improper  use  of  naval  means,  I 
iggested  to  j’ou,  having  in  view  the  confidence  so  flatteringly  reposed 
I such  means  by  you  and  General  Peck,  to  arm  and  equip  with  field 
u ces  and  men  for  this  service  on  the  Nansernond,  as  I had  done  with 
10  Mount  Washington  and  Stepping  Stones,  one  of  the  numerous  tugs 
nd  transports  at  your  disposal,  of  which,  as  shown  by  your  official 
otices  to  ine,  you  have  about  forty.  I have  not  been  informed  that 
le  suggestion  was  adopted.  In  your  letter  of  the  22d  you  say,  allud- 
ig  to  the  gunboats,  ‘‘  I know  there  is  danger  that  they  will  be  fired  into, 

1 ’ crippled;  but  this  hazard  must  be  incurred  to  i)revent 

iiri(  ” ^ crossing.  Yours  Avill  be  exposed  to  no  more  danger  than 

A newspaper  corespondent  from  Fortress  Monroe  and  professing  to 
(?iive  his  inspiration  from  the  ‘‘  highest  authority” — a great  breach  of 


662 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XXX, 


military  and  professional  decorum — accuses  me  of  withholding  the  neces- 
sary services  of  the  gunboats  and  of  desiring  to  keep  them  out  of  danger 
by  putting  them  in  glass  cases. 

‘ I have  not  learned  that  for  this  gross  and  indecent  assault,  this 
wicked  misrepresentation  of  an  honest  and  earnest  performance  of  duty 
under  high  responsibilities,  the  anonymous  correspondent  has  in  any 
way  been  corrected.  These  things  constrain  me  to  quote  from  a report 
by  Lieutenant  Lamson,  under  date  of  Sunday,  April  19: 

We  have  fought  the  rebels  every  day  since  last  Saturday  except  to-day,  with  c 
heavy  loss  compared  to  our  force,  and  the  army  have  laid  on  their  bank  or  in  theii 
earthwork  without  a man  hurt,  and  have  utterly  failed  to  render  me  the  assistanct 
and  support  they  ought  to  have  given. 

During  this  time  the  Mount  Washington  and  Alert  had  been  dis 
abled  and  withdrawn  for  repairs,  the  former  in  a serious  contest  witl 
the  enemy’s  battery  at  West  Branch,  having  had  her  boiler  exploded 
her  gallows-frame  destroyed,  and  having  been  otherwise  much  cut  u| 
while  helpless  and  aground  on  the  bar  commanded  by  that  battery 
without  the  use  of  her  steam.  Our  loss  in  this  and  subsequent  une 
qual  contests  amounted  to  one  of  our  vessels  entirely  disabled  and  tbret 
of  the  other  four  partially  so,  and  24  men  killed  and  wounded,  a ver 
large  ijroportion  of  our  small  number  of  men  engaged.  The  interval  o 
two  days  between  the  disabling  of  some  vessels  and  the  arrival  of  other 
on  the  Upper  Nansemond,  together  with  the  absence  of  any  naval  deiu 
onstration  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  in  James  River,  seemed  to  indicat 
that  it  was  not  his  intention  to  cross  the  Nansemond.  Your  re-enlorce 
ments  giving  you  as  I am  told  a strong  army  of  22,000  men  at  Suffolk 
enabling  you,  as  you  have  just  done,  to  erect  works  and  to  defend  th 
line  of  the  river  j the  inability  of  our  little  vessels,  as  shown  by  suhs( 
quent  contests  with  the  rebel  batteries,  to  raise  the  blockade  ot  tb 
Upper  Nansemond,  whilst  my  transports  and  tenders  were  being  cut  u 
without  being  adequate  to  the  main  object  of  i)rotecting  that  line;  rn 
orders  to  return  the  vessels  from  the  Potomac  Flotilla  as  soon  as  tb 
emergency  was  over,  and  a requisition  upon  ine  to  convoy  and  protec 
Major-General  Hooker’s  supply  vessels  going  into  the  Pamunkey,  con 
bined  to  dispose  me  to  withdraw  the  light  draughts  from  the  Upper  Nai 
semond,  and  1 accordingly  sent  Fleet  Captain  Crosby  to  Suffolk  to  asce 
tain  facts  and  to  bring  them  down  if  practicable,  giving  due  notice  to  tb 
army.  But  at  your  and  General  Peck’s  instance  I kept  them  in  tb 
river,  as  shown  in  my  dispatches  of  the  19th  to  General  Peck  oetoi 
and  to  General  Getty  after  the  capture  of  the  battery  on  the 
Branch,  which  capture  opened  our  communications.  The  former  cii 
liatch  went  through  your  headquarters. 

I am  further  constrained  to  say  that  it  was  not  until  after  two  iailnrc 
on  the  part  of  the  army  to  support  Lieutenant  Lamson  that  that  youii 
officer  was  finally  enabled  to  put  into  execution  (with  the  gallant  an 
effectual  co-operation  of  the  troops  under  General  Getty)  the  plai 
which  he  had  made  and  urged  to  capture  the  battery  at  West  Brauc 

A due  regard  for  the  facts  should  have  prevented  the  reflection  m 
plied  in  your  letter.  The  readiness  and  zeal  which  the  officers  and  nn 
under  my  command  have  exhibited  in  these  unequal  contests,  wbj^ 
our  vessels  have  been  “ fired  into,  injured,  and  crippled the  gallan  i 
with  which  they  have  incurred  ‘‘hazard  to  prevent  the  rebds  irom  cro. 
iug,”  these  did  not  tempt  me  selfishly  to  misuse  the  means  and  m 
with  which  I am  intrusted  for  the  public  welfare  to  undertake 
proper  explanation  an  enterprise  which  is  military  and  not  naval— * 
is  practicable  in  the  former  sense  and  impossible  in  the  latter,  we 


>AP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  663 

have  taken  pains  to  apprise  the  military  authorities  of  the  insufiSciency 
f these  means  to  the  ends  proposed  and  urged  by  them. 

Lieutenants  Cushing  and  Lamson  are  still  in  the  Nansemond  and  still 
nder  instruction  to  give  all  the  assistance  in  their  power  to  the  army, 
'he  orders  which  I have  given  Lieutenant  Lamson  not  only  do  not 
^strain  but  direct  his  going  into  the  Upper  Uansemond  when  necessary 
ad  practicable  at  his  discretion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  vonrs, 

S.  P*;  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg,  R'.  Atlantic  Blockading  Sguadron, 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  28, 1863. 

[aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Gcncral-in-  Chief : 

Admiral  Lee  has  withdrawn  all  his  gunboats  from  the  Upper  Uan- 
)mond,  against  my  remonstrance  and  General  Peekes,  leaving  us  to 
ike  care  of  ourselves.  We  had  two  unarmed  transports  at  Suffolk, 
hich  were  much  wanted,  and  yesterday  I ordered  them  down.  Two 
’our  officers,  who  have  been  commanding  on  a gunboat  I armed  my- 
ilf,  volunteered  to  pilot  them,  and  they  have  this  morning  performed 
le  service  successfully.  Both  boats  received  some  cannon-shot  and  a 
3od  many  rifle-balls,  but  that  we  expected.  Neither  sustained  any 
ijury  worth  mentioning,  though  they  were  fired  on  by  three  batteries 
ad  from  a good  many  rifle-pits.  I have  just  received  the  following 
ispatch  from  General  Peck,  from  which  you  will  see  that  the  enemy  is 
i earnest : 


aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  28, 1863. 


The  force  reported  by  Stratton  on  the  Chowan  was 'Garnett’s  six  regiments  of  in- 
ntry,  one  of  cavalry,  and  some  artillery,  which  has  joined  Longstreet.  Garnett 
Mmmanded  at  Little  Washington.  The  enemy  were  very  active  all  night,  and  wo 
spt  several  batteries  in  play  on  chopping  parties.  General  Getty  reported  move- 
ent  of  troops  down  the  river  with  artillery,  indicative  of  crossing. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

April  28,  1863 — 9.30  p.  m. 

aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I have  been  on  the  Nansemond  to-day.  No  movements  there.  Gen- 
'al  GarnetPs  brigade,  from  North  Carolina,  has  joined  Longstreet.  Two 
3ayy  guns,  drawn  each  by  10  horses,  passed  through  Surry  County  to 
uttblk  on  Tuesday  evening,  reaching  there  yesterddy.  We  shall  no 
D’abt  soon  hear  from  them. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


eneral  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  28,  1863. 


The  enemy  opened  a new  battery  with  three  guns  on  the  river  last 
ight.  Lieutenant  Eowe  deserves  great  credit  for  his  exploit.  When 
ill  the  guns  we  talked  about  be  sent  ? 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


(364 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAV.  XXX' 


Fort  Monroe,  April  28, 1803. 

Major-General  Peck: 

Captain  Baylor  already  preparing  the  guns,  and  they  will  he  sent  a.‘ 

soon  as  possible.  You  will  have  twelve.  -r^Tv 

JOHX  A.  BIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  28, 1863. 
Major-General  Bix : • 

A man  who  was  at  Franklin  on  the  20th  says  the  railway  bL-idge  wai 
being  built;  also  that  he  saw  two  trains  of  troops  coming  from  Weldoa 
The  people  told  him  that  45,000  men  were  under  Longstreet  andmon 
coming  from  Carolina.  ^ 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe  Arsenal,  Va.,  April  28, 1803. 

Lieut.  A.  B.  Johnson,  Suffolk^  Ya. : 

I will  send  you  to-morrow  1,000,000  cartridges,  caliber  .57,  and  the  re 
mainder  soon  after.  I will  forward  the  24  and  12  pounder  ammumtioi 
as  soon  as  it  can  be  prepared.  I have  telegraphed  for  the  18-poun(le 
ammunition.  Your  requisitions  are  large.  Have  you  storage  for  it 

T.  G.  BAYLOE, 

First  Lieutenant^  Arsenal^  Fort  Monroe. 


Suffolk,  April  28, 1863. 

Lieut.  T.  G.  Baylor,  - 

Commanding  Arsenal^  Fortress  Monroe.,  Va. : 

I am  aware  that  my  requisitions  are  large,  but  not  as  large  as  tb 
general  suggested.  He  thinks  we  shall  soon  have  use  for  it  all. 

My  storage  is  not  sufScient,  but  am  assured  that  more  shall  be  prc 

vided.  . . • 4- 

The  amount  of  daily  consumption  of  ammunition  now  is  not  smai 

although  reports  say  ^^all  quiet  at  Suffolk.”  TrxTTxronx- 

A.  B.  JUHJNfeUJN, 

Lieutenant.,  Ordnance  Officer. 


Hdqrs.  Beft.  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fo7't  Monroe^  Va..  April  28,  lt>03. 

General  Henry  A.  Wise,  , ^ 7 

Or  Commanding  Officer  of  the  Troops  07i  the  Chickaliominy : 

Sir  : The  town  of  Williamsburg  has  been  occupied,  as  you  are  awar- 
by  the  trooiis  under  my  command  as  a picket  station  or  outpost  ot  or 
town.  A large  portion  of  the  inhabitants  are  known  not  to  be  well  ai 
posed  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States.  They  have  ' 

been  quietly  pursuing  their  domestic  avocations,  been  unmolesteu, 
have  been  permitted  to  supply  themselves  with  the  necessaries  a 
comforts  of  life  at  Yorktown  and  Fort  Monroe.  The  insane  asylum  < 
Williamsburg  has  been  put  under  the  superintendence  of  aii  army  s 
geon,  and  its  300  helpless  inmates  supplied,  at  the  expense  of  the  U mu 


,Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


665 


States,  with  everything  necessary  to  their  comfort  and  with  the  remedial 
treatment  they  require.  While  exercising  these  offices  of  humanity  the 
troops  at  Williamsburg  have  been  several  times  attacked  by  your  forces, 
not  with  a view  to  gain  and  hold  possession  of  the  place  and  to  assume 
the  guardianship  which  has  been  extended  to  the  inhabitants  and  the 
tenants  of  the  asylum  by  us,  but  for  the  purpose  of  harassing  those  who 
were  performing  this  generous  service.  On  the  31st  ultimo  your  forces 
entered  and  endeavored  to  take  possession  of  the  town,  occupying  sev- 
eral houses  and  firing  upon  the  troops,  and  in  this,  as  I am  informed, 
they  were  aided  by  some  of  the  inhabitants,  who  have  been  living  for 
nearly  a year  under  our  protection.  More  recently  your  forces  entered 
the  town  and  took  possession  of  it,  placing  our  employes  in  the  insane 
asylum  under  parole,  carrying  off  some  of  the  servants,  and  depriving  its 
inmates  of  the  care  to  which  they  have  been  accustomed  and  which  their 
helpless  condition  renders  indispensable.  You  have  by  withdrawing 
your  forces  left  the  asylum  again  to  our  charity  and  compelled  Major- 
General  Keyes,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  troops  at  Yorktown  and 
Fort  Magruder,  to  supply  it  with  food  to  save  the  patients  from  starva- 
tion. These  raids,  under  the  peculiar  circumstances,  are  in  violation  of 
every  dictate  of  humanity.  Having  no  result  and  apparently  no  object 
but  annoyance  and  a useless  sacrifice  of  life,  they  are  also  in  violation 
of  every  principle  of  honorable  warfare.  I have  directed  Major-General 
Keyes  to  reoccupy  the  townj  and  that  the  aggressions  referred  to  may 
cease  I give  you  notice  in  case  of  any  repetition  of  them — 

1st.  That  the  inmates  of  the  asylum  will  be  sent  to  Kichmond  and  the 
United  States  relieved  of  the  burden  of  their  support  j 
2d.  That  any  house  which  may  be  taken  possession  of  for  the  purpose 
of  firing  upon  the  troops  stationed  there  will  be  razed  to  the  ground  j 
and, 

3d.  That  any  citizen  of  Williamsburg  not  belonging  to  a regularly 
organized  corps  Avho  shall  be  found  co-operating  in  these  attacks  and 
rising  in  arms  against  the  occupying  troops  will  be  put  to  death  as  a 
violator  of  the  laws  of  civilized  warfare. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

• Core  CreeJcj  Dover  Road,  April  28,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Eighteenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel:  The  troops  of  this  command  were  all  in  position  last  night. 
On  account  of  the  limited  number  of  cars  it  took  several  trips  to  bring 
everything  up.  Colonel  Amory^s  brigade  I sent  to  the  railroad  cross- 
ing at  Core  Creek.  He  took  possession  of  the  bridge  and  sent  a force 
immediately  across  the  creek  and  as  far  as  the  switch.  There  was 
nothing  there. 

I marched  here  (about  12  miles)  from  Colonel  Jones^  camp,  arriving 
ahttle  after  midnight.  I brought  with  me  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Lee, 
the  section  of  artillery,  and  one  company  of  cavalry,  with  Colonel  Jones 
iuid  his  regiment.  Plank  was  brought  from  Colonel  Jones’  camp  to  re- 
pair the  bridge  here,  and  it  was  at  the  bridge  at  1 this  morning.  A 
orce  was  sent  immediately  across  the  creek  here,  which  went  out  some 
distance  on  the  road,  but  found  nothing.  This  force  still  remains  across 


666 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


tlie  creek.  The  cars  were  running  to  the  creek  till  late  last  night,  and 
the  noise  of  the  whistles  was  constant  and  imposing. 

At  midnight  it  commenced  to  rain  very  heavily,  and  now  the  whole 
country  is  under  water.  The  men  are  patient  and  trying  to  keep  warm 
and  dry.  One  shower  succeeds  another  very  quickly,  and  we  are  wait- 
ing patiently  for  a lull  in  the  storm.  I communicate  with  Colonel 
Amory,  who  is  about  2 miles  from  here. 

It  is  my  impression  that  everything  has  retired  to  Kinston ; that  is, 
every  force  of  any  size. 

With  the  best  care  that  could  be  taken  a good  portion  of  the  men’s 
rations  will  be  soaked,  and  to-morrow  we  will  have  to  get  a supply. 
These  should  be  sent  to  Core  Creek  by  rail.  We  need  2,500  to  3,000 
rations  daily,  and  the  cavalry  horses  haT^e  no  forage.  There  are  two 
companies  of  them  here. 

This  I shall  send  by  Captain  Harris,  commissary  of  Colonel  Amory’s 
brigade. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ ^ j ^ PALMER, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Unofficial. — P.  S. — A ration  of  whisky  ought  to  be  sent  for  the  men 
if  provisions  are  to  be  sent.  • 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.j  April  29, 18C3. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps.,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : On  the  21st  of  this  month,  by  the  exhibition  of  a white 
flag  on  shore  by  a iierson  in  citizen’s  dress,  a boat  from  the  Stepping 
Stones  was  lured  ashore,  fired  on  by  troops  in  ambush,  one  of  its  cre^ 
killed,  and  the  following-named  men  taken  prisoners,  viz:  James  Cole 
man,  J.  McMclety,  F.  Hopkins,  and  J.  Reed.  This  was  a base  transaci 
tion  and  the  men  should  be  surrendered  and  not  exchanged  as  prisoner.^ 
of  war.  Lieutenant  Lamson  verbally  informed  me  that  in  a recent  com 
munication  by  flag  of  truce  at  Suffolk  the  enemy  expressed  a purpost 
to  return  these  three  men.  Please  have  this  done. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respeetfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  April  29,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-Chief : 

General  : Major-General  Peck,  as  you  are  aware,  is  performing  ver; 
arduous  duties,  greater,  I presume,  than  any  commander  of  an  arm; 
corps  who  has  not  a separate  department. 

Would  it  be  practicable  to  create  an  army  corps  for  him  from  tii 
troops  under  his  command  % I could  designate  the  regiments  to  cou 
pose  it  without  interfering  with  my  own  corps — the  Seventh.  He  i 


HAP.  XXX.  j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


667 


greatly  in  need  of  the  additional  staff  which  such  an  organization  would 
,qve,  and  no  officer  deserves  more  for  his  vigilance,  discretion,  and  de- 
motion to  his  duties. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ajpril  29, 1863. 

laj or- General  Peck  : 

Captain  Baylor  has  sent  you  seven  guns  and  200  rounds  of  ammuni- 
iou  for  each.  He  has  also  sent  four  mortars  and  1,000,000  cartridges 
or  small-arms.  His  men  are  very  much  overworked,  and  will  keep 
ast  to-morrow.*  The  other  five  guns  will  be  sent  the  next  day. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  29,  1863. 

lajor-General  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

I think  1 can  hold  Longstreet  here  for  some  time,  which  will  favor 
our  operations  very  materially.  When  he  retires  it  will  only  be  to  his 
wo  railroads,  where  he  can  go  to  Lee  or  strike  at  me,  according  to  cir- 
umstances.  You  and  I will  have  plenty  of  work.  He  is  bridging  the 
backwater  for  railroad  purposes.  The  impression  is  strong  that  Hill 
vmill  leave  North  Carolina  and  join  Longstreet. 

' JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


April  29,  1863. 

Jajor-General  Peck  or  Dix,  Sujfollc,  Va.: 

I have  fully  commenced  my  operations  here.  The  result  may  be  to 
Iraw  from  your  front  and  afford  you  an  opportunity  to  push  or  hold 
hem. 

JOSEPH  HOOKEE, 
Major- General  J Commanding. 


April  29,  1863. 

fiajor-General  Hooker, 

Army  of  the  Potomac : 

No  change  of  note  here.  Heavy  rain.  Governor  Seward  was  here 
o*day. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe^  April  29,  1863. 
jeneral  J.  G.  Foster,  New  Berne^  N.  C. : 

My  Dear  General  : I have  just  returned  from  Suflblk.  There  is  a 
constant  interchange  of  shots  from  rifle-pits  and  occasionally  from  bat- 
eries.  The  enemy  has  about  40,000  men. 

*The  day  of  national  humiliation,  fasting,  and  prayer  enjoined  hy  the  Presidents 
proclamation  of  March  30, 1863. 


668 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiTAP.  XXX 


The  weak  points  at  Suffolk  are  the  Nansemond,  running  to  the  real 
7 miles,  with  an  average  width  of  less  than  100  yards,  and  a range  oi 
heights’  which  overlook  a portion  of  our  defenses. 

All  vour  suggestions  have  been  anticipated,  and  it  will  require  a larg( 
force  to  dislodge  us.  Our  line  is  a long  one,  but  with  a reserve  force 
in  position  to  be  moved  promptly  to  any  point  of  attack  I fed  confideni 
that  we  are  secure.  The  enemy  is  bringing  siege  guns  from  Petersburg 
and  is  constructing  forts.  He  has  three  batteries  on  the  Nansemond 
and  is  constructing  casemated  forts  there.  All  indicate  that  he  hm 
come  to  stay.  I visit  Suffolk  every  other  day.  I have  entire  confidence 
in  General  Peck,  whose  prudence,  watchfulness,  and  good  judgmeni 

leave  nothing  to  be  desired.  _ . 

I am  greatly  indebted  to  you  for  the  diversion  you  are  making,  anc 
if  you  can  keep  General  Hill  where  he  is  you  will  render  us  a grea 

General  Hooker  has  moved  with  his  whole  army.  It  is  large,  v el 
disciplined,  and  amply  provided  with  all  the  materiel  of  war ; great  am 
confident  hopes  are  entertained  of  the  success  of  his  movement  on  Rich 
mond.  I have  never  thought  it  the  right  way  to  that  capital,  but  joii 

We  have^a^cavalry  force  at  South  Mills  and  shall  keep  open  the  cana 
route  as  long  as  we  can.  It  would  be  well,  however,  to  exercise  som 
caution  in  using  it  and  arrange  so  as  to  secure  the  destruction  of  tb 
dispatches  with  which  a messenger  is  charged  if  he  should  chance  t 
be  intercepted. 

I am,  dear  general,  truly,  yours,  jOHlsr  A.  DIX 

Major-  General. 

Please  keep  me  advised  of  your  movements. 


Headquarters  Brigade, 
Washington,  AT.  (7.,  April  29, 1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Eighteenth  Ariny  Corps  : 

Colonel:  Major-General  Foster,  commanding  Eighteenth  Aim 
Corps,  informed  me  that  Washington,  N.  0.,  had  been  made  a mdita 
posk  and  that  my  brigade  had  been  ordered  there,  and  t^at  I w.8 
command  the  post  while  General  Prince  was  ‘".command  the  Dis  ncG 
the  Pamlico,  and  that  Washington  would  be  included  in  that  distil, 
and  form  part  of  his  command.  I also  received  very  full  ^ erbal  . 
tions  from  General  Foster  in  regard  to  the  management  of  the  post, , 
well  as  to  what  he  desired  should  be  done  to  ®‘‘'engthen  its  defe  es^ 
accordingly  (after  reporting  on  my  arrival  here  to  Foster 

was  in  command  at  that  time)  fully  complied  with  all  of  • 

verbal  instructious  so  fiir  as  they  applmd  to  the  ®outh  side  of  * 
by  disposing  of  part  of  the  troops  at  Hill’s  Point  and  Hod  nan 
at  the.  cross-roads,  Ked  Hill,  &c,  m exact  conformity  w th  the 
instructions;  but  after  General  Prince’s  arriva  f f coi ered  th« 
views  did  not  correspond  with  those  of  General  ‘'"stcc.  ^ ' 
mo  that  he  had  received  no  written  orders  defining  his  duties  or  u < 
but  hfissued  the  annexed  (General  Orders  No.  2)  from  ^adqna 
ters  outlie  afternoon  of  April  28,  1803,  and  on  -9,  lb03  to- 

o’clock  p.  un,  .1  was  served  with  Genera  Orders  com  J 

(luarters  of  General  Prince,  a copy  of  which  is  also  heieto  attacliei . 


HAP,  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  669 

If  I have  misunderstood  General  Foster,  I deeply  regret  itj  but  it  is 
tterly  impossible  that  I could  do  so,  as  the  conversation  was  too  deli- 
ite  and  explicit.  I write  now  for  the  purpose  of  ashing  that  my  duties  as 
wimander  of  the  post  may  he  defined  by  an  order.  My  desire  is  to  serve 
ly  country  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  but  I can  be  of  no  benefit  to  the 
?rvice  in  my  present  position  unless  I either  have  some  instructions  to 
uitle  me  or  I am  allowed  to  proceed  according  to  my  own  judgment. 
By  General  Orders,  No.  2 (hereto  annexed),  the  defenses  of  the  post 
ere  placed  under  my  command.  This  morning  I commenced  throwing 
p an  earthwork  at  a point  to  the  right  of  Block-house  No.  3,  where 
reneral  Potter  indicated  that  General  Foster  desired  it  should  be  done; 
ut,  as  the  order  of  General  Prince  defining  my  duties  and  placing  the 
efenses  of  the  post  under  my  command  has  been  rescinded,  I do  not 
jel  at  liberty  to  proceed  with  this  or  any  of  the  other  works  necessary 
)r  the  defense  of  the  place  until  I shall  receive  an  explicit  order  to  do 
0,  as  Orders  No.  2 placed  me  not  only  in  command  of  the  defenses  of 
le  post  but  also  of  the  troops  stationed  here.  That  being  now  rescinded 
, leaves  me  without  any  command. 

I did  feel  a desire  to  aid  in  driving  back  the  enemy  that  now  seems 
) be  hovering  around  this  place.  In  fact  I was  in  hopes  that  I would 
e able  to  make  it  too  warm  for  them  to  have  even  a picket  within  20 
tiles  of  Washington,  much  less  to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  force  within 
or  7 miles  of  this  place. 

A Mrs.  Lucinda  Willard,  from  the  neighborhood  of  Beaver  Dam,  and 
bo  says  that  General  Potter  knows  her  very  well,  came  to  our  lines 
)-day  on  the  Plymouth  road  and  informed  me  that  the  enemy  was  en- 
imped  in  large  force  at  TrantePs  Creek,  and  that  they  intended  mak- 
ig  another  attack  upon  the  place,  both  by  land  and  with  a floating 
attery  which  they  are  to  bring  down  the  river,  and  that  their  object 
fis  time  is  to  burn  the  town.  She  says  that  the  rebel  soldiers  have 
een  writing  this  to  their  families  in  her  vicinity  for  the  past  three  or 
)ur  days.  I make  the  statement  for  what  it  is  worth.  If  General  Pot- 
‘r  knows  her  he  can  tell  whether  any  reliance  should  be  put  in  what  she 
\ys.  Her  statement  in  regard  to  the  troops  and  their  location  is  con- 
rined  from  other  sources.  However,  I think  it  would  be  well  to  have  a 
:roiig  work  erected  on  the  extreme  left  of  our  lines,  as  in  case  they 
loiild  take  it  in  their  heads  to  approach  the  place  b^^  the  river  and  at 
time  when  the  gunboats  might  be  engaged  below  the  bridge  they  could 
ive  us  some  trouble  unless  Ave  have  everything  ready  for  their  recej)- 
on. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  B.  SPINOLA, 
Brigadier- General  Volunteers. 


[Inclosures.] 

Ieneeal  Orders,  ) Headquarters  District  of  the  Pamlico, 

No.  2.  1 Washington j JST.  0.,  April  28,  1863. 

I.  The  military  post  of  Washington  consists  of  the  immediate  defenses 
f that  place.  The  town  and  citizens  are  not  included  in  the  military 
ost.  The  command  of  those  defenses  and  of  the  troops  will  devolve 
pou  Brigadier-Geueral  Spinola.  The  town  is  in  charge  of  the  provost- 
liarshal,  whose  authority  emanates  from  headquarters  of  the  district. 
H.  No  interference  with  private  property  excepting  by  or  through 
le  provost-marshal  will  be  sanctioned. 


670 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


III.  The  slashings  and  abatis  about  the  defenses  of  works  in  this 
district  will  be  carefully  protected  by  the  troops  and  preserved;  no  in- 
terference with  them  will  be  permitted. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince : 

^ ^ S.  W.  WALDEON,  Jr., 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders, 
No.  3. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Pamlico, 
Washington^  A.  (7.,  A])ril  29,  1863. 


Para^^'raph  I of  General  Orders,  No.  2,  Headquarters  District  of  the 
Pamlico,  Washington,  N.  C.,  April  28, 1863,  is  hereby  rescinded. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince,  commanding  district : 

S.  W.  WALDEON,  Jr., 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Paivilico, 

Washington.^  A.  (7.,  April  29, 1863. 

Lieut.  Ool.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  interesting  facts, 
showing  how  by  timely  orders  to  a grand  guard  I probably  saved  it 

from  capture:  , , ^ ^ ^ i 

On  visiting  the  pickets  over  the  river  day  before  yesterday,  the  day 
on  which  I took  command  here,  I found  a grand  guard  (1  captain,  2 lieu- 
tenants, and  70  enlisted  men  of  infantry,  and  2 cavalry  soldiers)  sta- 
tioned at  the  cross-roads.  Considering  them  so  much  out  of  place  as  to 
be  a mere  invitation  to  the  enemy  to  come  and  take  them,  I ordered  all 
the  vedettes  to  be  called  in  at  once,  so  that  no  time  should  be  lost,  and 
that  the  force  should  retire  with  all  dispatch  to  inside  of  Eed  Hill,  de- 
fining the  position  to  be  occupied.  This  was  at  11  o’clock  a.  m. 

I have  to-day  the  most  perfectly  reliable  intelligence  that  at  12  m. 
day  before  yesterday,  Daniel’s  brigade  (five  counted  regiments  aud 
some  cavalry)  arrived  near  the  chapel  which  is  1 mile  from  the  cross 
roads  toward  Greenville.  They  halted  half  a mile  before  reaching  the 
chapel  and  ^‘made  ready  for  a fight  aud  sent  forward  the  cavalry  U 
the  cross-roads.”  But  tiie  informant  does  not  know  why  the  cavalr\ 
soon  returned,  when  the  brigade  immediately  marched  back  on  the 
Greenville  road  and  made  their  headquarters  at  Taft’s  Store,  lo  milef 
from  here. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J^TwOjdieT-Gcneydl  YolunteerSj  CoMindiidind- 


N B. A reliable  man  on  tbe  Greenville  road  this  evening  sent  im 

this  message : “ They  are  all  gone  from  Taft’s  Cross-Roads,  but  I do  no 
know  which  way.”  l^robably  Taft’s  Store  and  Cross-Roads  refer  to  sanii 
place,  aud  that  Daniel  has  gone  to  Virginia. 

On  the  2Gth  the  Fifty  nintli  North  Carolina,  a cavalry  regiment  in  goo( 
condition  employed  on  the  north  side  tliroiighont  the  siege,  was  relicvcc 
at  its  camp,  10  miles  this  side  of  Greenville,  by  the  broken  down  rcgi 
ment  of  Claiborne.  The  former  “ went  off  for  Suffolk.”  ilns  infoimaii 
is  Private  Ferris,  a deserter  from  the  Fifty-ninth. 


671 


:hap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

y New  BernCj  April  29,  1863. 

desires  to  express  to  the  officers  and  men 
)fthe  Third  New  York  Volunteer  Cavalry  his  appreciation  of  their  gal- 
aiit  conduct  and  efficiency  in  the  various  actions  and  skirmishes  in 
iVhich  they  have  been  engaged  with  the  enemy  during  their  year’s  service 
n the  Department  of  l^'orth  Carolina. 

The  regiment  will  inscribe  upon  its  standard  and  the  several  com- 
)anies  upon  their  guidons  the  names  of  battles  and  skirmishes  as  nre- 
aously  directed  in  orders. 

The  battle-flag  of  the  Seventh  Confederate  (Claiborne)  Cavalry,  which 
vas  captured  from  the  enemy  in  the  gallant  charge  by  a detachment  of 
companies  A and  E against  superior  numbers  near  Little  Washington 
|n  the  18th  day  of  April  instant,  is  presented  to  the  regiment  as  a 
listmguished  mark  of  the  favor  and  appreciation  in  which  the  gallant 
ervices  of  this  command  are  held. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Foster: 

[SOUTHAED  HOFFMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


■ Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

T • n Tx  YHT  TT  ^^7  1863—3.30  p.  m. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  ’ ^ 

General-in-  Chief : 

The  Ninth  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  is,  I find,  determined  to 
3ave  on  Sunday.  It  is  one  of  the  best  regiments  I have  and  I cannot 
nord  to  lose  it  at  this  moment.  Can  you  give  me  another  regiment  in 
•lace  of  it . It  not,  can  I have  the  company  of  heavy  artillery  at  Fort 
IcHenry  belonging  to  Colonel  Eoberts’  regiment  here*?  I am  told 
reneral  Morris  did  not  need  it  and  thought  of  mounting  it.  With  this 
nd  the  two  companies  you  have  ordered  from  Fort  Dela^^^are  I will  try 
3 manage,  if  you  cannot  give  me  another  regiment. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


lajor-General  Dix : I"''"- 

What  does  General  Halleck  say  about  the  corps?  One  is  due  for  my 
emces,  which  have  long  been  more  arduous  and  responsible  than  most 
orps  commanders. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


T Monroe,  Va.,  April  30,  1863. 

laj.  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker,  j ^ . 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

Suffolk  by  a superior  force,  but  are  getting  stronger 
A vHii  i?  from  there  last  evening.  If  the  enemy  attacks 

e will  tare  badly.  A successful  movement  on  your  part,  for  which  we 
re  au  most  anxious,  will  be  of  great  service  to  us  by  preventing  Long- 
itreet  from  being  further  re-enforced  and  may  compel  him  to  with- 


t»w. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


672 


NOETH  CAEOLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIEGINIA. 


[Chap* 


April  30, 1863—12.30  noon. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe: 

The  enemy  has  need  of  every  man  here.  He  has  his  hands  full.  Eel j 
on  this.  I can  say  no  more.  HOOKEB,  . 

31ajor- Generali  Commanding. 

(Copy  to  General  Peck.) 


• Suffolk,  A;pril  30, 1863. 

Major-General  Hooker,  v 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

The  cnemv  opened  upon  the  Commodore  Barney  this  afternoon  will 
one  Whitworth,  one  SO  pounder,  and  one  35-pounder  Parrott,  ih 
Barney  and  Captain  Morris’  battery,  in  Fort  Stevens,  sdenced  the  bat 
tery  very  handsomely.  Heavy  rain  for  two  days  and  mu^  mint. 

JOHlS  J.  PhiBlX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix, 

Department  of  Virginia : 

The  enemy  opened  early  this  morning  from  near  Le  C^mpte’s  houe 
with  one  Whitworth  gun,  one  30  and  one  35  pounder  Parrott.  Th 
afternoon  they  opened  on  the  Commodore  Barney,  and  the  battery  w; 
silenced  by  the  Barney  and  Captain  Morris’  battery,  in  Port  Steven 
We  hold  Hill’s  Point  again.  ^ 

Alaior- General 


Fort  Monroe,  A^wil  30, 1863. 


Major-General  Peck  : 

I have  asked  a corps  for  you  and  will  advise  you 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  30, 1863. 


General  Dix: 

Our  gunboats  ought  not  to  leave  Elizabeth  Citj  , 
maud  the  lowest  approach  from  Carolina  by  Camden. 


as  they  can  co] 
That  route  tui  ’ 


South  Mills. 


JOHK  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 
April  30, 1863—6  p.  m 


Brigadier-General  Eipley  : 

General  Dix  requests  that  six  30-pouuder  Parrott  guns,  implemen. 
and  equipments  be  sent  to  him  as  soon  as  Pos^Me-  ^ 

bringing  up  heavy  guns  against  the  works  at  Suflolk,  and  these  g 
with  some  100-pounders  that  I will  get  from  the  forts  here,  are  de 

necessary  to  meet  them.  ^ ^ BAYLOE, 

First  Lieutenant  of  Ordnance 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION. 


673 


:nAr.  XXX.  J 


Vlajor-General  Dix : 


Suffolk,  Va.,  April  30,  1863. 


Have  had  a party  at  Lake  Drummoud  to-day.  They  went  up  the 
Tericho  Canal  and  then  moved  up  the  Washington  until  they  met  the 
ebel  pickets.  ’ Everything  is  looking  well. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


, . Monroe,  April  30,  1863. 

riaj or- General  Keyes, 

Commanding.,  YorMown  : 

Has  my  letter  gone  to  General  Wise?  Do  you  think  it  would  be  ad- 
Isable  for  us  to  let  the  Confederates  take  charge  of  the  insane  asylum  ? 
'hey  would  be  sending  in  and  going  out  for  supplies  and  it  seems  to 
]e  it  would  be  a means  of  communication  with  the  rebels.  Douglass 
an  come  back  as  steward,  if  you  think  proper,  under  our  superintend- 


nce. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Fourth  Corps, 

, . „ , YorMown^  April  30,  1863. 

lajor-General  Dix,  • ^ 

Commanding  Departmefit  of  Virginia^  Fort  Monroe: 

^Your  letter  to  Governor  Wise  was  sent  from  Williamsburg  yesterday 

Oui  picket  line  now  embraces  that  town.  The  case  of  the  insane 
sylum  is  a difficult  matter  in  our  hands  or  with  the  Confederates.  If 
ley  have  it,  it  would  afford  a standing  pretext  for  visits  from  their 
mssaries,  which  evil  must  be  balanced  by  our  troubles  with  the  institu- 
on.  I would  like  to  have  you  decide  the  question.  Douglass  1 regard 
s a pretty  bad  rebel. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 
Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  April  30,  1863. 
aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  25th  is  received.  Whilst  I have,  by 
ssuming  authority,  promptly  complied  with  your  requisitions  for  ma- 
ncl  ot  war  for  quartermasters’  vessels,  the  reference  of  all  your  requi- 
tions,  especially  those  for  general  outfits  for  such  vessels,  to  the  De- 
vrtmeiit  was  strictly  obligatory  upon  me.  Among  these  articles  which, 
la  1 approved  your  requisition,  I would  have  been  obliged  to  have 
^ f Baltimore  for  you  were  sixty  hammocks,  which  now 

>st8o.M  each.  The  officer  who  brought  your  requisitions  in  answer 
' my  questions  why  the  quartermaster  did  not  make  these  purchases 
plied  because  they  would  not  be  allowed  in  his  accounts.  Could  I 
operly  do  lor  that  Department  what  it  could  not  properly  do  for  itself? 
lie  necessities  of  the  war  have  obliged  the  Navy  to  use  Fortress  Mon- 
e as  a temporary  depot.  This  has  afforded  the  Army  the  opportunity 
43  R R — YOL  XVIII 


674 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  • 


to  extend  to  the  Navy  very  considerable  facilities,  and  this  has  always 
been  kindly  done  and  gratel'ally  received.  There  is  a difference,  how-i 
ever,  between  lending  a spare  tug  or  wagon  already  provided  for  the 
use  of  the  Army  and  buying  such  a tug  to  be  given  to  the  Navy  wdth-i 
out  proper  authority  to  do  so.  In  vindication  of  your  policy  of  proAud- 
iug  an  army-navy  for  the  defense  of  the  Upper  Nansemond  you  speak 
of  your  gunboat.  Smith  Briggs,  as  being  one  of  your  chief  supports  at 
Suffolk  in  consequence  of  our  gunboats  being  withdrawn ; ” and  m your 
letter  to  me  of  the  22d  you  say:  “My  two  armed  steamers  are  to  remain 
there.  Yours  are  to  be  exposed  to  no  more  danger  than  mine,”  and 
you  encourage  me  by  a reference  to  the  safe  running  by  the  Vicksburg 
batteries  of  our  iron-dads  under  cover  of  night  with  high  water  and  a 

swift  current.  .t  , 

As  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  gunboats.  Lieutenant  Lamson  was  obliged 
to  drop  down  below  the  bar,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  Upper  to  the  Lower 
Nansemond,  on  account  of  the  abandonment,  against  the  earnest  re 
monstrance  of  Lieutenants  Cushing  and  Lamson,  of  the  captured  rebel 
battery  by  our  troops  after  it  had  been  held  by  the  cross-fire  of  the 
gunboats,  whilst  the  troops  so  strengthened  it  in  the  rear  with  rifle-pits., 
intrenchments,  embrasures,  and  artillery  as  to  make  it  almost  impreg 
nable,  and  which,  while  occupied  by  the  enemy,  had  harassed  the  gun 
boats  considerably  and  cut  off*  their  communications  by  commanding 
the  bar,  over  which  but  one  of  them  could  pass  at  or  near  low  water. 

Had  this  battery  been  held  it,  with  our  battery  nearly  opposite,  would, 
have  afforded  the  gunboats  a cover  above  the  bar,  whence  they  mighl 
at  any  time  of  tide  have  moved  up  in  front  of  our  earthworks,  whicl 
Lieutenant  Lamson  informs  me  now  line  the  right  bank  of  Nausemonc 
Creek.  Your  gunboat  West  End  dropped  below  the  bar  when  our  gun 
boats  did  so,  but  Lieutenant  Lamson  informed  me  it  refused  to  stop  to 
ferry  back  your  troops. 

As  to  your  other  gunboat,  the  Smith  Briggs,  I am  informed  she  nevei 
engaged  the  batteries,  but  has  laid  at  Suffolk  expending  navy  ammu 
nition,  which  has  been  freely  supplied  to  her,  in  shelling  the  woods 
I cannot  see  how  she  or  any  other  gunboat  could  have  proved  a “ hos 
at  Suffolk.”  It  would  seem  better  to  have  the  guns  mounted  m bat 
teries  ashore  than  on  gunboats  floating  in  the  ditch  before  the  battery  o; 
fort.  The  West  Branch  Battery  not  having  been  reoccupied  by  tin 
enemy,  it  was  picketed  by  you  or  us.  Some  of  the  navy  gunboats  wen 
to  go  above  the  bar  yesterday.  I suppose  when  the  boats  get  abov( 
the  battery  the  enemy,  if  in  force,  will  reoccupy  it. 

I hope  you  will  see  in  this  only  a purpose  to  put  myself  and  my  com 
mand  right  ou  the  record.  I close  with  the  earnest  assurance  that 
will  always  be,  as  I always  have  been,  happy  to  co-operate  with  you 
and  that  whatever  means  are  at  my  command  shall  be  at  your  servic 
Avithin  the  extent  of  my  authority. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral,  Oomdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclading  Squadron. 


Headquarters, 
Elizabeth  City,  April  — , 1803. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General  Hoffman  : 

Sir:  I make  the  following  report  of  the  forces  under  my  command  a 
this  post  to  this  date: 

I was  sent  here  by  General  Palmer  February  28.  I have  one  compau 
of  Eighth  Massachusetts,  80  men;  one  of  the  Third  Massachusetts,  < 


P.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  675 

n • one  North  Carolina  company  of  about  20  men  ; two  armed  schoon- 
, with  26  men  each,  and  about  100  negroes  as  laborers, 
larch  12  I sent  a party  of  soldiers  from  the  North  Carolina  company 
0 the  woods  for  wood  with  12  negroes.  After  being  there  a short  time 
y were  attacked  by  about  40  guerrillas  and  1 negro  killed  and  2 
iinded  and  3 of  the  soldiers  taken  and  carried  away  prisoners.  Soon 
the  alarm  was  given  I sent  a company  in  pursuit,  but  they  having 
en  up  the  bridge  were  not  overtaken  by  our  forces, 
have  kept  the  negroes  employed  lately  in  throwing  up  an  intrench- 
Qt  and  have  it  nearly  finished.  I shall  then  send  those  that  are  not 
ided  here  to  New  Berne. 

Nothing  more  occurred  until  the  6th  of  April.  Captain  Sanders,  of 
North  Carolina  company,  with  a detail  of  7 soldiers  and  10  negroes, 
5 sent  down  the  river  in  a schooner  after  wood ; the  wind  blowing, 
y were  not  able  to  land  that  day ; he  returned  home  and  left  the  men 
board ; in  the  evening  they  went  on  shore  to  see  their  families,  and 
•e  all  taken  and  carried  away  to  Eichmond  prisoners,  leaving  that 
ipany  now  with  only  14  men  for  duty.  Had  we  a company  of  cavalry 
e I think  we  might  rid  this  section  of  the  country  from  the  guerrillas, 
it  is  now,  unless  we  go  out  in  a large  force,  we  are  liable  to  be  picked 
We  have  now  six  horses  and  one  yoke  of  oxen,  enough  to  do  our 
tning.  Previous  to  your  last  instructions,  under  General  Palmer’s 
er  I had  returned  to  the  persons  taken  from  10  horses  and  13  mules, 

. have  given  receipts  for  the  rest. 

V^ehaye  pceived  no  rations  since  I arrived  here,  although  I have  sent 
• requisitions,  and  I have  been  obliged  to  forage  upon  the  citizens,  and 
ae  Government  is  to  pay  for  them  it  will  be  much  more  expensive 
a if  sent  from  New  Berne,  as  provisions  are  scarce  and  high, 
he  negroes  are  very  much  in  need  of  clothing,  not  having  received 
! pay  or  clothing  from  the  Government  and  have  been  employed 
en  months. 

Tours,  respectfully, 

J.  W.  WALLIS, 

Major ^ Commanding  Post,  Elizahetli  City,  N.  C. 


I met  from  Tri-monthly  Eeturn  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  (Seventh  Army  Corps), 
y.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding,  for  April  30, 1863  (headquarters  Fort  Monroe,  Va.). 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 
absent. 

Aggregate  last  return. 

Pieces  of  field  artillery. 

Present  for  duty  equipped. 

<y 

O 

a 

S 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

tn 

a> 

o 

o 

CO 

O) 

o 

Eg 

O 

§ 

Fh 

<D 

O 

5a 

O 

a 

S 

quarters  of  Department, 

1.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix. 
Monroe,  Col.  S.  M.  Alford 

1 Hamilton,  Maj.  J,  A. 
rling. 

•jk.  Brig.  Gen.  E.L.Viele.. 
Ik,  Maj.  Gen.  J.  J.  Peck . . 
tofvn,  Maj.  Gen.  E.  D. 
^es. 

Grand  total 

17 

15 

19 

120 
1, 153 
287 

17 

593 

680 

2,  556 
26,  731 
6,  012 

18 

852 

702 

2,  698 
32,  038 
6,  717 

18 

857 

501 

2,  728 
20, 879 
6,  739 

416 

574 

2, 228 
22,  822 
5,054 

6 

252 

30 

15 

99 
1, 038 
230 

416 

2,  092 
19, 980 

3,  706 

3 

2 

63 

42 

77 

54 

1,  453 

1,  032 

19 

3 

43 

13 

542 

136 

1,422 

386 

1,611 

31,  094 

36,  589 

43,  025 

31, 722 

288 

1,  382 

26, 194 

no 

2,  616 

78 

2, 486 

Note.— The  Monthly  Eetum  for  April  gives  the  “ Aggregate  present  ” as  39,095. 


676 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia,  Major-General  DU 
commanding,  April  30,  1863. 


SUFFOLK. 

. Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck. 

FIRST  DIVISION,  SEVENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran. 


Tei'ry’s  Brigade* 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  D.  Terry. 


99th  New  York  [N.  G.  A.]. 
i:?0th  New  York. 

New  York  (Battalion)  Sharpshooters. 
I(i7th  Pennsylvania. 

11th  Rhode  Island. 


Foster’s  Brigade. 
Col.  R.  S.  Foster. 


6th  Massachusetts. 
13th  Indiana. 

112th  New  York. 
lC9th  New  York. 
165th  Pennsylvania. 
166th  Pennsylvania. 


Murphy^s  Brigade. 
Col.  Mathew  Murphy. 


10th  New  Jersey. 
69th  New  York. 
155th  New  York. 
164th  New  York. 
170th  New  York. 


Getty’s  division. 

Brig.  Gen.  George.  W.  Getty. 


First  Brigade. 
Col.  R.  C.  Hawkins. 


10th  New  Hampshire. 
9th  New  York. 

89th  New  York. 

103d  New  York. 

117th  New  York, 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Harland. 


Third  Brigade. 
Col.  A.  H.  Dutton. 


21st  Connecticut. 

13th  New  Hampshire. 
25th  New  Jersey. 

4th  Rhode  Island. 


8th  Connecticut. 
11th  Connecticut. 
15th  Connecticut. 
16th  Connecticut. 


Artillery. 


1st  Pennsylvania,  Battery  A. 
5th  U.  S.,  Battery  A. 


gurney’s  division. 
Col.  William  Gurney. 


Porter^ 8 Brigade. 
Col.  B.  Porter. 


40th  Massachusetts. 
22d  Connecticut. 
141st  New  York. 


Hughstonh  Brigade. 

Col.  Robert  S.  Hughston. 


127th  New  York. 
142d  New  York. 
143d  New  York. 
144th  New  York. 


•On  tlie  Monthly  Ketum  the  ‘?‘‘t’},rNlnetv  nintr^rw  Yort  ’ 

second  New  York  appear  in  this  brigade  instead  ol  the  Ninety-ninth  JNe 

New  York  Battalion. 


HAP.  XXX.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


677 


RESERVE  BRIGADE. 

Col.  D.  W.  Wardrop. 

99th  New  York.* 
118th  New  York. 

9th  Vermont. 

19th  Wisconsin. 


UNATTACHED. 


1st  New  York  Mounted  Rifles, 
lltli  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

1st  Delaware  Battery. 

7th  Massachusetts  Battery. 

3d  Pennsylvania  Artillery. 
16th  New  York  Battery. 

19th  New  York  Battery. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  D. 
4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  L. 
2d  Wisconsin  Battery. 

4th  Wisconsin  Battery. 


YORKTOWN. 


Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 


King’s  Brigade. 


Advance  Brigade. 


Col.  R.  M.  West 

139th  New  York. 

172d  Pennsylvania. 

178th  Pennsylvania. 

5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 
Artillery  detachment. 

Unattached. 

2d  Massachusetts  Cavalry,  First  Battalion. 

6th  New  York  Cavalry,  Third  Battalion. 

1st  New  York  Artillery,  Batteries  H and  F. 

8th  New  York  Battery. 

1st  Pennsylvania  Artillery,  Batteries  E and  H. 

5th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  M. 


4th  Delaware.  ' 
18th  New  York. 

19th  Pennsylvania. 
9th  Pennsylvania. 


NORFOLK. 


Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele. 

148th  New  York. 

173d  Pennsylvania. 

177th  Pennsylvania. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalrv  (one  company). 
7th  New  York  Battery. 

FORT  MONROE.\ 


Col.  S.  M.  Alford. 

3d  New  York. 

CAMP  HAMILTON. 

Maj.  John  A.  Dai^ling. 

3d  Pennsylvania  Artillery  (live  companies). 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry  (one  company). 

^Appears  also  in  Terry’s  brigade,  First  Division,  Seventh  Army  Corps. 
+ Department  Headquarters.  ^ 


[Chap.  XX. 


678  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


Abstract  from  Tri-monthly  Beturn  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Post 
commanding,  for  April  30,  1863  (headquarters  Netv  Berne,  N.  C.). 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

9 

(T) 

a. 

U 

! < 

Officers. 

Men. 

Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Major-General  Poster 

20 

20 

21 

1 

First  Division,  Brigadier-General  Palmer 

14G 

2,923 

3,765 

7,170 

! 7 l' 

Second  Division,  Brigadier-General  Naglee 

103 

1,861 

2,  382 

6,  503 

1 

Third  Division,  Brigadier-General  Ferry 

25 

544 

695 

.5,  609 

Fourth  Division,  Brigadier-General  We’ssells 

192 

2,  604 

.3,  286 

5,  568 

' 5’  8 

Fifth  Division,  Brigadier-General  Prince  

200 

3,967 

4,  881 

6,148 

GA 

Artillery  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  Ledlie 

33 

609 

816 

2,  077 

2,  ( 

Cavalry',  Col.  S.  H.  Mix 

25 

347 

463 

874 

< 

First  North  Carolina  (Union)  Volunteers.  Lieutenant-Colonel 

10 

391 

477 

544 

McChesney. 

Grand  total 

754 

13,  246 

16,  785 

34,  514 

I 34  J 

Organization  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Department  of  North  Car 
Una,  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  eommanding,  April  30, 1803 

FIRST  DIVISION. 


Briir.  Gen.  Innis  N.  Palmer. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory. 

17th  Massachusetts. 

43d  Massachusetts. 

45th  Massachusetts, 
hist  Massachusetts. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  H.  C.  Lee. 

5th  Massachusetts. 

25th  Massachusetts. 

27th  Massachusetts. 

4Cth  Massachusetts. 


SECOND  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Geu. 
First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Charles  A.  Heckman 

23d  Massachusetts. 

9th  New  Jersey. 

81st  New  York. 

98th  New  York. 


Henry  M.  Naglee. 

Second  Brigade.* 

Col.  W.  W.  H.  Davis. 

11th  Maine. 

100th  New  York. 

52d  Pennsylvania. 

104th  Pennsylvania. 

Independent  New  York  Battalioi. 


THIRD  DIVISION.* 


Brig.  Gen.  O.  S.  Ferry. 


First  Brigade. 


Second  Brigade. 


Col.  J.  B.  Howell. 

.56th  Now  York. 

58th  Pennsylvania. 

85th  Pennsylvania. 

174th  Pennsylvania. 

* Detached,  in  Department  of  the  S 
Pennsylvania. 


Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn. 

39th  Illinois. 

62d  Ohio. 

67th  Ohio. 

176th  Pennsylvania. 

1,  with  the  exception  of  the  Fifty-eigb 


!hap.XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

FOURTH  JDIYISION. 


679 


Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lewis  C.  Hunt. 

85tli  New  York. 

9*2d  New  York. 

96th  New  York. 

Olst  Pennsylvania. 

:03d  Pennsylvania. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson. 

10th  Connecticut.*^ 

24th  Massachusetts.  * 

44th  Massachusetts. 

5th  Rhode  Island. 


FIFTH  DIVISION. 
Brig.  Gen.  Henry  Prince. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  F.  B.  Spinola. 

r)8th  Pennsylvania. 

68th  Pennsylvania. 

71st  Pennsylvania. 

7.5th  Pennsylvania. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  James  Jourdan. 

3d  Massacliusetts. 

8th  Massachusetts. 

132d  New  York. 

158tli  New  York. 


ARTILLERY. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  H.  Ledlie. 

3d  New  York  (twelve  companies). 
23d  New  York  Battery. 

24tli  New  York  Battery. 

1st  Rhode  Island,  Battery  F. 

1st  U.  S.,  Battery  C. 


UNATTACHED. 

3d  New  York  Cavalry,  Col.  S.  H.  Mix. 
1st  North  Carolina  (Union). 


War  Department, 
Washington.,  May  1,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 
lajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

We  find  it  impossible  to  send  you  another  regiment  now.  Every 
vailable  man  is  employed.  I think  the  siege  of  Suffolk  will  very  soon 
:'e  raised. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-Chief. 


May  1,  1863—7.30  p.  m. 

fajor-General  Peck,  Suffolk,  Va. : 

Hood’s  and  Pickett’s  divisions,  of  Longstreet’s  corps,  are  in  our  front ; 
0 reported  by  deserters  and  prisoners  captured  to-day.  This  will  leave 
othing  of  Longstreet’s  command  in  your  front  but  Eansom,  if  he  is 
aere. 

DANL.  BUTTEKPIELD, 

" Major-General,  Chief  of  Staff . 

* The  larger  portion  of  regiment  detached  in  the  Department  of  the  South. 


680 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  1,  1863. 
General  D.  Butterfield,  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

There  may  be  portions  of  Longstreet’s  troops  with  your  opponents. 
If  so,  they  are  the  first  installments.  Deserters  and  contrabands  who 
came  in  yesterday  from  Hood’s  and  Pickett’s  divisions  agree  in  all 
points  with  others  that  have  fallen  into  our  hands.  The  pickets  ol 
Corse,  Garnett,  and  Law  are  on  all  the  roads  now.  There  have  been 
heavy  rains  here  for  a few  days.  Longstreet  had  two  railroads  in  about 
16  miles  of  his  line. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 

(Sent  by  General  Butterfield  to  General  Hooker  11.45  p.  m.) 


Fort  Monroe,  May  1,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck: 

Among  the  many  marvels  of  this  war  are  the  impossibility  on  oui 
part  of  getting  information  as  to  the  enemy  and  the  facility  withwhicl 
he  ascertains  everything  as  to  us.  I allude  especially  to  General  But 
terfield’s  dispatch  to  you  stating  that  Hood’s  and  Pickett’s  division! 
are  in  front  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  1,  1863. 

General  Dix: 

There  may  be  some  regiments  of  Longstreet’s  on  their  way.  Prob 
ably  they  are  the  first  installments.  His  line  was  only  about  15  or  1' 
miles  from  his  two  railways.  If  so,  it  shows  that  the  rebels  knew  o 
Hooker’s  moves  before  we  did.  Deserters  and  contrabands  came  ii 
yesterday,  giving  the  same  reports  as  heretofore,  and  appear  entitle( 
to  full  credit.  If  Lee  has  called  for  him  his  necessities  must  be  pressing 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  May  1, 1863. 


Major-General  Dix: 

Have  just  examined  one  of  the  deserters  of  Garnett’s  brigade,  n 
cently  from  North  Carolina.  He  says  about  what  all  have  said  froi 
tlie  outset  as  to  the  force  and  design.  His  captain  said  Loiigstree 
would  try  to  take  Suffolk,  and  that  he  had  telegraphed  for  re  enlorc( 


ments. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General 


United  States  Elag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Neivport  AFcwSy  Va.^  May  1,1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 

General  : I beg  leave  to  acknowdedge  the  receipt  at  the  hands  « 
Captain  Gouraud  of  your  communication  of  April  25.  . , . n 

The  proposition  regarding  Smith’s  Island  has  been  submitted  to 


:;hap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


681 


iS'avy  Department,  which  has  expressed  its  approval,  providing  the 

■ lecessary  co-operating  force  is  furnished  from  the  army.  The  Depart- 
juent  informs  me  that  it  has  unofficial  information  that  Major-General 
jdalleck  promises  to  suggest  to  you  to  assist  in  any  way  you  can,  with 
';he  force  under  your  command,  in  carrying  out  this  object.  I have 
ventured  to  send  a copy  of  your  letter  to  the  Navy  Department,  with 
' he  expression  of  my  hope  that  the  War  Department  would  find  it  ex- 
;)edient  to  furnish  you  with  means  sufficient  to  undertake  and  success- 

; ally  accomplish  so  desirable  a work.  I hope  that  you  will  soon  be 
;upplied  with  the  necessary  means  to  enable  you  to  communicate  to  me 
irour  readiness  to  put  the  project  into  execution.  I will  be  prompt  as 
ar  as  my  means  will  allow  to  render  all  proper  naval  assistance. 

With  many  thanks  for  the  cordial  manner  in  which  you  have  met  the 

■ noposition,  and  with  many  hopes  for  your  success  in  the  movement  on 
Gnston,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

I S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear -Admiral,  Gomdg.  W.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


United  States  FLAa-smp  Minnesota, 

Off  Afewjgort  News,  Ya.,  May  1,  1863. 

laj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 


General:  I had  the  honor  to  receive  on  the  27th  ultimo  your  in- 
[eresting  and  instructive  communication  of  the  22d  ultimo,  giving  your 
riews  respecting  the  occupation  of  posts  within  the  limits  of  your  com- 
[fiand. 

I It  was  only  in  connection  with  the  occupation  of  such  posts  by  the 
lavy,  as  a part  of  their  defense,  that  the  subject  claimed  my  official  at- 
ention. 

I meant  in  my  communication  of  the  17th  to  refer  only  to  positions 
a the  Sounds  of  North  Carolina,  and  not  to  Fort  Macon  and  Beau- 
Drt  Harbor,  the  defense  of  which,  and  of  Hatteras  Inlet,  is  of  obvious 
ecessity. 

As  to  Eoanoke  Island,  I suppose  it  best  that  the  abandoned  rebel 
mrks  there  should  be  razed  and  the  obstructions  in  Croatan  Sound 
emoved.  Then  such  observation  or  police  as  would  prevent  any  at- 
empts  at  reconstruction  might  answer ; but  even  if  reoccupied  by  the 
nemy  we  could,  if  there  were  not  too  many  other  places  to  guard,  con- 
lentrate  and  dislodge  them.  But  this  position  does  not  receive  naval 
ccupation  at  present,  and  thelefore  is  only  referred  to  in  view  of  future 
emands.  Your  views  in  respect  to  New  Berne,  Washingtou,  and  Ply- 
louth  possess  great  force.  They  would  require  considerable  military 
; efenses,  however,  to  accomplish  all  you  have  in  view.  They  are  sickly 
'laces ; Plymouth  especially. 

The  enemy  can  build  gunboats  on  the  Tar  above  Washington,  and 
n the  Eoanoke  above  Plymouth,  though  their  facilities  would  be  bet- 
3r  at  the  towns  if  they  held  them. 

The  question  with  us  is  how  many  places  can  we  profitably  hold,  com- 
(•aring  the  advantages  with  the  expense  of  possession.  We  do  not  hold 
Mzabeth  City,  Edenton,  Hertford,  Winfield,  &c.,  nor  does  the  enemy 
^rive  any  visible  advantage  from  having  access  to  them. 

My  general  view  of  our  policy  is  to  take  places  which  the  enemy  has 
irtified  j to  level  his  works  of  defense,  and  then  to  leave  these  places  as 


682 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


they  were  before  the  rebellion,  unless  they  are  of  particular  military  im- 
portance, in  which  case  they  would  require  and  justify  proper  defenses. 

Where  a place  is  held  it  seems  to  me  that  the  military  occupation 
ought  to  be  as  complete  as  practicable  in  itself;  and  when  this  cannot 
be  done  the  occupation  becomes  one  of  questionable  propriety  to  the 
extent  that  gunboats  are  permanently  needed  for  its  defense. 

I do  not  desire  or  attempt  to  interfere  with  your  military  plans,  and 
I fully  appreciate  the  good  spirit  in  which  you  favor  me  with  your  views. 
It  is  certainly  my  wish  and  purpose  to  co-operate  heartily  with  you. 
I shall  be  glad  if  this  interchange  of  ideas  will  lead  to  such  an  examina- 
tion of  the  subject  as  will  show  in  connection  with  each  necessary  mili- 
tary occupation  precisely  what  kind  and  extent  of  naval  force  is  re- 
quired in  the  Sounds.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  naval  part  of  our  policy 
there  is  to  have  such  a force  as  can  co-operate  in  expeditions  with  the 
army,  and  in  the  mean  time,  by  cruising  and  as  guard  vessels,  preserve 
the  blockade  and  the  police  of  the  waters. 

Should  the  enemy  build  gunboats  on  the  rivers  above  the  towns  the 
naval  force  should  be  sufacient  to  destroy  his  vessels  before  they  unite 
or  after  they  have  combined. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral,  Comdg,  N,  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


General  Orders,  1 He  adquarters  District  of  the  Pamlico, 

5.  ( Washington,  N.  G.,  May  1, 186^. 

I.  Pursuant  to  orders  from  the  Headquarters  of  the  Departmento 
North  Carolina  it  is  hereby  announced  that  the  lines  are  closed. 
ingress  or  egress  can  be  permitted,  and  no  trade  whatever  with  person 

living  beyond  the  lines.  . , i . 

All  persons  who  have  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  are  hereby  warnei 
against  any  unauthorized  communication  with  persons  residing  withi 

the  enemy’s  lines,  by  letter  or  otherwise. 

******* 


By  order  of  Brig. 


Gen.  Henry  Prince : 

S.  W.  WALDEON,  JR., 
Cajptain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington,!).  G.,  May  2,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va.  : 

Measures  should  be  taken  to  ascertain  the  force  of  the 
of  Suffolk.  If,  as  is  supposed,  the  mass  of  Longstreet’s  troops  has  join . 

Lee,  the  demonstration  agreed  upon  should  be 

H.  W.  HALLLfLJi, 


May  2, 1863. 

Major-General  Halleck,  i i. 

A demonstration  was  made  on  the  enemy’s  line  ‘ 

brought  out  a considerable  force.  An  attack  was  wa: 

on  one  of  the  batteries  last  night,  but  was  probably  postponed  to 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


683 


of  boats  to  be  brought  from  ITorfolk.  Every  effort  will  be  made  to 
ascertain  promptly  his  strength.  I telegraphed  General  Peck  on  the 
subject  last  night,  after  my  return  from  Suffolk,  in  consequence  of  a 
dispatch  from  General  Butterfield  stating  that  Hood^s  and  Pickett^s 
divisions  were  reported  on  General  HookePs  front.  I have  just  re- 
ceived a dispatch  from  General  Peck  in  which  he  says  deserters  from 
PicketPs  division  state  that  they  saw  Pickett  yesterday  and  that  no 
brigades  have  gone  from  LongstreePs  command.  They  received  orders 
to  be  ready  to  move  last  night,  but  the  orders  were  countermanded. 
One  of  the  deserters — a Texan — says  that  Hood  was  there  yesterday. 
Jenkins’  division  is  before  Suffolk.  I will  direct  General  Peck  to  make 
a reconnaissance  in  force  and  will  be  ready  to  make  the  movement  re- 
ferred to  by  you  promptly. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Maij  2,  1863—11.30  a.  m. 

General  E.  H.  Keyes,  YorJctown,  Va.: 

Our  cavalry  ought  yesterday  or  to-day  to  have  been  in  rear  of  enemy, 
on  the  Eichmond  and  Fredericksburg  road,  at  its  crossing  of  the  Pa- 
munkey  or  in  that  vicinity,  and  have  destroyed  it.  Use  every  jDossible 
means  to  get  any  information,  and  telegraph  it  to  us  and  oblige.  Thin gs 
are  very  lively  here  now. 

DANE.  BUTTEEFELD, 
Major-General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


May  2,  1863. 

Major-General  Hooker,  Army  of  the  Fotomac : 

Deserters  from  PicketPs  division  state  that  they  saw  Pickett  on  the 
Ist  and  that  no  brigades  have  gone  from  LongstreePs  command.  They 
received  orders  to  be  ready  to  move  last  night,  but  the  orders  were 
countermanded.  One  of  these  is  a Texan,  who  states  that  Hood  was 
here  yesterday.  Jenkins’  division  is  here. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

May  2,  1863—11.10  a.  m. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolh,  Va.,  and 

Colonel  Kelton,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Washington,  B.  C.: 

Two  despters  here  from  Pickett’s  division.  Left  him  on  the  Black- 
water  April  30,  and  no  signs  of  a movement  then. 

DANE.  BUTTERFIELD, 

Major-  General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


/I  , ^ 2,  1863. 

General  Butterfield,  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

I explanation  of  the  last  clause — no  signs  of  a movement 

jthen.  Does  that  refer  to  LongstreePs  move  or  General  Hooker’s  ? 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


684 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA, 


[Chap.  XXX. 


^May  2,  1863—6.40  p.  m. 

Major-General  Peck: 

The  last  clause  referred  to  movements  of  their  divisions  in  front  of 
you,  meaning  that  there  were  no  signs  of  these  divisions  in  your  front 
moving,  as  we  understood  it.  The  deserters  have  gone  to  Washington. 
We  are  in  full  movement  and  have  been  for  some  time. 

DANL.  BUTTERFIELD, 
Major-General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck: 

The  children  [cavalry]  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  were  to  have  cut 
the  railroad  at  the  Pamunkey,  half  way  from  Fredericksburg  to  Rich- 
mond, yesterday.  Watch  the  enemy  closely  to-night  and  make  a re- 
connaissance in  force  to-morrow  morning. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  Dix: 

I organized  a command  before  the  reception  of  your  dispatch  cover- 
ing your  suggestions.  But  the  telegram  from  Butterfield  to  the  effect 
that  no  movement  had  been  made  here  on  the  30th  agrees  with  all  the 
evidences  up  to  this  time.  Did  they  cut  the  line  ? 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  2, 1863. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

May  2,  1863—8.15  p.  m. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffollc,  Va. : 

Our  latest  and  most  reliable  information  from  Richmond  is  as  follows. 
Am  inclined  to  the  belief  that  this  will  prove  true : 


Our  friend  just  returned.  The  works  around  Richmond  are  most  formidable.  At 
Meadow  Bridge  and  Mechanicsville  route  they  are  intended  for  field  artill^y. 
guns  in  position.  At  Richmond  are  the  City  Battalion  and  some  artillery,  i wemy 
seven  hundred  rations  issued  to  troops  in  Richmond  in  active  service.  General  vv  is( 
has  5,000  on  the  Peninsula.  Longstreet  has  three  divisions  at  Suffolk.  ^ When 
left  Lee  they  were  each  8,000  strong.  Their  effective  force,  all  told,  not  over  1*^) 
men  D.  H.  Hill  is  ordered  from  Washington  to  re-enforce  Longstreet  s corps.  n‘ 
may,  however,  take  LongstreePs  place  at  Suffolk  and  Lee  may  be  re-enlorcea  o.' 
Longstreet. 

DANE.  BUTTERFIELD, 

Chief  of  Staff. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  2,  [1863,] 

Via  Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  4,  1863 — 12.30  a.  m- 

General  Butterfield, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac  : ^ 

It  is  important  to  arrive  at  correct  conclusions  regarding  Longstreet 
force.  You  say  three  divisions  left  Fredericksburg  with  24,000.  M. 
information  from  more  than  100  individuals  has  been  that  his  force  wa 


Dhap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


685 


28,000  to  30,000.  One  of  the  spies,  who  has  spent  weeks  in  their  camps, 
supplied  a list  of  that  army,  as  well  as  Lee^s,  and  28,000  was  the  figure 
on  April  1.  He  has  enforced  the  conscription  most  vigorously  in  sev- 
eral counties,  not  heretofore  visited,  on  this  side  of  the  Blackwater. 
He  has  been  joined  by  4,000  from  Hill,  and  perhaps  more  j but  the  ad- 
vance of  Hooker  will  soon  force  him  to  the  river.  His  men  are  ready 
to  go  at  a moment’s  warning. 

JOH^f  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 

(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


May  2,  1863. 

General  Hix: 

The  papers  from  the  other  line  have  the  idea  that  Longstreet  is  up 
there  and  this  was  a foraging  expedition.  This  correction  proves  that 
my  limited  sources  of  information  have  been  better  than  General 
Hooker’s  for  many  weeks.  General  Longstreet  has  his  own  campaign 
and  will  not  give  it  up  until  compelled  to  do  so.  The  people  at  Wash- 
ington should  understand  the  nature  of  this  siege  of  twenty-two  days. 

JOHN:  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  2,  1863—8.50  p.  m. 

General  Hix: 

By  a later  dispatch  from  General  Butterfield  it  is  now  understood 
that  no  troops  have  left  my  front.  It  is  now  reported  to  me  that  a 
train  arrived  at  sunset  and  that  troops  were  seen  about  the  railway 
station. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


May  2,  1863. 

General  Dix: 

Richmond  Enquirer  of  30th  has  a column  on  Hooker’s  advance  and 
the  adjunct  by  way  of  Suffolk.  It  thinks  that  “ Longstreet  has  broken 
up  the  camp  of  negro-stealing  Yankees,  destroyed  the  command,  and 
thereby  inllicted  a fatal  blow  to  Hooker,  involving  a change  of  his  plans.” 

JOHN  J.  PECK. 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Viroinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  2,  1863. 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloelcading  Squadron : 

''  Admiral  : Your  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  contains  some  references 
to  affairs  on  the  Nansemond  which  concern  the  immediate  commander 
there  more  nearly  than  myself,  and  a copy  will  be  forwarded  to  him. 

; I desire  to  acknowledge,  as  I always  have,  the  readiness  with  which 
my  calls  on  you  for  aid  have  been  answered.  In  regard  to  differences 
jof  opinion  between  us  concerning  our  respective  duties  I have  done  all 


686 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


in  my  power  fco  confine  the  knowledge  of  them  to  those  immediately 
around  me  and  my  official  superiors.  How  difficult  it  is  to  carry  out 
such  a purpose  in  this  country  of  free  discussion  I need  not  suggest  to 
you.  My  own  public  conduct  in  this  department  has  in  more  instances 
than  one  been  criticised  in  a most  unjust  and  offensive  manner  by 

a correspondent  whom  I knew,  but  as  it  did  not  affect  any  public 

interest  I did  not  notice  it,  although  I have  seut  three  out  of  the  depart- 
ment— two  for  giving  military  information  and  one  for  interference  with 
officials.  In  regard  to  the  newspaper  article  referred  to  by  you,  the  mo- 
ment my  attention  was  called  to  it  (for  I rarely  read  correspondents’ 
letters)  the  reputed  author  was  advised  that  he  had  been  guilty  of  a 
great  impropriety  in  using  the  words  highest  authority,”  which  was 
explained  to  be  a common  i)hrase  among  newspaper  correspondents, 
importing  that  the  statement  was  made  on  undoubted  information.  He 
was  also  advised  that  the  remarks  in  regard  to  yourself  were  strongly 
disapproved  by  me,  and  on  both  points  I was  assured  that  there  would 
be  no  cause  for  complaint  hereafter. 

The  last  paragraph  of  your  letter,  advising  me  that  Lieutenants  Lam- 
son  and  Cushing  were  authorized  in  their  discretion  to  go  into  the  Upper 
Nansemond  and  co-operate  with  my  forces  there  against  the  enemy,  is 
all  I can  ask,  and  I know  that  the  spirit  and  gallantry  those  officers 
have  exhibited  on  all  occasions  will  insure  to  us  all  the  aid  it  is  possible 
to  afford. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  200.  ) Washington^  May  2,  1863. 

******* 

HI.  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  J.  Wistar,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  report  to  Ma- 
jor-General Dix,  commanding,  &c..  Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  for  assignments 
duty  at  Suffolk,  Ya. 

By  command  of  Maior- General  Halleck : 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  May  3, 1863—8  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

I have  just  returned  from  Suffolk.  General  Getty  crossed  the  Nan- 
semond,  near  General  Peck’s  headquarters,  to-day,  with  5,000  men.  He 
was  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  2 miles  back.  A strong  dem- 
onstration will  be  made  on  the  enemy’s  right  flank  to-morrow  morning 
In  the  action  in  front  of  our  center  the  day  before  yesterday  we  lost  7 
killed  and  20  wounded.  The  enemy  acknowledge  33  killed  and  a large 
number  wounded.  We  cannot  ascertain  and  do  not  think  any  of  his 
troops  have  been  withdrawn.  To-morrow  we  shall  be  able  to  judge 
better  of  his  strength. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


iAl\  XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


687 


Yorktown,  3£ay  3,  1863—12  noon. 

[ajor-General  Butterfield  : 

I learn  that  the  enemy  have  left  the  White  House  on  the  Pamunkey. 
|hey  have  planted  torpedoes  there  in  the  river.  I cannot  learn  whether 
jie  bridge  has  been  destroyed. 

• E.  H.  KEYES, 

' Major- General. 


jeueral  Hix : 


May  3,  1863. 


[GarnetPs  and  Benning’s  brigades  joined,  from  Carolina,  and  Kern 
i^r’s  is  on  the  way  from  near  Gatesville.  LongstreePs  plans  and  ar- 
mgements  were  all  for  permanent  occupation.  He  designed  to  push 
e siege,  and  Hooker’s  move  and  my  preparation  only  prevented.  His 
irce  was  over  30,000.  When  he  can  he  will  return  with  the  same  end 
I view. 

(Wounded  yesterday. 


PECK, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  3,  1863. 

aj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck; 

I saw  Admiral  [Lee]  last  evening  on  the  Kansemond.  He  expressed 
e opinion  that  there  had  at  no  time  been  a large  force  at  Suffolk— 
. t over  20,000- — and  that  the  enemy  had  only  a few  movable  guns.  I 
yve  no  doubt  it  is  from  him  that  the  views  which  seem  to  prevail  in 
ashington  have  been  derived.  I think  I shall  be  with  you  to-day. 
ill  advise  you  as  soon  as  I get  my  mail. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  3,  1863. 

Jij.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

[ have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Peck, 
iom  my  personal  observation  to-day  I am  satisfied  that  the  conclu- 
J'n  he  and  the  other  general  officers  named  came  to  is  right.  Our 
1 iS  will  probably  reach  60  in  killed  and  wounded : 


- be  reconnaissance  in  force  has  been  pushed  up  very  close  to  the  enemy's  main  line 
‘ intrencbments,  which  is  strong  and  flanked  by  artificial  and  natural  obstructions. 
118  evident  that  he  has  considerable  force  massed  there,  and  means  to  make  a strone; 
tat  U pressed.  It  cannot  be  attacked  without  a greater  loss  than  I can  afford  af 
)•  time.  My  position  is  secure  now,  and  in  crossing  the  river  on  a single  bridge  to 
.at  a battle  on  his  ground  much  risk  is  assumed.  These  views  are  entertained  bv 
aerals  Getty  and  Gordon.  The  troops  have  been  under  fire  nearly  all  day,  and  be- 
?ed  with  peat  spirit  and  gallantry,  and  I shall  withdraw  them  probably  durin^^ 
> night  At  this  time  42  wounded  are  reported.  I regret  to  say  that  Colonel  Rim 
n,  01  the  One  hundred  and  third  New  York,  was  twice  wounded.  He  is  an  ofiScer 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


688 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Sunday,  May  3, 1863. 


Major-General  Foster: 

My  Dear  General  : My  official  letter,  May  1,  briefly  and  rather 
hastily  gives  my  views  on  the  public  points  noticed  in  your  unofficial 

favor  of  the  22d  ultimo.  , • » . 

I am  sure  you  will  not  misunderstand  my  motives.  1 am  subject  to 
so  many  calls  for  aid  which  I have  not  to  give  and  for  service  which  I 
cannot  render  that  I must  try  and  find  out  just  what  is  or  should  be 
reuuired  of  me  and  to  try  to  do  it.  If  I had  only  time  to  lay  before 
you  the  quantity  and  kinds  of  demands  made  on  me  here  you  would 
iaiio'h  outright  if  they  were  not  so  earnest  and  provoking. 

One  point  requires  a word  of  explanation  from  me  to  you.  My  im- 
pression is  that  I twice  bad  some  conversation  with  you  respecting 
naval  occupations  (resulting  from  army  occupations)  m the  bounds 
Some  of  the  views  you  now  write  you  expressed  to  me  at  New  Berne, 
expressed  my  views  fully  to  Townsend  and  I think  to  Davenport  and 
Flusser.  This  Townsend  recollects,  and  says  Davenport  thinks  he  recol 
lects  some  conversation  between  you  and  myself  about  it.  It  may  hi 
that  I said  less  to  you  than  to  others  after  hearing  your  views,  for  thet 
as  now  I was  impressed  by  what  you  said. 

If  the  occupation  of  Washington  and  Plymouth  would  facilitate  in 
stead  of  clogging  vour  operations,  of  which  you  are  the  best 
you  are  right  to  hold  them.  But  I should  like  to  have  the  mihiarj 
occupation  made  as  complete  as  possible  so  as  to  lessen  or  dispense 
with  the  stationary  naval  force  at  each  point.  -m 

I meant  to  add  to  my  official  letter  to  you  that  I hope  you  wil^e  a 
libertv  with  the  Dirigo  to  have  the  obstructions  in  the  river  at  VVasti 
ington  removed.  Such  impediments  should  be  removed  everywhere 
The  army  is  less  hampered  by  limits  than  the  navy  I believe,  especial  ^ 

"^I^was  sorry  to  hear  you  were  not  quite  well.  Hope  your  wa^ 

slight.  Please  present  my  most  respectful  compliments  to  Mrs.  h oster 
and  believe  me,  very  truly,  yours, 


p.  s. General  Halleck  cannot  give  you  the  troops  for  that  island. 

lia/e  been  obliged  to  write  in  great  haste  to  save  this  good  clianc 
for  Beaufort.  We  place  no  dependence  in  the  canal  mail  now. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
May  4,  1863 — 10.30  : 


a.  in. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief ; 

A few  hours  after  the  fight  yesterday  the  enemy  ‘I'lj" 

treat  We  are  in  pursuit.  He  was  re-enforced  on  Saturdaj  bj  i l 
liing’s  brigade  from  North  Carolina  and  Kemper  s is  on  t ^ 
ingw'ossed  the  Chowan  near  Gatesville.  / 
agreed  upon  with  you  at  once,  imngstreet  has 

Major-General 


HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


689 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  4,  1863. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

General  Peck  says  Longstreet’s  line  of  rifle-pits  and  batteries  is  not 
3SS  than  10  miles  in  extent.  Batteries  are  arranged  with  embrasures 
nd  parapets  of  12  or  15  feet  thickness.  His  line  was  of  immense 
trength.  It  encircled  Suffolk  from  the  Edenton  road  to  the  NTanse- 
lond. 

i A.  DIX, 

i Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

May  4,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

J^Iajor-General  Foster  is  applying  for  cavalry,  and  I understand  for 
)me  of  mine.  I have  but  2,600,  and  can  spare  none.  I have  1,500 
t Suffolk,  900  at  Williamsburg,  and  200  at  Norfolk  ; besides.  General 
[ill  is  on  the  Blackwater.  General  Foster  will  be  undisturbed. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

May  4,1863 — 9 p.  m. 

[ajor-General  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Fotomac  : 

1 Following  just  received  from  General  Keyes: 

' Lieutenant-Commander  Gillis,  just  returned  from  near  West  Point,  has  learned  that 
‘ e rebel  force  from  White  House  and  below,  and  opposite  on  the  Pamunkey,  have 
sen  withdrawn  to  Hanover  Court-House.  There  are  troops  on  this  Peninsula,  but 
>w  many  is  not  known.  Nothing  has  been  learned  about  bridges  except  that  the 
ilroad  bridge  at  the  White  House  still  stands. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

3fay  4,  1863 — 3.30  p.  m. 

' aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Peck : 

I Lave  in  my  possession  the  communication  of  Maj.  Gen,  D.  H.  Hill  to  General 
mgstreet,  reporting  his  arrival  at  Carrsville,  with  his  entire  division  4 miles  this 
Ic  of  Carrsville  on  the  2d,  and  awaiting  his  orders. 


A telegram  from  Major  Stratton,  just  received,  confirms  this.  He 
lys: 


The  troops  from  Carolina  were  ordered  to  Suffolk  on  the  2d,  and  the  wagons  to 
ankliii.  Have  just  returned  from  a portion  of  their  center  line,  which  would  have 
st  us  not  less  than  2,000  men  to  have  carried.  All  their  lines  are  strictly  in  accord- 
'Ce  with  the  rules  of  a besieging  ormy.  Hill  may  commence  operations  unless  de- 
.aiided  elsewhere. 


R R— VOL  XVIII. 


JOHN  A.  HIX, 

3Iajor- General. 


690 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[UIIAP.  XXX. 


May  4, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

A brioade  is  on  this  side  the  Chowan  and  Longstreet  was  re-enforced 
on  Saturday  morning  (2d)  by  General  Benning,  with  five  regiments  and 
lifteeu  pieces,  who  crossed  the  Chowan  and  marched  from  Gatesville. 
Hood  commanded  yesterday,  and  had  his  division  and  other  troops. 
Longstreet  was  2 miles  back.  Providence  Church  was  filled  with 
wounded.  At  9.30  p.  m.  all  his  forces  save  picket  lines  moved  for 
Blackwater.  He  had  seven  hours  the  start.  Colonel  Poster  started 
with  a brigade,  battery  and  some  cavalry,  and  turned  up  at  Leesviile 
at  6 a.  m.,  where  he  has  found  the  enemy.  I have  cautioned  him  re- 
peatedly against  being  led  off  too  far.  Before  troops  can  reach  him 
they  will  be  over.  He  will  do  all  that  can  be  done  on  that  route. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  4, 1803. 

Major-General  Dix: 

A telegram  from  General  Getty  to  the  effect  that  Hood  and  Ander-i 
son  had  seven  brigades  on  the  river  yesterday,  and  that  at  8.30  orders 
were  giv^en  to  retire.  We  should  have  had  a warm  time. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


Port  Monroe,  May  4, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

Tlie  enemy  having  gone  I must  have  5,000  men  at  once,  either 
gomery’s  [*?]  division  or  any  other  you  choose.  Send  them  to  Norfolk 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  4, 1863. 

General  Hix: 

It  will  hardly  be  advisable,  it  seems  to  me,  Avhile  they  are  on  this  sid 
the  river  and  the  results  of  the  pursuit  are  unknown.  It  would  be  sv 
naled  to  Pranklin  in  an  hour  or  two.  Let  me  have  your  views.  Ha 

to  send  Corcoran.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


[May  4,  1863.] 

Major-General  Dix: 

It  is  my  opinion  that  General  Hill  is  to  take  Longstreefis  place  o 

the  Blackwater.  . ^ ctntPi 

If  any  one  goes  it  must  be  Gordon,  and  with  the  number  you  state 
That  number  is  all  that  ought  to  be  taken  under  any  circumstances. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


691 


!;hap.  XXX.] 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  Maij  4, 18C3. 
Major-General  Peck,  Commanding,  Suffollc: 

It  is  not  best  to  interrupt  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  j but  our  troops 
should  be  recalled  tlie  moment  the  enemy  crosses  the  Blackwater.  I 
would  rather  have  Gordon  or  Getty.  The  movement  to  be  made  is  an 
important  one  and  needs  experience  in  command.  But  your  safety  must 
DC  consulted. 

I The  enemy  will  not  be  likely  to  return  unless  Hooker  fails. 

I JOHN  A.  HIX, 

I Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  4,  1863. 
idajor-General  Peck,  Commanding,  SuffoUc: 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  all  the  forces  before  Suffolk  have  moved  for 
he  Blackwater,  including  Pickett’s  division?  Advise  me  as  soon  as 
)ossible.  I do  not  quite  understand  your  dispatch. 


! 


Major-General  Peck: 
Defer  till  to-morrow. 


j 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  4,  1863. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


I Fort  Monroe,  May  4,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck,  Commanding,  Suffolk: 

Let  General  Gordon  be  ready  with  6,000  men.  The  movement  must 
joamieiice  to-morrow.  I will  advise  you.  Let  General  Getty  take  110 
)f  the  Ninth  New  York.  I may  want  the  rest  to  save  the  Third  New 
fork— one  of  the  finest  regiments  in  service.  Will  know  in  two  or 
hree  days. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


May  4,  1863 — about  7 a.  m. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolk,  Va. : 

^ Notliiijg  of  positive  nature  with  regard  to  Hood  and  Pickett.  Among 
»00  or  1,000  prisoners  yesterday  statements  to  any  one  talking  to  theni 
vas  to  effect  that  Hood  and  Pickett  were  due  here  last  night,  and  we 
Oioiild  soon  hear  from  them.  The  most  reliable  information  I have  had 
H from  a deserter,  a resident  of  Orleans  County,  New  York,  conscripted 
aa  Louisiana  regiment,  who  stated  that  on  Saturday,  while  detailed 
0 the  rear,  their  columns  engaged  to  cook  provisions,  a force  about 
qiuil  to  two  brigades  marched  by.  Conversing  with  the  troops  he 
'Sked  whose  they  were.  They  said  they  were  Hood’s  division.  They 
ire  being  re  enforced  in  some  measure  from  below — whether  from  your 


692 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


front  or  General  Keyes’  of  course  I do  not  know.  They  had  nothing  at 
Kichmond  to  send  here.  We  have  had  heavy  fighting  here  for  two  or 

three  days.  DAKL.  BUTTEKFIELD, 

Major-General,  Chief  of  ^Staff. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

May  4,  1863—10.45  a.  m. 

Major-General  Peck,  Suffolh,  Va. : 

Our  cavalry  bring  information  of  15,000  or  20,000  of  Longstreet’s 
forces  getting  Off  from  the  cars  at 

Major-General,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  4, 1863. 


Major-General  Hooker, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

Loiigstreet  was  re-enforced  by  General  Penning  with  five  regiments 
and  fifteen  pieces  on  the  2d.  He  crossed  the  Chowan  with  pontoons. 
General  Kemper,  with  another  brigade,  has  also  crossed,  making  three 
m all  Hood  commanded  yesterday,  and  Longstreet  was  2 miles  m the 
rear  with  reserves.  They  suffered.  At  9.30  p.  m all  his  forces  moved 
bv  different  interior  routes  for  the  Blaokwater.  He  has  several  hours 
the  start  All  his  arrangements  were  for  a continual  siege  ot  bufiolk. 
I was  fully  prepared  for  that.  ^ 

Major-General. 

(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


May  4,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

I have  a communication  of  General  Hill  to  General  Longstreet,  o 


Mav  2,  1863,  in  which  he  reports  his  arrival  with  his  entire  division  ai 

^ . /• TT4rx  tt'QU  rhpn  riluN 


or  near  Oarrsville,  and  asks  for  orders.  His  command  was  then  j,nl> 
14  miles  from  Suffolk.  This  is  confirmed  by  telegraph  from  South  Mil  s 
N.  0.  All  the  troops  that  crossed  the  Chowan  were  ordered  to  Sullol 
and  the  supply  trains  to  Franklin,  the  depot  of  the  railroad  from  ^ ort 
Carolina.  Every  arrangement  was  made  by  the  enemy  that  is  calic , 
for  by  the  rules  governing  a besieging  army.  j PECK 

Major-General. 


May  4, 1863. 

Major-General  Keyes, 

Commanding.,  Yorldonm  : 

The  enemy  commenced  his  retreat  from  Suftolk  at  9.30  last  e^emiip 
We  are  in  pursuit.  We  had  a sharp  fight  yesterday,  driving  him  to 
intrenchments.  Our  loss  about  60.  JOHN  A HIX 

Major- General 


CORiiESPOKDE]S:CE,  ETC. — UNION. 


693 


|;nAP.  XXX.] 


Yorktown,  Ya.,  Blay  4,  1863. 

^lajor- General  Dix : 

The  following  received  a few  moments  ago  from  Colonel  West: 

Fort  Magruder. 

Colonel  SuYDAM : 

Intelligence  comes  to  me  that  cannot  be  disregarded  that  the  enemy  will  attack  at 
layligbt  or  before.  I liav^e  taken  every  precaution  against  surprise. 

E.  M.  WEST. 

Shall  I go  down  to  Fort  Monroe  in  the  morning  ? Please  reply  im- 
nediately. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-  General. 


General  Keyes:] 

Come,  if  the  attack  is  not  made. 

J.  A.  D. 


Headquarters, 

South  3IillSj  W.  (7.,  May  4,  1863 — 8.30  a.  m. 
Vlaj.  Gen.  John  J.,  Peck, 

Commanding  at  Suffolk.,  Ya. : 

General  : The  rebel  forces  have  left  all  the  country  between  this 
iiid  the  Perquimans  Eiver.  Captain  Eeynolds  was  at  Sandy  Cross  at 
\ o’clock  this  morniug.  Known  Union  citizens  there  informed  him  that 
he  rebel  infantry  left  Saturday  night  at  sundown  and  the  cavalry  at 
laylight  on  Sunday  morning.  The  infantry  had  orders  to  report  at 
Suffolk,  the  cavalry  at  Sunbury,  and  the  wagon  train  was  ordered  to 
oe  at  the  Blackwater  to-day  (Monday).  A man  who  had  come  through 
rom  Sunbury  stated  that  the  cavalry  on  arriving  at  Sunbury  received 
mlers  to  report  at  Suffolk.  The  citizens  near  Sandy  Cross  thought  that 
he  rebels  were  still  at  Suffolk  on  Sunday  night,  say  at  sundown. 

Captain  Eoberts  and  command  reached  Woodville  this  morning  at  2 
Vclock.  The  enemy  (Third  Korth  Carolina  Cavalry)  left  there  on  Satur- 
lay  night  at  0 o’clock.  They  left  two  or  three  sick  behind,  who,  to- 
gether with  several  other  soldiers  were  captured  by  Captain  Eoberts. 
Captain  Eoberts  says : 

They  seem  to  have  gone  in  the  direction  of  Gatesville.  I shall  immediately  push 
brward  toward  Newby’s  Bridge  and  ascertain  further  iiarticulars. 

i The  bearers  of  the  dispatches  from  Captain  Eoberts  say  that  the  en- 
3my  left  Woodville  apparently  in  considerable  haste,  according  to  reports 
3f  citizens. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEAKKLIK  A.  STEATTOK, 

Major,  Commanding  Detachment  at  South  Mills. 


j United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

; Off  Newport  Neivs,  Va.,  May  4,  1863. 

j^aj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

I Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va.: 

General:  In  view  of  Major-General  Hooker’s  present  movements 
ind  of  the  fact  that  you  have  a very  considerable  army  in  this  depart- 
'Hcnt,  say  20,000  troops,  and  understanding  to-night  that  the  enemy  has 
Esappeared  from  before  Suffolk,  I respectfully  and  earnestly  propose  to 


694 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


you  a joint  expedition  to  take  Fort  Powliatau,  Petersburg,  and  i)erlia})s 
Pichmond.  1 am  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice  and  will  co-operaU 
with  you  in  any  and  every  way  possible.  Aly  gunboats  and  a few  com 
panics  will  hold  your  posts  at  Suffolk  and  Yorktown. 

The  opportunity  for  striking  a great  blow  is  such  as  rarely  presentir 
itself  in  the  history  of  nations.  I am  confident  you  will  improve  it. 

I have  the  honor,  general,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg,  Bear-Admiralj  Comdg.  Y.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  l^ewport  Neivs,  Va.,  May  4,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Ya. : 

General  : I have  received  your  communication  of  the  2d  instant 
Unfounded  and  unjust  newspaper  attacks  on  the  Navy  Department  aia 
myself  by  a known  correspondent  at  the  fort  under  your  command  art 
certainly  injurious  to  the  public  service,  whether  they  are  contradictei 
and  repelled  in  the  same  manner,  thus  creating  controversy  betweei 
public  officers  and  exposure  of  public  affairs,  or  whether  they  art; 
allowed  to  remain  unanswered.  The  discipline  of  the  Navy  does  no 
sanction  a resort  to  newspapers  to  remedy  a wrong  thus  wantonly  done; 
It  is  wholly  inexcusable  to  resort  to  newspaper  attacks  in  cases  when 
an  appeal  can  be  taken  to  and  a remedy  applied  by  the  Government  ti 
matters  affecting  the  public  interests. 

The  only  order  I gave  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  gunboats  from  lli 
Upper  Nansemond  Avas  on  the  19th,  when  I sent  tlie  fleet  captain  U 
Suffolk  to  communicate  Avith  the  authorities  and  Avithdraw  the  gunboat 
if  practicable.  This  order  was  iwoked  the  same  day  at  the  instance  o 
General  Peck  hy  an  order  sent  by  me  through  your  headquarters  in 
dispatch  to  General  Peck.  When  that  order  was  given  you  had  heeii 
re-enforced  largely;  you  had  just  provided  military  defenses  for  tli 
right  bank  of  the  Upper  Nansemond;  the  improAused  little  gunboat 
were  not  a sufficient  or  necessary  defense  there  and  were  much  Avantcti 
elsewhere  and  their  communications  Avere  interrupted  by  a battery  i 
a strong  earthAvork,  which  had  cut  up  several  of  them  badly,  killed  oi 
Avounded  a large  per  cent,  of  their  small  crews,  whilst  two  detachment 
of  troops  according  to  the  official  reports  to  me  had  failed  to  co-operat 
Avith  Lieutenant  Lamson  to  take  the  battery  and  raise  the  blockade. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  efficient  support  (by  General  Getty  i 
I)erson)  was  gAen  to  Lieutenant  Lamson’s  plan,  and  he  landed  the  3fi 
troops  close  to  and  in  rear  of  the  battery,  and,  aided  by  them,  got  hi 
four  navy  field-pieces  up  the  bank  and  taking  the  enemy’s  battery  i 
reverse  stoi)ped  their  attempt  to  turn  it  on  our  troops,  Avho  gallantl 
dashed  in  and  easily  took  it.  The  surprise  Avas  complete. 

Next  day,  the  20th,  General  Peck  abandoned  this  earthwork,  the  rca 
to  which  in  the  mean  time  had  been  strengthened  by  our  troops.  Tin 
eAmeuation  As  as  earnestly  resisted  by  Lieutenants  Gushing  and  Lamsoi 
and  obliged  the  latter  to  drop  down  a feAV  hundred  yards  from  the  ha 
tery  and  just  beloAV  the  bar  Avhich  it  commanded.  Thus  General  Pec 
and  not  myself  caused  the  gunboats  to  withdraAV. 

My  subsequent  orders  to  Lieutenant  Lamson  did  not  prevent  but  n 
quired  this  gallant  and  Avilling  young  oflicer  to  render  the  army  a 
practicable  assistance.  I should  mention  that  I not  only  reA'oked  in 
order  of  the  19th  to  Captain  Crosby  before  it  was  executed  and  befoi 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


695 


HAr.  XXX.] 


he  battery  was  taken  (as  General  Peck  well  knows,  because  it  was 
la  my  telegram  to  him  in  answer  to  one  from  him),  but  when  the  bat- 
|ery  was  taken  I immediately  informed  General  Getty  that  I cordially 
llowed  the  boats  to  remain.  In  view  of  the  exertions  I had  made  to 
quip  and  maintain  a little  flotilla  to  aid  you  whilst  you  were  perfecting 
[^our  defenses,  of  the  service  that  flotilla  had  rendered  you,  and  your 
aiowledge  that  its  withdrawal  from  above  the  battery,  though  neces- 
ary  and  proper,  was  not  by  my  order,  you  must  feel  that  the  assault 
Liade  on  me  by  the  well-known  correspondent  at  the  fort,  who  gave 
►oint  to  his  attack  by  declaring  that  he  was  reflecting  your  feelings, 
ras  most  unwarrantable. 

This  correspondent,  in  the  same  inspired  communication  (for  in  that 
ight  be  has  presented  his  reflections  to  the  public),  also  charges  me 
7ith  being  at  fault  for  the  reoccupation  by  the  rebels  of  their  aban- 
loned  earthworks,  called  Fort  Powhatan,  in  the  upper  part  of  James 
liver.  This  reoccupation  was  a military  act  done  in  your  department. 
Vbeu  Colonel  Ludlow  informed  me  of  it  on  his  return  down  James 
liver  in  a flag  of  truce  I did  not  wait  for  you  to  ask  me  to  co-operate, 
)ut  I went  immediately  to  confer  with  you  on  the  subject.  Your  reply 
vas  that  you  could  do  nothing,*  that  the  enemy  was  on  this  side  of  the 
flackwater  in  greater  force  than  yourself;  but  you  asked  me  if  I could 
lot  shell  them  out.  I confess  that  I was  a little  surprised  at  this  ex- 
)ectatiou,  in  view  of  the  failure,  from  want  of  army  co-operation,  of  a 
)etter  force  than  I had  to  shell  the  enemy  out  of  Fort  Darling,  which 
lad  no  rebel  navy  to  support  it. 

The  reoccupation  of  Fort  Powhatan  was  the  easy  and  natural  effort 
>f  the  enemy,  who  had  remained  in  possession  of  the  Blackwater  in 
i'ont  of  Suffolk  (between  Suffolk  and  Fort  Powhatan)  for  the  last  eight 
nonths.  Where  an  active  enemy  holds  miliiary  possession  of  a country 
II  force  he  may  not  only  reoccupy  his  forts  on  his  river  front,  but  he 
nay,  where  there  is  no  military  interference,  build  forts  on  the  bluffs  of 
he  river  where  he  had  none  before.  One  of  our  gunboats,  as  proposed, 
)r  several  of  them,  aided  by  the  one  iron-clad  I then  liad,  could  not 
lave  driven  him  from  Fort  Powhatan  after  he  had ’reoccupied  it. 

Under  the  circumstances  of  this  case  the  unfounded  and  injurious 
issaults  made  by  a correspondent  at  the  fort,  who  is  under  your  imme- 
liate  authority  and  who  professedly  writes  from  military  intelligence 
iominunicated  to  him  there,  it  seems  both  proper  and  decent  that  his 
mfounded  charges  against  the  Navy  Department  and  myself  should  be 
publicly  corrected  by  the  same  authority  under  which  he  claimed  and 
s understood  by  the  public  to  write. 

I The  current  duties  of  the  squadron  require  and  receive  my  first  atten- 
Ition.  It  is  only  when  they  are  disposed  of  that  I can  give  attention  to 
natters  even  of  this  interest. 

: I have  the  lionor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Bear- Admiral^  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


I ITdqrs.  Dett.  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

I Fort  Monroe^  May  I,  1803. 

MnJ.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster  : 

My  Dear  General  : General  Naglee  is  here.  I have  no  cavalry  to 
spare,  as  I have  an  important  movement  to  make. 

We  had  a sharp  fight  at  Suffolk  yesterday;  our  loss  nearly  70;  the 
jinemy’s  not  known. 


696 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX, 


Last  night  Longstreet’s  whole  force  fell  back  to  the  Blackwater. 
General  D.  H.  Hill  arrived  on  the  Blackwater  at  Carrsville  the  day 
before  yesterday.  General  Peck  has  his  communication  of  the  2d  in- 
stant reporting  his  arrival  there  to  General  Longstreet. 

You  can  have  scarcely  anything  left  to  oppose  you  in  North  Carolina. 
Garnett’s  brigade  arrived  at  Suffolk  more  than  a week  ago. 

Hooker  has  moved  and  has  been  fighting. 

The  enemy  will  concentrate  his  whole  force  between  Richmond  and 
Fred  er  icksburg. 

In  haste,  very  truly,  yours, 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Hdqrs.  Outposts,  Camp  Fifty-eighth  Regt.  Pa.  Vols., 

May  4,  18G3. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Teyith  Army  Corps: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  on  the  information  of  my  patrol,  tliat 
the  enemy  have  reestablished  their  posts  on  Core  Creek;  also  that 
they  were  burning  or  endeavoring  to  burn  the  railroad  bridge  yester- 
day afternoon. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  RICHTER  JONES, 

Colonel  Fifty-eighth  Regiment,  Commanding  Outposts. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  Netvs,  Va.,  May  4,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : In  view  of  the  recent  sudden  and  extraordinary  calls 
made  upon  me  for  naval  defense  of  military  lines  and  positions  I con- 
sider it  to  be  my  duty  to  request  you  to  inform  me  what  military  posts 
or  occupations  in  your  department  require,  in  your  judgment,  naval 
defense,  for  what  reason,  and  to  what  extent. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  May  5,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  ; In  your  communication  to  me  of  the  2d  instant  you  say : 

In  regard  to  differences  of  opinion  between  ns  concerning  onr  respective  duties  I 
have  done  all  in  my  power  to  confine  the  knowledge  of  them  to  those  immediately 
around  me  and  my  official  superiors. 

I will  thank  you  to  let  me  know  what  are  the  ^^differences  of  opinion 
between  us  concerning  our  respective  duties,”  to  which  you  refer. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron. 


:nAr.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION.  697 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  op  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

I Fort  Monroe j F«.,  May  5,  1863.  ' 

ictg'.  Ivear-Aclmiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

I Commanding  Forth  Atlantic  Blochading  Squadron  : 

I Admiral  : I have  tlie  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
)f  the  4th  instant  requesting  me  to  inform  you  what  “ military  posts  or 
!)ccupations  in  my  department,  require,  in  my  judgment,  “naval  de- 
euse,  for  what  reason,  and  to  what  extent.’^ 

I I liave  the  pleasure  of  furnishing  the  desired  information  : 

I 1st.  Port  Monroe,  the  importance  of  which  as  a key  to  the  Ghesa- 
icake  Bay  and  its  tributaries  it  is  unnecessary  to  state  to  you.  We 
leed  no  naval  defense  there  beyond  what  might  be  furnished  in  case  of 
jimergency  by  your  fleet  at  Newport  l^ews. 

2d.  Norfolk.  This  position  was  occupied,  and  I will  say  also  every  other 
)osition  held  by  me  was  in  the  occupation  of  our  forces  before  I took 
ommand  of  this  military  department.  The  especial  object  in  view  on 
he  part  of  the  Government  in  holding  Norfolk  I sui)pose  to  be  to  de- 
rive the  enemy  ot  a means  of  annoyance.  He  might  build  vessels 
here  and  send  them  out  at  favorable  moments  to  molest  us,  as  he  did 
n former  occasions.  Two  other  very  essential  objects  are  to  keep  open 
iir  internal  line  ot  communication  between  the  departments  of  Vir- 
inia  and  North  Carolina,  and  to  have  a naval  depot  where  our  numer- 
us  steaniers  on  the  Lower  Chesapeake  and  its  tributaries  can  be  re- 
aired without  being  sent  to  Baltimore  or  Washington  on  any  sudden 
mergency  or  in  case  of  any  common  casualty.  I think  there  should  be 
^vo  gunboats  in  Norfolk  Harbor. 

3d.  Suffolk  is  held  to  cover  Norfolk,  insure  the  inland  communica- 
on  to  Albemarle  Sound,  and  to  keep  the  enemy  at  a distance.  We 
ave  had  two  gunboats  there,  the  Stepping  Stones,  one  of  yours,  and 
le  West  End.  I have  armed  the  Smith  Briggs,  and  if  the  Stepping 
tones  is  needed  elsewhere  her  services  can  be  dispensed  with.- 
4th.  Yorktown.  This  post  is  considered  important  to  give  us  the 
3utrol  of  the  Peninsula  up  to  that  point,  keeping  the  enemy  from  com- 
ig  below  it,  and  commanding  the  York  Eiver  in  case  we  need  it  for  the 
tovement  of  troops.  It  would  be  desirable  to  have  two  gunboats 
lere,  as  the  occupation  of  Gloucester,  on  the  other  side,  follows  that  of 
orktown.  ' . 

5th.  Williamsburg  is  occupied  as  an  outpost  of  YMrktown  for  the 
mpose  of  preventing  the  enemy  from  approaching  the  latter  and  an- 
oying  us  with  field  guns  and  small-arms  of  long  range  and  of  watching 
IS  movements  as  tightly  as  possible  up  the  Peninsula.  This  position 
not  susceptible  of  naval  defense,  and  it  is  only  referred  to  from  its 
'lation  to  Yorktown  to  give  you  a complete  view  of  the  subject. 

5th.  I am  about  to  occupy  West  Point  to  cut  off*  the  enemy^s  commu- 
lication  with  Matthews  and  Gloucester  Counties,  and  as  a position 
om  which  a flank  movement  can  be  made,  in  case  of  emergency,  on  the 
miny’s  forces  at  Eichmond  if  he  should  be  assailed  from  the  north  or 
>uth.  It  is  at  the  confluence  of  two  rivers,  and  two  gunboats  are  very 
^suable. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


698 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Dept,  oe  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 
ilDQRS.  31onroe,  Fa.,  May  5,  18G3. 


Actg.  Hear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 


Commanding  North  Atlantic  Bloclcadmg  Sguadron : ,, 

Admieal:  I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  yesterday, 
i.roposiiig  a CO  operation  of  the  army  and  navy  forces  under  your  com- 
13  and  mine  “to  take  Fort  Powhatan,  Petersburg,  and  perhaps 
Kichmond,”  supposing  that  your  gunboats  and  a few  companies  can  ho  d 
the  p“sts  of  Suffolk  aSd  Torktown.  My  movable  force  is  comparative  y 
small  and  entirely  inadequate  to  the  great  object  referred  to,  nor  won h 
it  he  safe  to  depend  on  your  gunboats  and  a few  companies  to  hold 
Suff  olk  and  Yorktown . Only  the  river  front  at  Suffolk  could  be  P^teoted 
bv  your  guns,  leaving  the  other  lines,  several  miles  m extend  to  be  de- 
fenLd  by  a few  companies.  The  same  observation  is  applicable  in  a 
mol  forrible  manner  to  Yorktown.  Neither  of  these  POSitioos,  wi  h b 
large  amount  of  guns  and  ordnance  stores  in  both,  can  bo  safely  let! 

" Imay  athUn  reglTto  Suffolk  that  the  enemy  is  in  force  on  the  Black 
water  - that  his  abandoned  works  are  very  heavy  and  extensive,  sho^ 
his  designs  to  be  permanent  occupation,  and  that  we  may  expect  the 
investment  to  be  renewed  as  soon  as  the  emergency  which  has  ltd  tc, 

Ids  withdrawal  shall  have  passed  by.  , . ^ 

You  will  remember  that  I called  your  attention  in  an  interview  lutb 
you  several  weeks  ago  to  the  fact  that  the  enemy  were  at  work  at  Fort 
Powhatan,  and  expressed  an  earnest  desire 
should  drive  him  away  before  any  guns  were  mounted.  My 
■ire  ilv't  he  is  now  occupying  it  with  considerable  foice.  i slioiild  la 
‘most  happy  to  co-operate  with  you  if  I had  » spfflcmnt  ^ 

posable  men  under  my  control  to  insure  the  c^tject,  but  all 
can  spare  are  required  for  another  movement,  which  has  already 

If  Fort  Powhatan  could  be  reduced  I could  not  be  E."  [* 

an  attack  on  Petersburg  or  Kichmond,  ®^F®P,*  eita 

(litv  Point  as  the  Appomattox  is  not  navigable  up  to  the  b 

and  from  thence  to  th^e  latter  themovement  would  be  made  at  a^ 
from  the  James  Kiver,  the  most  important  part  vo  ir  in'sscl 

of  the  enemy  and  so  obstructed  as  not  to  be  ° j p,, 

wHhnnt  frrpqt  delav  Moreover  my  advices  are  that  every  mile  oi  u 

country  between  Petersburg  and  Kichmond  ^ 

so  that  a very  large  force  would  bo  necessary  to  reach  Kichmond 

‘^'in'^the’movement  I have  above  referred  to  as  commenced  I will  i 
another  communication  ask  your  aid. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  ’ 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  AIinnesota, 

Off  Neivport  News,  Afay  5,  18G3— evening,. 

Mai  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg,  Seventh  Army  Corjys,  Fortress  Alonroe,  \a. : 

General  : I received  this  evening  your  c°“'“”*p3odore  MoH  ' 
1 have  made  Lieutenant-Commander  5°^Xibed  liim  = 

now  at  Yorktown,  acquainted  witli  your  objtct,  and  lust 
give  you  all  the  assistance  in  his  power. 


ttAV*  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


699 


Lieutenant-Commander  Babcock,  in  tbe  Morse,  accompanied  by  the 
lystic,  is  instructed  to  inform  you  by  10  a.  m.  to-morrow  of  his  readi- 
ess  to  accompany  the  troops  to  York  Biver,  where  he  will  report  to 
aeutenant-Commander  Gillis. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Act(j,  Rear-Admiral^  Comdg.  JV.  Atlantic  Bloclcadmg  Squadron. 


I Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

I May  5,  1803—10.30  a.  m. 

laj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halle CK, 

General-in-Chief : 

I have  just  received  tlie  following  from  General  Peck.  I am  going  to 
uffblk  to  send  olf  the  expedition  referred  to  heretofore: 


Major  Stratton’s  information,  from  entirely  reliable  sources,  Union  and  rebel,  is 
lat  Longstreet  had  over  30,000  before  he  was  joined  by  any  of  Hill’s  forces.  The 
,iemy  had  three  entire  lines  of  works  where  we  were  on  Sunday,  and  could  not  have 
een  carried. 


joim  A.  mx, 

Ahajor- General. 


|[ajor-General  Hix : 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  May  5,  18G3. 


: During  the  investment  of  Longstreet’s  and  HilFs  forces  we  have  capt- 
red  five  pieces  of  artillery,  about  400  prisoners,  much  camp  equipage, 
■ id  some  rifles.  Xot  less  than  400  or  500  have  deserted  from  the  rebels; 
robably  his  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  about  COO,  making  his  total 
I'ss  about  1,500. 

Our  killed  is  34;  wounded,  201;  and  missing,  14.  Total,  240.* 

All  the  morale,  prestige,  glory,  and  victory  of  the  twenty-three  days 
idoiig  to  our  patient  and  brave  men.  Besides,  they  have  held  the 
asses  of  the  enemy  around  Suffolk,  in  order  to  enable  General  Hooker 
» secure  a crowning  victory  for  the  Hnion,  and  are  entitled  to  a share 
' the  glory  that  may  accrue  to  his  arms. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Alajor-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  5, 1863. 

ajor-General  Peck: 

I am  just  leaving  for  Suffolk. 

JOHN  A.  mx, 

Major-General. 


Xew  Berne,  X.  C.,  Alay  5,  1863. 
eneral  Halleck,  . ? ^ ? 

Commander -in- Chief  V.  S.  Army.,  Washingto7i,  JD.  C.: 

General:  There  are  several  contingencies  likely  to  occur  in  the 
lairs  of  this  department  which  should  I think  be  brought  to  your  notice 
ore  fully  than  I have  or^an  in  fact  do  in  correspondence.  I would  like 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  288. 


700 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


therefore  to  run  on  for  a day  and  lay  the  whole  matter  before  you,  which 
I can  do  verv  briefly  should  It  meet  your  wishes  to  permit  me  to  do  so. 

Please  to  telegraph  your  reply  to  General  Dix,  at  Fortress  Monroe, 
where  I will  have  an  officer  to  bring  it  to  me. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  ^ ^ FOSTER, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Eiuhteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Berne.,  N.  (7.,  May  5, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief  Z7.  8.  Army: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letter  of 

^ My  fdea  of  an  attack  on  Wilmington  was  to  take  and  hold  Smith’s 

Islaud  as  a basis  of  supplies,  &c.,  and  I still 

information  shows  that  it  cannot  now  be  done  as  easilj  as 

been  then,  the  enemy  having  established  a post 

battery.  (This  information  is  not  deemed  certain.)  I will  attempt  ai  j - 

thing  i am  directed  to,  but  my  opinion  is  that  my  force  is  nt  er 


thina’ i am  airecieu  lu,  uuu  . 

adeq^uate  to  accomplish  any  ontside  work,  and  is 

riAfATi.QP.  luformatiou  shows  that  General  Hill  is  still  m oiii 


IS  wiJh  hTLceT^^^^^^^^  I “ 

information  of),  and  is  threatening,  'ftoops  from  Witojngton  ^ 
Morehead  City  (our  depot  of  supplies)  and  the  line  of  *1*®  ‘if 

defense  of  which  I have  given  to  General  Heckman  and  his  brMile, 
2,100  men  (my  old  troops),  recently  arrived  from  the  Department  of  the 
South.  Gmeral  Heckman  has  as  much  as  he  can  do  to  protect  that, 
line,  and  I have  ordered  him  to  stay  and  do  so.  ^“';®/®®?^®,''  ‘j . 
spondcnce  shows  the  plans  somewhat  of  the  enemy 
inn- of  a pontoon  train  for  crossing  the  White  Oak  and  NewRneis, 
ncmessary  to  an  attack  on  Morehead.  In  fact  we  are  «ijeatened  at  a 
noints  and  though  1 feel  perfectly  confident  at  every  point  1 Kuot 
that  constant  vigilance  is  required  and  also  the  l'[®®®“®f 
now  here  If  I bad  5,000  disposable  men  I would  undeitake 
isZiS  and  I tiink  with  success;  and  in  that  * ^et  me  re^ 

sav  tliout>b  at  tlie  risk  of  seeming  importunate  (wliicli  intcntio 

St  Idilclafm)  that^^ 

be  ordered  back  to  me  I would  be  in  apositionto  attack  Smi  i^ 
General  Stevenson’s  brigade  consists  of  ^ 

gade  and  three  other  veteran  regiments,  and  is  now  in  the  1^®!’  " 
of  the  South.  Of  course  to  occupy  and  fortify  a post  my  (n|.,Vic< 

tools®  &c.,  would  be  necessary,  and  all  t^t  I took  doun  toi  ® 
ton  expedition  are  yet  afloat  and  nntoucbed  in  Beaufort  Hai  L o . 

would  have  to  be  ordered  back.  • i Lxr  +1ia  d iv  o 

1 niiist  in  this  connection  recall  to  your  mind  ^he 

July  the  effectives  in  this  department  will  not  "?®J®  ^.jee  (t«  ■ 
nOO  ‘irtillerv  are  now  being  mustered  out,  tbeir  teiin  ot  s v 
fears^  haviiifcxpired,  and  iS  June  twelve  of  my  fullest  '•®g>«>®« , •' 

to  be  mustered  out,  tbeir  term  of  service  then  expiring  ^ 

Tbi^  fact  shows  wbat  I can  do  with  my  effective  force,  and  m>  reasoi. 

for  nraing  tbe  return  of  some  of  my  troops.  x.hp(lien 

I have^  tbe  bonor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfull,\ , j oui 

servant,  ^ rOSTEK, 

Major-  Genera  ?,  Co m m a n (Vny- 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


701 


IOhap.  XXX.] 


iVIaj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

May  6,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 


I embarked  5,000  men  yesterday  and  last  night  at  Ntorfolk,  and  hope 
:o  have  them  at  their  destination  to-morrow  morning.  We  had  a heavy 
3low  last  night,  and  it  is  yet  too  rough  for  some  of  our  transports.  I 
kvas  at  Suffolk  yesterday.  Over  200  prisoners  had  been  brought  in. 
riiey  represented  forty  regiments,  three  batteries,  two  independent  bat- 
:alions,  and  one  cavalry  regiment.  It  is  not  at  all  probable  that  in 
liese  captures  all  the  regiments  before  Suffolk  were  represeuted.  The 
‘nemy’s  works,  which  are  very  extensive  and  heavy,  indicate  continued 
)cciipation.  He  was  building  stables.  General  Peck  sends  out  a cav- 
ilry  force  to  the  Black  water  to-day. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


lajor-General  Peck: 


Fort  Monroe,  May  6, 1863. 


I have  no  news  from  Washington.  This  is  not  encouraging,  as  the 
^^ires  were  in  operation  last  night.  The  enemy  have  doubtless  left  the 
backwater.  Trains  3 miles  long  reached  Petersburg  last  night. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington^  May  6,  1863—3.30  p.  m. 
lajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Ya. : 

pe  operation  agreed  upon  between  us  will  not  be  made  till  further 
rders.  Everything  will  remain  as  it  is  till  you  hear  further  from 
Vashmgton. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


lajor-General  Dix: 


Yorktown,  May  6,  [1863]. 


Colonel  Davis,  of  the  Twelfth  Illinois  Cavalry,  with  the  advance  of 
IS  regiment,  has  arrived  at  Gloucester  Point,  having  accomplished 
Illy  the  orders  of  General  Stoneman.  I have  sent  a cavalry  scout  up 
le  Lichmond  road  to  get  information  of  any  of  our  cavalry  which 
lay  be  coming  down.  General  Stoneman  seems  not  to  have  been  aware 
‘at  the  enemy  have  all  along  had  troops  on  this  Peninsula,  and  Colonel 
avis  encountered  a regiment  of  infantry  and  three  pieces  at  Tunstall 
oQr  ^ battery  of  eight  pieces,  by  all  accounts,  at  or 

evv  Kent  Court-House.  Colonel  Davis  is  very  anxious  to  have 
pnboat  go  up  to  the  Mattapony  to  look  for  a detachment  of  his  regi- 
ent  under  Major  Bronson, 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major- General. 


702  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [CuAi-.xxx.j 

Tort  Monroe,  May  6,  18C3. 

General  Gordon,  Atlantic  Eotel^  Norfolk: 

1 think  it  important,  on  reflection,  that  you  go  up  with  the  troops.  They ' 
will  leave  at  daylight.  If  anything  should  delay  me  it  would  be  very 
awkward.  The  troops  should  be  pushed  on  to  their  destination,  landed,! 
and  intrenched  immediately.  The  engineer  will  not  be  here  in  time  toi 
leave  before  9 or  10  o’clock.  The  cavalry  will  be  all  ready.  Oaptaiiii 
Ludlow  will  furnish  a tug  at  any  time  you  name.  I will  telegraph  him., 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General.  ' 


May  G,  [18G3.] 

Major-General  Ejeyes, 

Commanding,  Yorktoivn : 

I think  you  had  better  send  up  a cavalry  force  toward  Diascuud 
Bridge,  but  not  a gunboat  in  the  direction  now. 

fJUizLJN  XX* 

Major-General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Ojf  Newport  News,  May  G,  18G3.  ' 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Suffolk,  Ya. : 

General  : Your  communication  dated  the  21st  ultimo,*  in  reply  t(| 
mine  of  the  20th,  was  received  on  the  26th. 

Squadron  duties  have  prevented  an  earlier  reply  to  your  commimica 
tion  which  I regret  to  find  is  very  deficient  in  candor  and  professiona 
comity  proper  in  official  correspondence,  and  reasonably  to  be  expectec 
from  an  olBoer  educated  at  West  Point.  When  naval  defense  is  neces, 
sary  for  militarv  works  a timely  requisition  from  the  War  or  JNavy  Be, 
partmout  for  the  number  and  kind  of  vessels  needed  therefor  shonK; 
be  made,  that  they  may  be  built  or  purchased  and  equipped. 

I am  not  responsible,  as  you  seem  to  suppose,  for  the  defense 


military  post  at  Suffolk,  as  dependent  on  the  defense  ot  the 


line  of  the  Upper  Nansemond,  which  is  a mere  creek,  unsuited  to  tlK 
oiierations  of  vessels  and  obviously  requiring  military  defense, 
was  it  my  fault  that  such  necessary  military  preparations  were  no 
already  made.  Heretofore  I had  a small  vessel— the  Stepping  btones- 
resembling  a Norfolk  ferry-boat,  carrying  field  pieces  on  field  carnages 
patrolling  that  small  stream  to  preserve  the  blockade  and  iiitercep 
rebel  communications,  trade,  mails,  &c. 

When  Suffolk  was  threatened,  as  General  Keyes  informed  me,  by  tu- 
enemy,  40,000  strong,  with  pontoons  and  heavy  artillery  (as  reportec 
by  deserters  all  along  the  lines),  urgent  calls  were  made  upon  me  lo- 
gunboats.  This  call  was  preceded  by  equally  earnest  calls  lor 
assistance  to  repel  the  enemy,  who  was  attacking  one  and  threateinii| 
another  military  x)ost  in  the  Sounds  of  North  Carolina,  which  requii 
all  the  light  draughts  provided  by  the  Government  for  otl^^r  nav. 
duty  not  needed  to  answer  demands  at  other  points,  except  the  L 
modore  Barney,  which  I sent  to  the  Nansemond,  together  with  my 
transports,  one  armed  with  field  pieces  and  manned  by  a detaclime 
from  this  vessel,  the  other  as  a tender,  with  ammunition,  coal,  a 
three  of  my  small  tugs  (each  armed  with  two  light  pieces),  thiis^i^^ 


*'Not  found. 


CHAr.  XXX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


703 


the  squadron  without  a transport,  tender,  dispatch,  mail,  or  picket 
boat,  save  one  tug.  When  on  the  14th  of  April  you  telegraphed  me 
that  three  of  the  improvised  gunboats  were  disabled,  and  asked  for 
more,  I obtained  temporarily  and  sent  to  the  Nansemond  four  tugs, 
half  the  Potomac  steam  flotilla. 

This  recital  shows  what  earnest  efforts  were  made  to  relieve  you.  It 
must  be  very  apparent  to  every  candid  and  intelligent  professional 
mind  that  had  General  Longstreet  really  intended  to  force  a crossing 
of  the  Upper  Nansemond  with  the  reputed  means  at  his  command  these 
few  light  pieces,  mostly  field  pieces,  on  the  open  decks  of  a few  mer- 
chant vessels  could  not  have  prevented  his  doing  so  there.  The  same 
number  of  field  pieces  would  have  made  a better  resistance  behind 
earthworks  ashore  than  on  frail  little  steamers  afloat.  Hence  in  my 
instructions  of  the  13th  ultimo,  sent  to  Lieutenants  Cushing  and  Lam- 
son  that  day  and  night,  these  views  were  expressed  by  me  to  be  com- 
municated to  you.  Your  theory  therefore  that  this  conviction  was  the 
result  of  the  rough  handling  the  boats  received  in  fighting  the  enemy’s 
earthworks  on  the  14th  falls  to  the  ground.  It  was  my  manifest  duty  to 
let  you  know  that  the  Uavy  had  not  the  means  to  make  the  military 
lefense  expected  of  it.  Had  I undertaken  the  defense  imposed  without 
i word  of  warning  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  naval  means  as  a substi- 
tute for  military  defense  to  protect  your  rear  from  a real  attempt  by 
the  enemy  to  cross  the  Uansemond  Creek,  the  failure  that  must  have 
ensued,  so  disastrous  to  the  army  and  nation,  would  have  been  charged 
Lipou  the  Uavy.  I did  send  Fleet  Captain  Crosby  to  Suffolk  on  the  19th 
Lo  withdraw  the  boats  if  practicable  from  the  Upper  Hansemond. 

The  situation  was  this  : You  had  been  largely  re-enforced,  and  had 
i gallant  army,  22,000  strong,  at  Suffolk.  You  had  just  erected  earth- 
^vorks  and  rifle-pits  along  the  right  bank  of  the  Nansemond  suitable  to 
.its  defense.  The  enemy  had  made  no  attempt  to  cross  Hansemond 
Creek,  the  blockade  of  which  he  had  established.  His  earthwork  at 
West  Branch,  which  commanded  the  bar  at  the  mouth  of  Uansemond 
Creek,  had  cut  off  the  communications  of  the  gunboats  whilst  yours  were 
q)en  ; had  thoroughly  disabled  one  and  seriously  damaged  three  other 
:)oats,  besides  killing  and  wounding  a large  proportion  of  their  small 
•rews.  The  enemy’s  rifle-pits  and  artillery  on  the  left  flank  were  a se- 
lous  annoyance  to  the  boats  but  did  not  seem  to  threaten  the  safety 
)f  the  post.  Your  detachments  had  twice  failed  to  support  Lieutenant 
Camsoii  and  capture  this  battery  and  raise  the  blockade  (which  was 
ifterwards  so  easily  done),  and  our  transports  and  tenders  were  sus- 
aiiiiiig  in  an  unequal  and  unnecessary  contest  with  the  enemy’s  earth- 
>vorks  much  damage.  Nevertheless,  when  you  that  day  (the  19th)  by 
elegraph  desired  the  retention  of  the  gunboats  in  the  Upper  Nanse- 
noiid  1 promptly  replied  by  telegraph  and  directed  Lieutenant  Lamson 
hrough  you  to  remain  with  the  boats.  You  most  unfairly  omit  this 
roiii  your  statement  of  the  case  and  go  on  to  charge  me  with  having 
'vitlidrawn  the  gunboats,  when  the  fact  is  I gave  no  such  orders  to  do 
io  after  the  one  I just  revoked  at  your  instance  and  through  you. 

On  the  20th  you  ordered  this  earthwork,  which  our  troops  had  held 
luder  the  cross-fire  of  the  gunboats  and  had  greatly  strengthened,  to 
^0  abandoned.  Lieutenant  Lamson  reported  to  me  that  this  evacuation, 
‘aiiiestly  opposed  by  him,  obliged  him  to  withdraw  the  boats  from  the 
Cpper  to  the  Lower  Nansemond  from  just  above  to  just  below  the  bar, 
mder  West  Branch  Battery  and  commanded  by  it  a distance  of  half  or 
liree-quarters  of  a mile.  Thus  your  orders  and  not  mine  occasioned 
be  withdrawal  of  the  gunboats.  In  your  communication  of  the  21st 
^'ou  admit  your  ability  to  hold  the  Nansemond  without  the  boats. 


704 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  XXX.  j 


Your  reference  to  wliat  you  term  Longstreet’s  present  campaign/'  as 
occasioned  by  bis  i^eoccupation  over  two  montbs  since  witbont  interrup- 
tion of  Fort  Powbatan,  tlms  ‘‘establishing  most  firmly  bis  left  flank  on 
James  lUver/^  is  scarcely  intelligible.  Fort  Powbatan  is  50  miles  in  an 
air  line  from  Suffolk,  whilst  the  enemy  have  been  permitted  to  occupy 
for  the  last  half  year  the  line  of  the  Blackwater  immediately  in  front  of 
Suliblk  and  less  than  half  way  in  the  general  direction  of  Fort  Powbatan. 
Of  course  it  was  easy  enough  for  them  to  reoccupy  tbeir  fort  in  their  rear. 

It  may  instruct  you  to  know  that  as  soon  as  I learned  from  Colonel 
Ludlow  that  the  enemy  bad  reoccupied  and  was  strengthening  Fort 
Powbatan,  a military  act  performed  within  the  military  lines  of  this 
military  department,  Avitbout  waiting  for  General  I)ix  to  ask  me  for  naA  al 
co-operation  I promptly  called  on  and  conferred  with  him  on  the  subject, 
and  receiA’ed  bis  assurance  that  be  could  not  act,  as  the  enemy  was  on 
the  Blackwater  in  greater  strength  than  be  bad.  It  was  obvious  from 
the  failure  from  want  of  military  co-operation  in  the  attack  on  Fort 
Darling,  Avitb  an  iron-clad  and  gunboat  force  quite  equal  to  that  at  my 
command,  tliat  I could  not  without  military  co-opeption  prevent  the 
enemy  from  bolding  and  extending  a fort  on  bis  river  trout  when  he 
held  in  force  undisputed  military  possession  of  the  country  around  it. 

Respectfully,  yours,  ^ 

yi-cttjt  Oo^}id(j*  A.  A-tXantic  ZZloclcddinci  S(iu(t(X’)ou. 


Yoektown,  Va.,  J/ai/  7,  1863. 


(Received  8.55  a.  m.) 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-CMef : 

I am  on  my  way  to  West  Point,  where  ali  the  troops  must  have  ar-i 
rived  with  the  exception  of  a battery  which  has  been  delayed  tor  trans-| 
portation  and  which  will  bo  there  before  night.  They  would  liave  gonel 
up  last  night  but  for  the  weather,  which  was  too  rough  for  some  of  tlic; 
small  trans])ort8.  General  Keyes  and  General  Gordon  are  witli  them., 
I ordered  the  small  cavalry  force  with  the  expeditiou  to  be  sent,  as  soon 
as  lauded,  to  the  White  House  to  try  and  destroy  the  railroad  bridge. 
Colonel  Davis,  who  led  the  cavalry  raid  to  the  “e^Styorhood  of  Rich- 
mond, arrived  at  Gloucester  Point  yesterday.  Generals 
and  Wilcox  are  on  the  Blackwater,  with  their  ' 

We  have  not  yet  heard  what  force  is  atZuiii  and  Ivor,  but  hope  to  le< 
to  day  None  of  Longstreet’s  force  could  well  have  been  at  1<  redeiicUsi 
buS  on  Sunciay.  It  may  be  now,  but  if  so,  by  forced  marches,  the  rail 
road  communication  bavin g been  broken.  JOHN  A DIX 

Major-General. 


Maj. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  NetrporPJS'ews,  3[a7j  G loOi). 

Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fort  Monroe,  V a. : 

General:  I have  directed  Lieutenant-Commander  Gillis  to  dcRu 

the  United  States  steamers  Morse  and  Mystic  to  give  all  possible  assi.t, 
ance  in  respect  to  your  proposed  occupation  ot  W est  i oint. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  ^ ^ 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


I 


lAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


705 


Yorktown,  Va.,  May  7,  1SG3. 
(Eeceived  0.35  a.  m.,  May  8,  18G3.) 

aj.  Geu.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : 

I ordered  a reconnaissance  up  tlie  Peninsula,  above  Williamsburg 
3Sterday.  The  enemy  have  withdrawn  from  Diascund  Bridge,  15  miles 
)ove,  where  they  had  2,000  men,  and  crossed  the  Ohickahominy.  They 
ive  doubtless  gone  to  Eichmond. 

JOHY  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


ajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  May  7, 18G3. 


Have  ordered  a court  of  inquiry  in  the  Oorcoran-Kimball  affair. 
Generals  Jenkins,  Davis,  and  Wilcox  have  the  Lower  Blackwater 
'adquarters  at  Franklin,  with  a full  division.  What  is  above  at  Black- 
ater  Bridge,  Zuni,  aud  Ivor  I am  not  advised,  but  probably  one  of 
ill’s  divisions.  All  the  people  outside  state  that  the  generals  told 
eni  the  army  would  remain  all  summer,  and  raising  crops  was  out  of 
e question  near  the  lines. 

JOHX  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


ajor-General  Keyes, 

Commanding^  Yorhtown : 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  7,  18G3. 


The  batteries  are  on  board  the  J ohn  Eice  j the  spades  and  pickaxes 
I hoard  a tug  towing  a float  for  a temporary  wharf  j materials  and 
irkmeii  for  repairing  the  old  wharf  accompany  the  expedition,  with 
: ,000  rations,  forage,  &c. 

Everything  has  been  provided  for.  Push  on  the  moment  the  trans- 
its arrive.  Land  and  send  your  cavalry  out  at  once  to  destroy  the 
iilroad  bridge  over  the  Pamuukey  at  White  House.  They  should 
Dve  rapidly,  but  circumspectly,  as  there  may  be  enemy^s  troops  after 
>8  dispersed  Illinois  cavalry.  The  Spaulding,  with  General  Gordon, 
1 be  behind.  Do  not  wait  for  her  j she  is  faster  than  some  of  the 
( ler  transports  and  will  overtake  you. 

You  should  leave  Yorktown  by  8 o’clock  if  possible. 


JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


ajor-General  Keyes  : 

Commanding  J Yorhtown  : 

laavo  gone,  bcsitles  the  batteries.  I fear  one 

^ 3 P*  You  had  better  push  on  the 

[J^t  the  infantry  gets  up. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

un  ^ ^ Major-General, 

45  R R— VOL  XVIII 


706 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Fort  Monroe,  May  7, 18G3. 

General  Gordon,  Yorktoivn:  . i ^ 

(To  be  sent  on  board  the  Spaulding  the  moment  she  arrives.) 

' Tlie  cavalry  will  have  gone  ere  you  reach  Yorktown.  Push  on  to  you 
destination.  General  Keyes  has  gone  on  to  send  off  the  cavalry  at  onc< 
to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge  of  which  I spoke,  and  will  see  to  th.; 
iTndiuL^  till  von  arrive.  He  will  command  the  movement  at  present, 
hope  to  be  up  by  3 p.  m.  After  you  left  I found  it  was  necessary 
Dush  up  rapidly.  A float  for  temporary  wharf,  materials  for  repairni: 
the  old  one,  intrenching  tools,  and  all  necessary  supplies  have  gone, 
am  anxious  that  you  should  reach  the  point  of  landing  as  soon  as  th 

of  your  division.  JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Mawr- General. 


Yorktown,  Va.,  May  7,  1863—7  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief: 

The  forces  sent  up  the  York  Elver  this  morning  have  effected  a hm( 
' ing  at  West  Point  without  opposition.  Ko  appearance  of  any  enemy  i 

that  quarter.  EUFUS  KING, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Post 


West  Point,  Va.,  May  7,  1863— 7 p.  m. 
Mai  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 

Our  troops  are  all  landed  and  in  position.  A small  P^^ty  of  reh 
cavalry  was  found  here.  AYe  took  5 prisoners  and  lost  1 ot  our  lieute 
ants  killed.  On  one  of  the  prisoners  found  Eichmond  papers  ^is  moi 
in  O’  ^ Eailroad  communication  between  Fredericksburg  and  Eichmo 
wiTs  re-established  yesterday  (Gth),  a train  of  wounded  having  arrived 
It  ehmond  from  Guinev’s  Station,  12  miles  from  Fredericksburg.  Tb> 
Lkuowledge  a loss  of  7,000  or  8,000.  It  is  officially  stated  that  Gener 
Hooker  is  at  United  States  Ford,  holding  a strimg 
trenched  and  receiving  heavy  re-enforcements.  General  McGowa 
reZrtecl  severely  wounded.  Generals  Hill  and  Heth  are  on  duty  aga. 
Nffiety-two  of  Colonel  Davis’  (Stoneman’s)  cavalry  are  with  him  at  Glc- 
from  Tiillahoma  (5th),  says  that  General  Forrt 


= CpaVciTom  (5th),  ^ays  that  General  Forrest  I- 

captured  1,000  Yankees  near  Home,  Ga.,  arms, 

Major-General 


Yorktown,  Va.,  May  7, 1863 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War;  „,o,,inin' 

Colonel  Kilpatrick,  with  the  Harris  Light  Cavalry  and  ' 

f'-walrv  have  iust  arrived  at  Gloucester  Point,  having  accomphsl 
the  object  of  their  mission  fully  and  most  gallantly. 
eiiemv  to  within  3 miles  of  Kichmond,  and  destroyed  a laigo  cimouni 
property  Ind  bridges.  General  Dix  and  General  Keyes  left  tins  mo- 

ing  for  West  Point.  liUFUS  KING, 

Brigadier-  General 


;nAP.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


707 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Yircinia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

On  the  Yorh  River ^ above  Yorhtown,  May  8,  1863—10  a.  m.  ‘ 
i\Iajor-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

I I iGC6ivc(i  3 otir  clispatcLi  of  tho  Otli  at  2 o’clock  this  iiioriiiDg“.  The 
I’apidity  of  my  movements  had,  as  you  were  advised,  anticipated  it. 

; >ut  I will  hold  my  transportation  subject  to  your  orders,  and  no  incon- 
enience  can  result,  as  the  troops  can  move  more  rapidly  from  their 
!)resent  position  than  from  Suffolk  if  they  are  needed  on  the  Eappa- 
iiannock  or  even  on  the  James  Eiver. 

I The  enemy  left  Suffolk  Sunday  night.  Our  troops  were  in  pursuit  on 
londay.  On  Monday  night  I ordered  the  movement  agreed  on.  The 
iroops  were  thrown  across  the  railroad  to  Eorfolk  and  embarked  and 
iiad  reached  Fort  Monroe  on  Wednesday  morning,  with  the  exception 
f two  batteries  which  marched.  Wednesday  we  were  detained  by 
heavy  blow.  On  Thursday  the  troops  were  pushed  up  to  West  Point 
he  wharf  repaired,  and  they  were  in  position  and  partially  intrenched 
efore  dark.  I sent  up  materials  for  repairing  the  wharf  and  intrench- 
ig  tools  with  the  expedition.  N"othing  was  omitted.  Brigadier-Gen- 
ral  Gordon  was  in  command  of  the  troops  before  Wednesday  night  I 
Tdered  Major-Genm\al  Keyes  to  take  100  cavalry— all  he  could  spare— 
nd  go  up  himself.  He  conducted  the  landing  with  good  judgment 
nd  great  promptness,  and  I joined  him  with  Major  Stewart,  my  chief 
iigiiieer,  before  the  landing  was  completed  and  shortly  after  he  and 
reneral  Gordon  had  commenced  putting  the  troops  in  position  11  miles 
•oni  the  wharf  on  a well-chosen  and  very  defensible  line. 

The  cavalry,  under  Major  Hall,  of  the  Sixth  Kew  York,  agreeably  to 
ly  previous  order,  pushed  on  at  once  to  White  House  and  destroyed 
le  railroad  bridge  over  the  Pamunkey,  in  the  night,  underfire  from  the 
^iposite  side.  It  was  very  dark,  and  none  of  his  party  were  injured, 
he  movement  was  so  prompt  that  he  was  only  five  minutes  behind  the 

essenger,  who  arrived  at  the  White  House  from  the at  West  Point 

ith  the  information  of  cur  landing.  On  his  return  he  encountered 
ul  captured  a party  escorting  Lieutenant  Estes,  aide  to  Colonel  Kil- 
itrick,  and  20  of  his  men  to  Eichmond.  Lieutenant  Estes  had  pre- 
ously,  with  his  small  party,  captured  and  paroled  3 officers  and  about 
> men,  but  had  been  surrounded  by  the  militia,  which  had  turned  out 
masse. 


Yajor  Hall  deserves  great  praise  for  his  promptitude  and  gallantry, 
leutenant  Estes  will  make  a written  report  to  his  proper  commander, 
e refused  a parole  for  himself  and  men  when  captured.  Colonel  Kil- 
itnck  has  arrived  with  700  men  at  Gloucester  Point,  400  of  his  own 
ul  300  of  Colonel  Davis’  Illinois  regiment.  He  savs  none  of  Long- 
feet  s men  had  left  Eichmond  on  Suuday  morning.  “^The  colonel  capt- 
ed  an  aide  of  General  Winder  within  the  fortifications,  3 miles  from 
elimond.  He  does  not  believe  the  railroad  connection  to  Eredericks- 
iig  was  re-established  on  Wednesday. 

I have  5,000  infantry,  two  batteries,  and  100  cavalry  at  West  Point. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


M.f  n 1 T ^ lORKTOAVN,  May  8,  1863. 

Col.  Louis  H.  Pelouze,  ’ 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fort  Monroe^  Ya. : 

I am  at  tliis  place  with  my  staff  and  only  one  regiment  of  my  brigade; 
^ other  two  regiments  are  with  General  Gregg’s  division.  I expected 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX.i 


708 


after  destroviug  tUe  bridges  near  Eiclimond  to  return  to  General  Stonei 
man’s  headquarters,  but  was  forced  to  seek  safety  withm  jmur  lines.  1 
am  here  with  my  entire  staff  and  without  a command.  I respecttullj 
ask  for  instructions. 

J.  KILPATEIOK, 

Col.  Comdcj.  First  Brigade,  Third  Division,  Cavalry  Corps.  • 


Maj.  Gen.  11.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief 


Yorktown,  Va.,  May  8,  1863. 


Colonel  Kilpatrick,  with  his  regiment  (the  Harris  Light  Cavalry)  ain 
the  rest  of  the  Illinois  Twelfth,  has  just  arrived  at  Gloucester  Point 
onnosite  this  fort.  They  burned  the  bridges  over  the  Chickahominy 
destroved  three  large  trains  of  provisions  in  the  rear  of  Lee  s arm} 
drove  in  the  rebel  pickets  to  within  2 miles  of  Eichmond,  and  have  los 
only  1 lieutenant  and  30  men,  having  captured  and  paroled  ui^;ard  t 
300  prisoners.  Among  the  prisoners  was  an  aide  to  General  AViiidc] 
who  was  caiitured  with  his  escort  far  within  the  intrenchments  outsul 
of  Eichmond.  This  cavalry  have  marched  nearly  200  miles  the  3 
of  May : were  inside  of  the  fortifications  of  Eichmond  on  the  4th  j buinoi 
all  the  stores  at  AyletPs  Station,  on  the  Mattapony,  on  the  oth ; a< 
stroved  all  the  ferries  over  the  Pamunkey  and  Mattapony  and  a lar^ 
commissary  depot  near  and  above  Tappahannock,  and'came  here  in  goc^ 
condition.  They  deserv^e  great  credit  for  what  they  have  done,  it 


one  of  the  finest  feats  of  the  war. 


EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General. 


M^ar  Department, 

May  8,  i8G3. 

General  Eueus  King,  YorUown : 

Thanks  for  your  telegram.  Please  give  me  any  furthm’  informatic 
you  have.  We  are  all  anxious  to  hear  from  the  gallant  o&cers  and  S( 
iliers  who  have  performed  an  achievement  unsurpassed  for  daring  aij 
success.  Give  my  congratulations  and  compliments  to  them. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


Yorktown,  Va.,  May  8,  1863—12  p.  m.; 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Seeretary  of  War: 

Your  dispatcli  of  this  day  has  been  received,  and  "’'11  ^5 
cated  in  general  orders  to  the  Harris  Light  Cavalry  an<l J'  ® , 

Illinois  to-morrow.  The  officers  and  men  will  be  rejoiced  1°  “ 

their  brilliant  exploit  is  fully  appreciated  at  headquarter.s.  ^“9  . 

good  condition,  and  after  a day’s  rest  will  bo  ht,  as  tl'ey  are  ' 

birther  active  service.  All  quiet  on  our  front  and  nothing  new  here, 

EUFUS  KING, 
Brigadier-  General,  Conwianding 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


709 


r!Al>.  XXX.] 


War  Department, 
Washington^  May  8,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 
lajor-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe^  Va. : 


Your  movement  is  all  right.  Hold  on  to  what  you  have  got.  I only 
dshed  delay  for  General  Hooker. 

IT.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


SuFEOLiv,  Ya.,  May  8,  1803. 

lajor-General  Dix: 

I see  by  the  papers  that  the  Eichmond  press  states  that  LongstreeUs 
[•oops  were  not  with  Lee 5 only  Longstreet  in  person.  This  I appre- 
end  is  the  true  version. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  D.  0.,  May  8,  1803. 

lajor-General  Dix, 

(For  Getter al  Foster ^ Fort  Monroe^  Va.) : 

General  Foster  at  the  present  time  should  not  be  absent  from  his 
ommand.  Moreover  no  interview  can  ’now  give  him  re-enforcements 
y any  i)ossibility. 


H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


War  Department, 
Washington.^  May  8,  1803. 

lajor-General  Hooker,  Falmouth^  Ya. : 

General  Dix  had  moved  his  troops  before  he  received  my  order  to 
aspembhis  operations,  and  probably  occupied  West  Point  in  force  yes- 
irday. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


[aj 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  IVeivport  News,  May  8,  1803. 

. Gen.  John  A.  Dix,'U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe.  Va. : 


General  : On  the  morning  of  the  4th  instant  I proposed  to  you  a 
)nit  expedition  against  Fort  Powhatan,  I'etersburg,  and  Eichmond. 
his  was  in  consequence  of  information  that  the  enemy  had  left  Suf- 
)lk;  that  General  Hooker  was  between  Eichmond  and  the  rebel  army 
t Fredericksburg,  and  that  you  had  30,000  troops  here.  Your  reply, 
ated  May  5,  received  on  the  Gth  instant,  gives  your  reasons  for  not 
Ring  able  to  co-operate  in  the  proposed  movement.  In  this  replv  vou 
‘mark : 


You  will  rcmcmbor  that  I called  your  atteution,  in  an  interview  with  you  several 
fteks  ago,  to  the  fact  that  the  enemy  were  at  work  at  Fort  Powhatan,  and  expressed 
' earnest  desire  that  some  of  your  gunboats  should  drive  him  away  before  any  guns 
rce  advices  are  that  he  is  now  occupying  it  with  considerable 


710  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  j 

This  statement  I am  sorry  to  say  is  extremely  inaccurate  and  injuri- 
ous to  me.  You  seem  to  have  overlooked  my  correct  statement  pf  this 
matter  in  another  communication  to  you  of  the  4th  instant,  to  which 
you  promised  in  another  communication  of  the  5th  instant  to  reply 
‘‘  when  relieved  from  the  pressure  of  (your)  present  very  urgent  duties.” 

On  Wednesday,  the  18th  of  March,  Colonel  Ludlow,  returning  with  a 
flag  of  truce  from  City  Point,  in  a note  dated  Tuesday,  informed  me 
that  the  ‘‘rebels  are  very  much  strengthening  their  works  at  Old  Port 
Powhatan  and  seem  to  have  a large  force  in  garrison  there.”  Yotwith-i 
standing  this  reoccuiLation  was  a military  act  performed  within  thei 
military  lines  of  your  department,  I did  not  wait  for  you  to  call  on  mo 
for  co-operation,  but  went  to  see  you  the  next  day  on  the  subject.  You 
stated  that  the  enemy  was  already  on  this  side  of  the  Blackwater  witli, 
28,000  men,  a larger  force  than  yours,  and  that  you  could  not  act  in  the: 
matter.  You  showed  me  the  position  of  Fort  Powhatan  (not  laid  down' 
on  my  chart)  about  10  miles  from  Harrison’s  Point.  You  asked  me,, 
with  the  usual  complimentary  opinion  of  the  army  as  to  the  ability  ol 
the  gunboats  not  only  to  protect  but  to  take  forts,  if  my  gunboats 
could  not  “shell  them  out.”  . x.  , 

In  view  of  the  failure  for  want  of  military  co-operation  ot  a better 
iron-clad  and  gunboat  force  than  I then  had  to  “ shell  them  out”  of 
Port  Darling,  I explained  to  you  why  your  suggestion  was  impracticable 
and  left  you,  as  I supposed,  satisfied  on  that  point. 

This  occurred  seven  instead  ‘of  several  weeks  ago,  nor  did  I then  un- 
derstand you  as  “expressing  an  earnest  desire  that  some  of  our  gun- 
boats should  drive  him  away  before  any  guns  were  mounted,”  for  thv 
reason  that,  with  the  facts  then  fresh  in  your  memory,  you  knew  as  well 
as  I did  from  Colonel  Ludlow’s  report  of  the  previous  day  that  the  en- 
emy had  a large  force  in  garrison  there,  and  you  could  not  possibly 
have  supposed  that  he  would  have  garrisoned  his  fort  with  a large  force 

when  it  was  without  guns.  _ . . 

I trust,  general,  there  can  be  no  settled  purpose  to  do  me  injustice, 
and  therefore  ask  you  to  correct  this  error. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, ^ 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  Y.  Atkmtic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


Suffolk, 'il/uy  9, 18G3. 


General  Dix : 


Prom  all  the  information  I can  g 
Blackwater.  Spear  is  very  sick, 
something. 


et,  about  two  divisions  are  on  tin 
When  he  recovers  I shall  feel  o 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Yorktown,  Mag  9,  1803. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 

General  Gregg  was  ordered  to  destroy 
burned  those  over  the  Chickahominy. 
but  was  told  by  prisoners  that  he  did. 


the  bridges  referred  to.  I onl' 
I do  not  know  that  he  succeeded 

J.  KILPATRICK, 

Colonel,  cfc. 


\ 


I 


lAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


711 


Washington,  I).  0.,  May  9,  1863. 
ajor-General  Foster,  l^ew  Berne,  N.  G. : 

General:  Your  report,  dated  April  30,  of  the  defense  of  Washing- 
lu  is  just  received.  Both  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War  have 
)Qken  in  the  highest  praise  of  the  gallantry  of  yourself  and  your  troops 
. the  defense  of  Washington  against  the  superior  forces  of  the  enemy. 
; will  rank  among  the  most  glorious  operations  of  the  war. 

I have  also  just  received  your  letters  of  the  5th  instant  asking  for  re- 
iforcements.  I regret  it  is  at  iiresent  utterly  impossible  to  give  you 
ly.  Every  available  man  was  sent  to  Suffolk  and  to  co-operate  with 
eneral  Hooker.  I have  the  positive  orders  of  the  President  to  wnth- 
raw  no  troops  at  present  from  General  Hunter’s  command.  There  is 
3 other  place  from  which  troops  can  now  be  withdrawn.  As  you 
now,  I have  from  the  beginning  had  no  hopes  of  success  at  Charles- 
>n,  but  the  IS'avy  insisted  upon  making  the  attack.  It  is  unfortunate 
lat  so  many  things  are  undertaken  at  the  same  time ; but  this  I can- 
it  avoid.  I think  you  will  agree  with  me  that  our  operations  on  the 
’’ississippi  Eiver  are  much  more  important  at  the  present  time  than 
ly  that  can  be  carried  on  in  North  Carolina. 

In  regard  to  matters  in  Virginia  we  have  our  hands  full.  Troops 
mnot  be  withdrawn  from  there  without  great  danger.  Moreover,  the 
resident  directed  some  months  ago  that  no  troops  be  taken  from  (len- 
'al  HookePs  army.  I hope  we  may  soon  get  recruits  by  draft.  It 
ill  be  made  very  soon ; but  we  cannot  yet  calculate  positively  upon 
le  result. 

Had  General  Hooker  been  successful  on  the  Kaj)pahannock  it  would 
ave  helped  us  very  much  in  carrying  out  the  conscription.  Now  we 
lay  possibly  have  some  difficulty;  but  this  will  be  overcome. 

General  Hooker  failed  to  accomplish  his  main  object  on  the  Eappa- 
amiock  but  he  met  with  no  disaster.  He  believes  the  loss  of  the 
;iemy  to  be  much  greater  than  his  own  and  will  immediately  renew 
perations. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-Chief. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  May  10,  1863. 

[aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army,  Washington,  B.  C.  • 

General:  The  troops  at  Suffolk  have  been  hard  at  work  demolish - 
ig  the  enemy^s  works,  which  are  very  substantial  and  extended.  They 
ould  not  have  been  constructed  during  the  three  weeks  of  the  invest- 
lent  by  less  than  30,000  or  40,000  men.  I have  ordered  General  Peck 
I take  up  all  the  rails  on  both  roads  from  the  Blackwater  to  Suffolk 
nd  send  them  to  this  fort.  The  enemy  had  already  removed  them  from 
lie  first  3 miles  beyond  Suffolk,  on  the  Weldon  road,  and  had  loosened 
*tie  spikes  on  6 miles  more,  either  to  carry  them  off  for  use  on  other  roads 
r to  construct  iron-clad  batteries  in  front  of  ours. 

I desire  to  present  to  you  some  views  in  regard  to  holding  Suffolk,  and 
'^k  your  decision  in  regard  to  them.  Suffolk  is  no  longer  ot*  any  use  to  us 
s a position  for  making  friends  of  the  secessionists.  The  poi)ulation 
liere  and  in  the  surrounding  country  are  bitter  and  imi>lacable.  The  only 
hject  iu  holding  it  is  to  remler  the  inland  connection  with  North  Carolina 
y the  canals  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dismal  Swamp  somewhat  more 


712 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX: 


secure.  Is  this  object  of  sufficient  importance  to  warrant  the  cost  an 
tlie  hazard  of  maintaining  the  position*?  The  connection  is  conveniei 
daring  the  months  of  December,  January,  February,  and  Alarch,  whel 
the  communication  by  sea  is  liable  to  interruption  by  storms ; but  dii 
ing  the  other  eight  months  it  is  of  little  importance.  We  only  use 
for  dispatches,  a semi- weekly  mail,  and  for  the  transportation  of  officerl 
and  occasionally  a few  men.  They  may  as  well  go  outside.  It  does  nj 
follow  that  we  shall  lose  this  connection  by  withdrawing  from  Suifol! 
but  we  shall  make  it  less  secure.  Suffolk  is  strong  with  a large  forci 
and  very  weak  with  a small  one.  In  the  face  of  an  enemy  it  is  iinpoi 
sible  to  fall  back  on  Norfolk.  It  must  be  held  at  all  hazards.  AVe  ha^^ 
over  one  hundred  guns  there.  Its  capture  would  be  the  greatest  dij 
aster  of  the  war.  It  has  a very  narrow  river  running  back  7 miles  I 
the  rear,  always  endangering  the  loss  of  our  communication  with  oi; 
supplies.  The  enemy  can  approach  it  rapidly  by  two  railroads.  It  cji 
never  be  safely  left  without  15,000  men,  and  if  invested  by  a large  for 
it  must  have  25,000. 

The  line  of  Deep  Creek  is  8 miles  from  Norfolk.  It  is  a better  lo 
in  all  respects.  The  communication  with  the  rear  cannot  well  be  ci 
It  will  always  be  possible,  even  in  the  face  of  an  enemy,  to  fall  back 
Norfolk.  It  can  be  defended  by  10,000  men.  There  is  but  one  ohjd 
tion  to  the  change — the  moral  effect.  We  fall  back  12  miles  j but 
the  other  hand  we  advance  40  on  the  York  Eiver  and  place  ourselvf 
at  AA^est  Point,  within  35  miles  of  Eichmond.  By  occupying  the  line  i 
Deep  Creek  we  should  save  from  10,000  to  15,000  troops,  and  the  trai 
portation  of  supplies  up  the  Nansemond,  and  gain  a more  secure  positic. 
The  change  can  be  made  now  while  the  great  body  of  the  enemy  ^ 
away.  It  will  be  impossible  when  he  returns.  If  the  change  should 
approved,  I should  place  General  Peck  in  command  of  the  new  line  a. I 
make  him  Military  Governor  of  Norfolk,  where  his  vigilance  and  promp 
tilde  would  be  of  great  advantage,  sending  General  Viele  into  the  fie . 
I should  also  take  up  the  rails  on  both  roads  between  Suffolk  and  De 
Creek  and  deprive  the  enemy  of  the  power  of  using  them  either  for  roaii 
or  for  constructing  iron  batteries. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ' JOHN  A.  DIN, 

Major-General 


[Indorsements.] 

May  14,  18G3. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  General  Totten,  Chief  Engineer,  General  E 
nard,  and  General  Cullum  for  the  expression  of  their  views  in  regard 

General  Gix’s  general  plan.  HALLECK,  . , 

General-in- Chiefs 


Washington,  D.  C.,  May  14, 1803: 
AVe  concur  in  the  general  views  of  General’ Dix  respecting  the  abi 
donment  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  the  determination  of  the  strength  and  dir 
tion  of  the  new  line  of  defense  at  Deep  Creek  being  left  to  General 


and  his  engineers. 


J.  G.  TOTTEN, 
Briaadier- General,  Chief  of  Bnyinccrs 
J.  G.  BAENAED, 

Brigadier-General,  &c 
GEO.  W.  CULLUM, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Engineers  and  Brigadier-Genera 


Chap.  X:xS;.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


713 


Headquauters  Outposts, 

Camp  Fifty-eighth  Eegt.  Fa.  Vots.^  May  10,  1803. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hofpman, 

Assistant- Adjutant  General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy  have  occupied  the 
line  of  Core  Creek  in  greater  force  than  heretofore,  how  great  I have 
not  yet  ascertained.  They  made  a reconnaissance- this  side  the  Dover- 
road  bridge  on  Thursday  with  a troop  of  cavalry  (of  the  Sixty-third 
North  Carolina)  and  some  infantry.  They  have  leveled  the  works  I 
had  commenced  this  side  the  bridge  (at  Dover-road  Crossing),  and  have 
erected  field  works  with  two  embrasures  beyond  the  creek.  Also  the 
bridge  itself  seems  to  have  had  additional  work  on  it  since  we  retired. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

eJ.  EICHTEU  JONES. 


United  States  Elao-stiip  Minnesota, 

Off  Neiiport  Neics,  Va.,  May  11,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe : 

General:  In  the  communication  from  you  dated  the  5th  and  re- 
ceived the  7th  instant  you  state  your  expectation  that  the  siege  of  Suf- 
folk will  be  renewed. 

Soon  after  assuming  this  command  I had  the  honor  to  propose  to  you 
that  all  the  abandoned  rebel  earthworks  within  your  lines  should  be 
razed.  Standing  as  they  do,  hardened  by  age,  they  tempt  the  reoccupa- 
tion  by  the  enemy,  to  whom  it  would  be  but  the  work  of  a night  to  re- 
occupy them,  to  mount  and  casemate  guns  enough  to  command  the 
channel,  and  cut  off  the  communications  of  the  gunboats. 

Last  fall  Commodore  Livingston,  at  my  suggestion,  leveled  the  work 
at  Helena  which  commands  the  navy -yard. 

I respectfully  suggest  to  you  that  it  would  be  of  great  advantage  to 
naval  operations  if  you  would  have  the  abandoned  rebel  earthworks  on 
the  Lower  Nansemond,  Elizabeth  Eiver,  and  at  SewelPs  Point  thoroughly 
leveled,  excepting,  of  course,  such  as  you  may  deem  necessary  for  mili- 
tary purposes. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

. ^ S.  P.  LEE, 

Aetg.  Kear-Ad7mral,  Comdg.  N.  AtUmtie  Bloelcadmg  Squadron. 


Headquarters  Eighteenth  Army  Corps, 

Departme^it  of  North  Carolina,  May  11,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Hallecic, 

Commander -in- Chief  XJ.  S.  Ar^ny,  Washington,  I).  C.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  vour  tele- 
mm  of  the  8th  instant. 

I beg  leave  to  say  that  it  was  not  mainly  to  obtain  re-enforcements 
mat  1 wished  to  see  you,  although  I desire  above  all  things,  as  I am 
uee  to  confess,  the  return  of  the  brave  men  whom  I took  from  this  de- 


714 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


partraent  to  that  of  the  South,  aud  who  are  there  subject  to  mortifica- 
tion and  discomfort  and  a situation  apparently  of  no  benefit  to  the 
^ public  service. 

My  object  related  to  contingencies  that  might  arise  (and  which  have 
now  arisen)  and  what  should  be  my  action  under  the  circumstances.  I 
am  pleased,  personally,  that  the  trip  will  not  now  be  needed,  and  that 
I can  now  give  my  whole  attention  to  the  necessary  preparation.  I 
have  made  up  my  mind  to  meet  the  enemy  at  every  point  and  to  con- 
test every  step  so  obstinately  that  its  attainment  will  be  made  by  him 
with  sorrow.  I have  no  fears  of  any  disaster  in  this  department  (and 
with  3,000  more  men  I could  obtain  a small  victory),  but  I beg  you  to 
believe  that  whatever  efibrts  may  be  made  against  us  we  will  try  to  give 
you  a satisfactory  report. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major- Ge7ieral,  Coimnandmg. 


Yorktown,  jMay  11,  [18G3.] 

Major-General  Dix : 

I am  just  down  from  West  Point.  The  works  there  are  now  strong 
in  front,  and  I left  General  Gordon  at  work  on  batteries  near  the  Point, 
where  at  least  four  20-pounder  Parrotts  are  necessary,  and  if  you  can 
send  back  all  that  were  taken  from  here  I can  supply  them.  What  I 
shall  recommend  for  the  positions  under  my  immediate  command  will 
depend  in  a great  degree  on  the  conditioh  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
which  I do  not  know. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


' Suffolk,  May  12, 18G3. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Line  from  Bowers’  to  Southern  Branch  that  is  shortest  and  ofiers  an 
impassable  flank  rests  upon  the  arm  of  the  Branch  near  Hodge’s,  on 
Martin’s  place.  By  Heine’s  map,  7 miles  of  Deep  Creek  would  he 
thrown  out,  as  well  as  approaches  along  Dismal  Canal.  Deep  Creek  is 
narrow  aud  would  have  to  be  guarded.  Please  look  particularly.  Five 
miles  difference,  which  is  very  great. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-Genei'al. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  13, 18G3. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton  : 

I send  you  by  this  evening’s  mail  two  Charleston  papers  of  the  9tli 
and  11th,  handed  to  me  by  the  captain  of  Her  Britannic  IMajesty’s 
steamship  Rinaldo,  just  arrived  from  that  city  in  forty-five  hours, 
news  except  the  death  of  Stonewall  Jackson,  telegraphed  from  Rich- 
mond on  Monday.  Kews  from  Vicksburg  to  the  0th.  Landing  of 
Federal  troops  at  Young’s  Point  is  announced. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- Geiw'al. 


piiAP.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  715 

I 

i ITdqrs.  Dept,  of  N^orth  Carolina,  Eighteenth  A.  C., 

Neic  Berne^  N.  G.,  May  13,  1863. 

Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron^  Hamgytoyi  Beads,  Va. : 

' Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
May  1,  repeating  some  of  yonr  views  on  the  subject  of  posts  on  the 
Sounds  in  this  department,  and,  as  always,  yonr  views  claim  my  care- 
ful consideration. 

In,  as  it  were,  a joint  department  like  this  it  is  a matter  of  discrimina- 
tion what  points  to  hold  as  of  greater  benefit  to  both  arms  of  the  serv- 
ice. The  points  on  the  coast  are  of  course  equally  important  for  all  par- 
ties. Roanoke  Island  is  of  great  advantage  to  us  as  a strategical  point; 
would  be  to  the  enemy.  If  the  island  were  abandoned  and  the  works 
were  razed  I have  no  doubt  that  it  would  be  occupied  by  the  eneinj^ 
via  Rag^s  Head  and  across  Roanoke  Channel.  At  this  point,  from  the 
shallowness  of  the  water,  gunboats  could  not  prevent  the  occupancy 
and  could  not  prevent  the  erection  of  batteries,  even  were  it  known  that 
it  would  be  attempted ; whereas  that  position  could  be  held  by  a small 
force  on  the  island  against  a large  one  crossing. 

Experience  has  shown  us  the  facility  with  which  sand  batteries  can 
be  erected,  and  also  ])roved  that  their  power  of  withstanding  fire  is 
treater  than  stone.  It  would  require  but  a few  weeks  to  again  fortify 
Roanoke  Island  (should  the  enemy  have  it),  and  probably  the  taking  of 
it  has  shown  them  the  falsity  of  their  previous  line  of  defense;  and  I 
believe  the  division  might  lose  more  men  than  were  withdrawn  from 
iny  force  as  garrisons. 

As  to  Washington  and  Plymouth  my  views  were  given  in  my  letter 
M the  22d  ultimo.  While  I have  force  sufficient  it  seems  to  me  impor- 
ifcant  to  hold  the  rich  grain-growing  counties  lying  in  the  pockets  held 
by  these  towns,  and  also  as  strategical  points  for  harassing  the  enemy 
so  long  as  I have  force  sufficient  for  any  offensive  movements ; but  such 
:nay  not  be  the  case  long. 

Again,  if  the  enemy  should  construct  gunboats  up  the  Tar  and  Roan- 
)ke  Rivers  they  probably  could  not  be  made  sufficiently  formidable  to 
lefeat  the  naval  forces  at  Washington  and  Plymouth ; the  naval  as  well 
IS  land  batteries  could  assist  in  the  defense.  It  is  not  likely,  however, 
:bat  naval  vessels  crossing  through  the  Sounds  would  be  in  force  equal 
Lo  encounter  the  combined  forces  at  Washington  and  Plymouth,  in 
^hich  case  (the  enemy  always  being  in  a position  to  make  concerted 
Itiiovements)  a concentration  of  the  vessels  from  several  might  be  made 
Tor  attacking  detached  vessels,  in  which  case  the  result  might  be 
lisastrous.  Of  these  probabilities  you  of  course  are  the  best  judge, 
but  merely  in  accordance  with  our  mutual  desire  to  exchange  ideas  for 
file  general  good  I give  it  as  my  opinion  that  were  the  towns  of  Wash- 
ngton  and  Plymouth  abandoned  the  mouths  of  the  rivers  so  situated 
^vould  be  the  right  and  best  places  for  the  guard-boats,  and  that  the 
presence  of  the  assistance  on  land  would  necessitate  the  presence  of  a 
‘large  naval  force  to  be  as  effective  as  the  present  guarding  force. 

Would  the  class  of  boats  in  service  here  be  of  much  use  in  outside 
■service  ? 

I inclose  herein  a’  slip  cut  from  a Raleigh  paper,  which  shows  the 
^iews  held  by  the  enemy  upon  the  subject  of  our  abandonment  of  the 
ounties  of  Albemarle,  the  advantage  gained  by  them  of  food,  &c. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  admiral,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  G.  POSTER, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


716 


north  CAROLINA  ANt)  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXV. 


Headquarters  Outposts, 
CamiJ  Fifty -eighth  Begt.  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  May  13,  18G3. 


Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assista7it  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a civilian  who  came  down  the' 
Nense  road  yesterday  informs  me  that  he  found  no  iiosts  at  Core  Creels, 
and  has  been  told  that  there  are  none  this  side  of  Moseley  Creek.  Also 
the  sergeant  in  charge  of  my  daily  patrol  informs  me  that  a man  who 
came  down  the  Dover  road  stated  to  him  that  there  are  no  Confederate, 
troops  this  side  of  Gum  Swamp.  These  reports  I shall  endeavor  to 
verify  in  the  course  of  the  day. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

. J.  BIOHTBE  JONES, 

Colonel  Fifty-eighth  Begimeyit,  Co^nmanding  Outposts. 


Suffolk,  May  14, 18G3. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Major  Wentz  thought  he  would  be  ready  on  Monday  evening.  Yes-| 
terday  he  said  he  would  be  at  Carrsville  before  sunset.  Colonel  Foster 
went  yesterday,  and  writes  that  the  train  is  not  through.  He  decided 
to  try  that  road  first  after  examination.  Time  is  precious,  but  I hope 
we  shall  succeed.  After  taking  up  several  miles  he  might  change  roads., 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  Afay  14,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Coimnanding , Yorldown : 

General  : I have  forwarded  your  letter  to  the  Adjutant- General, 
and  suggested  that  Major-General  Ord  should  have  a command  bettei 
suited  to  his  rank  than  that  of  West  Point,  if  one  can  be  given  to  him. 
But  he  has  behaved  so  handsomely  I deemed  it  due  to  him  to  suggest 
also  that  his  wishes  should  be  consulted.  t t>  • 

On  the  maturest  consideration  I have  decided  to  make  West  loini 
an  independent  command.  Your  own  is  a very  extensive  and  impor 
tant  one,  embracing  Gloucester  Point,  Yorktown,  Williamsburg,  ami 
indeed  the  whole  Peninsula.  I do  not  think  your  attention  shoakl  h( 
divided  between  this  command  and  another.  You  need  nothing  but 
troops  to  make  it  the  most  important  in  the  department,  as  it  bring.- 
you  nearer  to  Bichmond  than  any  other  except  West  Point,  and  re 
garding  your  limits  as  now  extended  to  the  neighborhood  of  the  >v  liiti 
House  you  are  even  nearer.  Should  the  enemy  reappear  at  Diascunr 
Bridge  I will  do  all  I can  to  afford  you  the  means  of  assailing  him,  as  J 
jiroposed  more  than  two  months  ago.  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  then 
will  be  an  advance  from  West  Point  with  a sufScient  force  to  accom 
plish  anything.  If  there  should  be  I shall  take  the  command  myseii 
You  cannot  doubt  my  desire  to  do  all  in  my  power  to  meet  yoni 
wishes,  and  also  to  do  justice  to  your  rank.  Circumstances  have  maui 
the  command  at  Suffolk  during  the  last  two  months  more  importaii 
than  any  other,  but  events  may  at  any  moment  render  it  necessary 
throw  the  principal  iiart  of  my  force  into  your  own  command.  I desin 


Chap.XXX.1 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


717 


iincler  all  circumstances  that  you  should  retain  it,  and  I suggest  whether 
now  you  may  not  repeat  Colonel  West’s  reconnaissance,  pushing  it 
farther  on. 

I am  told  there  is  onl^^  a small  cavalry  force  at  the  White  House. 
The  expedition,  if  you  think  it  advisable,  from  the  information  in  your 
possession,  to  undertake  it,  should  be  organized  under  your  personal 
superintendence. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

® Major-General. 


Major-General  Keyes, 

Commanding^  Yorldown : 


[Fort  Monroe],  Maij  14, 1863. 


Your  dispatch  arrived  this  morning  while  I was  away.  I wrote  you 
a few  hours  ago,  stating  that  on  full  reflection  I had  decided  to  make 
West  Point  an  independent  command. 

I have  suggested  a movement  uj)  the  Peninsula.  Please  make  the 
change  you  clesire  in  the  cavalry  and  I will  endeavor  to  give  it  back  to 
you  in  a few  days  with  an  addition  of  the  same  arm. 

I have  forwarded  your  letter  to  the  Adjutant- General,  as  I have  ex- 
plained in  mine,  which  you  will  receive  to-morrow  j but  I cannot  concur 
in  your  removal  to  another  department. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monrooj  Va.,  May  14,  1863. 

Actg.  Pear- Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantie  Bloelcading  Squadron  : 

Admiral  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  let- 
ter of  the  11th  instant  proposing  that  all  the  rebel  earthworks  within 
my  lines,  except  such  as  are  necessary  for  military  purposes,  should  bo 
razed. 

All  the  troops  at  Suffolk  have  been  constantly  occupied  since  the 
retreat  of  the  enemy  in  leveling  his  intrenchments,  which  are  very  ex- 
tended and  solid.  When  this  is  completed  they  will  be  occupied  with 
not  less  urgent  labors  for  the  next  month. 

At  Norfolk  and  Fort  Monroe  I have  barely  force  enough  for  guard 
duty,  but  I will  x)ersonally  examine  as  soon  as  practicable  all  the 
earthworks  in  this  vicinity  and  meet  your  wishes  as  far  as  I can.  Eliza- 
beth City  is  in  North  Carolina  and  not  under  my  control. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  resi^ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  Dix: 


Washington,  D.  C.,  May  14,  1863. 


Tbe  matter  of  your  letter  of  the  10th  is  ai)proved.  I write  you  to-day. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Genera  l-in-  Chief. 


718 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  j 


Washington^  May  14,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  lOtli  is  received.  I fully  agree  with 
you  that  the  line  of  Deep  Creek  is  much  better  for  the  defense  of  Nor-| 
folk  than  the  line  of  the  Yansemond.  Suffolk  is  a most  ill-chosen  posi-j 
tion  for  defense,  and  is  unimportant  in  any  other  respect  than  security, 
of  Norfolk.  Why  it  was  ever  occupied  I do  not  know.  "i 

Although  fully  concurring  in  your  views  I felt  unwilling  to  approve, 
the  change  without  first  submitting  the  matter  to  a board  of  able  andj 
experienced  officers  and  afterward  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  All  con-: 
firm  your  views.  Before  making  the  change  the  new  line  should  be 
well  fortified  and  prepared  for  the  batteries.  It  should  for  the  presents 
be  considered  the  second  line,  and  the  intended  change  kept  a iirofound 
secret.  The  arrangements  for  the  defense  of  this  line  should  be  made 
under  the  direction  of  your  chief  engineer.  Major  Stewart. 

AVhen  abandoned,  the  works  of  Suffolk  should  be  destroyed. 

Yours,  trulv, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Fort  Monroe,  ilia?/  14,  1803. 

Major-Gi3neral  Peck: 

1 have  a dispatch  from  the  General-in-Chief  approving  my  sugges- 
tions as  to  changes  I named  to  you.  The  second  line  and  the  dismant- 
ling of  the  railroads  must  be  pushed  to  completion. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  14,  1863. 

General  Dix: 

At  5 p.  m.  Colonel  Foster  had  driven  the  enemy  back  to  his  intrench- 
ments  and  the  working  party  w^as  doing  wellj  within  miles  of  Black- 
water. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  15,  1863. 

Major-General  Dix : 

The  working  party  are  now  just  this  side  of  Carrsville  ; getting  along 
Avell.  Have  sent  rations  to  Colonel  Foster.  The  enemy  are  running 
cars  very  actively  in  view  of  advance  on  that  line. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Outfosts, 

Camp  Fifty -eighth  Itegt.  Fennsylvania  Vols.^  May  15,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  facts  which  I communicated 
to  headquarters  yesterday  respecting  the  line  of  Core  Creek  are  con- 
firmed by  my  patrol,  and  that  the  enemy  have  now'  no  force  on  that 
line, 


Chap.  XXX.]  COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  , 719 

I also  learn  from  various  sources,  so  that  I count  on  it  as  reliable  to 
a reasonable  degree,  that  the  enemy^s 'force  in  Kinston  is  now  very 
small,  not  exceeding  five  regiments,  and  that  there  are  few  troops  at 
Goldsborough.  Of  the  five  regiments,  one  is  at  Gum  Swamp  and  one 
at  AVise’s  Forks,  and  the  regiment  at  Gum  Swamp  is  open  to  a move- 
ment on  its  rear  and  might  be  cut  off.  If  it  is  thought  desirable  under 
existing  circumstances  to  seize  Kinston  and  Goldsborough  I would  re- 
quest to  be  allowed  to  strike  the  railroad  somewhere  north  of  Golds- 
borough, in  order  to  intercept  re-enforcements,  &c.  AYith  one  good  in- 
fantry regiment  added  to  my  own  and  three  or  four  troops  of  cavalry 
and  a section  of  artillery  I feel  confident  I could  reach  that  railroad 
with  little  or  no  opposition  and  break  it  up  extensively,  that  is,  pro- 
vided the  intention  be  kept  entirely  secret. 

The  enterprise  would  justify  some  labor  and  risk  in  reference  to  tbe 
capture  of  Goldsborough  only,  but  as  connected  with  a simultaneous 
movement  from  Suffolk  on  Weldon  it  might  materially  interrupt  the 
enemy’s  communications  and  influence  the  war. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KICHTER  JOKES, 

Colonel  Thirty  eighth  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  Comdg.  Outposts. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

May  16,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 


Colonel  Foster  is  covering  our  work,  which  is  in  good  progress,  on 
the  railroad  near  Carrsville.  Has  been  engaged  with  the  enemy  more 
or  less  for  two  days.  A lively  artillery  fire  has  been  kept  up  on  our 
workmen.  Yesterday  the  enemy  advanced  within  canister-range,  but 
was  driven  back  with  considerable  loss.  On  our  side  a caisson  was 
riddled,  a horse  killed,  and  9 men  wounded.  The  iron  is  arriving  in 
Norfolk.  When  we  get  on  the  other  road  we  shall  probably  have  some 
sharp  fighting. 


JOHK  A.  MX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  16,  1863. 

Major-General  Peck, 

Commanding^  Suffolk  : 

A report  has  just  reached  me,  not  on  the  best  authority,  that  the.  encAiv 
lias 000  men  at  Scott’s  factory  and  10,000  at  Colonel  Thomas’.  A'/Uere 
these  places  are  I do  not  know,  but  somewhere  between  the  lYtack- 
water  and  the  Kansemond,  I believe. 

JOHK  A.  DIX, 

Major- Oensra  1. 


Major-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  16,  1863. 


Scott’s  factory  is  at  Smithfield,  but  the  other  place  I cannot  locate 
exactly.  That  is  a good  country  for  supplies,  and  from  it  thety  flank  all 
|iio\es  on  Blackwater.  If  there,  it  looks  like  assuming  the  ohensive,  for 
tuere  is  a considerable  force  on  the  river  massed  near  Franklin. 

JOHK  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


720  . NOETH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  LChai-.  XXX. 

Fort  Monroe,  2Iay  17, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck, 

Commanding^  Suffollc  : 

My  man  is  here  from  i7ew  Haven  [Eichmond].  He  says  none  of  Long- 
street’s  force  have  gone  beyond  ]!:7ew  Haven,  and  that  they  are  on  the 
Ncav  London*  and  head  of  Washington.*  Heard  that  there  was  some 
trap  to  draw  out  the  troops  at  Boston  [Suffolk].  It  would  be  well  to 
ascertain  truth  of  yesterday’s  report.  Foster  must  be  very  vigilant. 

JOHN  A.  MX, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  17, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

No  pains  should  be  sj^ared  to  sustain  Foster.  He  should  be  re-en- 
forced, if  necessary.  Was  the  enemy  seen  near  Alexandria'? 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  May  17,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  14th  is  received  and  your  wishes  have 
all  been  anticipated.  The  moment  I received  your  telegraphic  dispatch 
saying  that  you  approved  my  views,  I sent  Major  Stewart  to  examine 
the  new  line,  and  it  will  be  fortified  under  his  direction.  It  has  been 
given  out  that  we  are  to  fortify  it  as  a second  line,  and  a show  of  strength- 
ening the  defenses  at  Suffolk  is  to  be  kept  up  until  it  is  ready. 

I have  just  returned  from  Suffolk ; the  enemy  is  on  this  side  the  Black- 
water  and  in  considerable  force.  Colonel  Foster  is  between  him  and 
our  working  party  with  8,000  men.  We  hope  to  finish  our  work  on  the 
Weldon  road  by  Wednesday.  When  we  go  to  Zuni  we  shall  send  a 
still  larger  force. 

My  man  came  in  from  Eichmond  to-day.  He  says  that  only  one  divis- 
ion of  Longstreet’s  force  went  north  of  Eichmond,  and  that  it  returned 
to  Petersburg,  being  too  late  for  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.  He  con- 
firms my  former  statements  that  the  force  before  Suffolk  was  near  40,000, 
and  he  says  this  whole  force  is  at  Petersburg,  ou  the  Blackwater,  and 
back  of  Franklin,  on  the  Weldon  road. 

The  Eichmond  has  met  with  an  accident ; he  could  not  ascertain  pre- 
cisely what,  but  thinks  it  was  some  damage  to  her  machinery.  The  two 
iron-dads  on  the'stocks  are  getting  on  slowly.  He  thinks  they  cannot 
be  completed,  before  August,  but  he  judged  from  what  he  saw  tljat 
workmen  had  been  transferred  from  one  to  the  other,  indicating  an  in- 
tention to  bring  one  out  as  soon  as  possible. 

He  is  satisfied  that  troops  have  recently  been  brought  to  Eichmond 
from  Georgia  and  South  Carolina  and  sent  on  to  Fredericksburg.  It 
was  said  at  Eichmond  that  Lee  was  to  attack  Hooker  and  drive  him 
back  to  the  Potomac. 

I am,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

JOHN  A.  MX, 

Major-General 

* Cipher. 


HAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


721 


Headquarters  Fourth  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Yorktown,  Va.,  May  17,  18G3. 

Aeut.  Col.  L.  H.  Pelouze, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  Virginia: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  to  you  (according  to  instruc- 
ions  from  Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac)  instructions  given  me 
rom  the  same  headquarters.  I expect  my  command  will  have  all  ar- 
ived  by  this  evening.  While  it  is  my  great  desire  to  literally  carry  out 
he  orders  of  my  chief,  I intend  also  to  act  in  comx)liance  with  the  wishes 
Liid  instructions  of  the  major-general  in  whose  department  I am  to  tem- 
)orarily  remain.  Any  advice,  suggestion,  or  instruction  that  the  major- 
>enerai  commanding  the  department  may  do  me  the  honor  to  forward 
; shall  be  pleased  to  receive  and  promptly  to  execute. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KILPATPvICK, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 

[In  closure.] 

Headquarters  Army  oe  the  Potomac, 

May  13,  18G3. 

Jolonel  Kilpatrick, 

Commanding  Cavalry  Brigade : 

Colonel:  The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  assume 
oiiunand  of  the  regiments  of  cavalry  now  with  you  at  Yorktown ; tlnit 
ou  will  hold  your  force  well  in  hand,  inflicting  whatever  damage  the 
egitimate  rules  of  war  sanction  upon  the  enemy,  his  supplies,  and  his 
oinmnnications.  You  will  observe  his  movements  as  far  as  ixossible. 
lou  will  take  with  you  from  this  camp  the  dismounted  men  of  both 
egiinents  and  remount  them  there  with  captured  animals.  You  will 
eport  by  letter  and  telegraph  as  occasion  requires,  holding  your  com- 
aand  ready  to  co-operate  with  this  army  in  its  operations. 

You  will  furnish  General  Keyes,  or  the  commanding  ofhcer  in  whose 
lepartment  you  may  temporarily  remain,  with  copies  of  your  instruc- 
ions  that  you  may  receive  from  time  to  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  WILLIAMS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


District  of  the  Albemarle, 

Flymoutli,  N.  G.,  May  17,  18G3. 

jieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  condition  of  aflairs  in  the 
listrict  as  follows : 

The  lines  in  front  of  this  town  are  in  ])rogress  toward  completion. 
Clie  parapet  of  Fort  Williams  is  now  \vell  sodded  on  its  exterior  sloi)e, 
IS  also  three  sides  of  the  superior  slope  and  palisades,  readv  for  the 
litcli. 

The  breastworks  on  the  right  and  left  are  being  strengthened  by  a 
lubstantial  revetment  of  timber  and  the  ditch  considerably  widened,  as 
llso  the  epaulement  on  the  left  of  the  Columbia  road. 

The  excavation  and  revetment  of  the  redoubt  near  Boyle  Creek  is 
learly  complete,  and  will  be  ready  for  the  gun  by  the  last  of  this 
veek.  The  redoubt  above,  intended  for  the  protection  of  river  obstruc* 
4G  R R — YOL  xyiii 


722 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.' 


tions,  is  progressing  favorably,  but  the  frame  for  magazine  has  not  beer 
received,  and  preparations  are  now  made  to  construct  it  on  the  ground 

This  work,  constructed  by  the  Ninety-sixth  New  York  Volunteers,  J 
have  named  Fort  Gray,  in  memory  of  Col.  0.  O.  Gray  of  that  regiment 
killed  in  battle  at  Kinston,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  commanding 
general.  The  obstructions  at  the  head  of  the  island  have  been  com 
menced.  There  have  been  many  difficulties  on  account  of  repairs  t( 
the  pile-drivers  and  density  of  the  substratum,  but  it  is  believed  tliai 
work  will  progress  hereafter  more  rapidly. 

Light  guns  are  required  for  Fort  \Villiams  and  for  the  redoubt  neai 
the  Columbia  road. 

At  Koanoke  Island  working  parties  are  employed  in  getting  out  pali 
sades  for  Forts  Keno  and  Parke.  The  north  face  of  the  latter  is  ii 
danger  of  being  seriously  washed,  as  also  the  easterly  face  of  Fort  Fos! 
ter,  both  of  which  require  attention. 

A few  guerrillas  are  skulking  within  the  limits  of  this  county,  bu 
in  small  numbers,  and  a company  of  cavalry  is  reported  to  be  in  tb 
neighborhood  of  Jamesville,  but  thus  far  have  made  no  hostile  demon 
strations. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ H.  W.  WESSELLS, 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers^  Commanding. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  18,  18G3. 

General  Dix : 

A contraband  from  Franklin  says  GeneralJenkins  states  that  we  ar 
fortifyihg  at  Carrsville  and  relaying  the  road  from  this  end  with  tb 
rail  from  that  end  with  the  view  of  advancing.  The  mail-boats  ar 
at  or  below  Franklin.  Stratton  reports  Lieutenant  Titus  with  47  me 
having  a skirmish  near  Newby’s  Bridge  with  150  guerrillas.  An  an 
buscade  was  prepared  to  capture  all  his  party,  but  he  cut  his  wa 
through;  Lieutenant  Beatty  and  2. privates  severely  and  1 sergean 
slightly  wounded ; 1 rebel  killed,  2 prisoners,  several  wounded.  ^ 
Ipss  of  horses,  some  having  been  taken  by  us.  Stratton  apl)ro^’es  tb 
conduct  of  Lieutenant  Titus. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

♦ . Major-General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  18, 18G3. 

General  Vielb: 

The  boats  were  taken  down  to  the  Albemarle  Sound  and  into  tli 
Chowan.  They  are  at  Franklin  probably.  Major  Stratton  sent  out 
party  to  the  Pasquotank  with  a view  of  intercepting  them. 

^ JOHN  J.  PECK, 

3Iajor- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  j\[ay  18, 1863. 

Major-General  Peck: 

Do  I understand  that  the  railroad  connection  between  Boston*  an 
Baltimore*  is  now  complete;  and,  if  so,  how  many  miles  of  iron  l 
side  the  former  are  taken  up  and  removed  ! 

JOHN  A.  DIa, 

Major-General. 


Cipher. 


;hap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


723 


\Iajor-Geueral  Dix: 

Engine  now  running. 
Jarrsville. 


Suffolk,  May  18,  1803. 

Iron  removed  for  about  miles  this  side 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


lajor-General  Dix: 


Suffolk,  May  18,  1863. 


If  Hooker  is  reduced  as  reports  state,  Lee  does  not  require  Longstreet 
0 leave  Black  water. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


lENERAL  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Eiohteenth  Army  Corps, 

No.  79.  I Mew  Berne,  May  19,  1863. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  the  War  Department  Brig.  Gen.  E.  A. 
Vild,  U.  S.  Volunteers  (a  gallant  and  accomplished  soldier  andgentle- 
lan),  has  arrived  in  this  department  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a bri- 
ade  of  colored  troops.  General  Wild  will  establish  recruiting  offices 
t such  points  as  he  may  select,  and  all  district  commanders,  command- 
ig  officers  of  posts,  and  other  officers  and  men,  are  hereby  enjoined 
nd  ordered  to  afford  to  General  Wild,  his  officers  and  men,  every 
icility  and  aid  in  the  performance  of  their  duties  and  in  carrying  out 
illy  and  in  good  faith  the  orders  of  the  Government. 

The  commanding  general  expects  that  this  order  will  be  sufficient  to 
isure  the  prompt  obedience  (the  first  duty  of  a soldier)  of  all  officers 
nd  soldiers  in  this  department  to  the  orders  from  the  War  Depart- 
lent. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

[SOUTHAED  HOFFMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


lajor-General  Peck: 


Fort  Monroe,  May  20,  1863. 


The  Baltimore  Sun  of  Monday  says  we  are  taking  up  the  track  of 
le  Seaboard  and  Koanoke  Eailroad  from  Carrsville  to  the  junction  of 
le  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Eailroad.  The  writer  of  this  letter  is  not 
ere;  when  he  returns  I shall  see  to  it.  The  rails  on  the  Seaboard  road 
eigh  158  tons  per  mile ; those  on  the  Petersburg  road  246  tons  per 
file.  Of  course  it  will  require  time  to  remove  them.  The  operation 
11  the  latter  road  will  amount  to  a campaign  and  we  must  look  for  some 
harp  fighting,  for  I do  not  believe  5,000  tons  of  railroad  iron  will  in 
le  present  emergency  be  given  up  without  a contest. 

All  quiet  at  West  Point.  Gordon  needs  more  guns,  and  one  of  his 
^giments  goes  shortly.  How  are  you  getting  on  % 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


724 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  I 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  3Iay  20, 1863. 

General  Dix;  i • 

The  papers  do  our  cause  almost  as  much  harm  as  the  rebel  armieSj 
Hooker’s  moves  wero  all  read  in  tUe  papers  long  before  the  hour  fojj 
Lee  to  strike,  and  he  knew  both  sides  of  the  game.  , 

Wentz  commenced  as  be  did  to  save  time.  He  has  not  reported  thii 

raorninir,  buti  believe  I will  transfer  the  work  at  da^L 

A deserter  says  between  20,000  and  30,000  on  Blackwater  unde: 
Long-street.  Have  not  believed  it.  joHN  J.  PECK, 

Maior- General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  May  20, 1863. 

Major-General  Dix: 

I ordered  Windsor  to  be  occupied  at  dusk  as  a base  of  operataom 
which  you  fully  understand.  Work  is  to  be  rushed  vigorously.  Fort 
fications  of  Suffolk  are  in  progress.  ^ PEOK, 


*1 /f  I 


Major-General  Dix: 

Wentz  is  now  within  3 miles  of  Suffolk, 
ranged  for  the  matter  spoken  of. 


Suffolk,  May  20, 1863. 


The  programme  is  all  a 


JOHN  J.  PEOK, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Outposts, 
Camp  Fifty-eighth  Begt.  Pennsylvania  Vols.,  May  20,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

• Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I propose  sending  the  Fifty  eigh 
Ttp<riment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  to-morrow  morning  (Thursday) 
seize  the  crossings  of  Core  Creek,  to  rebuild  the  bridges,  and  to  captm, 
if  practicable,  the  enemy’s  post  at  the  railroad  switch; 
events  the  latter  enterprise  as  a cover  and  pretext  for  our  ulten 

'^wT'carry  on  the  movement  without  losing  time  and  opportunity i 
ought  to  have  the  re-enforcements  by  rail  or  otherwise  i 

morrow  afternoon  or  evening ; the  earlier,  the  more 
rest  and  sleep.  I contemplate  moving  from  Core  Creek  about  10  p.  i. 

so  as  to  reach  my  position  just  before  daylight.  „„ar<l  airaiit 

I might  effect  our  object  with  two  regiments,  but  to  aS®  t 

possibilities  I wish  six;  also  three  companies  of  cavalry,  two  pieces 

artillery  (though  the  artillery  is  not  likely  to  be 

had  better  have  three  days’  rations.  For  cavalry  J i 

company  and  Jacob’s,  who  have  been  with  me  before,  and  I shall 

Wilson’s  (now  on  the  line)  for  the  third.  i t i u ^orrvl 

As  regards  your  suggestion  respecting  the  Trent  road  I shall  car 
out  by  ordering  one  of  the  cavalry  companies  now  on  that  ® . 
Une,  or  both,  tfith  two  companies  of  the  infantry  now  there,  to  mak- 


3AP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. UNION. 


725 


BCODnaissance  on  Friday  on  the  Trent  road,  at  least  as  far  as  Trenton 
'orks,  and,  if  the  cavalry  can  cross  the  river  at  the  ford  above  the  town, 
) capture  any  small  i^arties  that  may  be  there. 

For  the  bridge  fifteen  to  twenty  or  twenty-five  2-inch  plank,  not  less 
lan  12  feet  long,  will  be  siifQcient,  poles  with  dirt  on  them  answering 
)r  the  ends  near  the  banks,  as  far  out  as  earth  can  conveniently  be  cast 
ith  a shovel]  and  a team  had  better  be  sent  with  them  to  report  this 
rening  to  the  office  at  BatcheldeFs  Creek  bridge  and  there  to  await  my 
rders.  If  I succeed  I shall  need  the  team  in  addition  to  my  own,  to 
■ansport  captured  arms,  &c.,  and  at  all  events  to  bring  along  lame 
)ldiers. 

If  there  are  any  further  explanations  required  or  suggestions  to  be 
lade  please  communicate. 

If  I have  a really  good  marching  regiment  in  addition  to  my  own  I 
lall  prefer  the  path  to  the  left  as  a surer  course,  though  it  will  involve 
)me  fording  of  small  streams,  mud,  &c.,  and  will  probably  oblige  field 
hcers  to  move  on  foot. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  EIOHTER  JONES, 
Colonelj  Commanding  Outposts. 


aj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 

May  21,  1863 — 12  noon. 


The  rails  will  all  be  up  on  the  Weldon  Kailroad  beyond  Suffolk  to-day. 
o-raorrow  we  commence  on  the  Petersburg  Railroad.  The  troops  were 
I position  last  night.  We  hope  to  save  7,000  tons  of  iron,  but  expect 
> tight  for  it. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


ajor-General  Peck  : 


Fort  Monroe,  May  21,  1863. 


The  articles  relating  to  removing  rails  came  from  the  correspondent 
the  Associated  Press  and  not  from  the  correspondent  of  the  Herald, 
r.  Thompson  will  call  on  you  to-day.  I think  him  a reliable  man. 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


laj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix: 


Suffolk,  May  21,  1863. 


General  Getty  writes  me  that  a report  is  current  throughout  the 
Mintry  that  Suffolk  is  to  be  abandoned.  He  was  informed  that  it  origi- 
ited  with  the  adjutant  of  the  One  hundred  and  forty-eighth  New  York 
Stories  of  the  greatest  absurdity  are  circulated  by  officers, 
a J think  this  one  should  be  investigated,  as  a caution  to  officers. 


JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


726 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  Alay  22,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleok, 

General-m-  Chief  : 

Eiaiity  contrabands  were  sent  last  week  to  Franklin  from  EichmoiK 
to  take  ui)  the  iron  on  the  Weldon  road.  Four  ot  them  are  in  Suffolk 
We  have  now  all  the  iron  safe.  We  have  commenced  on  the  Peters 
burg  road,  near  Zuni,  and  shall  take  ux)  the  track  back  to  Windsor  hj 
to-night.  We  commenced  dismantling  these  roads  at  the  right  time. 

, ' Major-General, 


Suffolk,  Alay  22, 18G3. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Will  be  at  Windsor  before  night  on  the  return.  I have  10,000  then 
to  xirotect  workmen.  General  Dodge  is  just  from  Windsor.  He  say 
45-X)Ound  rail  is  just  as  good  as  the  heavy  one,  and  the  Governmen 

can  save  much.  .TOHN  J.  PECK, 

Alajor-  General 


Fort  Monroe,  May  23, 18G3. 

Major-General  Peck  : 

I incline  to  the  belief  that  there  are  few  troops  on  the  Blackwatei 
From  two  sources  I learn  that  troops  in  large  numlmrs  have  gone  Iron 
New  Haven  to  New  York  and  to  the  Southwest  by  Danville.  We  hav 
no  artillerists.  You  must  take  them  from  J'®"’’ 

Alajor- General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  Alay  23,  18G3 — 8.45  p.  in. 

General  Dix : r -v 

General  Dodge  at  Antioch  Church  was  attacked  at  G.lo  p.  m.  iN 

particulars.  JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General. 


Bed  House,  Picket  Station,  Alay  23, 18G3. 

Col.  J.  Kichter  Jones, 

Commanding  Outposts : 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  ‘Accordance  with  yoii 
orders  to  me  of  the  21st  instant  I moved  my  company,  together  wit 
Company  L of  my  regiment  and  two  companies  of  the  One  hundre  an 
fifty-eighth  New  Yo?k  Regiment  from  Captain  command,  o 

the^  Trent  road,  at  5 o’clock  yesterday  morning.  On  arriving  at  th 
Trenton  Forks,  which  point  was  reached  without  our  seeing  | 

enS  ttan  a half  dozln  who  scattered  into  the 
1 sent  one  of  the  infantry  companies  down  the  Jrenton  road  t 
iioiter  the  crossing  of  the  river,  and  left  the  other  at  . ej, 

ceeded  with  the  cavalry  up  the  Kinston  road,  and  on  reachi  ^ 
of  Noble’s  idantation,  (>  miles  from  the  forks  found  it  ^Arncaded,^c^^  1^ 
small  earthwork  thrown  up  to  the  right  of  the  road.  Passing 


HAP.  xx:^.] 


C0RtlESt>ONDENCE,  ETC. — tJNlON. 


727 


tructioii  I found  at  the  distance  of  a quarter  of  a mile  a loug  earthwork 
ath  two  embrasures  for  cannon,  extending  about  200  yards  on  each  side 
f the  road.  There  were  also  huts  erected  for  a regiment.  Two  rebel 
avalrymen  were  seen  as  we  approached  in  rear  of  the  earthwork,  and 
was  informed  by  Mrs.  Noble  that  12  comi)rised  the  whole  force  of  the 
nemy  at  this  i)oint.  These  eluded  our  pursuit,  which  was  continued  for 
bout  a mile.  From  Noble’s  a road  runs  to  the  Trent  Eiver.  The  bridge 
as  been  burned,  and  I learned  that  the  river  was  unfordable.  at  this 
oint.  1 therefore  countermarched  and  proceeded  by  the  road  which 
uites  the  Trent  and  Kinston  roads,  4 miles  beyond  the  forks,  to  Trenton 
iridge.  A few  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  dismounted  fired  upon  us  from 
je  town,  but  retreated  too  rapidly  to  permit  their  capture,  although 
forded  the  river  immediately  and  chased  them  3 miles,  by  the  road 
hich  leads  out  of  Trenton,  up  the  river. 

Not  more  than  a dozen  of  the  enemy  were  seen,  and  this  appeared  to 
e the  force  of  pickets  maintained  in  Trenton,  which  is  relieved  daily 
om  Tuckahoe,  10  miles  distant.  While  I was  in  Trenton  two  small 
Qoccuiued  buildings  were  burned  by  some  one  of  my  command  without 
[•(lers. 

I bivouacked  at  the  forks  of  the  roads  and  this  morning  sent  out  a 
latoon,  4 miles  bj^  the  Kinston  road,  which  saw  no  signs  of  the  enemy, 
fter  waiting  for  further  orders  until  4 o’clock  p.  m.  at  the  Forks  1 re- 
irned  to  camp. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectful] v,  your  obedient  servant, 

N.  HALL, 

Captain  Company  G,  Third  New  Yorh  Cavalry, 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

May  25,  18G3. 

ajor-General  Dix,  Commandiny,  (&c.  : 

Have  you  it  in  your  power  to  obtain  reliable  information  of  the  trans- 
r of  troops  from  Charleston  to  Kichmond'?  From  recent  indications  it 
of  great  importance  that  this  fact  should  be  ascertained  as  early  as 
'acticable. 

JOSEPH  HOOKEE, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  25,  18G3— 3 p.  m. 

ajor-General  Hooker: 

I am  informed  from  three  dilferent  sources,  and  do  not  doubt,  that 
oops  liave  gone  from  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  but  whether  to 
ragg  or  Lee  not  quite  certain.  The  greater  part  of  Longstreet’s  forces, 
cently  on  the  Blackwater,  are  near  Eichmond,  read^^  to  move  either  on 
ledericksburg  or  West  Point. 

' JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

May  2G,  18G3 — 11  p.  m. 

-q.  Gen.  IT.  W^.  Halleck, 

General -in-  Chief : 

Major-General  Ord,  who  has  come  down  this  evening  from  West 
oiut,  recommends,  with  the  concurrence  of  General  E.  D.  Keyes  and 


728  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. i 

Geueral  Gordon,  the  withdrawal  of  onr  troops  from  that  position,  un-i 
less  he  can  have  4,000  more  infantry,  28  guns  in  addition  to  those 
already  there,  and  a pontoon  bridge  1,200  yards  long.  The  recoui-i 
mendation  is  founded  on  the  altered  state  of  things  since  the  occir, 
pation  took  place:  First,  the  retreat  of  General  Hooker;  second,  the; 
very  recent  concentration  of  troops  in  the  vicinity  of  Iliclunond  froiiii 
the  Blackwater  and  North  Carolina  line;  third,  the  probability  of  an 
attack  in  force  at  an  early  day,  as  I am  advised  by  General  Gordon! 
by  telegraph  since  General  Ord  left ; and,  fourth,  the  appreliensionj 
that  our  communication  with  the  supplies  will  be  interrupted  by  their 
erection  of  heavy’batteries  on  the  York,  the  enemy  having  already  with, 
his  light  guns  fired  with  some  effect  on  our  mail-boat,  so  as  to  render 
an  armed  convoy  necessary  for  our  transports.  In  the  uncertainty  as! 
to  General  Hooker’s  movements  I have  thought  proper  to  communicate 
with  you  at  once.  I have  discharged  three  regiments.  More  are  soon 
to  follow,  and  from  ai)pearances  I suppose  I cannot  hope  to  have  theii 
places  supplied.  In  that  case  my  force  will  soon  be  reduced  below  tlie 
minimum  necessary  for  my  extended  command.  Averse  as  I am  to  any 
retrograde  movement,  I should  be  disposed  to  concur  with  my  three 
general  officers,  unless  from  your  more  extended  view  of  the  whokl 
ground  yon  can  afford  me  a hope  of  being  strengthened  either  by  fresh' 
troops  or  by  early  movements  in  Virginia,  which  will  keep  the  enemy 
fully  occupied. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General, 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va.^  May  26,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Commanding,  Torldown : 

General  : I have  until  to-day  been  prevented  by  urgent  engage 
ments  from  replying  to  Colonel  West’s  letter  to  your  assistant  adjii 
tant-general,  of  the  14th  instant,  with  your  indorsement  of  the  15th. 

The  colonel  refers  to  the  meritorious  conduct  of  the  troops  at  Will 
iamsburg  and  Fort  Magruder,  when  assailed  by  a superior  force  uiidei 
General  Wise,  and  regards  my  omission  to  speak  of  them  in  my  ordei 
concerning  the  recent  investment  of  Suffolk  as  forcing  ‘‘  the  unpleasam 
conclusion  that  there  was  something  left  undone  which  should  liavt 
been  done.” 

In  your  indorsement  you  say  you  “ regard  Colonel  West’s  complain 
as  just,”  with  an  intimation  that  I have  been  guilty  of  “partiality.” 

I regret  very  much  that  Colonel  West  should  have  drawn  from 
omission  to  refer  to  his  command  in  the  order  alluded  to  the  inference 
that  he  and  his  troops  had  not  done  all  that  brave  and  devoted  mei 
could  do,  and  he  will  see  from  a statement  of  facts  that  there  is  m 
ground  for  such  an  inference.  « 

The  operations  at  Suffolk,  after  the  third  day  of  the  investment  o 
three  weeks,  were  carried  on  under  my  own  observation,  as  I was  ever 
alternate  day  either  there  or  on  the  Nansemond. 

On  the  other  hand  the  operations  at  Williamsburg  and  its  vicinil: 
commenced  and  ended  during  my  absence  and  while  you  were  in  com 
maud  of  the  department.  This  fact  would,  however,  have  made  no  fiit 
ference  with  me  if  the  meritorious  services  of  the  troops  had  been  pro]) 
erly  represented  to  me  by  a report  from  you  or  from  Colonel  W’^est 
But  no  such  representation  has  ever  been  made  to  me.  Nothing  wa 


lAP.  XXX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


729 


ft  by  you  at  the  headquarters  of  the  department,  either  in  the  form  of 
report  or  statement  of  the  services  of  Colonel  West  and  his  troops  j 
u’  could  I find  among  the  telegraphic  dispatches  a single  one  giving 
jy  but  the  most  meager  account  of  the  advance  and  retreat  of  the 
lemy.  .Thus  you  will  perceive  if  there  is  a fault  anywhere  it  is  not 
le  to  the  “partiality”  unjustly  imputed  to  me,  but  to  your  omission  to 
ave  on  the  files  of  the  department  the  data  necessary  to  enable  me  to 
) justice,  as  I would  most  cheerfully  have  done  at  the  proper  time,  to 
olonel  West  and  his  command. 

You  will  please  send  to  him  a copy  of  this  letter,  Avith  a request  that 
may  be  communicated  to  his  officers. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


ENERAL  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  op  N.  0.,  Eighteenth  A.  C., 

No.  81.  j New  Berne.,  May  20,  1863. 

The  commanding  general,  in  common  with  the  officers  and  men  of 
is  command,  is  called  upon  to  mourn  the  loss  of  a most  gallant  officer, 
)1.  J.  Eichter  Jones,  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  who  fell 
the  head  of  his  regiment  on  the  evening  of  May  23,  whilst  repelling 
i attack  on  the  outposts. 

Colonel  Jones  won  the  admiration  of  all  in  this  department  by  the 
defatigable,  able,  and  gallant  manner  with  which  he  filled  the  ardu- 
18  duties  of  commander  of  the  outposts.  He  died  whilst  yet  enjoying 
e triumph  of  a victory  won  by  his  valor  and  counsel.  To  the  service, 
this  dejiartment,  and  to  his  regiment  this  death  has  been  a sad  loss ; 
id  to  all  here,  and  to  those  at  home  whom  he  loved,  the  commanding 
neral  offers  his  most  sincere  sympathy.  May  his  bright  example  lead 
any  to  tread  the  arduous  path  of  duty  witli  as  pure  an  appreciation  of 
ity  and  with  as  firm  unswerving  tread  as  he. 

All  the  flags  in  this  department  Avill  be  carried  at  half-mast  for  the 
ree  days  following  the  receipt  of  this  order,  and  at  this  post  half-hour 
ms  will  be  fired  from  Forts  Totten  and  Eowan  from  sunrise  to  sunset 
-morrow.  May  27. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster: 

[SOUTHAKD  HOFFMAN,] 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  27,  1803. 

ajor-General  Peck: 

We  are  threatened  with  an  attack  at  West  Point,  and  I shall  be 
iJiged  to  call  on  you  for  some  troops  and  guns.  General  Ord  is  on 
8 way  here.  He  took  command  there  j^esterday. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

: Major-General. 


Suffolk,  May  27,  1803. 

Ijor-General  Dix: 

jWill  the  Provisional  Brigade  answer?  Wardrop  and  Wistar  are  in 
Wardrop  is  one  of  my  best  officers.  The  Ninety-ninth  is  equal  to 
rice  its  number  of  ordinary  men. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-General.  . 


730 


NOtlTtt  CAtlOLlNA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  tCnAr.XXxj 
Fort  Monroe,  May  27,  18G3.  \ 

Major-General  Peck  : 

The  Provisional  Brigade  will  do.  Have  it  ready  to  move  at  a luo 
mentis  warning.  I am^vaiting  dispatches  from  Washington.  Unles; 
Hooker  does  something  the  question  of  retaining  West  Point  become, 
a doubtful  one. 

' JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Suffolk,  May  27,  18G3. 

Major-General  Dix: 

Will  have  brigade  ready.  Unless  Hooker  moves,  that  position  wil 
be  very  hazardous  indeed. 

JOHN  J.  PECK, 

Major-  General. 


May  27,  18G3— 12  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes, 

Commanding.,  the.,  TorMoicn  : 

Do  you  know  of  any  force  of  the  enemy  to  prevent  Colonel  Kilpati  icl 
with  Ids  two  regiments  from  crossing  the  country  from  Gloucester  f 
Urbana,  and  are  his  horses  in  suitable  condition  to  make  the  marcli 
All  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  in  my  front  are  at  Culpeper,  and  he  has  m 
infantry  below  Port  Boyal.  From  Urbana  Colonel  Kilpatrick’s  com 
mand  could  be  ferried  over  the  Kappahannock,  under  cover  of  the  gun 
boats,  should  it  be  necessary.  Please  reply  without  delay. 

JOSEPH  PIOOKER, 
Major- General^  Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  May  27,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

I send  below  a dispatch  from  Major-General  Keyes  in  reply  to  your? 
I have  received  a dispatch  from  General  Gordon  advising  me  of  a fore 
on  the  Mattapony  and  that  he  is  threatened  with'  an  attack.  Abon 
200  of  Colonel  Kilpatrick’s  men  are  not  mounted.  I wish  yon  woul 
leave  them  with  me  at  present.  I need  them  very  much  at  West  Point 
where  I have  only  200  cavalry.  I will  endeavor  to  get  horses  for  tliei 
in  Gloucester  County. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

[Inclosuro.] 

Major-General  Hooker, 

Commanding  xirmy  of  the  Potomac: 

1 know  of  no  force  to  prevent  Colonel  Kilpatrick  crossing  to  Urban& 
if  he  can  cross  the  Rappahannock  safely;  their  horses  in  fair  conditioi 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  May  28,  18G3. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe  : 

My  information  is  that  Lee  is  massing  all  his  forces  on  the  RapD 
hannock.  As  General  Hooker  reports  directly  to  the  President  I kno^ 


IA1\  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


731 


ot  what  he  intends  to  do.  I can  give  you  no  re-enforcements  what- 
ver.  If  under  these  circumstances  your  position  at  West  Point  is 
eemed  unsafe  jmu  will  withdraw  from  it. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General- in-  Chief. 


United  States  Flag  ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  May  28,  1863.  • 

laj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Comdg.  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

General  : Your  interesting  communication  of  the  13th  instant  was 
jceived  during  my  absence  at  Washington,  where  I saw  General  Hal- 
(ck  and  urged  him  to  give  you  more  men.  He  informed  Secretary  Fox 
nd  myself  that  it  would  be  utterly  impossible  to  do  so  until  conscripts 
re  got.  Still  I pressed  the  matter  in  another  interview,  and  left  at 
le  Department  a report  on  the  subject,  which  1 was  informed  would 
e communicated  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

I hope  you  may  get  the  troops  which  you  so  greatly  need  for  the 
3cupation  of  Smith’s  Island  and  the  attack  on  Wilmington. 

Your  views  respecting  the  occupation  of  Plymouth,  Koanoke  Island, 
^d  Washington  are  certainly  very  forcible.  I will  at  all  times  use 
rery  effort  to  sustain  you  in  holding  your  positions,  and  especially 
bile  you  are  supported  by  so  few  troops.  I have  instructed  Coni- 
lander  Davenport  to  make  every  exertion  to  support  you  at  this  crit- 
:al  period. 

If  you  can  make  the  military  occupation  of  Uew  Berne,  Plymouth, 
id  Washingtou  complete,  so  as  to  require  little  or  no  gunboat  defense, 
wer  vessels  will  be  required  in  the  Sounds,  and  yet  allow  a sufficient 
lovable  force  there  to  keep  the  police  of  its  waters,  prevent  such  es- 
ipes  as  those  of  the  Arrow  and  Emily  up  the  Chowan,  and  prevent 
iolations  of  the  blockade.  Though  the  vessels  in  the  Sounds  are  not 
lapted  to  outside  cruising  a portion  of  them  would  be  very  useful  for 
lockade  and  other  duty  here. 

I have  just  written  urgently  to  the  ^^Tavy  Department  to  try  and  get 
3u  more  troops  and  artillery. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  P’.  LEE, 

Aetg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Blochading  Sguadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  Va.,  May  30,  1863—12  m. 
faj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

: Your  dispatch  is  just  received.  I have  but  one  gunboat  here,  attend- 
•g  a court-martial,  and  one  at  Uorfolk,  repairing  with  dispatch  for  im- 
ortant  duty.  Five  other  gunboats  are  now  in  the  vicinitv  of  York- 
»wn. 

Please  inform  me  fully  what  service  is  required,  that  I may  know 
liat  dispositions  to  make  and  what  instructions  to  give  to  nroinote  the 
nolle  interest. 

S.  P.  LEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 


732 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX| 


War  Department, 
Washington,  May  30,  1803.  ' 

Major-General  Dix,  Fort  Monroe,  Va. : 

The  troops  withdrawn  from  West  Point  are  greatly  needed  here 
Gan  they  not  be  spared? 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya., 
May  30,  1803 — 1 p.  ra. 


1 went  with  Major-Generals  Peck  and  Keyes  to  West  Point  yester 
day,  and  on  consultation  with  General  Gordon  it  was  unanimously  de 
cided  to  withdraw  the  troops,  throw  them  up  the  Peninsula  abov( 
Williamsburg,  aud,  in  conjunction  with  the  force  under  Keyes,  attacl 
the  enemy  at  Diascund  Bridge,  which  is  as  near  Pichinond  as  Wes 
Point.  There  are  at  West  Point  only  4,700  men,  and  they  will  be  re 
duced  to  4,000  shortly  by  the  discharge  of  a regiment.  General  Keyei 
has  only  5,000  men  at  Gloucester  Point,  Yorktown,  and  Williamsburg 
and  it  is  very  desirable  that  he  should  have  this  re-enforcement.  I have 
lost  three  regiments  and  shall  lose  fourteen  more  b}^  expiration  o 
service. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  May  30, 18G3. 

Major-General  Keyes: 

Send  word  to  General  Gordon  as  quickly  as  possible  that  the  gunboat.'i 
have  failed  me,  and  that  they  cannot  be  ready  till  to-morrow.  I wil 
send  up  the  transportation  to-morrow  night. 

JOHX  A.  DIX, 

Major-General 


May  31,  1803 — 10  a.  m. 

Major-General  Dix,  Fortress  Monroe : 

Agreeably  to  your  request  directions  have  been  given  for  the  dis 
mounted  men  of  Colonel  Kilpatrick’s  cavalry  to  report  to  you.  Wil 
you  please  have  me  furnished  with  a map  of  the  position  of  your  forcci 
at  West  Point,  and  also  the  position  and  approximate  strength  of  tlu 
enemy’s  forces  in  that  vicinity  ? We  have  concurrent  evidence  tha 
Hood’s  division  is  posted  between  Gordonsville  and  Louisa  Court 
House,  and  Pickett’s  at  Taylorsville  (near  Sexton’s  Junction).  Long 
street  is  in  front  of  me.  I conclude  that  General  Lee  must  be  absent, 

I have  received  no  communication  from  him  in  reply  to  mine  since  j 
week  ago  yesterday. 

JOSEPH  HOOKEB, 
Major- Genera  I,  Commanding. 


riAi’ . XXX. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


733 


Fort  Monroe,  May  31,  1863. 


lajor-General  Hooker, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 


It  lias  been  decided  to  withdraw  from  West  Point  and  throw  the 
orce  there  np  the  Peninsula  toward  the  White  House.  I can  get  no 
atisfactory  information  as  to  the  enemy’s  force.  There  was  last  week 
. considerable  body  massed  north  of  Kichmond,  on  the  railroad,  ready 
0 support  Lee  at  Fredericksburg  or  Wise  at  White  House.  1 can  hear 
lOthing  of  them  since  Wednesday.  I will  advise  you  of  all  my  move- 
lents.  My  force  is  small. 

JOHN  A.  BIX, 

Major-  General, 


District  of  Beaufort, 
Morehead  City,  N.  0.,  May  31,  1863. 

lent.  Col.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Eighteenth  Army  Corps: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  communicate  that  I assumed  com- 
]and  of  the  district  on  my  arrival  here  yesterday. 

I have  put  250  men  at  work  on  the  fort  in  front  of  this  city  to-day. 

1 have  also  started  things  up  at  Newport  Barracks  and  vicinity, 
here  I found  matters  very  loose.  I am  in  hopes  I shall  have  every- 
liing  in  fine  working  order  in  a day  or  two. 

I am,  most  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

F.  B.  SPINOLA. 


bstract  from  Tri-monilily  Beiurn  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  (Seventh  Army  Corps), 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  commanding,  for  May  31, 186^  (headquarters  Fort  Monroe,  Va.). 


Command. 


eadquarters  Department, Maj , 
(Jen.  John  A.  Dix. 
oil  Monroe,  Col.  S.  M.  Al- 
ford. 

imp  Hamilton,  Maj.  J.  A. 
aiailing. 

oTfolk,  Brig.  Gen.  E.  L. 
Vide. 

illblk,  Maj.  Gen.  John  J. 
Peck. 

orktown,  Maj.  Gen.  E.  D. 
(Keyes. 

rest  Point,  Brig.  Gen.  G.  H. 
Gordon. 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present  and 
absent. 

Aggregate  last  return. 

Pieces  of  field  artillery. 

Present  for  duty  equipped. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

00 

u 

% 

<B 

o 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

i 

0 

0 

Men. 

17 

17 

17 

17 

15 

432 

582 

GG3 

G98 

15 

432 

If) 

497 

594 

G23 

Gil 

3 

74 

15 

394 

120 

2, 172 

2,  54G 

1 

2,  G92 

2,  Gt4 

G 

102 

1,  975 

2 

54 

5 

132 

9G6 

18,  0G8 

22,  38G 

2G,  821 

1 

27,  724 

100 

849 

15,  773 

76 

1,391 

36 

1,  326 

295 

5,  050 

5,  99G 

6,  555 

G,  5G3 

30 

238 

3,  6G8 

3 

902 

13 

448 

217 

4,  533 

5,351 

G,  277 

G,  299 

196 

4,121 

6 

93 

8 

282 

1,G45 

30,  752 

37,  472 

43,  G48 

14,  GOG 

136 

1,  400  I25,  969 

1 

126 

2,  514 

77 

2,582 

[Chap.  XXX !' 


734  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia^  Maj.  Gen.  Job 
A.  Dix,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding,  May  31,  18G3. 

FOUETn  ARMY  CORPS. 


Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 
First  Division  (.Yorktown). 


Advance  Brigade. 

Col.  R.  M.  West. 

139tli  New  York,  Col.  Antkony  Conk. 

Gtli  New  York  Cavalry  (battalion),  Maj. 
W.  P.  Hall. 

178tli  Pennsylvania,  Col.  James  Johnson. 
5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col. 
Wiliiam  Lewis. 


King's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Rurus  King. 

4th  Delaware,  Col.  A.  H.  Grimshaw. 
168th  Now  York,  Col.  William  R.  Brown 
169th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Lewis  W 
Smith. 

179th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  William  II 
Blair. 


Second  Division  (West  Point). 


Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Gordon. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  William  Gurney. 

l‘27th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  S.  L.  Wood- 
ford. 

142d  Now  York,  Col.  N.  M.  Curtis. 

143d  Now  York,  Col  Horace  Boughton. 
144th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  David  E. 
Gregory. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Burr  Porter. 

22d  Connecticut,  Col.  George  S.  Burn 
ham. 

40th  Massachusetts,  Maj.  JosephM.  Day 
14l8t  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  William  K 
Logie. 


Artillerg. 

2d  Wisconsin  Battery,  Capt.  Charles  Beger. 
4th  Wisconsin  Battery,  Capt.  John  F.  Valleo. 


Reserve  Artillery  (Yorktown). 

Capt.  James  McKnigiit. 

1st  New  York,  Batteries  F and  H,  Capts.  Willliam  R.  Wilson  and  Charles  E.  Mink. 
8th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  Butler  Fitch. 

Ist  Pennsylvania,  Batteries  E and  H,*  Capts.  T.  G.  Or  wig  and  Andrew  Fagan. 
5th  U.  S.,  Battery  M,  Capt.  James  McKnight. 


Unassigned  Infantry. 


172d  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  James  A.  Johnson. 


SEVENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 


Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix. 
Peck’s  Division  (Suffolk). 
Brig.  G^n.  Michael  Corcoran.! 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  D.  Terry. 

26th  Michigan,  Col.  J.  S.  Farrar. 

1st  New^  York  Battalion  Sharpshooters, 
Capt.  Joseph  S.  Arnold. 

130th  New^  York,  Col.  Alfred  Gibbs. 

152d  New  York,  Col.  Alonzo  Ferguson. 
167th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  J.  D.  Davis. 
11th  Rhode  Island,  Col.  Geo.  E.  Church. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  R.  S.  Foster. 

13th  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  J.  Dobbs. 
112th  New  York,  Col.  J.  C.  Drake. 

169th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  John  Mc- 
Conihe. 

lG5th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  C.  H.  Buebler. 
166th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  A.  J.  Fulton. 


* One  section  of  Battery  E with  West’s  brigade  and  another  at  West  Point. 
tMaj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck  commanding  the  post  of  Sufiblk. 


aAP.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Mathew  Mukphy. 


735 


loth  New  Jersey,  Colonel  Ryerson. 

69th  New  York,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Reid. 
155th  New  York,  Colonel  McEvily. 

164th  New  York,  Colonel  McMahon. 

170th  New  York,  Colonel  Mclvor. 


Getty’s  Division  (Suffolk). 
Brig.  Gen.  George  W.  Getty. 


First  Brigade. 
Col.  W.  R.  Pease. 


^.■)lh  New  .Jersey,  Col.  Andrew  Derrom. 
iOth  New  York,  Lieut. Col. T.  L.  England. 
i3d  New  York,  Col.  William  Heine. 

7 til  Now  York,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  White. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Edw  ard  Harland. 

th  Connecticut,  Col.  John  E.  Ward. 
tU  Connecticut,  Col.  G.  A.  Stedman. 
th  Conneoticut,  Col.  C.  L.  Upham. 
th  Connecticut,  Col.  Francis  Beach. 

Artil 

1st  Peonsylvania,  Battery  i 
5th  U.  S.,  Battery  A,  Lieut 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  A.  H.  Dutton. 

2l8t  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  F.  Burpee. 
10th  New  Hampshire,  Colonel  Donohoe.  * 
13th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  A.  F.  Stevens. 
4th  Rhode  Island,  Lieut.  Col.  M.  P.  Buf- 
fum. 

Beserve  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  I.  J.  Wistar. 

99th  New  York,  Col.  D.  W.  Wardrop. 
118th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  O.  Keese,  jr. 
9th  Vermont,  Lieut.  Col.E.  H.  Ripley. 
19th  Wisconsin,  Col.  H.  T.  Sanders. 


’erg. 

Capt.  John  G.  Simpson. 
James  Gilliss. 


Unassigned  (Suffolk). 
Cavalrg. 


Ist  New  York  Mounted  Rifles,  Col.  B.  F.  Onderdouk. 
11th  Pennsylvania,!  Col.  S.  P.  Spear. 


Artillerg. 

Capt.  F.  M.  Follett. 


1st  Delaware  Battery,  Capt.  B.  Nields. 

Massachusetts  Battery,  Capt.  P.  A.  Davis. 
10th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  F.  L.  Hiller. 

19th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  W.  H.  Stahl. 

4th  U.  S.,  Battery  L,  Lieut.  H.  C.  Hasbrouck. 


Norfolk,  Va. 

j,  Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele. 

148th  New  York,  Col.  William  Johnson. 

Pennsylvania,  Col.  Daniel  Nagle. 
l/7th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  G.  B.  Wiestling. 

F),Capt.  B.  B.  Mitchell 
7th  New  York  Battery,  Qapt.  P.  C.  Regan. 


• Tranaferred  from  First  Brigade,  f Two  compauios  on  dctaciied  service, 


736 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

Fort  Monroe. 

Col.  S.  M.  Alford. 

3(1  New  York,  Col.  S.  M.  Alford. 

Camp  Hamilton. 

Maj.  John  A.  Darling. 


[Chap.  XXX 


3d  Penusylvaniii  Artillery  (Ist  battalion),  M.aj.  John  A.  Darling, 
lltli  Pennsylvania  Cavalry  (one  company). 


Ahsii 


met  from  Tri-rwnmn  Beturn  of  the  EigUemth  Armu  Corps,  Department  of 
Carolina,  Maj.  Gen.  Mm  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Armii,  commanding,  fot  May  31,  lb()3. 


Commaud. 


General  staif 

Palmer’s  division 

Jourdau’s  brigade 

l.ee’s  brigade 

Mix’s  cavalry  brigade 
Artillery 


Total  at  New  Berne - - 

District  of  Beaufort  ...  - 

District  of  the  Albemarle 

District  of  tbo  Pamlico  . . . . . 

Detaclied  (Department  of  tlie  boutb) . 


Grand  total. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Officers. 

Men. 

21 

2*^7 

79 

G7 

18 

41 

4.  708 

1,  G05 

1, 104 
319 

1, 103 

. 453 

8,  839 

83 

1,718 

. 121 

1,5G7 

. 137 

2,  781 

. 794 

14^905  1 

21 
G,  349 
2, 155 
1,405 
378 
1,30G 


7. 1 

IS 


1, 


n,G14  ! 
2,353  ! 
1,892  I 
3,318  I 


1.5, -J 
3,i 
2,; 
3.' 
10,1 


5 I 19, 177  I 34, 


Onianixation  of  the  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  Department 

iZ  m-  Gen.  Johi  O.  Foster,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding.  May  % 

isoi* 

FIRST  DIVISION  (New  Berne). 


First  Brigade,  t 
Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory 


17th  Massachusetts,  Maj.  Jones  1 rankle. 
43d  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  John  G. 

VvTiiton.  T.,  1 

45th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Charles  R.  Cod- 
man. 

5l8t  Mass.achusctts,  Col.  A.  B.  R.  Sprague. 


Brig.  Gen.  Innis  N.  Palmer.! 

Second  Brigade.f 
Col.  Horace  C.  Lee. 

5th  Massachusetts,  Col.  George  II.  P' 


won.  . 1 T.-  1 * 

25th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Josiah  I icket 
27th  Massachusetts,  Maj.  W.  G.  Bartar 
mew. 

46th  Massachusetts,  Col.  William 
Shurtletf.  , 


tSecond  Brigade. 


:hap.  xxx.j 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  ' 737 

INDijPENDljNT  UHIG  A UTC.  {New  Jierne). 


Jounlan’s  Brigade. 

Col.  James  Jourdan. 

:i(l  Miissachnsetts,  Col.  S.  P.  Riclimoud. 
8tli  Massacliu setts,  Col.  F.  .T.  Coffin. 

58th  Ncav  York,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  H.  Mc- 
Nary. 

58th  Pennsylvania,  Lient.  Cok  C.  13. 
Curtiss. 

ArlUlery. 

(I  New  York,  Maj.  T.  J.  Kenl^e(l3^ 
st  Rhode  Island,  Rattery  F,  Capt.  Janies 
Beiger. 


Lee'ii  Brigade. 

Col.  Francis  L.  Lee. 

44tli  Massachusetts,  Col.  Francis  L.  Lee. 
92d  New  York,  Capt.  T.  A.  Merriman. 
5th  Rhode  Island,  Col.  Henry  T.  Sisson 

Cavalry. 

Col.  S.  H.  Mix. 

3d  New  York,  Lient.  Col,  G.  W.  Lewis. 
12th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  P.  G.  Vonght. 
23d  New  York  Battalion,  Capt.  Emory 
Cummings. 


Outjjost. 

132d  New  York,  Col.  P.  J.  Claasseu. 


DISTRICT  OF  THE  ALBEMARLE.  * 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Wessells. 

85th  New  York,  Col.  J.  S.  Belknap. 

96th  New  York,  Col.  E.  M.  Cullen. 

101st  Pennsylvania,  Col.  David  B.  Morris. 

103d  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  C.  Maxwell. 

8th  Massachusetts  (three  companies),  Capt.  F.  E.  Porter. 

1st  North  Carolina  (Union),  Company  L,  Lieut.  G.  W.  Graham. 

ooi  Company  D,  Capt.  H.  W.  Brown. 

24th  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  J.  E.  Lee 


DISTRICT  OF  BE  A UFORT. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  M.  Naglee.  t 

23d  Massachusetts,  Col.  A.  Elwell. 

9th  New  Jersey,  Col.  A.  Zabriskie. 

81st  New  York,  Maj.  D.  B.  White. 

98th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  F.  Wead. 

3d  Now  York  Cavalry,  Companies  B and  C. 
1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C. 


DISTRICT  OF  THE  PAMLICO.  I 

Brig.  Gen.  PIenry  Prince. 

158th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  D.  B.  McKibbin. 

168th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Joseph  Jack. 

171st  Pennsylvania,  Col.  E.  Bierer. 

175th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  S.  A.  Dyer. 

1st  North  Carolina  (Union),  Lieut.  Col.  J.  M.  McChesnev. 
nth  Massachusetts,  Company  G,  Capt.  W.  T.  Grammer. 

1 I Cavalry  (two  companies),  Capt  G.  ¥.  Jocknick. 

North  Carolina  Artillery  (Union),  Company  A. 

23d  New  York  Battery,  Capt.  A.  Ransom. 


Orgamzed  May  3,  1863.  Accordiug  to  district  return  the  Eio-htv-fifth  and  Niiipfv 

"-as  iu  comma, u<l,  aiut  I.o  was 

f c,.  cX'ucrill  - 

CoYat”  regiments  appear  as  the  “Keystone  Brigade/’ 

47  11  R — YOL  XVIII 


738 


north  CAROLINA.  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  IOmap.  XXI. 


detached.* 

10th  Connecticut,  Col.  John  L.  Otis. 

11th  Maine,  Col.  H.  M.  Plaisted. 

24th  Massachusetts,  Col.  F.  A.  Osborn. 

39th  Illinois,  Col.  Thomas  O.  Osborn. 

56th  New  York,  Col.  Charles  H.  Van  Wyck. 
100th  New  York,  Col.  George  B.  Dandy. 

New  York  Battalion. 

62d  Ohio,  Col.  Francis  B.  Pond. 

67th  Ohio,  Col.  Alvin  C.  Voris. 

52d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  J.  C.  Dodge,  jr. 
85th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Joshua  B.  Howell. 
104th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  1.  U.  Hart. 
174th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  Nyce. 

176th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  A.  A.  Lechler. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  N^ews,  June  1,  louJ. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  I)ix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va.  . 
rp-NFRAL-  I had  the  honor  verbally  to  inform  you,  shortly  after  the 

1 avaiiea  m.>se  Desperate,  was  here  yesterday  morning  to  com 

Luce  “a"  allowed  by  the  officer  left  in  command  m >S>iorance  of  m, 
fho  enhioot  In  the  course  ot  conversation  he  informed  m 

bei  “gTnCmed  of  tSe  r'equirement  of. the  Cockade  m this  respect 
1 would  respectfully  observe  that  it  is  a violation  of  the  hloc  au 
(uirr  mySruction^s  from  the  Department  ^r  >ts  preservat.o 
turn  over  to  foreisn  men-of-war  supplies  of  any  kind  which  ha'e  ' 
introduced  wXn  its  lines  for  the  United  States  troops  and  I wo  i 
suggest  that  instructions  be  issued  to  prevent  ®“ch  violation  in  fut 
1 have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfullj  o^iiA^^ 

Acfg.  Rear-Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


EORT  MONROE,  VA.,  ^tinc  2, 

Mai.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Qeneral-in- Chief : , tv  i.  \v 

I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Pec 
you  please  communicate  it  to  General  Hooker  . 

* For  service  In  Department  of  the  South.  . 


JHAI*.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


739 


)ated  in  the  funeral  of  Jackson.  General  Elzey  comroands  in  the  city.  Citizens  and 
oldiers  talk  of  Lee's  moving  into  Maryland  with  85,000  men.  Says  the  most  of  Lonjr- 
treet  s troops  that  left  Blackwater  stopped  about  Richmond  in  consequence  of  the 
larm  resulting  from  the  raids.  General  Ewell  made  lieutenant-general. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 

Copy  of  this  has  been  sent  to  Major-General  Hooker. 

THOS.  T.  ECKERT, 

Major ^ &c. 


, . _ Yorktown,  Va.,  June  2,  1863—12.30  p.  m. 

lajor-General  Hooker, 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

It  seems  apparent  from  the  rumors  that  reached  me  that  a movement 
f rebel  troops  is  going  on  from  south  to  north,  and  that  the  idea  pre- 
ails  over  the  lines  that  an  invasion  oE  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania  is 
3on  to  be  made.  I have  heard  nothing  definite,  but  all  the  rumors 
3Dcur  to  produce  the  impression  stated. 

E.  D.  KEYES, 

/n  1 ^ , *’  Major-General. 

(Copy  to  General  Halleck.) 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 

, ^ A ^ Monroe,  Va.,  June  2,  1863. 

ctg.  Rear-Admiral  S.  P.  Lee, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Plochading  Squadron : 

Admiral  : When  I received  your  letter  of  the  23d  of  April  advising 
e that  you  considered  the  President’s  proclamation  of  the  31st  March 
1 superseding  his  order  of  the  11th  November  last  I had  no  informa- 
on  on  the  subject  to  warrant  me  in  giving  it  a definite  answer.  I have 
cently,  and  in  several  instances,  seen  letters  from  the  Treasury  De- 
irtment  informing  individuals  in  reply  to  inquiries  made  by  them  that 
e whole  matter  of  trade  with  Norfolk  was  still  under  my  control  by 
rtue  ol  the  order  referred  to.  I would  respectfully  suggest  under 
ese  circumstances  that  you  ascertain  from  the  President  himself 
rough  the  Navy  Hepartment,  whether  the  order  is  in  force,  unless 
»u  are  satisfied  with  the  view  taken  by  the  Treasury  Hepartment, 
inch  IS  constantly  granting  permits  on  my  certificates  as  heretofore. 
1 nave  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major- General. 


Hdqrs.  Hept.  of  Virginia,  Seventh  Army  Corps, 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  June  2,  1863. 


ipt.  C.  B.  Wilder, 

Asst.  Quartermaster  and  Suqyerintendent  of  Contrabands : 

The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  re- 
Tt  ot  your  communication  of  this  date  relating  to  certain  contra- 
Lf  ^ transportation  to  Norfolk,  &c.,  and  in  reply  to  state 

ft  no  has  reterred  so  much  of  said  communication  as  relates  to  the 
t report  Eieutenant-Colonel  Thomas,  chief  quartermaster. 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


740  - - 

As  to  the  definition  of  your  powers  and  duties  under  your  instructions 
from  the  War  Department,  dated  January  28,1863, 1 am  also  requested 
to  state  that  colored  persons  (contrabands  or  otherwise)  who  are  em- 
nloved  and  paid  by  the  several  chiefs  of  the  staff  departments  as  labor- 
ers are  entirely  under  the  control  of  the  said  chiefs  of  departments,  aM 
that  no  passes  to  these  persons  can  be  given  by  you  except  as  may  be 
authorized  by  the  said  chiefs  of  departments ; that  passes  to  others 
(contrabands  or  colored  vagrants)  not  employed  as  mentioned  above 
mav  be  o'iven  by  you  to  Hampton,  Fox  Hill,  and  other  places  within 
the  lines  this  side  of  Yorktown,  but  cannot  be  given  by  you  either  to 
come  inside  Fort  Monroe  or  any  other  military  post,  or  to  go  on  board 
nublic  transports  from  one  place  to  another  in  this  department,  or  to 
ao'  out  of  the  department,  and  that  all  passes  for  such  purposes  must 
be  submitted  to  and  receive  the  indorsement  of  the  proper  military  au- 
thority before  they  can  be  nsed  or  become  valid. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient^ser^aiH^^  BUREN 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

June  3,  1863—2  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

From  all  that  can  be  gathered  a good  many  conscripts  have  gone  U 
General  Lee.  Beauregard’s  troops  have  not  gone  in  that  direction 
They  have  probably  gone  to  Vicksburg,  as  well  as  the  troops  fron 
Georgia.  Longstreet  was  at  Petersburg  last  week.  It  is 
day  that  he  dined  at  South  Quay,  below  Franklin,  on  the  Blackwater 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Special  Okdees,  » Hdqes.  of  the  Aemy,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 
No.  249.  ) ' Washington.,  June  3,  1863. 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  Hector  Tyndale,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  will  rej^rtfor  dut 
to  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  commanding  Departmei 
of  Virginia. 

******* 


By  command  of  Major-General  Halleck ; 


E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Of  Newport  NewSj  J une  3, 1803. 

Mai.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps^  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : I have  received  your  letter  of  yesterday 
mits  for  Norfolk  trade,  and  have  referred  the  case  to  the  Navy  Depai 

nieiit  with  your  suggestions.  ^ un  o3vis( 

I would  be  much  obliged  to  you  if  you  would  cause  me 
by  telegraph  or  otherwise,  as  most  convenient, 
occur  for  sending  mails,  dispatches,  or  passengers  by 
ter’s  boats  from  Fortress  Monroe  to  New  Berne  or  Beaufort,  i 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


741 


often  much  embarrassed  for  means  of  communicating  with  this  squad- 
ron on  the  coast  off  Wilmington  and  in  the  Sounds  of  N^orth  Carolina, 
and  not  unfrequeutly  steamers  leave  for  the  above-mentioned  ports  be- 
fore I can  avail  myself  of  the  opportunities  they  afford. 

1 beg  leave  to  acknowledge  the  willingness  and  courtesy  with  which 
dispatches,  passengers,  and  sometimes  stores  have  been  taken  and  de- 
livered for  the  Navy  by  the  army  transports. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

. T.  . S-  lee, 

Actg.  Mear- Admiral j Comdg.  W.  Atlantic  JBloclcading  Squadron. 


United  States  Flag-ship  Minnesota, 

Off  Newport  News,  June  13,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Seventh  Army  Corps,  Fortress  Monroe,  Va. : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  June  2 on  the  supposed  super- 
seding of  the  President’s  order  of  November  11,  1862,  by  the  Presi- 
dent’s proclamation  of  March  31,  1863,  with  respect  to  Norfolk  trade  I 
beg  to  inform  you  that  according  to  your  suggestion  I referred  the  mat- 
ter to  the  Department  on  the  3d,  and  in  reply,  under  date  of  the  9th, 
received  this  morning,  I am  instructed  that  the  order  of  November  11 
1862,  is  not  considered  suspended.  I have  instructed  the  guard  ves- 
sels accordingly. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfullv,  yours, 

. X.  . . S.  P.  LEE, 

Actg.  Hear- Admiral,  Comdg.  N.  Atlantic  Bloclcading  Squadron. 


corresfoinideince;,  etc. 

^ ^ Petersburg,  Ya.,  August  28,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper:  i i j ? 

The  Federal  fleet  (nine  gunboats)  which  came  up  the  river  vesterdav 
lias  gone  down  James  Eiver  to  its  out-anchorage  off  Westover'and  come 
to.  No  Federal  vessels  in  James  Eiver  above  that  point  (Westover). 
ihe  fleet  landed  a small  force  at  City  Point  last  night:  also  a small 
party  on  the  Appomattox  Eiver  in  order  to  flank  one  of  my  signal  sta- 
Lions.  They  were  disappointed  in  their  object.  The  post,  not  being 
armed,  fell  back.  ' Is  there  no  possible  means  of  arming  the  signal  corps 
with  revolvers?  I understand  the  Navy  Department  has  a 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  MILLIGAN, 

Captain,  &e. 


Bencral  S.  Coopek,  Va.,  August  29, 1862. 

Adjutant  [and  Inspector]- General: 

The  Federal  fleet  off  Berkley  (nineteen  gunboats,  including  the  mon- 
or  Galena)  got  under  way  this  morning  at  10  a.  m.  and  stood  down  the 

“y  telegraphed  from  Berkley  that 

he  fleet  [was  out]  of  sight  from  that  point,  heading  down  the  river. 

J.  F.  MILLIGAN. 


[Chap.  XXX 


742  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

1.  ) Richmond^  Va.^  August  30,  18G2. 

I.  By  direction  of  tlie  War  Department  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith  as 
sumes  command  of  the  defenses  of  Eichmond  and  its  approaches. 

II.  The  officers  whose  names  are  herein  announced  constitute  the  staff 
Map  Samuel  W.  Melton,  assistant  adjutant- general;  Surg.  E.  S.  Gail 
lard,  medical  director;  Maj.  A.  E.  Cone,  chief  quartermaster;  Maj.  B 
McKennie,  assistant  quartermaster;  Maj.  S.  B.  French,  chief  commis 
sary;  Maj.  E.  F.  Beckham,  ordnance  officer;  Lieut.  James  Howard 
C.  S.  Artillery,  aide-de-camp. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General, 


Three  Miles  prom  Tunstall’s  Station, 

Cross-Roads,  New  Kent,  August  30,  18G2. 

Maj.  Samuel  W.  Melton: 

Major:  The  enemy  advanced  to-day  to  Eew  Kent  Court-House  am 
to  Forge  Mill,  on  the  Diascund  road.  At  the  latter  place  150  cavalu 
reported.  My  scouts  were  fired  upon  by  40  or  50  men  just  this  side  o 
Kew  Kent  Court-House.  Kew  Kent  is  about  0 miles  from  me,  am 
Forge  Mill  about  7 or  8 miles.  I send  scouts  out  again  to-night.  I un 
derstand  that  the  Yankees  are  about  leaving  Williamsburg,  and  thes( 
parties  may  be  assuring  their  rear. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  P.  SHIKGLEE, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  &c. 


August  31 — 8.30  p.  m. 

General:  The  above  note  has  just  been  received.  I expect  some 
thing  more  definite  by  to-morrow  morning. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

' G.  W.  S. 


Headquarters, 

Peter shttrg,  Va.,  Septemher  8,  18G2. 

Hon.  George  W.  Eandolph, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : In  pursuance  to  your  instructions  by  indorsement  on  back  of : 
letter  of  John  Goode,  jr.,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  complaint; 
made  by  owners  of  negroes  at  work  here  on  the  defenses  are  founded  oi 
misrepresentations.  The  negroes  are  well  taken  care  of. 

2d.  The  work  is  in  the  main  part  completed  from  the  Appomatto: 
Eiver  to  near  where  it  will  cross  the  Jerusalem  road.  About  four- fifth 
of  the  work  is  therefore  finished. 

3d.  Could  the  engineer  department  procure,  say,  150  negroes,  thcs* 
might  be  discharged  on  Saturday  next,  notwithstanding. 

4th.  That  General  Hill  promised  with  his  force  to  obstruct  the  Eoanolo 
Eiver,  because  it  can  be  done  by  the  engineer  force  and  such  as  I cai 
procure  voluntarily  in  that  section  of  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 
Brigadier-  General 


Chap.  XXX.l  CORfeESPONjDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  '?43 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  Generates  Office, 

/ Richmond,  Fa.,  September  9,  1862. 

***=»**# 

XXY.  Brig.  Gen.  G.  J.  Bains  will  turn  over  his  submarine  defenses 
m James  Biver  to  Lieut.  Hunter  Davidson,  0.  S.  Xavv 

* * % •;  ^ 

By  command  of  Secretary  of  War: 

JXO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Engineer  Bureau, 

,,  , T T.  ^ Fa.,  September  10,  1862. 

Col.  J.  F.  Gilmer,  ’ 

Chief  Engineer  Department  of  Northern  Virginia: 

^lonel:  Inclosed  I send  you  a communication*  from  the  Secretary 
ot  War,  directing  the  construction  of  a passage-way  through  the  obstruc- 
tions for  the  iron-clad  steamer  Richmond.  I inclose  you  also  a tracing 
ot  a drawing  in  my  possession,  showing  the  two  upper  lines  of  obstruc- 
tions, with  depths  ot  water  at  ebb-tide.  I have  studied  the  question 
with  some  care,  and  think  the  opening,  if  made,  should  be  on  the  north 
side  ot  the  river  as  near  the  bank  as  possible.  The  gateway  may  be  ar- 
thefdea^t  below,  although  further  study  may  greatly  improye 

The  bottom  of  the  passage-way  would  of  course  have  to  be  kept  leveled 
with  pierres  perdues,  so  that  the  lighter  when  sunk  would  come  to  the 
low- water  level.  There  is  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  propriety 
)t  making  the  passage-way,  and  it  would  certainly  seem  of  doubtful 
policy  to  send  below  an  iron-clad  vessel  with  an  inferior  single-acting 
mgine,  .at  least  if  we  are  to  form  any  judgment  from  recent  disasters. 

wiFia'®  naturally  referred  to  you  as  chief  engineer 

)f  the  Bepartment  of  Northern  Virginia.  It  would  seem  an  easy  mat- 
raise  the  crib  of  the  second  line  of  obstructions,  which  one  is  too 
loTtance  ^ water.  It  is  here  mentioned  as  a matter  of  im- 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  ' 

ALFRED  L.  RIVES, 

Acting  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


Hbadquartees, 

BicJmoml,  Va.,  September  15,  1862. 

Hajor-Geueral  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Va. ; 

yesterday  was  received  at  12  m.  to-day.  I 
vcnm  if  iff®  Secretary,  wth  the  remark  that  unless  he  objected  I 
rnmli  f ^ the  regiments  He  told  me  to  use  my  own  discretion,  and 

dril-  letter  which  he  received  a few  moments  before  from . 

f f f '"Close  the  letter*  with  this.  Colonel  Daniel  takes 

Mirth  cirnTnfif'®  i®*^  regimeiRs  and  a fine  battery.  If  the  Second 
iie  oriw  if  f “ <-avalry  will  be  of  use  to  you  in  this  expedition  suspend 
lie  order  sending  them  forward  until  after  you  get  back.  I have  dir^ted 

* Not  found. 


t Drawing  omitted. 


744 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX., 


Colonel  Daniel  to  return  with  his  coininand  as  soon  as  the  expedition  isi 
over.  Strike  the  hardest  blow  you  can.  Ooinmiinicate  with  me  as  often 
as  practicable. 

With  full  confidence  in  your  judgment,  and  wishing  you  every  suc- 
cess, I remain  vonrs,  truly, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 
Major- General.,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
WaJx'eJleld,  Va.,  September  17,  18G2. 

General  S.  G.  French: 

General  : I fear  very  much  that  unless  the  business  of  building  the 
bridge  and  repairing  the  railroad  be  pushed  our  expedition  will  be  a 
very  discreditable  tkilure  to  us  all.  Capt.  [Charles  H.]  Dimmock  has 
returned  to  Petersburg  without  my  seeing  him,  so  I do  not  know  what 
arrangement  he  has  made;  but  there  are  no  materials  whatever  here— 
no  timber,  no  tools,  and  no  car-logs  to  haul  the  timber.  The  bridge 
can  best  be  built  somewhere  on  the  railroad,  and  when  this  is  fini.s]ied 
transported  down  to  Zuni;  but  if  the  enemy  choose  to  they  can  prevent 
it  until  they  are  driven  away.  Whatever  we  are  to  do  must  be  done' 
quickly,  or  all  our  trouble  will  be  in  vaiu. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  PETTIGEEW, 

Brigadier- Genera  I 

. p.  s. — This  was  written  before  I received  your  note  at  night,  but  it 
may  as  well  go. 


Wednesday  Kight,  [September  17, 18G2.] 

General  S.  G.  French: 

General  : I have  just  received  your  note.  You  say  nothing  about 
Daniel,  but  I suppose  your  note  to  him  gives  all  the  requisite  direc- 
tions. I inclose  a note  from  Ferebee  just  come  in.  The  captain  yon 
saw  in  my  tent  said  he  thought  some  artillery  had  gone  up  by  the  river. 
Nevertheless  I am  surprised  at  the  amount,  for  I was  told  that  a lady 
arrived  at  Franklin  with  dates  up  to  Monday,  and  said  there  were  only 
six  pieces.  1 shall  order  Burroughs  to  withdraw  his  pickets  Saturday 
night  and  rendezvous  his  force  at  Isle  of  Wight  Court-House  early  on 
Sunday  morning,  and  proceed  thence  to  the  river  opposite  to  Sufiolk. 
upon  the  supposition  that  we  are  to  advance  Sunday  unless  you  make 
a different  disposition.  Do  send  a courier  to  hunt  up  Lieutenant  Ire 
dell,  my  ordnance  officer,  and  send  him  down  here.  I hope  Morey  wili 
have  forage  collected  for  us  at  Franklin.  I think  it  would  be  w'ell  t( 
order  dowm  some  extra  surgeons.  I am  very’’  poorly  off  in  that  line 
Upon  the  strength  of  the  eighteen  pieces  I inclose  an  order  for  the  tNve 
iron  32s  and  a very  good  company^.  Mosele.v  has  not  men  enough  h 
Ids  command  to  justify  more  gtins.  If  they"  are  to  come  to  me  here  it 
must  be  by-  rail,  and  I wish  you  would  give  an  order  for  transporta 
tion.  But  I rather  think  they  had  better  go  by"  land,  and  if  you  agret 
wdth  me  idease ‘alter  the  inclosed  order  so  as  to  make  them  report  ai 
Fraiddin  instead  of  Wakefield  and  send  it  out  to  Moseley’s  camp. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

J.  J.  PETTIGREW, 

■ Brigadier- Gen  era  I , 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


745 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters, 

FrcmlcUn,  Va.,  Septemher  17,  18G2 — 11  a.  m. 
Brij?.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettiorew: 

General:  My  bridge  across  tbe  Blackwater  will  be  completed  with 
certainty  in  five  hours.  It  will  be  strong  enough  to  support  the  heav- 
iest artillery.  The  damage  to  the  village  from  the  guns  of  the  enemy 
on  Monday  last  is  of  trifling 'importance— no  damage  in  fact.  The 
strength  of  the  enemy  at  Suffolk  on  Monday  last  was  1,901)  cavalry, 
five  regiments  of  infantry,  and  eighteen  pieces  of  artillery.  This  is  re- 
liable. 

I am,  general,  most  truly,  yours, 

D.  H.  PEREBEE, 
Colonel,,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Bains’  Farm, 
Walcefield^  F«.,  September  17,  1802. 

Vlaj or- General  French,  Commanding: 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yours  of 
his  date.  I herewith  inclose  the  letter  of  instructions  to  Colonel 
)wcns,  commanding  Fifty-third  Regiment  I^orth  Carolina  Infantry, 
.vhose  regiment  I wish  to  join  me.  The  instructions  in  regard  to  the 
'oute  I shall  leave  with  you  to  give  according  to  your  Suggestions. 
Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 
Colonel,,  Commanding  Brigade. 


COLERAIN,  N.  0.,  September  18,  1802. 
Eton.  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  Raleigh,  N.  C. : 

Sir:  Some  of  the  leading  farmers  and  citizens  of  Bertie  County  had 
i consultation  on  the  15th  instant  in  Windsor,  it  being  Monday  of 
m])eiior  court,  for  the  purpose  of  making  representations  to  Your  Ex- 
cellency in  regard  to  the  condition  of  affairs  in  this  county  and  to  ask 
^ome  executive  action  in  their  behalf.  Lewis  Thompson,  esq.,  was  ap- 
)ointed  to  visit  Raleigh  and  see  you  in  person,  but  he  not  being  able  to 
to  until  about  October  1, 1 was  requested  in  the  mean  time  to  lay  before 
rou  in  writing  the  points  agreed  to  be  presented  and  the  reasons  which 
odiiced  the  gentlemen  present  to  ask  some  action  upon  them. 

This  county  is  almost  entirely  surrounded  by  the  waters  of  the  Al- 
jemarle  Sound  and  the  Roanoke  and  Chowan  Rivers,  all  of  which  are 
lavigable  to  the  largest  of  the  enemy’s  steamers,  while  the  Caskie  River 
uid  Salmon  Creek,  running  into  the  very  heart  of  the  county,  are  navi- 
rable  to  his  steamers  of  highest  draught.  Upon  these  water-courses  lie 
lie  main  body  of  the  excellent  farming  lands  of  the  county,  and  several 
honsarid  slaves  are  upon  these  lands.  The  gunboats  of  the  enemy  are 
raversing  these  waters  almost  daily.  Occasionally  the  enemy  hind  a. 
ew  troops  at  unexpected  iioints,  but  so  far  have  committed  veiy  little 
lepredation.  The  military  post  at  Plymouth  is  upon  the  very  border 
)f  the  county  and  is  accessible  by  the  water-courses  above  named, 
ihere  is  not  a Confederate  soldier  here,  and  not  the  least  show  of  pro- 


746 


KORTll  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXS: 


tectiou  extended  to  the  citizens.  They  are  completely  at  the  mercy  o 
the  enemy  and  nothing  but  his  clemency  prevents  their  total  ruin.  Tin 
I)eople  are  for  the  most  part  loyal  to  the  Confederacy  and  have  actet 
with  surprising  prudence  and  faithfulness.  But  how  long  is  it  prudeu 
to  suffer  these  people  to  depend  entirely  upon  the  enemy  for  safety  anc 
feel  that  they  are  neglected,  if  not  abandoned,  by  their  own  Government 
The  greater  part  of  the  able-bodied  men  of  the  county  have  volunteerec 
in  companies  raised  in  this  and  the  adjoining  counties  and  are  now  ir 
the  army.  Some  have  been  taken  out  by  the  conscript  law,  and  tin 
attempted  execution  of  that  law  has  driven  many  of  not  very  reliabk 
character  to  the  enemy  at  Plymouth,  and  many  more  of  little  bettei 
character  are  in  readiness  to  repair  to  Plymouth  or  to  the  gunboats  if  its 
further  execution  is  attempted.  The  loyal  citizens  have  more  to  dreai 
from  these  deserters  than  from  the  regular  enemy.  By  the  census  o 
1860  it  appears  that  there  are  8,000  slaves  in  this  county  and  only  6,00( 
whites.  They  have  as  yet  lost  comparatively  few  slaves,  but  it  is  witl 
great  difficulty  that  the  few  men  left  here,  unsupported  by  a show  o 
military  force,  are  able  to  guard  the  avenues  of  escape  and  keep  u] 
efficient  police  regulations.  If  they  should  attempt  to  remove  th( 
slaves  the  most  of  them  would  run  off'  at  once,  and  any  general  attemp 
to  remove  them  would  produce  an  almost  universal  stampede,  resulting 
in  the  loss  of  the  negroes  and  endangering  the  lives  of  the  few  citizens 
But  if  the  removal  could  be  eff'ected,  how  could  so  large  a number  be  fee 
elsewhere,  and  what  would  become  of  the  property  necessarily  left  he 
hind?  But  as  Southern  men  they  take  another  view  of  the  conse 
quences  of  such  a removal.  If  the  slave-holders,  being  men  of  means 
flee  upon  the  ax)proach  of  danger  and  leave  the  poorer  classes,  who  an 
unable  to  move,  and  the  families  of  soldiers  in  the  army  exposed  no 
only  to  the  enemy  but  to  the  gangs  of  runaway  slaves,  it  Avill  product 
a state  of  things  and  of  feeling  much  to  be  dreaded.  Is  it  not  the  dnt^^ 
of  the  influential  slave-holder  to  remain  and  to  exert  himself  to  i_)reservi 
social  order  and  to  i)revent  an  entire  disruption  of  society?  It  is  hope( 
that  the  enemy  will  soon  be  driven  away,  and  these  people  are  bearini 
ni)  under  their  troubles  sustained  by  that  hope,  feeling  that  they  liav 
been  and  still  are  neglected,  but  yet  willing  to  believe  that  the  best  ba. 
been  done  that  circumstances  would  allow.  Several  months  spent  ii 
this  state  of  constant  danger  and  anxiety  has  enabled  the  thinking  luei 
of  this  county  to  see  what  was  necessary  to  be  done  more  clearly,  per 
haps,  than  can  be  seen  by  those  at  a distance,  even  in  authority,  wb< 
must  judge  from  reports  only. 

They  met  in  Windsor  on  the  15th  instant  and  agreed  to  ask  the  in 
fluence  of  Your  Excellency  with  the  Confederate  authorities  to  adop 
the  following  measures  and  such  others  as  may  be  deemed  most  ex 
X)edient : 

1st.  That  two  companies  of  cavalry  be  quartered  in  Bertie  Count; 
X)ermanently,  and  they  desire  especially  the  two  companies  comman(le( 
by  Cax^tains  Bandolph  and  Eure,  which  are  now  somewhere  on  tb 
Seaboard  and  Boanoke  Bailroad.  They  ask  these  two  officers  becauS' 
they  know  them  to  be  men  of  great  discretion,  having  the  entire  conn 
dence  of  the  peoxfle  of  this  section.  They  think  a force  under  an  indit' 
creet  officer  would  be  of  more  injur^^  than  benefit.  For  instance,  sbonb 
an  officer  exhibit  any  troops  upon  water-courses  in  sight  of  the  enein. 
it  would  cause  a shelling  of  the  whole  neighborhood,  and  if  near  an. 
dwelling  would  insure  its  destruction.  They  deem  the  character  of  tb 
officer  sent  in  this  emergency  of  the  very  greatest  imi)ortance,  and  woub 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


747 


prefer  no  force  to  one  under  an  officer  of  doubtful  judgment.  With  this 
cavalry  to  back  them  the  citizens  left  could  preserve  order  and  i:>revent 
any  great  number  of  slaves  from  escaping.  The  very  presence  of  such 
a force  would  intimidate  the  enemy  and  embolden  the  loyal  citizens  to 
speak  and  act  with  freedom  and  zeal.  The  loyal  citizens  of  this  county 
ought  to  have  some  support.  The  interest  of  the  Confederacy  in  this 
section  requires  it. 

2d.  That  the  President  be  requested  by  Your  Excellency  to  exercise 
the  discretion  vested  in  him  by  the  late  act  of  Congress  to  exempt  this 
county  from  further  execution  of  the  conscript  law.  There  are  not  now 
tnen  enough  in  the  county  for  efficient  police  duty,  and  any  further 
attempt  at  executing  the  law  instead  of  getting  soldiers  for  our  army 
would  run  recruits  to  the  enemy,  for  the  correct-minded  men  subject  to 
the  law  have  already  gone  to  camp.  The  substantial  men  of  the  county 
Iread  to  see  the  others  made  their  enemies.  If  the  conscript  law  is 
extended  to  forty-five  years  its  execution  would  complete  the  ruin  of 
±is  county. 

3d.  That  no  military  order  requiring  slaves  to  work  on  fortifications 
3r  serve  in  the  army  be  sent  to  this  county.  Its  efiect  would  be  to  make 
^he  slaves  run  off  and  very  few  could  be  obtained  under  the  order,  for 
t would  be  idle  to  attempt  to  hunt  negroes  in  this  section  now. 

But  another  reason  why  such  an  order  should  not  be  sent  here,  and 
;vhy  the  counties  bordering  on  the  enemy^s  lines  should  be  especially 
jxempted  by  name,  is  this : If  the  Confederate  authorities  commence 
:aking  these  exposed  slaves,  or  any  part  of  them,  the  enemy  will  then 
jave  a military  excuse  to  take  those  that  are  left,  and  they  will  not  be 
?low  to  do  so.  Mr.  Thompson  will  be  in  Ealeigh  about  October  1 to 
iommunicate  verbally  with  Your  Excellency  upon  this  subject  and  to 
nake  more  full  and  specific  statements  than  can  be  well  done  within 
he  limits  of  a letter. 

I have  written  under  the  instructions  of  the  meeting  of  Bertie  gentle- 
uen,  as  mentioned  above,  but  allow  me  to  add  that  for  the  most  part  I 
ipprove  their  recommendations  and  think  it  is  the  best  that  could  be 
lone  under  the  circumstances.  Perhaps  so  small  a force  as  two  com- 
)ames  might  be  in  danger  of  being  cut  off  by  the  enemy,  but  I think  in 
in  emergency  the  citizens  would  rally  with  such  arms  as  they  could  get 
0 repel  an  attack.  If  the  Confederate  authorities  are  not  able  to  do 
iomething  it  might  be  well  to  authorize  the  raising  of  a State  force  to 
>perate  m this  section.  It  could  be  done  without  difficulty  under  a 
)roper  officer,  and  would  be  efficient  after  awhile;  but  something  ought 
0 be  done  for  this  section  of  the  State  at  once. 

Allow  me  personally  to  assure  you  of  my  esteem  and  readiness  to 
ender  you  all  the  service  in  my  power  in  any  measures  deemed  best 
'or  the  interests  of  the  State. 

Yours,  most  resi^ectfully, 

JOHN  POOL. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond.  Va..  September  18,  18G2. 

»laj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comynanding^  &c.  : 

General  : If  you  are  not  entirely  satisfied  that  your  force  is  ample, 
lud  that  prompt  and  complete  success  can  be  attained,  your  movement 
ihould  be  suspended  and  the  troops  should  x^romptly  return  to  their 


748 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


original  positions.  A good  deal  of  time  lias  elapsed  in  preparing,  aiu[ 
I am  satisfied  that  tlie  enemy 'are  well  informed  of  onr  intentions  aiu 
that  they  are  prepared.  Besides,  the  indications  are  that  they  wouk 
avail  themselves  of  any  advantage  they  might  gain  and  follow  us  up 
They  have  reocciipied  Williamsburg  in  force  and  are  extending  theii 
lines  again  in  this  direction  from  that  point.  An  attempt  was  made 
last  night  to  burn  the  bridges  over  the  river  here.  It  is  not  wise  at  tbit 
time  to  bring  on  a ooubtful  conflict  so  far  from  onr  lines  and  so  close 
to  their  strongholds.  Unless  you  are  certain  of  great  advantages  susj 
pend  your  operations  and  let  the  greater  part  of  the  troops  resume  thei] 
former  positions. 

Kespectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 
Major- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 
Richmond^  Ya.^  September  18,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French; 

Your  letter  of  yesterday  is  received.  If  you  are  not  entirely  satisfice 
that  you  have  ample  means  for  accomplishiug  the  object  promptly  aiu 
successfully  you  had  better  suspend  the  movement.  I have  alread; 
furiiished  you  more  than  could  well  be  spared.  There  are  indication 
that  the  enemy  has  notice  of  our  intentions  and  is  prepared  to  meet  us 
and  also  to  take  advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  troops  are  absent  froD 

the  defenses  of  this  city.  ,G.  W.  SMITH,  . 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders,  i Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

69.  f Richmond,  Va.,  September  19,  1862. 

# * * * ^ * * 

III.  Hereafter  the  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith  will  embrac 
that  part  of  the  country  lying  south  of  the  line  of  operations  unde 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  iucluding  the  Department  of  North  Carolina.  Al 
commanders  within  these  geographical  limits  will  report  to  and  receiv 

their  orders  from  Major-General  Smith. 

******* 


By  order : 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


September  19, 1862. 

I have  information  from  Suflblk  as  late  as  Wednesday  afternoon.  Tli 
force  is  two  full  regiments  and  three  skeleton  regiments  of  intantr 
numbering  3,800, 1,900  cavalry,  and  six  pieces  of  artillery.  The  lankc 
merchants  are  packing  up  their  goods  preparatory  to  a move,  lanke 
cavalry  to  the  number  of  140  now  encamped  in  5 miles  ot  us  to  wau 
our  movements.  The  bridge  complete.  ^ ^ bePFPFF 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


1IA1’.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


749 


Headquarters, 
Richmond^  F«.,  September  27,  1862. 

liij.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Coind(j.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina^  Fetersburg,  Va. : 

General  : Your  report  of  movements  in  tbe  direction  of  Suffolk  and 
he  causes  which  induced  you  to  suspend  operations  was  duly  received, 
^ou  acted  wisely  in  returning  under  the  circumstances  as  developed ; 
here  was  too  great  doubt  of  success  to  justify  an  engagement  in  that 
iiarter  at  this  time. 

I received  your  note  of  the  23d,  inclosing  pencil  report  of  agent  from 
hiffolk.  It  seems  to  have  been  delivered  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and 
y him  handed  to  General  Magruder  to  be  given  to  me.  Magruder  did 
ot  meet  me,  and  forgot  the  note.  Not  having  heard  from  you  since,  I 
lifer  that  the  report  has  not  been  confirmed.  I think  it  important  that 
oil  should  as  far  as  [practicable]  and  consistent  with  other  duties  and 
ecessities  hold  your  forces  in  E'orth  Carolina  in  condition  and  position 
0 move  promptly  in  this  direction  at  any  and  all  times.  General  Lee 
5 far  off;  and  we  may  be  called  upon  suddenly  without  aid  from  him  to 
epel  an  attack  in  force.  The  Secretary  of  War  has  several  times  sug- 
ested  the  withdrawal  of  Major  Burroughs’  companies  of  cavalry.  He 
Qtends  uniting  [them]  with  others  upon  this  side  and  forming  a regi- 
leiit.  I request  that  you  at  tbe  earliest  moment  have  these  Virginia 
ompanies  under  Major  Burroughs  relieved  by  other  cavalry  and  or- 
ered  to  report  to  Major  Melton,  adjutant- general  of  my  command,  in 
his  city.  We  have  found  here  large  numbers  of  men  left  behind,  sick 
r unfit  to  march,  in  the  different  camps  at  the  time  General  Lee’s  forces 
3ft.  These  men  have  been  collected  and  sent  forward  to  their  com- 
lands.  I would  be  glad  if  any  such  remain  in  your  vicinity  to  have 
oil  collect  and  organize  them  in  detachments,  under  control  of  officers 
,nd  non-commissioned  officers,  and  send  them  forward  by  the  cars. 
)ii  arriving  here  they  will  be  taken  charge  of  by  Colonel  Walker’s 
;uard,  which  is  under  General  [Winder],  and  dispatched  to  Winchester. 
Large  quantities  of  arms,  clothing,  tents,  * * *■  the  camps  in 

his  vicinity,  and  I presume  something  of  the  same  kind,  but  to  a less 
xtent,  occurred  near  Petersburg;  if  so,  have  measures  taken  to  rem- 
ily  the  evil.  I hope  that  you  are  getting  the  detached  companies  and 
rregular  forces  into  satisfactory  shape. 

liave  you  heard  from  Col.  J.  O.  Long,  sent  to  inspect  Partisan  Ean- 
[ers  ill  Western  North  Carolina'? 

Respectfully  aud  truly,  yours,  ^ SMITH, 

Major-General. 

I have  just  received  your  note  of  this  morning  since  writing  the 
ibove. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh.)  N.  0.,  September  28,  1862. 

Iciieral  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

General:  I learn  that  the  troops  (cavalry)  in  Eastern  North  Caro- 
ilia  are  to  be  brigaded,  which  is  proper  enough ; but  the  very  first 
irder  calls  all  of  them  to  Garysburg,  leaving  the  whole  coast  of  North 


750 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.I 


Carolina  without  protection.  Without  the  protection  of  the  cavalr^i 
the  finest  provision  region  in  the  State  can  be  desolated  by  the  enemy 
in  a few  days.  It  is  not  to  be  thought  of  for  a moment,  and  I earnestly 
protest  against  it.  If  it  is  not  the  intention  of  the  President  to  protect 
us  we  must  protect  ourselves.  Major  Evans  will  speak  more  particu- 
larly. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


Executive  Office, 

Richmond^  Fu.,  September  29,  1862. 

Col.  J.  R.  Davis, 

Aide-de-Camp,  Richmond^  Va.: 

Colonel  : You  will  proceed  to  Petersburg,  Va.,  and  confer  with  Gen 
eral  French  respecting  the  general  condition  of  his  command,  and  es 
])ecially  as  to  the  number,  organization,  and  efficiency  of  the  partisai 
troops  serving,  or  being  proposed  for  service,  in  that  district  j also  ai 
to  the  number,  position,  and  movements  of  the  enemy  in  the  countrj 
on  the  south  side  of  the  James  River  and  eastern  coast  of  North  Caro 
lina.  Should  it  be  requisite  you  will  visit  the  encampments  of  the  par 
tisans  and  the  camp  of  instruction  near  to  Raleigh ; but  it  is  desirec 
that  you  should  return  by  or  before  Thursday  next. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Abstract  from  Return  of  the  Department  South  of  James  River,  eommanded  hj  Brig.  Gen 
S.  G.  French,  for  Septembci',  1862.  , 

i 


Comm.and. 


Pttersburg,  Va. : . 

Brig.  Oen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew,  brigade 

Capt.  J.  P.  Milligau,  Signal  Corps 

Capt.  S.  T.  Wright,  artillery  . 

District  of  North  Carolina,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Martin. 
Pranklin,  Ya.,  Col.  J.K.  Marshall,  two  regiments 
and  tAVO  sections  of  artillery. 

Port  Walthall,  Captain  Sturdivant,  artillery.-.-.. 
Port  Clifton,  Capt.  J.  C.  Coit,  infantry  and  artil- 
lery. 

liich'mond  turnpike.  Captain  Murchison,  cavalry.. 
Prince  George  Court-House,  Capt.  D.  Bell,  cavalry. 

Total - • 

Wilmington,  N.  C.,  Brig.  Gcu.  G.  J.  Bams,  Dis- 
trict  of  the  Cape  Pear. 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

a 

o 

o 

« 

tu  ^ 

6 

ci 

o 

o 

Officers. 

Men. 

p. 

o 

U . 

Cfl 

fcC 

© 

oM 

buri 

^ a 

fee 

<1 

V 

o 

QQ 

CO 

O 

m 

o 

w 

4 

3,  021 
110 

3,  821 
122 

4,  519 
125 

1 

39 

49 

123 

43 

177 

2,  854 

3,  721 

4,  327 

50 

918 

1,110 

1,  390 

3 

64 

79 

9G 

5G 

8 

238 

285 

343 

96 

2 

30 

9G 

105 

102 

4 

GG 

79 

81 

407 

7,  340 

9,  362 

11, 109 

297 

222 

3,  559 

4,  921 

5,  59S 

252 

jG20 

10,  899 

14,  283 

1 1G,704 

549 

So 


Artillery^ 


G 1...... 

IG  1 


22  ! 55  ' 3 

I I 


jhav.XXX.]  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  751 

Ibstract  from  Field  Beturn  of  troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  G.  TF.  Smith,  October  1, 
1862  {headquarters,  Bichmond,  Fa. ). 


Commands. 


Present  for 
duty. 


a 


Ph 


a 


p 

C3 


ilaj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  commanding: 

Troops  in  North  Carolina  (Wilmington  and  Kinston) 

Troops  in  Virginia  (Petersburg) 

Jrig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise’s  brigade,  Chaffin’s  farm 

Job  T.  J.  Page,  Chaffin’s  Bluff 

Irig.  Gen.  J.  Daniel’s  brigade,  near  Drewry’s  Bluff' 

iieut.  Col.  W.  P.  Shingler’s  cavalry,  picketing  the  Peninsula, 
vichraond  defenses,  light  and  heavy  batteries  around  Eich^ 
mond. 


420 

242 

111 

23 

191 

11 

89 


7,117 
4,  498 
1,660 
265 
2,  908 
147 
1,  693 


7,515 
4,  686 
1,765 
329 
3,  044 
168 
1,825 


9,  265 
5,  569 
2,214 
413 
3,  893 
223 
2,  238 


10,  756 
6,  657 
2,  780 
481 
4,  922 
261 
2,  983 


scar  Brook  Eun,  on  Brook  turnpike: 

54th  Eegiraent  North  Carolina  State  Troops 

57th  Eegiment  North  Carolinar  State  Troops 

59th  Eegiment  Georgia  Volunteers 

42d  Eegiment  Mississippi  Volunteers 

Irigadiei  -General  Winder,  Department  of  Henrico  (includes 
Camp  Lee,  city  guard,  &c.) 

'olonel  Chambliss,  on  Eappahannock : 

61st  Eegiment  Virginia  Volunteers 

13th  Eegiment  Virginia  Cavalry* 

2d  Eegiment  North  Carolina  Cavalry  * 

lapt.  S.  S,  Lee,  C.  S.  Navy,  Drewry’s  Bluff* 


27 
30 

28 
33 
40 


377 

591 

622 

443 

1,742 


405 
602 
638 
470 
1,  751 


502 

767 

789 

633 

2,097 


17 


393 


408 


454 


764 
978 
991 
741 
2,  522 


741 


Grand  total. 


1, 262 


22, 456 


23, 606 


29,  057 


35,  577 


* No  report  received. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  October  1,  1862. 

ieueral  Jones,  Winchester^  Va.: 

Inforiii  Gcueral  Lee  that  a fleet  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  to  one 
lundred  and  thirty  transports  moved  up  toward  Alexandria  on  the  29th 
iltinio;  that  the  enemy  had  blown  up  the  fortifications  at  Evansport  and 
lock  Pit  Point;  that  300  cavalry  occupied  Warrenton  on  the  same  day, 
laroled  the  sick  and  wounded  and  left  at  night;  that  two  regiments  of 
nfantry,  one  of  cavalry,  and  a battery  of  four  pieces  are  moving  toward 
^Varrenton  and  the  Eappahannock.  These  are  all  the  facts,  "it  is  re- 
lorted  that  Sigel  on  the  27th  ultimo  moved  on  Centreville  with  30,000 
neu,  mostly  new  regiments  (destination  Gordonsville),  and  that  a large 
orce  was  to  advance  immediately  toward  Eichmond  via  Fredericksburg* 
*Ve  have  pretty  reliable  information  that  the  force  at  Suffolk  has  been 
iicreased  to  about  18,000  men. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major- General. 


Udqrs.,  Biehmond,  Va.,  October  2,  1862. 

'laj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General:  Yours  of  yesterday  is  received.  I think  it  advisable  to  or- 
ler  11])  the  two  regiiflenis  proposed,  i.  e.,  one  from  Wilmington  and  one 
roni  Kinston,  immediately.  I would  then  feel  that  we  had  two  brigades 
mmediately  available  for  any  point,  at  the  same  time  leaving  a respect- 


752 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


able  force  at  Petersburg,  at  Drewry ’s  Bluff,  aud  at  Chaffin’s  Bluff.  The  aC; 
cumulation  of  force  at  Suffolk  is  such  that  in  case  they  should  land  belov' 
the  obstructions  on  James  Eiver  a force  from  their  large  fleet  of  traiisi 
})orts,  we  would  need  all  the  available  force  from  North  Carolina.  Please 
have  the  two  regiments  that  will  be  left  at  each  of  the  points  named-, i 
Wilmington  and  Kinston— ready  to  move  whenever  called  upon.  In  cas<' 
the  enemy  makes  a very  strong  demonstration  upon  Gordonsville  anc 
General  Lee  is  not  in  position  to  meet  it,  1 shall  have  to  move  some  o, 
the  forces  from  here  in  that  direction ; and  as  both  Kichmond  and  Petersj 
burg  must  be  guarded,  this  might  require  that  all  the  troops  except  th^ 
heavy  artillery,  some  cavalry,  and  a few  infantry  companies  for  guards 
of  bridges,  &c.,  should  be  withdrawn  Irani  North  Carolina.  Be  ready.  ] 
directed  the  adjutant- general  to  send  you  the  information  received  hep 
upon  which  the  telegram  of  yesterday  was  based.  How  far  down  tb^ 
James  Kiver  does  your  signal  line  extend  now  ^ Give  us  the  earliest  prac 
ticable  accurate  information  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  I am  mud 
obliged  to  you  for  sending  General  Kains’  letter.  I directed  it  to  be  ro 
turned,  thinking  you  would  prefer  to  file  it  in  your  own  office.  Let  me  hav( 
Burroughs’  cavalry  companies  as  soon  as  you  can.  They  are  much  neede( 
above.  If  the  particular  company  you  refer  to  from  the  vicinity  of  Sul 
folk  cannot  be  spared  now,  keep  it  for  the  present ; send  on  the  others 
Say  to  General  Pettigrew,  please,  that  it  is  contemplated  that  his  brigad- 
wiil  be  called  in  this  direction  for  active  service.  I know  he  will  be  ready 
Communicate  with  me  freely  and  in  full  all  your  views  and  wishes. 

I remain,  respectfully  aud  truly,  yours, 

’ G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  North  Carolina, 

Raleigh,  N.  C.,  October  5,  18G2. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : When  I was  assigned  to  the  command  of  this  district  by  th 
direction  of  General  Lee  I assumed  the  general  control  of  the  con 
scription  or  recruiting  business  in  the  State.  So,  after  doing  so, 
deemed  it  advisable  to  issue  the  inclosed  order,  in  connection  with  th 
order  and  proclamation  of  Governor  Vance.  The  good  effect  of  tha 
order  has  been  very  perceptible.  Your  telegram*  to  Major  Mallett  c 
yesterday’s  date  will  set  aside  this  order  and  cause  great  complaiul 
. i respecfully  suggest  that  men  be  not  forced  into  regiments,  but  b 
allowed  the  choice  assured  in  my  order.  Major  Mallett  only  using  sue. 
influence  as  he  can  to  direct  their  choice.  Should  a sudden  emergenc. 
require  the  use  of  400  or  500  men  in  the  vicinity  of  Bichmond  it  won!' 
be  better,  in  my  judgment,  to  order  the  camp  guard  there  for  a week  o 
so  than  to  compel  conscripts  to  go  to  those  regiments. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' J.  G.  MARTIN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Iiidorsoment.] 

Write  to  General  Martin  that  it  Avas  deemed  necessary,  in  order  t 
insure  uniformity  in  the  execution  of  the  law'  lor  the  enrollment  ol  coi 
scrii)ts,  that  it  should  be  conducted  under  the  control  of  the  depai 
ment,  and  it  was  so  ordered  on  April  28  last  in  General  Oiders, 


Not  found. 


IHAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


753 


;0.  Experieuce  thus  [far]  has  coutirmed  the  views  theu  tiikeu,  and  it 
las  been  found  that  to  place  the  enrollment  of  conscripts  under  the 
oiitrol  of  the  general  commanding  a department,  subjects  it  to  change 
rith  every  change  of  a department  commander.  General  Lee’s  orders 
pere  not  intended  to  conflict  with  the  policy  and  express  order  of  the 
lepartment,  but  merely  to  secure  tbe  valuable  aid  of  the  adjutant-gen- 
ial of  the  State  in  carrying  that  policy  out.  The  only  objection  to  the 
-rder  i^roposed  by  General  Martin  is  that  it  conflicts  with  the  conscrii)t 
ct  in  restricting  the  maximum  of  infantry  companies  to  a smaller  num- 
»er  than  is  allowed  by  that  act.  The  right  to  volunteer  before  enroll- 
lent  is  reserved  by  law,  and  the  order  to  Major  Malle tt  only  applies 
0 enrolled  men.  Orders  have  been  given  for  the  immediate  filling  up 
f the  Virginia  and  I^'orth  Carolina  regiments  at  Eichmond,  because 
be  enemy  are  iireparing  to  attack  the  city  with  a heavy  force. 

G.  W.  EANGOLPH. 

[Inclosures.] 

rENERAL  ORDERS,  ^ STATE  OF  E.  C.,  EXECUTIVE  DePT., 

V Adjt.  General’s  Office  (Militia), 

No.  7.  ) Raleigh^  JS^.  (7.,  September  13,  18G2. 

I.  Colonels  and  other  officers  in  command  of  the  Militia  of  North 
'arolina  are  hereby  ordered  to  bring  all  men  liable  to  conscription  in 
tieir  commands  and  all  soldiers  absent  from  their  regiments  without 
lave  to  the  camp  of  instruction  at  Ealeigh.  All  iiower  necessary  for 
be  enforcing  of  this  order  is  hereby  given  them. 

II.  A failure  or  refusal  to  comply  with  this  order  will  subject  the  of- 
iuder  to  the  penalties  of  a court-martial  and  consequent  reduction  to 
be  ranks. 

III.  The  executive,  through  its  own  officers,  having  thus  undertaken 
3 collect  all  persons  liable  to  militia  duty  instead  of  allowing  Confed- 
rate  officers  to  do  so,  it  is  earnestly  hoped  that  all  will  come  up  promptly 
3 the  performance  of  their  duty. 

By  order  of  Governor  Vance  : 

J.  G.  MAETTN, 
Adjutant-  General, 

A proelamalion  by  Z.  B.  Vance,  Governor  of  North  Carolina. 

Executive  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

September  18,  1862. 

Whereas  information  has  reached  me  that  certain  persons,  unmindful 
f the  calls  of  patriotism  and  forgetful  of  the  duties  of  good  citizens,  are 
sing  their  influence  to  prevent  obedience  to  the  law  of  Congiess  known 
s the  conscription  law,  and  that  others  are  attemiiting  to  organize  an 
pen  resistance  to  its  execution  ; and  whereas  such  conduct  being  not 
nly  in  direct  violation  of  law,  but  also  detrimental  in  the  highest  degree 
3 the  cause  of  our  country,  it  becomes  my  sacred  duty  to  prevent  and 
Bpress  the  same  by  all  the  means  in  my  power : 

Now,  therefore,  I,  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  Governor  of  North  Carolina,  do 
}sue  this  my  proclamation  warning  all  such  persons  to  desist  from  such 
inpatriotic  and  criminal  conduct,  earnestly  hoping  that  allAvhoare  dis- 
’•cliued  to  defend  their  homes  themselves,  either  by  reason  of  age,  in- 
rmity,  or  cowardice,  will  cease  to  dissuade  those  who  are  willing,  and  no- 
tying  positively  all  i)ersons  contemplating  an  armed  resistance  to  the 
il‘  there  really  be  any"  such  misguided  and  evil  disposed  persons  in 
48  R R— VOL  XVIII 


754 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX) 


our  midst,  that  they  will  commit  the  crime  of  treason  according  to  tb 
laws  of  Congress,  and  must  not  expect  to  escape  its  penalties.  Whit 
thousands  upon  thousands  of  our  best  and  bravest  have  cheerfully  obeyei 
the  law  and  by  their  patriotic  valor  have  driven  the  enemy  back  to  tb 
Potomac,'  it  would  be  an  intolerable  outrage  upon  them  to  permit  other! 
to  shirk  or  evade  the  law,  or  worse  still,  to  resist  it  by  open  violence 
Let  no  one,  therefore,  be  deceived.  The  law  will  be  enforced,  and  I ap 
peal  to  all  loyal  and  patriotic  citizens  to  sustain  those -who  are  chargei 

Given  under  my  haud  aud  attested  by  the  great  seal  ot  the  State.  Don 
at  the  city  of  Kaleigh  the  18th  day  of  September,  1862.  ^ 

By  the  Governor : 

ll.  H.  Battle,  Jr., 

Private  Secretary. 


General  Orders,  1 

No.  2.  ( 


Hdqes.  District  of  North  Carolina, 
Raleigh,  N.  C.,  September  9, 1862. 

I All  persons  liable  to  military  duty  under  the  conscription  law  ai 
hereby  required  to  come  to  the  camp  of  instruction  near  this  city  a 
once.  Those  doing  so  will  be  allowed  to  select  the  infantry  regimein 
they  wish  to  join,  and  unless  full  they  will  be  assigned  accordingly. 

II.  The  regiments  of  infantry  and  artillery  on  duty  in  this  State  ai 
authorized  to  enlist  conscripts  to  increase  each  company  of  infantry  ar 
heavy  artillery  to  100  men,  but  not  exceeding  it,  and  light  batteries  i 
150  men. 

BycommandofBrig.Gen.J.G.  Martin:  ^ goBDON 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

State  of  N.  Carolina,  Executive  Dept.,  A.  O., 

RaUigh,  m C.,  September  22,  1862. 

The  $50  bounty  will  be  paid  to  all  men  who  come  into  camp  und 
this  call  before,  they  leave  to  join  their  regiments.  ^ 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond^  Pa.,  Octoher  9,  1862.. 

Col.  Walter  Richmond,  Va.: 

Sir  : By  direction  of  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  you  are  here 
assigned,  as  an  agent  of  the  Department,  ™ 

navigable  water-courses  in  the  eastern  iwt  ot  the  Stated 
lina  viz  the  Neuse,  Tar,  Boanoke,  and  Chowan  Bivers,  with  a view 
iheir  defense  against  a naval  and 

the  rivers  as  far  down  as  possible,  and  thus  afford  all  the  P™ , ® 

our  power  to  plantations  and  other  property  along 
be  effective  the  defense  in  each  case  will  consist  of  two  P® 

Eirst,  the  placing  of  strong  obstructions  in  the  ® Jj,s  i 

.second,  batteries  (with  works  ot  proper  strength  for  defe  ° . [ 

land  attack)  so  placed  on  the  bank  as  to  have  a ®®“P*®*®.  ^ eai 
the  ob.structing  works.  As  the  garnson  that  can  be  , 

fort  will  have  to  be  small,  the  facilities  for  sending  prompt  succor 


ur.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


755 


ich  position  occupied  must  be  carefully  studied.  The  strength  of  pro- 
le to  be  given  to  the  works  along  the  land  fronts  will  of  course  be 
Dverned  by  the  same  consideration.  It  is  hoped  that  it  will  be  found 
racticable  to  occupy  a point  on  the  Neuse  at  least  as  low  as  Kinston, 

I the  Tar  as  low  as  Greenville,  and  on  the  Eoauoke  as  low  as  Ham- 
ton.  This  can  only  be  determined  upon,  however,  after  making  the 
Lamination  intrusted  to  you.  As  to  the  Chowan  Eiver,  it  is  probably 
/ present  so  entirely  under  the  control  of  the  enemy  as  to  prevent  us 
om  holding  any  point  along  its  banks.  In  the  progress  of  events  this 
:ciipation  may  become  practicable,  in  which  case  you  will  make  the 
‘sired  examination.  In  the  selection  of  sites  for  batteries  to  command 
rers  high  points  should  be  preferred,  and  the  open  range  of  river 
‘low  should  not  be  greater  than  that  of  our  own  guns.  As  soon  as  you 
i\e  decided  upon  the  positions  to  be  held  and  the  general  character 
the  works,  namely,  obstructions,  batteries,  forts,  &c.,  you  will  report 
once  to  this  Bureau,  sending  such  sketches,  maps,  and  plans  as  will 
ve  a full  understanding  of  your  projects.  At  the  same  time  you  will 
xke  preparations  for  procuring  all  necessary  materials  and  labor  for 
nstruction,  reporting  the  results  at  once  to  this  office.  Application 

II  be  made  to  the  major-general  commanding  at  Kichmond  for  in- 
Tictions  to  be  given  to  the  commanders  in  Korth  Carolina  to  furnish 
)ops,  when  needed,  for  protecting  the  operations  now  committed  to 
ur  charge.  At  the  earliest  day  practicable  two  assistants  will  be  as- 
;ned  to  you,  with  the  hope  that  by  their  aid  you  can  press  the  defenses 
® rapidly  to  a state  of  efficiency.  You  will  please  to  proceed  to 
jrth  Carolina  at  once  and  enter  upon  the  duties  assigned  you.  You 
11  notify  this  Bureau  as  early  as  possible  as  to  the  point  at  which  the 
jistants  shall  be  ordered  to  report  to  you.  Prompt  arrangements 
11  DC  made  for  jiaying  the  necessary  expenses. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


Headquarters, 

. ^ c ^ Ya.^  October  10,  1862. 

y.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  ’ 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Va.: 

Ieneral  : The  Secretary  of  War  says  that  although  we  cannot  form 
5 i artisan  Rangers  into  a brigade  regularly  there  is  no  reason  why 
‘ regiments  of  Colonel  Claiborne,  Colonel  Ferebee,  Colonel  Griffin 
Colonel  Evans  should  not  all  be  required  to  report  to  Brigadier- 
iieral  Robertson.  He  requests  that  this  be  done  and  that  General 
oertson  be  assigned  to  command  the  pickets  and  outposts  of  these 
as  the  camp  of  instruction,  and  that  the  picket  and 
I s c t)e  performed  by  details,  so  that  all  may  share  instruction 
camp  If  General  Robertson  will  request  the  adjutant  and  inspector 
ra  to  assign  an  assistant  adjutant- general  or  quartermaster  and  a 
nimssary  to  his  command  it  will  be  done,  and  his  wishes  I am  sure 
X De  complied  with  in  regard  to  the  particular  officers  he  may  desiff- 
for  these  places,  if  it  is  practicable  to  do  so. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly^  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major- General^  Commanding, 


756 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XX 


Engineer  Bureau,  Eichmondy  Va.,  October  11, 1862.; 


Maj.  Samuel  W.  Melton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Major:  By  direction  of  tbe  Secretary  of  War  I have  assigned  . 
Col  Walter  Gywnn,  civil  engineer,  the  duty  of  examining  the  Nem, 
Tar  Boanoke,  and  Chowan  Eivers,  including  their  tributaries,  withk 
view  to  their  defense  by  obstructions  placed  in  the  rivers  and  batteri; 
commanding  the  same.  Colonel  Gwynn  is  instructed  to  proceed  wn 
the  works  at  once,  if  practicable.  To  aid  him  and  give  the  necessar 
protection  to  his  operations  I have  to  respectfully  request  Major-Gt- 
eral  Smith,  commanding,  to  give  orders  to  the  commanders  m Bori 
Carolina  and  at  Petersburg,  Va.,  to  act  in  concert  with  Colonel  G wye, 
and  alford  him  every  assistance  possible  with  the  troops  under  the 
respective  commands.  I will,  if  possible,  assign  two  enpneer  officii 
to  assist  in  pressing  forward  the  contemiilated  works.  It  is  hoped  t3 
planters  along  the  rivers  will  be  able  to  furnish  the  requisite  labor  Ir 
constructing  the  defenses. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  &e., 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Chief  of  Bureau 


p.  s. Please  furnish  a copy  of  the  general’s  orders  to  this  Bureau  i 

the  use  of  Colonel  Gwynn. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond,  Va.,  October  11, 1862 

Capt.  C.  B.  Collins, 

Corps  of  Engineers,  C.  S.Army,  Smithmlle,  JS.  C. . 

Captain  : Your  letter  of  the  2d  instant  was  received  three  or  fo 
days  ago,  but  a iiressure  of  current  business  in  this  office  has  preveni 
•in  earlier  reply.  In  reference  to  the  construction  of  casemates  m l i 
Caswell  I have  to  say  that  it  is,  in  my  judgment,  impracticable  to  < 
so,  but  as  a protection  to  the  artillerists  thick  and  high  traverses  slion 
be  constructed  between  the  guns  and  the  parapet  raised  on  the  ri[t 
and  left  so  as  to  form  half  embrasures,  giving  only  such  field  ot  fare, 
may  be  necessary  to  cover  the  channels  of  approach.  The 
ought  to  have  a height  of  not  less  than  even  feet  above  the  Icveb 
the  terre-plein,  and  the  intermediate  traverses  should  have  a tliickii» 
of  not  less  than  18  feet  at  the  base.  If  the  guns  are  too  near  each  ot  * 
to  allow  space  for  traverses  of  the  requisite  dimensions  then  c\ . 
alternate  one  should  be  removed  and  mounted  at  new  points  select 
so  as  to  give  the  best  fire  possible  on  the  approaches.  revett, 

the  traverses  the  turf  or  sod  from  the  low,  marshy  groimd  adjacent 
iirobablv  answer,  also  for  the  increased  height  to  be  given  to  tfac  H 
pet  on  the  right  and  left  of  each  gun.  If  possible,  you  should  K 
bomb-proofs  within  the  work  for  sheltering  the  artillerists  not  euga 
in  serving  the  guns.  At  the  rear  end  and  under  the  interme^^ 
traverses  may  be  a proper  place  for  the  bomb-proofs.  ^ ^ , 

tional  long-range  guns  will  be  provided  lor  P ort  G 

the  new  appropriations  become  available  lunds  will  be  placed  t T 
credit,  as  promised  by  Captain  Bives.  It  is  out  of  the  P^.^ 
Bureau,  owing  to  the  many  calls  for  engineer  officers,  to 
an  assistant  at  this  time.  If  the  works  will  be  delayed  for  the  wan 
one  you  must  employ  a competent  civil  engineer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ jlMEB, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Burea 


UP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


757 


Headquarters, 
Richmond j Ya.,  Octoher  13,  18G2. 


ajor-General  French, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 

General  : In  giving  instructions  for  replacing  incompetent  men  on 
gnal  duty  by  other  details  the  major-general  commanding  designed 
restrict  such  details  to  your  command  proper,  his  authority  over 
en  from  other  armies  who  may  be  in  hospital  only  continuing  so  long 
I they  are  properly  retained  as  inmates.  He  directs  that  you  will  re'’- 
ird  General  Lee’s  orders  in  reference  to  Sergt.  H.  M.  Cottingham 
3mpany  B,  Second  Georgia  Battalion,  and  Private  Thomas  F.  Holly’ 
)mpany  H,  Third  Alabama  Eegiment,  as  imperative,  and  remand  these 
en  to  their  respective  commands.  Their  places  in  the  Signal  Corps  will 
i supplied  by  details  from  your  own  command.  An  order  has  been 
|ued  to-day  (a  copy  ot  which  has  been  furnished  you)  assigning  Col. 
alter  Gwynn,  civil  engineer,  to  the  duty  of  examining  the  Neuse,  Tar, 
)anoke,  and  Chowan  Eivers,  with  a view  to  their  defenses,  and  direct- 
? you  to  assist  as  far  as  possible  with  the  forces  under  your  command, 
possible,  two  other  engineer  officers  will  assist  in  pressing  the  works 
[•ward.  It  is  very  desirable  that  measures  be  taken  to  procure  labor 
)ni  the  planters  along  these  rivers,  and  the  major-general  commanding 
sires  that  whatever  may  be  necessary  to  that  end  be  done  promptly, 
the  people  will  furnish  the  assistance  reasonably  expected  of  them 
e works  can  be  completed  at  an  early  day. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant,. 


SAML.  W\  MELTOK, 
Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Engineer  Bureau, 


Corps  of  Engineers^  Provisional  Army^  Richmond.,  Va. : 

5ir  : Herewith  I hand  you  an  order  to  proceed  to  Goldsborough,  E".  C, 


I report  to  Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  civil  engineer,  for  duty?  ’as  an 
distant  in  the  operations  committed  to  Colonel  Gwynn,  in  addition  to 
) ordinary  duties  of  the  engineer,  you  are  charged  with  the  disburse- 
nts  of  all  funds  to  be  expended  in  payment  for  materials  and  work- 
inship  applied  in  the  construction  of  defenses  along  the  rivers  of 
stern  North  Carolina  and  for  surveys  of  the  country  bordering  there- 
. For  this  purpose  funds  will  be  placed  to  your  credit  with  tlm  treas- 
?r  of  the  Confederate  States  at  Eichrnond,  Va.  You  will  keep  and 
ider  this  Bureau,  for  transmission  to  the  Treasury,  the  monthly 
i quarterly  statements  and  accounts  as  required  by  the  Army  Ee^-ii- 
lons.  On  your  application  to  this  office  the  necessary  blank  forms 
I he  supplied. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 .T  U mT.l\TT7T:» 


©ived,  and  have  occu])ied  my  serious  attention. 


758 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  B.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


I have  not  been  unmindful  of  the  condition  of  the  eastern  portion  o 
your  State,  and  can  make  allowance  for  the  anxiety  felt  by  those  wh 
reside  there.  Efforts  are  industriously  made  to  organize  and  instruc 
the  new  levies  of  mounted  troops,  that  force  being  most  relied  on  t 
protect  your  exposed  districts,  and  you  may  be  assured  that  the  Gov 
ernment  will  do  everything  in  its  power  to  defend  tlie  citizens  of  Onf- 
low against  the  depredations  of  the  enemy.  AVith  tliis  view  Generu 
French  has  received  orders  to  send  thither  as  soon  as  practicable 
force  to  x>re vent  marauding  expeditions  and  afford  protection  to  privat 

^ The  large  and  increasing  numbers  of  the  enemy  at  Suffolk,  whenc 
he  threatens  North  Carolina  and  Virginia  as  well  as  our  principal  liii 
of  communication,  has  rendered  it  necessary  to  concentrate  our  iorce 
at  a point  where  they  can  offer  the  most  effective  resistance;,  and  i. 
the  success  of  that  resistance  I am  sure  that  the  intelligent  citizens  (j 
Onslow  County,  as  well  as  of  the  rest  of  North  Carolina,  wili  perceiv 
how  deeply  they  are  interested.  . . • , 

I gratefully  acknowledge  tbe  earnest  and  patriotic  manner  in  whicl 
since  your  assumption  of  the  executiye  authority  in  North  Carolin! 
you  have  labored  to  fill  her  battle-thinned  regiments  and  recruit  oi 
armies  in  the  field.  I am  happy  in  the  confidence  that  you  will  coi 
tiuue  to  afford  this  Government  your  valuable  co-operation,  and  beg  t 
assure  you  of  the  deep  interest  I feel  in  all  that  relates  to  the  seem  it 
and  welfare  of  your  State. 

very  respectfully  aud  truly,  yours, 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  October  20,  1802. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis: 

Dear  Sir  : Pardon  me  for  addressing  you  in  regard  to  a matter  tli; 
should  ordinarily  come  before  the  Quartermaster-General,  but  its  u 
portance  justifies  me  in  bringing  the  matter  directly  to  your  notice. 

Large  quantities  of  harness  are  made  in  this  State  by  contract  wi 
the  Confederate  Government  agents.  The  prices  paid  being  more  rein 
nerative,  almost  two-thirds  of  our  leather  is  made  into  harness  inste. 
of  shoes.  As  shoes  are  now  our  greatest  need  I respectfully  sugge 
that  the  Quartermaster-General  cease  to  contract  for  leather  liaine 
and  allow  the  whole  product  of  our  tanneries  to  go  into  the  manutactii 
of  shoes.  Harness  sufficiently  strong  for  all  reasonable  inirposes  c: 
be  made  of  heavy  cotton  goods.  Much  of  it  is  in  use  in  this  >Stm  , * 
is  found  to  answer  every  end.  So  far  as  my  observation  goes  it  v 
enable  us  to  double  the  amount  of  shoes  produced. 

I need  not  remind  you  of  the  importance  of  this  item  for  tlic  am 
nor  of  the  great  difficulty  we  are  realizing  in  getting  a supply.  ^ 
Hoping  you  may  think  favorably  of  the  suggestion,  I remain, 
respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ VANCd- 


Engineer  Bureau,  ^ 
Richmond,  Ya.,  October  20,  l8o-. 

Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  Aiiiston,  V.  0. : • r. 

Colonel:  I am  in  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  17th 
you  describe  the  position  of  the  defensive  works  on  t'l.®  A?"®® 
miles  below  the  town  of  Kinston,  constructed  by  Maj.  W.  B.  Ihomi  ■ 


:bap.XXX.]  correspondence,  etc. CONFEDERATE.  759 

The  selection  of  a better  position  for  defending  the  river  is  desirable, 
sspecially  if  one  can  be  found  below.  Much  must  be  left  to  your  judg- 
tnent  and  experience  in  making  the  change,  but  when  you  have  chosen 
i new  site  you  will  as  soon  as  possible  furnish  this  office  with  a full  de- 
scription and  sketch  of  the  ground  and  the  approaches.  If  you  need 
the  service  of  Major  Thompson  as  an  assistant  you  can  retain  him.  His 
local  knowledge  will  give  him  advantages  that  will  no  doubt  make  his 
services  the  more  valuable.  I presume  Lieuts.  [W.  G.]  Bender  and 
Randolph,  Provisional  Engineers,  have  reported  to  you  by  this  time  as 
issistants.  You  have  the  authority  to  employ  agents  to  collect  the  nec- 
essary negro  force  to  construct  the  work  committed  to  your  charge,  and 
oremen  or  overseers  to  direct  their  labors  to  the  best  advantage.  With 
the  services  of  Major  Thompson  and  Lieutenants  Bender  and  Eandolph 
IS  assistants  it  is  hoped  that  you  will  not  find  it  necessary  to  employ 
jcrsons  in  the  capacity. of  superintendents.  It  does  not  appear  from 
:he  records  of  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeueraFs  Office  that  Major 
Ihompson  holds  the  appointment  of  major  in  the  Provisional  Army  of 
jhe  Confederacy.  Is  he  an  officer  in  one  of  the  JSTorth  Carolina  regiments 
jow  in  the  Confederate  service  ? I fear  that  there  will  be  much  difficulty 
u procuring  a sufficient  number  of  chains  and  anchors  for  securing 
ieavy  rafts,  such  as  you  propose  for  obstructions  in  place  of  cribs  sunk 
^vith  the  stone  or  in  place  of  piling.  You  will  please  to  make  every 
ffibrt  to  procure  such  materials  as  will  be  needed  for  the  works  you  may 
lecide  upon.  You  will  purchase  all  the  shovels  and  spades  you  can  anil 
m the  best  terms  they  can  be  procured  5 also  such  other  tools  as  may  be 
lecessary.  If  you  fail  to  get  as  many  as  you  may  need  the  Bureau  may 
)e  able  to  aid  you  to  a limited  extent. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


ibstract  from  Field  Beturyi  of  troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith,  October  20 
1H02  {headquarters,  Richmond,  Va.).  ’ 


Commanda. 


)^partment  of  North  Carolina 

Ihaftin’a  Bluff : 

Brigadier-General  Wise’s  brigade 

Col.  T.  J.  Pago 

hewry’s  Bluff,  Brigadier-General  Daniel’s  brigade, 
icketing  Peninsula,  Holcombe  Begion  (cavalry) 

lichmond  defenses & v j/ 

>E  Brook  Run : 

[Mississippi  Volunteers 

j4th  North  Carolina  Troops 

57th  North  Carolina  Troops 

m Rappahannock : 

Virginia  Infantry 

59th  Georgia  Volunteers  * 

13th  Virginia  Cavalry  * 

2d  North  Carolina  Cavalry  * ..k"! 

redericksburg,  15th  Virginia  Cavalry* 

'rewry'a  Bluff;  Capt.  S.  S.  Lee,  C.  S.  Navy* 

Apartment  of  Henrico* 


Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 


650 

lie 

23 

198 

11 

87 

27 
29 
25 

28 


1, 194 


11, 537 

1,  699 
265 
3,  359 
147 
1,  679 

340 

540 

502 

404 


20,  532 


14, 805 

2,  266 
413 
4, 475 
223 
2,128 

490 

726 

737 

500 


26,  763 


17,  767 

2,  887 
481 
5,  437 
261 
2,845 

565 

873 

971 

571 


32,  658 


* No  report  received. 


760 


NOirril  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  VXX. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg j Va.,  October  22, 1862. 

[Governor  Vance,  Raleigh^  N.  C.:\ 

Dear  Governor  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 

your  letter  of  yesterday.  , . ^ ^ i i 

Let  me  first  assure  you  that  you  have  not  the  interest  and  weltare  ol 
the  people  of  your  State  more  at  heart  than  I have. 

2d.  That  after  the  deiiarture  of  General  Lee  to  Northern  Virginia 
North  Carolina  was  stripped  of  all  her  available  forces  to  meet  the  enein j 
on  the  Potomac. 

3d.  That  on  the  threatening  advance  of  the  enemy  at  W arrenton  and 
Lower  Potomac  I was  directed  to  hold  all  the  regiments  at  points  on  tin 
line  of  the  railroads  to  move  up  here,  and  in  this  condition  they  now 
mostly  remain.  It  was  my  wish  to  rapidly  mass  my  forces  and  stnkf; 
blows  at  different  points  where  the  enemy  were  in  small  force  in  difier 
ent  parts  of  your  State,  but  the  requirements  of  General  Lee  have,  to 
gether  with  the  accumulation  of  the  troops  of  the  enemy  at  Suffolk,  prc 

vented  my  doing  so.  i • i 

4th.  Finding  the  enemy  not  disposed  to  advance,  some  days  sinf^e  J 
sent  orders  to  Col.  [W.  F.]  Martin  (Seventeenth  Eegiment)  to  hold  lit^' 
troops  ready  to  move  on  Plymouth  j that  Colonel  Cantwell  would  joii 
liim,  &c.,  and  not  to  disclose  the  movement  to  any  human  being.  1 (h( 
not  know  the  colonel  was  on  leave.  The  orders  to  both  him  and  Cant 
well  were  on  the  outside  marked  Private,”  lest  some  staff  officer  shoiilc 
open  them.  The  result  was  Martin’s  Private”  letter  and  Cantwell! 
must  have  been  forwarded  to  them,  and  neither  being  with  their  regi 
ments  nothing  has  been  heard/rom  them.  . n f 

5th.  On  the  20th,  Eadcliffe’s  regiment  was  ordered  up  in  place  ot  Cant 
well’s,  and  Colonel  Eadclifle  has  been  directed  to  move  with  his  regimen 
and  Martin’s  on  Plymouth,  to  drive  out  the  enemy  and  give  the  peopK 
of  Martin,  Washington,  and  Tyrrell  Counties  an  opportunity  to  brinj^ 
out  their  provisions,  &c.  As  secrecy  is  the  soul  of  success  in  cases  o 
this  kind,  I told  no  one  except  one  officer  on  my  staff,  who  did  part  o 
the  writing  for  me.  I presume  Eadcliffe  will  move  the  last  of  this  week 
or  early  next  week,  on  Plymouth,  and  1 hope  with  successful  result? 
About  this  you  had  better  say  nothing,  for  between  gossip  and  the  news 
papers  nothing  can  be  done  without  the  enemy  finding  it  out  belore  i 
can  be  executed. 

Gth.  There  were  some  complaints  came  to  me  respecting  the  viiii 
drawal  of  forces  from  Onslow  County.  The  same  cavalry  force  is  ther 
under  Captain  Ward  that  has  been  there  since  the  fall  of  Aew  uerii 
except  two  companies  of  Partisan  Eangers.  When  these  rangers  ar 
disciplined  in  the  camps  of  instruction  at  Garysburg  we  will  ha\ 
force  for  the  position  that  can  move  rapidly  from  point  to  point. 

7th.  I have  been  anxious  to  have  the  rivers  obstructed,  but  ha\c  nat 
no  means  to  do  it.  Finally  engineers  have  been  sent  to  examine  then 
Had  they  been  ordered  to  report  to  me  I should  now  have  had 
the  Eoanoke  Eiver  at  work.  I can  only  say,  in  conclusion,  that  i 
do  all  that  can  be  done  to  protect  the  people,  at  the  same  time  coniron 
the  threatening  forces  of  the  enemy  where  they  are  in  large  force, 
forces  in  Suffolk  now  are  25,000.  [This]  holds  most  of  my  troops,  iroi 

necessity,  here  and  at  Franklin.  , 

I will  be  most  happy  to  confer  with  you  at  any  time  and  will  tna 
you  to  "Write  to  me  freely  your  views  on  any  matters  concerniiv 

common  welfare.  -r^T^T^xrr^rT 

Yours,  very  truly,  FEENC  , 

Brigadier-General,  Command. ng. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


761 


Engineer  Bureau,  October  25, 1862. 

Maj.  Samuel  W.  Melton, 

Assistant  Adjutant^  General : 

I have  respectfully  to  state  that  this  Bureau  is  particularly  anxious 
to  act  in  concert  with  the  commanders  of  the  troops  in  the  military 
districts  of  the  Department  of  Northern  Virginia.  As  chief  engineer  of 
that  department, and  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  the  congressional  dele- 
gation from  North  Carolina,  I sent  Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  a civil  engineer 
of  great  experience  and  a graduate  of  West  Point,  to  examine  promptly 
the  question  of  obstructing  and  defending  the  rivers  of  Eastern  North 
Carolina,  with  authority  to  engage  negro  labor  and  materials  for  the 
works  j to  report  his  action  at  once  to  this  Bureau  j also  to  Brigadier- 
Ceneral  French,  commanding,  &c.,  and  ask  of  him  protection  and  sup- 
port, if  needed. 

On  the  11th  instant  Tasked  of  Major-General  Smith  that  instructions 
l)e  given  to  the  district  commanders  to  give  every  assistance  and  pro- 
jection possible  with  their  troops  in  furtherance  of  the  works — works 
fer  which  I as  chief  engineer  of  the  department  am  responsible.  I 
ieel  sure  Colonel  Gywnn  will  keep  Brigadier-General  French  informed 
)f  all  his  selections  of  sites,  the  character  of  the  works  proposed,  their 
)rogress,  &c.,  as  he  has  been  directed.  As  the  question  of  defending 
:he  rivers  of  Eastern  North  Carolina  is  strictly  one  for  the  engineer,  I . 
nust  have  the  control  and  direction  of  the  officers  engaged  in  the  labor,* 
)ut  in  such  direction  I have  and  will  order  them  to  act  in  full  concert 
,vith  Brigadier-General  French  and  other  district  commanders. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  F.  GILMEP, 

Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


Executive  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Va.,  October  27,  1862. 

Tis  Excellency  Gov.  Zebulon  B.  Vance  : 

Sir:  I am  directed  by  the  President  to  inform  you  that  your  letter 
►f  the  20th  instant,  suggesting  the  employment  of  heavy  cotton  stuffs 
or  army  harness  and  the  devotion  of  leather  to  the  exclusive  manu- 
acture  of  shoes  was  referred  to  the  Quartermaster-General,  who  reports 
hat  very  inconsiderable  contracts  are  made  by  the  Quartermaster’s 
lepartmenb  for  harness  in  North  Carolina.  The  contracts  to  which 
^ou  refer  are  probably  for  the  Ordnance  Bureau.  The  suggestion 

a good  one,  that  the  practice  of  using  leather  be  discontinued  as  far 
s possible  for  the  manufacture  of  anything  else  than  shoes ; but  the. 
iaartermaster-Geueral  thinks  that  while  cotton  serves  very  well  for 
fiaiitation  harness  it  is  unfit  for  the  wear  and  tear  to  which  harness  is 
lecessarily  subjected  in  the  army. 

Your  letter  has  been  forwarded  to  the  Secretary  of  War  with  direc- 
lons  to  secure  the  leather  of  the  country  as  far  as  practicable  for  shoes. 

I have  the  honor,  sir,  to  present  you  the  compliments  of  the  President. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

; BURTON  N.  DARRISON, 

Private  Secretary. 


762 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters,  Bichmond,  Va.^  October  29, 1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  ..  -n . i 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Va.: 

General:  Your  private  note  of  the  25th  was  duly  received.  I ha\e 
succeeded  in  getting  authority  to  order  Lieut.  Col.  [R.]  Lindsay  VValker,, 
of  the  artillery,  to  report  to  you,  to  take  charge  of  the  artillery  defenses 
of  Petersburg  and  vicinity.  You  will  find  Colonel  Walker  an  energetic 
and  determined  officer.  He  has  served  with  marked  distinction  in  the 
field,  and  I am  satisfied  will  be  of  great  service  to  you.  Wlien  Colonel 
Walker  reports  to  you,  in  case  the  services  of  Major  Moseley  are  no 
longer  essentially  necessary  the  previous  order  directing 
to  General  Pendleton  for  duty  in  General  Lee’s  army  should  be  carr  ed 
into  effect.  If  it  is  necessary  in  your  judgment  to  retain  Major  ^l(>sele.> 
inform  me  of  the  fact  in  order  that  further  instructions  in  regard  to  him 
may  be  given.  I am  trying  to  get  up  a battery  of  heavy  rifled  guns  or 
field  carriages,  to  use  either  at  Petersburg  or  here  as  necessity  may 
require.  Please  say  to  General  Kains  that  General  Lee  pleasec 

^th  the  manner  in  which  the  enemy  were  beaten  off  by  ^e  Whitwort 
guns,  but  he  says  that  he  cannot  spare  the  two  Whitworths  he  has  ai 
present.  I wrote  to  General  Lee  asking  him  to  let  General  Bams  havi 
these  guns  but  he  declines. 

I hope  that  your  arrangements  for  opening  up  the  counties  ot 
Washington,  and  Tyrrell  will  be  successful.  Everything  practicabk 
should  be  done  to  effect  this  important  object,  and  I entirely  approi  i 
of  all  your  efforts  to  do  so.  General  Wisis  had  started  with  his  com 
mand  fOT  Williamsburg  and  Jamestown  Island  when  your  telegram  o 
Sunday  morning  reached  me.  I ordered  the  infantry  to  retuin  b 
Chaffin’s  Bluff,  but  the  cavalry  has  gone  down  to  arrest  ““1  P""'; 

negroes  for  murders  committed  by  He  is  a 

one  available  but  Brigadier-General  Chngman  for  Kinston.  He  is . 
present  on  leave  of  absence,  and  the  President 

prefers  to  go  to  General  Lee’s  army,  lou  ought  to  f , 

that  point,  and  if  General  Martin  does  not  desire  to  continue  in  that  com 
mand  exclusive  of  his  present  duties  in  Baleigh  as  ai^utant-geueial 
which  are  in  my  opinion  incompatible  with  the  first— -I 
suffo-est  or  recommend  a good  officer  for  the  position.  I will  lay  the  siil 
ISfore  the  Secret  endeavor  to  get  a brigadier-genera^ 

I have  requested  Colonel  Gilmer  to  send  you  an  engineer.  I am  satu 
fipfl  that  besides  the  general  engineers  [who]  are  under  his  contro.,  ^ 
fcomma^^^^^^^^^^  SaHment  you  have  uL  for^  [an  engineer]  under  you 
own  Srs.  ^ If  you  can  recommend  one  that  would  suit  you  I will  tak 
nleasure  in  aiding  to  get  him  appointed  and  ordered  on  duty  with  y 
Yours  of  yeSay  in  Colonel  Gwynn  has  been  referred  t 

Colonel  Gilmer,  Chief  Engineer.  Colonel  Gwynn  should  have  rei 
to  you  at  once,  showing  you  his  orders,  and  asking  assistan  > 
securing  co-operation.  I hope  he  has  now'  done  so. 

Respectfully  and  truly,  yours,  ^ SMITH, 

Major-Genei-al 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Ya.,  October  30, 1862. 

Hon.  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  r<  . 

Governor  of  North  Carolina^  Baleigh,  iV.  o.  • 

Goyebnob:  I have  the  letter  written  by  Mr.  Kanns  to  yj**  tm 
Tarborough,  which  was  indorsed  to  me  by  your  aide-de-camp. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


763 


most  cheerfully  send  three  regiments  and  a corresponding  force  of  ar- 
tillery to  the  vicinity  of  Leech ville  but  for  two  considerations : First,  I 
have  not  got  them  to  spare ; secondly,  with  the  power  of  the  enemy 
to  throw  heavy  re-enforcements  from  New  Berne  into  Washington  it 
would  be  extremely  hazardous ; they  might  be  cut  off.  You  will  readily 
perceive  under  what  embarrassments  I labor.  With  my  small  force  I 
have  to  hold  in  check  25,000  at  Suffolk,  2,000  at  Washington,  12,000 
perhaps  now  in  New  Berne,  and  a large  force  represented  at  Beaufort. 
The  force  I sent  last  week  to  Plymouth  I hope  is  now  on  the  borders  of 
Beaufort  and  Washington  Counties,  and  may  bring  out  some  supplies. 
You  will  readily  perceive  I cannot  handle  my  small  force  as  I would 
wish,  because  if  I were  to  withdraw  them  from  any  point  to  operate  on 
another  for  any  length  of  time  it  would  be  but  to  expose  that  point 
from  which  they  were  withdrawn.  If  I take  the  troops  from  Kinston 
to  operate  toward  Beaufort  County  it  exposes  Goldsborough  and  Wil- 
mington. If  I send  them  from  here  it  leaves  25,000  in  front  of  me  with 
only  a march  of  40  miles  from  Zuni.  I am  doing  all  I can  to  draw  sup- 
plies from  the  eastern  parts  of  the  State,  and  even  in  this  much  depends 
on  the  cheerful  co-operation  of  the  people. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Engineer  Bureau,  October  30, 1862. 
Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  Goldsborough,  W.  C.  : 


Colonel:  I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of  the 
22d  and  24th  instant.  In  accordance  with  your  wish  your  son  has  been 
applied  for,  and  as  soon  as  the  detail  is  granted  he  will  be  ordered  to 
report  to  you  in  Tarborough  for  duty. 

I have  just  learned  from  a letter  of  General  S.  G.  French  to  General 
G.  W.  Smith  that  100  negroes  are  ordered  to  assemble  at  Hamilton. 
You  will  therefore  take  immediate  steps  to  receive  and  set  them  to 
work. 

In  your  letter  of  the  24th,  alluding  to  the  defenses  of  Neuse  Eiver,  you 
write  the  works  embrace  the  river  batteries  and  will  require  10,000  men 
for  their  defense.  You  further  estimate  that  an  armament  of  thirty-four 
guns  in  all  will  be  necessary.  These  are  works  of  vastly  greater  mag 
uitude  than  I have  ever  contemplated  or  can  approve.  In  my  letter  of 
instructions  of  the  9th  instant  I particularly  called  your  attention  to 
the  fact  that  the  garrisons  of  such  forts  as  you  might  construct  would  be 
necessarily  small.  Instead,  therefore,  of  building  forts  defending  the 
river,  in  turn  to  be  defended  by  covering  works,  I decidedly  prefer,  as 
a general  thesis,  and  without  special  and  controlling  circumstances,  one 
work  commanding  the  river  with  strong  land  as  well  as  water  fronts, 
defiled,  if  necessary,  to  protect  it  from  attacks  on  commanding  ground. 
1 most  earnestly  therefore  call  your  special  attention  to  prompt  studies 
and  actions  to  carry  out  these  views.  In  my  judgment,  with  rare  excep 
tions,  a permanent  garrison  for  each  position  of  one  regiment,  is  the 
utmost  that  can  be  reasonably  hoped  for. 

Very  respectfully. 


J.  F.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  and  Ch  ief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


764 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith,  October  31, 
1862  (headquarters  Richmond,  Va.). 


Present  for 
duty. 


Commands. 


o 


fl 


a 


l-s 

fcc 


Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Departrnent  of  North  Carolina. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  A..  Wise’s  brigade,  Chaffin’s  farm 

Col.  T.  J.  Page,  Chaffin’s  Bluff 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  Daniel’s  brigade,  near  Drewry’s  Bluff 

Holcombe  Legion  (cavalry),  picketing  the  Peninsula... 

Kichmond  deffinses 

Brook  turnpike : 

42d  Kegiment  Mississippi  Volunteers 

54th  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops 

57th  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops 

59th  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers 

Capt.  S.  S.  Lee,  C.  S.  Navy,  Drewry’s  Bluff  (in  part) . . . 

Department  of  Henrico 

61st  Regiment  Virginia  Infantry* 

Colonel  Chambliss,  on  Rappahannock : 

2d  Regiment  North  Carolina  Cavalry* 

13th  and  15th  Regiments  Virginia  Cavalry* 

Grand  total 


573 

126 

21 


13 

93 


10,  045 
1,621 
246 
3,  255 
125 
1,717 


10,  858 
1,  760 
341 
3,  468 
153 
1,824 


13,  521 
2,  242 
417 
4,  387 
196 
2, 140 


16, 100 
2,  809 
487 
5,412 
264 
2,  703 


30 

34 

25 

38 


298 

466 

545 

593 


307 

505 

561 

619 


12 

107 


220  300 

2, 124  2,  428 


426 
657 
762 
761 
359 
3, 146 


496 
784 
1,  042 
966 
395 
5,  228 


1,  267 


21,  255 


23,124 


29,  017 


36,686 


* No  reports. 


Subsistence  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  November  2, 18G2. 

His  Excellency  Gov.  Zebulon  B.  Yance,  Raleigh^  N,  G.: 

Sir  : It  is  very  desirable  to  exhaust  the  hogs,  beeves,  pease,  beans, 
and  potatoes  of  that  part  of  North  Carolina  which  lies  within  the  lines 
of  the  enemy  or  accessible  to  them.  The  President  called  my  attention 
to  information  derived  from  you  on  the  subject,  and  the  representations 
made  in  response  to  inquiries  have  been  of  a discouraging  nature.  I 
venture  to  apply  to  you  for  action  thereon.  It  is  obvious  that  those 
charged  with  such  an  undertaking  should  be  reliable  business  men, 
whose  integrity  and  energy  should  be  personally  known  to  those  among 
whom  they  are  to  operate.  Neither  myself  nor  anj^  one  in  my  office  bas 
such  knowledge  of  the  country  or  the  people  of  lower  North  Carolina 
as  to  enable  me  to  make  the  proper  selections  and  the  necessary 
arrangements  to  the  above  end.  That  being  the  case  I write  to  ask  if 
you  will  allow  your  agency  to  be  used  in  this  matter  by  having  tbe 
whole  devolve  upon  you,  except  so  far  as  existing  arrangements  go. 
They  run  thus  far : Mr.  Jacob  Parker  has  a contract  for  packing  hogs 
at  Warrenton,  and  has  the  following  counties  allotted  to  him  for  pur- 
chase, viz:  Pranklin,  Warren,  Nash,  and  Halifax.  In  addition,  Maj.  W. 
H.  Smith  has  made  certain  arrangements  with  Mr.  H.  Hayes,  of  Har- 
rellsville,  which  he  will  detail  to  you.  Tlie  balance  of  the  district 
spoken  of  it  is  proposed  to  put  under  your  charge,  with  these  remarks: 

1st.  That  as  this  Bureau  has  already  more  captains  and  majors  than 
it  ought  to  have  it  is  not  expedient  to  appoint  more,  except  in  case  ol 
absolute  necessity,  but  to  operate  by  agents,  wiiose  agencies  can  cease 
when  their  business  with  tbe  Department  closes. 

2d.  That  the  points  of  delivery  of  the  hogs  should  be  fixed  with  ret 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COKKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


765 


ereuce  to  the  packing-houses,  both  in  and  out  of  the  State  of  North 
Carolina,  so  that  such  as  can  go  conveniently  to  the  packeries,  which 
Major  Smith  has  established  or  will  establish,  may  do  so,  and  such  as 
are  more  convenient  to  Petersburg  can  go  to  that  point,  whence  they 
can  be  brought  to  this  place. 

3d.  That  it  may  be  necessary  to  procure  both  bags  and  transportation 
to  get  out  the  pease  and  potatoes  and  any  bacon  that  may  be  attainable. 
As  to  the  transportation,  Mr.  Hayes,  in  a letter  to  Major  Puffin,  says 
that  a few  teams  and  wagons  can  be  bought  in  his  region.  If  they  can 
be  bought  at  prices  satisfactory  to  yourself  you  will  be  authorized  to 
buy  them,  and  when  they  are  done  with  they  can  be  disposed  of  in 
some  satisfactory  manner.  As  to  the  bags,  it  would  be  very  desirable  to 
secure  the  services  of  some  of  the  factories  of  North  Carolina  in  order 
to  get  them,  and  as  they  have  not  been  called  on  up  to  this  time  it  is 
to  be  hoped  that  they  will  now  be  able  to  serve  the  needs  of  this  Bureau. 
One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  now  is  to  get  bags,  and  there  are  not 
half  enough.  Can  you  not  get  them  ? Please  try. 

I have  been  induced  to  ask  you  to  undertake  the  above  service  in  con- 
sequence of  your  communication  to  the  President,  and  my  notice  of  your 
address  to  the  people  of  your  State,  indicating  a readiness  to  help  the 
cause  in  general. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  B.  NOPTHPOP. 


Engineer  Bureau,  November  3,  18612. 

Col.  Walter  Gwynn, 

In  eharfje  of  Defenses  in  Eastern  North  Carolina : 

Colonel  : I have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the 
29th  instant  relating  to  the  defenses,  disbursements,  &c.,  in  Eastern 
North  Carolina.  A requisition  for  $30,000  in  favor  of  Lieut.  W.  G. 
Bender  has  been  made. 

I am  glad  to  hear  that  so  satisfactory  a iiosition  for  the  defense  of  the 
Koanoke  Piver  has  been  found  at  PainbowBend.  The  line  of  infantry 
to  cover  miles  to  the  pond,  causing  the  enemy  to  make  a detour  of  15 
miles,  seems  a good  suggestion.  It  is  not  possible  at  present  to  furnish 
all  the  armament  required,  still  platforms  and  i^ositions  should  be  pre- 
pared for  formidable  river  batteries  (a  part  of  these  platforms  should  be 
prepared  for  siege  carriages).  You  will  most  probably  have  to  exercise 
your  ingenuity  in  mounting  the  guns,  as  the  supplj^  of  guns  is  very 
limited.  There  are  only  two  i)ile-drivers  in  this  vicinity,  both  steam, 
with  2,000-pound  hammers,  and  in  constant  usej  they  are,  moreover, 
mounted  on  boats.  They  should  be  sought  for  in  the  section  where  you 
are,  and  if  they  cannot  be  found  seek  to  have  them  made  where  you 
are;  and  failing  in  that,  if  you  will  send  on  drawings  of  the  hammers, 
i^c.,  required,  I will  order  them  to  be  executed  at  the  Tredegar  Works. 
While  our  founderies  and  machine-shops  are  so  overtasked,  and  the 
price  of  labor  and  iron  so  high,  I do  not  think  screw-piles  at  all  advisa- 
ble. Before  approving  the  suggestion  of  repairing  the  steamboat  Cora, 
it  is  necessary  for  the  Bureau  to  have  an  approximate  estimate  of  the 
cost.  Communicate  with  Muj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French  respecting  provisions 
and  transportation  and  request  his  co-operation.  Capt.  C.  H.  Dimmock, 
engineer  in  charge  at  Petersburg,  will  be  requested  without  delay  to 
forward  you  the  required  amount  of  intrenching  tools.  Your  call  for 
stationery  will  be  promptly  attended  to. 


766 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


When  convenient,  please  send  a fair,  legible  copy  by  a clerk  of  your 
communications  to  this  Bureau. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  UlLMEK, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  November  3,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina^  Raleigh : 

Sir  : By  order  of  Col.  L.  B.  E’orthrop,  Commissary-General  of  Subsist- 
ence, Avho  has  written  to  you  fully  in  regard  to  purchase  of  certain  ar- 
ticles to  be  made  for  the  Subsistence  Department  of  the  Confederate 
States,  I send  Mr.  Jacob  Parker  to  see  you  in  the  hope  you  have  ac- 
cepted the  position  which  Colonel  Northrop  has  felt  warranted  in  calling 
upon  you  to  undertake,  not  less  from  a desire  to  avail  of  your  advantage 
of  position  than  from  a conviction  of  your  patriotism  and  energy.  Mr. 
Parker  wishes  to  know  what  price  to  pay  for  hogs,  and  1 refer  to  you 
and  Major  Smith,  especially  yourself,  as  the  best  source  of  information 
on  that  head.  He  also  represents  that  speculators  are  ready  to  dog  bis 
steps  as  soon  as  he  moves  and  asks  how  he  is  to  get  rid  of  them.  I reply 
that  whatever  plan  you  may  recommend  will  have  the  respectful  con- 
sideration of  this  Bureau.  If  approved,  as  it  is  presumed  it  will  be,  the 
most  strenuous  efibrts  will  be  used  to  get  for  it  the  active  sanction  of 
the  War  Department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBANK  G.  EUFFIN, 

Major  and  Commissary  of  Subsistence. 


Navy  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  November  4, 1862. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina  : 

Sir  : Commander  Cooke,  sent  by  me  to  North  Carolina  to  obtain  iron 
for  plating  the  gunboats  being  built  in  and  for  the  defense  of  the  State, 
has  returned  without  having  accomplished  this  object.  He  reports  that 
you  have  the  control  of  a quantity  of  railroad  iron,  and  I therefore  ad- 
dress myself  to  you  upon  the  subject. 

To  enable  the  boats  to  resist  the  guns  of  the  enemy  their  armor  must 
be  at  least  4 inches  thick,  placed  at  an  angle  of  at  least  36^.  This  armor, 
from  the  limited  power  of  our  mills,  we  are  compelled  to  roll  into  plates 
2 by  7 inches  and  10  feet  long,  and  to  put  them  on  the  vessels  in  two 
courses. 

If  you  wall  let  the  Department  have  the  rails,  and  facilitate  its  trans- 
portation to  Bichmond,  they  will  be  immediately  rolled  into  plates  for 
the  vessels  in  question  and  for  such  other  defenses  as  we  may  build  in 
the  waters  of  your  State. 

Commander  Cooke  will  remove  the  iron  if  you  consent  to  its  transfer, 
and  will  arrange  the  compensation  according  to  his  instructions. 

Please  telegraph  your  reply. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ' S.  E.  MALLOEY, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy, 


hap.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


767 


Engineer  Bureau,  November  4, 1862. 

japt.  James  W.  Cooke, 

C.  8.  Navy,  White  Hall,  N.  C. : 

Captain  : Col.  Walter  Gwynn  sends  the  following  extract  from  a 
etter  of  yours  to  him  : 

According  to  tbe  understanding  with  you  in  Richmond  I have  commenced  work  at 
V’hite  Hall,  and  if  you  think  the  river  cannot  be  defended  in  time  to  protect  the  work 
will  thank  you  to  inform  me  of  the  fact  through  Colonel  Gilmer  or  the  Secretary  of 
he  Navy. 

To  which  Colonel  G.  replies  in  his  letter  to  me  : 

My  opinion  is  that  with  a sufficient  force  the  obstructions  we  are  placing  in  the  Neuse 
liver  can  he  defended  against  any  force  the  enemy  are  likely  to  send  against  it.  They, 
s well  as  the  land  defenses,  will  be  completed,  I think,  in  six  weeks;  hut  unless  the 
Duth  side  of  the  Neuse  is  occupied,  if  the  enemy  possesses  any  enterprise  at  all  they 
rill  most  assuredly  destroy  the  gunboat  which  Commander  Cooke  is  building  at  White 
lall.  A force  stationed  at  AVhite  Hall  might,  however,  prevent  such  a disaster.  You 
rill  please  communicate  this  opinion  to  Commander  Cooke. 

If  further  information  with  regard  to  troops  for  defense  be  desired  it 
5 respectfully  suggested  that  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  commanding  at 
Petersburg,  be  addressed  on  the  subject. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  F.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  November  4,  1862. 


■ol.  Walter  Gwynn, 

Be])t.  of  Eastern  North  Carolina^  Goldsborough,  N.  C.: 


Colonel  : I have  to  acknowledge  your  letter  of  October  31,  just  re- 
eived.  Your  views  regarding  the  safety  of  the  Eoanoke  Eiver  and  the 
Topriety  of  continuing  the  construction  of  a gunboat  at  Hamilton  shall 
'0  promptly  communicated  to  Commander  James  W.  Cooke,  of  the 
l^avy.  I am  of  the  decided  opinion  that  the  cost  of  screw-fiiles  and  the 
ifQculty  of  obtaining  them  renders  their  use  injudicious.  With  re- 
:ard  to  the  two  pile-drivers  called  for  by  you  I would  suggest  that 
ilefinite  descriptions  and  plans  should  be  prepared,  and  that  they  should 
•e  executed  in  Petersburg.  The  Bureau  cannot  attend  to  such  details, 
11(1  the  workshops  of  Eichmond  are  so  crowded  with  work  for  the  Ord- 
iiaiice  Department  that  they  should  be  the  last  called  on  for  other  work, 
'hree  thousand  pounds  each  strikes  me  as  an  excessive  weight  for  your 
lammers ; 1,200  pounds  would  be  far  better.  If  you  need  another  as- 
ivStant  it  is  suggested  that  you  employ  Glaucus  E.  Olds,  a member  of 
lapt.  William  W.  Carraway’s  company  (unattached),  of  the  Forty-first 
Jegiment  North  Carolina  Troops.  The  comfiany  is  now  at  Kinston. 
Hs  services  can  probably  be  secured  at  once  by  communicating  with 
is  captain,  and  in  the  mean  time,  should  you  desire  it,  an  application 
dll  be  made  to  the  Secretary  of  W ar  for  his  regular  detail. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  F.  GILMEE, 

(Jolonel  arid  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau^, 


768 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.I 


Headquarters, 
Eichmond,  Va.,  November  5,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  ^ , Tr  ‘ * 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  Your  letter  of  yesterday  in  reference  to  the  movements  o? 
the  enemy  to  cut  off  Colonel  Iladcliffe  is  received.  It  was  shown  toth( 
Secretary  of  War,  and  with  his  approval  1 telegraphed  General  Lee  ai 
Culpeper  Court-House : 

General  French  urgently  asks  that  a brigade  be  sent  to  him  at  once.  Can  you  sene] 
it  immediately  ? It  is  needed.  I think  a division  should  in  addition  be  sent  here,  bu 
this  is  not  so  immediately  urgent. 


I inclose  with  this  a copy  of  a note  addressed  to  me  by  Major  Beck 
ham,  ordnance  officer,  in  reference  to  arms  for  General  Eobertson’t 
troops.  We  will  do  everything  we  can  for  you.  Keep  me  mformec 
fully  upon  all  movements  of  importance. 

Eespectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

Maior- General. 


1>.  s. I have  written  to  the  Postmaster-General,  requesting  him  ti 

establish  a telegraph  station  at  Eocky  Mount,  between  Goldsborougl 
and  Weldon. 


Engineer  Bureau,  November  G,  1802. 
Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  Goldsborough,  W.  (7.  : 

Colonel:  I have  just  received  your  letter  of  the  2d  instant  am 
hasten  to  reply  to  the  points  therein  presented.  In  reference  to  the  es 
tent  of  the  works  for  land  defense  on  the  Neuse  Eiver  I have  to  say  tha 
the  lines  as  proposed  by  you  will  form  an  intrenched  camp,  and  as  sucl 
are  I doubt  not  well  located.  But  this  is  not  the  character  of  the  dc 
feuso  indicated  bv  your  instructions.  Owing  to  the  great  call  for  troop 
to  meet  the  enemy  where  he  is  in  great  strength  the  force  that  can  h 
assigned  to  the  defense  of  the  Keuse,  Tar,  and  Eoanoke  Eivers  must  1) 
comT)aratively  small.  The  proper  defense  therefore  for  these  rivers  is  tu 
one  named  in  the  instructions  heretofore  sent  from  this  Bureau  to  yo 
for  yoUr  gov'ernment,  viz:  One  work  with  batteries  bearing  on  the  ri\e 
and!  the  obstructions  therein,  with  water  and  land  fronts  of  sufficieii 
strength  of  profile  to  resist  an  assault,  thus  enabling  the  small  garrison 
(as  small  they  must  be)  to  hold  out  until  a succoring  force  can  relle^ 
them.  Such  works  as  a general  thing  can  be  enfiladed  from  surroum 
ing  heights.  This  kind  of  work  must  be  first  established.  If  time  b 
allowed  for  occupying  the  surrounding  hills  afterward  it  may  be  jut 
cious  to  do  so.  Intrenched  camps  may  have  to  be  made  by  the  troop 
when  they  are  concentrated  for  the  defense  of  a particular  iioint.  i ‘ 
ground  at  Eainbow  Bend,  as  you  describe  it  (being  defended  in  part  b 
an  extensive  pond  and  swamx>)  is  particularly  favorable.  The  line  } o 
are  extending  across  to  rest  its  right  flank  on  these  natural  defenses  i 
no  doubt  judiciously  chosen,  but  you  will  not  lose  sight  of  the  iinpo 
tance  of  a work  even  at  this  position  which  can  be  held  by  a sma 
garrison,  say  one  regiment.  I will  call  the  attention  of  Maior-Genen 
Smith,  commanding  the  southern  portion  of  the  Department  of  v irgmt 
to  what  you  report  in  reference  to  want  of  concert  in  the  opetations 
the  troops  in  your  vicinity.  I approve  your  proposition  to  visit  tbe  ^ 
of  Petersburg  for  the  purpose  of  getting  pile-drivers  and  hands  skmy 
in  their  use  as  soon  as  you  shall  have  made  all  the  aiTangementS 
the  xirosecution  of  the  works.  When  in  that  city  you  will  please  ca 


769 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

Major-Geueral  Frencji  and  confer  fully  with  him  on  the  subject  of  de- 
fenses for  the  rivers  of  Eastern  North  Caroliua. 

I do  find  some  difficulty  in  reading  your  letters,  and  when  possible  I 
must  ask  you  to  have  fair  copies  made  for  transmission  to  this  Bureau 
The  engagement  of  the  assistant  you  met  with  at  Tarborough  must  be 
but  temporary,  as  application  has  been  made  for  the  detail  of  your  son 
lor  service  at  that  place  j this  at  your  request. 

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  much  can  be  done  to  aid  in  the  defense  of 
North  Carolina  by  taking  favorable  points  below  your  forts 
and  felling  a large  number  of  trees  along  the  banks  and  getting  them 
m the  stream  in  such  a manner  as  to  lodge  and  form  irregular  rafts  ex- 
tending long  distances  up  and  down  stream,  and  then  at  favorable  points 
a oug  the  banks  make  rifle-pits  for  sharpshooters,  who  can  protect  the 
obstructions.  I will  make  every  effort  to  get  guns  to  arm  the  forts  von 
arc  building,  but  it  will  not  be  possible  to  get  them  of  the  heaidest  cal- 
iber,  and  such  as  we  can  get  will  probably  be  mounted  on  siege-carriages. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant,  ‘ 

J.  F.  GILMEK, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


Engineer  Bureau,  November  8,  3802. 
Ool.  J.  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Or dnanee : 

Colonel  : Defensive  works  are  in  course  of  construction  on  three  of 
ohe  most  important  rivers  of  Eastern  North  Carolina— on  the  Eoanoke 
n the  vicimty  of  Hamilton ; on  the  Tar,  near  Tarborough,  and  on  the 
Neuse,  at  Kinston.  Anticipating  the  early  completion  of  these  works 
L have  the  honor  to  make  a requisition  for  the  armament.  This  in  each 
jase  should  consist  of  five  rifled  guns  on  siege-carriages  of  such  caliber 
IS  can  be  most  promptly  supplied.  Of  these  fifteen  guns  those  required 
or  the  Eoanoke  will  probably  be  first  needed.  As  soon  as  any  of  these 
ire  ready  I respectfully  request  to  be  notified  of  the  fact. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

T XT  Ealeighj  November  8,  1862. 

^ol.  L.  B.  Northrop:  ’ 

Dear  Sir  : Yonr  communication  to  Governor  Vance  has  been  re- 
leived,  in  which  you  propose  to  avail  yourself  of  his  agency  in  iirocur- 

beeves,  pease,  beans,  and  potatoes 
rT  portion  of  the  State  “ within  the  lines  of  the  enemy  or  acces- 
nnif  M Excellency  directs  me  to  say  in  reply  that  he  will 

nost  cheerfully  undertake  the  task  which  you  propose  to  assign  to  him. 
le  IS  of  opinion  that  the  energies  of  the  Department  should  be  directed 
,0  the  removal  of  those  articles  from  the  counties  which  are  threatened 

All  the  counties  west  of  this  place  are  at 
eseut  safe,  and  if  a supply  of  salt  can  be  procured  the  hogs  will  be 
area  into  bacon,  which  can  be  procured  at  any  time. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

DAVID  A.  BAENES, 
Nide-de-Camp  to  Governor  Nanee. 


40  R R— VOL  XVIII 


770  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  i 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  262.  J Bichmond,  Fa.,  November  8, 1862. 

* ‘ ‘ # * * * * * 

VI.  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  0.  Whiting  is  assigned  specially  to  the  defense 
of  the  Cape  Fear  Biver.  He  will  proceed  to  W^ilmington,  N.  0.,  and 
enter  upon  that  duty. 

******* 


By  command  of  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ordnance  Bureau, 
Richmond^  November  10, 1862. 


Hon.  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina : 

Sir  : Colonel  Gorgas  requests  me  to  state  in  reply  to  your  favor  of 
the  8th  instant  that  the  Secretary  of  War  has  given  general  directions 
in  regard  to  the  equipment  of  forts,  and  that  Wilmington  will  not  be 
forgotten. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  S.  EHETT, 

Colonel^  Inspector  of  Ordnance. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  November  11,  1862. 
Governor  Vance,  Raleigh,  N.  0. : 

Yours  of  the  9th  and  10th  received.  The  re-enforcements  sent.  Evans* 
brigade  is  all  that  is  now  disposable.  It  is  not  practicable  at  this  time 
to  reduce  the  command  in  Tennessee.  The  vigilance  of  deepest  interest 
watches  affairs  in  North  Carolina.  We  will  try  to  anticipate  the  enemy, 

JEFFEESON  HAVIS. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Va.,  November  11, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

The  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  you  send  four  regiments  to  the 
vicinity  of  Wilmington  immediately— the  two  recently  withdrawn  fron 
there  and  two  others  to  be  selected  by  yourself.  He  suggests  tha 
General  Clingman  be  assigned  to  command  them,  reporting  to  tm 
commander  of  the  defenses  of  Cape  Fear  Eiver,  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  (v 


Whiting. 


G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Va.,  November  12,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  : Since  my  telegram  of  yesterday,  directing  that  four  regi 
ments  be  sent  to  the  vicinity  of  AVilmington  with  orders  to  report  t 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  commanding  defenses  of  Cape  lea 
Eiver^  the  Secretary  of  War  has  requested  me  to  ask  your  views  m rt 


Chai’.  XXX.]  COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  771 

garcl  to  the  proper  ^geographical  boundary  of  the  district  about  Wih 
luington.  General  Whiting,  I understand,  is  to  be  ordered  to  report 
directly  here.  I sent  you  a telegram  to-day  informing  you  that  the 
place  for  delivering  paroled  prisoners  was  changed  to  City  Point,  and 
directed  the  adjutant-general  (Major  Melton)  to  send  a letter  of  instruc- 
tions. The  commissioner  (Major  Quid)  will  go  over  to-morrow,  and  I 
send  an  officer  of  my  staff  to  confer  with  your  officers  in  your  absence 
and  endeavor  to  assist  in  making  the  necessary  arrangements.  Gen- 
eral Lee,  under  date  of  the  10th  instant,  writes  that  when  the  regiments 
are  tilled  by  conscripts — 

They  could  surely,  in  addition  to  those  you  now  have,  enable  you  to  secure  the  for- 
age, beef,  and  pork  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  State.  This  is  not  only  important,  but 
will  be  necessary,  in  my  opinion,  to  insure  a supply  of  provisions  for  the  arm v,  and 
I hope  you  vrill  use  every  effort  to  accomplish  it. 

This  he  writes  me  in  answer  to  my  letters  to  him  in  regard  to  matters 
in  your  department..  There  can  be  no  question  in  regard  to  the  impor- 
tance of  securing  the  supplies  referred  to,  and  I am  perfectly  aware  of 
the  fact  that  you  are  and  have  been  for  along  time  of  this  opinion.  At 
the  same  time  always  keep  an  eye  to  Petersburg  and  Weldon  and  the 
railroad.  It  is  a difficult  question  to  solve  and  a hard  task  to  perform 
with  small  means.  The  division  I asked  for  has  not  been  sent,  but  keep 
me  informed  of  the  exact  condition  of  affairs,  and  I will  do  everything 
in  my  power  to  support  and  assist  you.  I hope  to  be  able  to  send  you 
the  heavy  guns  asked  for  at  the  obstructions.  Will  write  you  more 
fully  upon  this  to-morrow.  Colonel  Gwynn  called  upon  me  with 
Colonel  Gilmer  to-day.  He  was  requested  to  see  you  in  person  without 
delay,  and  to  carry  out  your  views  and  instructions.  He  said  that  he 
would  do  so  cheerfully. 

Kespectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major  ~ General. 


State  of  I^orth  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  November  12,  18G2. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis: 

My  Dear  Sir  : I have  accepted  the  proposition  of  Colonel  ]!lorth- 
rop,  Commissary-General,  to  collect  with  my  own  agents  all  the  supplies 
possible  in  Eastern  Horth  Carolina,  and  my  agents  are  already  down 
there  at  work.  Two  of  the  richest  counties  in  the  State  are  Gates  and 
Hertford,  and  I am  extremely  anxious  to  strip  them  first.  It  is  neces- 
sary , however,  to  have  some  protection  and  assistance  from  the  troops. 
I therefore  earnestly  request  that  you  will  order  General  French  to 
semi  Colonel  Ferebee’s  Eegiment,  Fifty-ninth  (who  were  raised  in  that 
section),  with  a section  of  artillery  to  Winton,  on  the  Chowan.  By  so 
doing  the  whole  county  of  Hertford  could  be  stripped  in  their  rear  and 
jnuch  brought  across  the  Chowan  from  Gates.  It  seems  to  me  this  can 
be  done  with  great  advantage  to  the  service. 

Kespectf Lilly,  &c., 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

, Raleigh,  November  12,  1802. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Will  you  do  me  the  favor  to  read  the  inclosed  letter? 
At  is  from  a highly  intelligent  and  patriotic  gentleman  in  the  mountains 


772 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


of  North  Carolina,  and  gives  a touching  description  of  things  m that 
region  about  which  I spoke  to  you  when  in  Eichmond— in  reprd  to  the 
nropriety  of  exempting  it  from  any  further  call.  The  greater  portion 
thereof  1 am  convinced  would  form  a proper  object  for  ^e  exercise  of 
the  discretion  vested  in  you  by  the  law.  Should  you  not  think  so  I would 
be  t'lad  to  be  allowed  the  privilege  of  receiving  all  such  as  organized 
companies  for  the  defense  of  our  coast  this  winter. 

Very  respectfully,  ^ VANOK. 

[Inclosure.] 

Near  Franklin,  November  3, 1862. 

Governor  Vance;  . , ^ 4. 

Dear  Sir  : There  are  about  enough  men  in  Macon  County  between  the 
a'>es  of  thirty-five  and  forty  to  make  one  company.  Wo  jiaye  an  oppor- 
tunity as  I understand,  of  getting  into  Colonel  Folk  s battalion.  This  is 
nreferable  to  going  as  conscripts.  I am  requested  by  a number  ot  our 
most  respectable  citizens,  who  are  between  theseages,  to  ask  you  whether 
TyoufopTnion  any  other’ alternative  will  be  presented  than  conscr^tioi. 
or  Ling  to  that  battalion.  We  have  no  hesitation  in  believing  that  it 
is  our  d^itv  to  stay  here  and  provide  for  the  helpless  while  it  is  m our 
power  to  do  so.  Consultations  were  held,  and  it  was  agreed  [n  family 
■ councils  who  should  go  and  what  ones  should  stay.  Those  ' bom 
the  lot  fell  to  stay  in  many  instances  made  the  greater  sacrifice  ot  feeling. 
But  we  baL  taSm  upon\is  charges  and  responsibilities  that  we  can- 
not  throw  off  until  compelled  to  do  so,  or  until  there  » 

we  will  be  so  compelled.  Having  acted  conscientiously  '“^matter 
we  feel  that  we  haL  done  nothing  to  deserve  the  punishment  of  going  to 
the  army  discredited  by  conscription.  Before  we  .are  taken  to  a camp 
instructfon  discredited  and  scattered  to  the  four  P.,'. 

ile"e  of  doing  what  we  should  have  done  long  ago  had  it  not  been  for  *' 
earnest  appeals  of  brothers  whohave  fallen  in  the  service  to  stay  and  take 
of  thUe  left  to  our  charge.  I shall  venture  on  a suggestion,  though  it 
may  s“m  to  come  ^m  a pfrty  interested.  For  every  able-bodied  man 
t il-Vn  from  this  county  there  ought  to  be  an  able-bodied  man  retained. 
We  LL  a numbero^  in  the  field  now  M<)w  *he 

number  of  voters  in  the  county.  Our  people,  haying  poor 
communication  with  other  sections,  have  l^'^rned  to  subsist  mainly^ 
the  immediate  production  of  their  own  labor. 

and  the  innocent  and  helpless  must  ?heiT  iLwL 

witli  rnrrent  money*  You.  know  all  about  men  and.  tne  i 

0 e IdL^nL  for  th“r  wiLs  and  children.  They  can  turn  away  from  th 
graves  of  comrades  and  brothers  firm  in  the 

died,  for  the  sake  of  objects  coming  to  tbeir  Tecollection  w ith  tliougn^^ 
of  home  But  what  consolation  or  encouragement  can  come  a , . 
heart  in  an  hour  of  trial  from  a home  where  the  helpless  are  per.slnng 

for  want  of  his  haiuls  to  provide?  j 

We  have  but  little  interest  in  the  value  of  sla^es,  but  tue  . 
matter  in  this  connection  about  which  we  feel  a very  y,,are 

re  opposed  to  negro  equality.  To  prevent  this  ^ t ‘to 

the  last  man,  down  to  the  point  where  women  a"  I fo®  j.  ^ 
sailer  for  food  and  clothing ; when  these  l>®8;in  to  suffer  aiM  die, 
tlmi  see  them  eoualizetl  with  an  inferioi  race  \'e  will  d . 
il^rythings  LeiJ  life  itself,  stands  pledged  to  the  cf'®®!  Lltnig 
greatest  strength  may  be  employed  to  the  best  ad\  antage  an  b 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCJ],  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  ‘ 773 

gle  prolonged  let  us  not  sacrifice  at  once  the  object  for  which  we  are 
fighting. 

I have  not  thought  it  worth  while  to  dwell  in  argument  upon  the 
question  as  to  whether  the  mountain  people  can  subsist  after  taking  out 
every  man  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty.  It  will  be  sufficient 
for  any  one  acquainted  with  this  section  to  pass  in  imagination  through 
almost  any  neighborhood  and  consider  the  matter  over.  In  a short  dis- 
tance of  where  I now  write  there  are  seven  families,  living  on  adjoining 
lands,  and  the  only  man  to  be  left  for  them  all  is  ninety  years  old.  I 
have  mentioned  this  case  to  no  one  who  has  not  been  able  to  point  out 
one  similar  to  it.  The  usual  means  of  subsistence  seems  to  be  cut  off 
from  great  numbers. 

I shall  only  ask  you  to  reply  to  the  questions  presented  in  the  first  few 
sentences.  Knowing  the  press  of  important  matters  that  must  be  upon 
j’^ou,  it  is  with  reluctance  that  I have  written  at  all,  and  was  only  in- 
duced to  bring  matters  to  your  notice  which  are  not  immediately  under 
your  control  by  the  request  of  a number  of  citizens  tliat  I should  do  so. 

With  great  respect,  yours,  truly, 

D.  W.  SILER. 


Richmond,  Va.,  November  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding^  Petersburg^  Va. : 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting  having  been  assigned  to  Wilmington, 
N.  0.,  for  the  defense  of  the  Cape  Fear,  will  report  directly  to  Maj.  Gen. 
G.  W.  Smith.  The  Secretary  of  War  desires  your  opinion  as  to  what 
should  constitute  the  boundaries  of  the  proposed  Wilmington  District. 
Very  respectfullv,  &c., 

JASPER  S.  WHITING, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  Oe^ieral. 


Cape  Feah  District, 
Warsaw.,  N.  0.,  November  14,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Gustayus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding.,  ffic.,  Bielimond,  Va.  : 

General:  My  first  and  last  request  will  be  for  troops  the  instant 
they  are  available.  The  Department  is  undoubtedly  aware  of  the  im- 
minent need  for  them  for  the  defense  of  Wilmington.  The  fever  is 
abating  rapidly  and  there  will  shortly  be  no  danger  to  apprehend  as  to 
the  health  of  the  men.  Then  it  is  that  I anticipate  trouble  from  the 
enemy,  who,  aware  of  the  undefended  condition  of  this  important  place, 
are  likely  to  strike  before  we  can  collect  our  resources.  The  peculiar 
features  of  the  site  of  Wilmington  as  regards  the  ocean,  the  harbor  at 
a distance  of  24  miles  with  its  two  entrances,  the  river  and  the  surround- 
ing country,  make  the  presence  of  a strong  maneuvering  force,  in  addi- 
tion to  the  stationary  batteries,  indispensable.  Not  less  than  10,000 
effective  men  should  be  collected  as  soon  as  possible,  together  with  five 
or  six  field  batteries.  I hope  the  Department  will  be  able  to  comply  with 
this  requisition,  which,  as  the  difficulty  of  the  position  is  so  well  known, 
will  not  be  considered  too  great.  The  batteries  might  be  drawn  from 
the  reserve  artillery  of  the  army,  which,  in  my  opinion,  was  always  in 
larger  force  than  required.  If  any  troo])s  are  on  hand  to  start  they  may 
he  sent  at  once  to  Northeast  Station,  on  the  Wilmington  and  Weldon 
Railroad. 


774 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


2d.  There  is  now  on  the  Cape  Fear  upward  of  300,000  bushels  of  ex- 
cellent rice  in  the  barns  of  the  planters  between  the  city  and  the  lower 
rice  lands.  The  crop  has  not  been  thrashed,  owing  to  various  obstacles. 
It  will  be  very  valuable  to  us  in  every  way,  both  for  food  and  lorage, 
and  should  not  be  suffered  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enem.p  should 
there  be  danger  of  that  I shall  destroy  it.  In  the  mean  tune  I suggest 
the  purchase  of  the  whole  or  a greater  portion  by  the  Commissary  and 
Quartermaster’sDepartmeiits.  The  planters  will  sell  to  the  Government 
now  at  a far  more  reasonable  price  than  to  private  purchasers,  and  as 
rice,  like  everything  else,  is  rising  in  value  it  will  be  well  to  secure  this 
important  article  of  food  at  once.  Please  to  call  the  attention  of  the 

Secretary  of  War  and  Commissary-General  to  this.  i i 

3d  Please  to  send  me  the  authority,  which  from  time  to  time  has 
been  issued  to  generals  in  command,  relative  to  the  securing  or  destriic- 
tion  of  private  property  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  I refer  especially  to  crops— cotton,  naval  stores,  liimbei,  &c.,  of 
which  he  stands  so  much  in  need.  I require  this,  as  I shall  at  once  take 
all  means  in  my  power  to  secure  these  things  on  the  Cape  ^ eai  . 

4th.  Instructions  as  to  the  proclamation  of  martial  law  in  district.-s 

menaced  by  the  enemy. 

Please  address  me  at  Wilmington. 

Very  respectfully  and  obediently,  ^ ^ wHITING, 

Briqadier-  General,  Commandbuj. 


Cape  Fear  District, 
Warsaw,  JSf.  C.,  November  14,  18G2 

Hon.  George  W.  Randolph, 

(Secretary  of  War,  Eichmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Department  to  the  ])Osi- 
tion  of  Wilmington  and  its  vital  importance  in  this  war. 
blit  three  great  harbors  on  our  coast  not  in  possession  ot 
(diarlcston  Mobile,  and  Wilmington.  Of  these.  Charleston,  though  i . 
:i«r:  wouMt  a’severe  blow  to  us  and  an  occasion  of  great  trm.pl. 
to  the  enemv  and  have  serious  eflect  on  the  war  at  home  and  ah  , 
Slot  ns  of  such  strategic  importance  in  Pcc«c"  o 

affairs  al  the  other  two.  Their  capture  destroys  gfc^^y[cries  o( 
commuuication  now  more  than  ever  necessary  since  J?® 
sissippi:  cuts  two  great  lines  of  telegraph;  renders  Charleston  oilitt 
avail  to  us,  should  it  prove  impregnable,  as  an  PO'"* 

material,  and  affords  by  rivers  and  roads  most  effective  basis  by  wm 
the  enemy  may  extend  their  power  to  the  interior,  cn‘\“gcr“g  at  once 
the  armi^  of  the  east  and  the  west,  on  w^ch  „ ,,^.,1 

country  rest.  These  two  points.  Mobile  and  W ilmington,  are,  ffc 

TcWstances,  exceedingly  difficult  to  defend  ’cfrcftfes  in  tt  en- 
I speak  advisedly,  from  long  service  at  all  ot  these  citic- 
gineer  service  of  the  late  United  Sffites.  T>iougl.  nearly  all  ^ nuj^l^ 
said  on  this  subject  in  regard  to  Wilmington  will  aPP'y  loca  y . , 

as  generally  to  Mobile,  it  is  with  the  former  I now  have  to 
the  last  importance  to  hold  the  port.  In  the  fall  and  v inter 

ade  is  exceedingly  difficult,  owing  to  Cape  awan^ 

the  coast,  which,  with  its  extensive  shoals,  extends  foi  to  ^ 

Iweerthelwo  entrances  to  the  harbor.  T''® 
weather  at  the  main  entrance,  while  it  is  v^ry  dangerous  lor  . . ^ 
side,  forces  them  to  the  northward  of  the  Cape  and  ,„iv  es  ca.  y . 


!hap.  XXX.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  775 

vessels  running  the  blockade.  In  like  manner  the  northeast  gales  drive 
he  enemy  to  shelter  to  the  southward  of  the  Gape  and  clears  the  new 
nlet  or  upper  entrance.  The  river  affords  great  facilities  for  building 
jimboats.  Two  are  already  there  ready  for  their  iron.  Their  comple- 
ion  ought  not  to  be  left  to  chance,  for  either  of  them  would  compel 
nost  extraordinary  preparations  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  and  undoubt- 
edly enable  us  to  hold  the  port  for  a great  length  of  time,  and  time  is 
uuch  with  us  now.  Once  in  service  and  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
he  building  of  a fleet  of  similar  vessels.  Along  the  Sound,  in  the  im- 
nediate  vicinity  of  the  river,  are  extensive  works  producing  3.000  bushels 
)f  salt  daily.  This  important  supply  depends  entirely  on  our  holding 
he  port.  I mention  these  considerations  as  worthy  of  attention,  but 
subordinate  to  the  great  strategic  importance  of  the  plan  in  relation  to 
he  progress  of  the  war. 

As  to  its  defense  and  the  difficulties  of  the  problem,  it  will  be  seen 
)y  reference  to  the  map  that  the  two  entrances,  7 miles  apart,  sepa- 
•ated  by  Smith’s  Island,  are  isolated  from  mutual  support  by  the 
iver  itself.  As  the  works  defending  them  (not,  by  the  way,  of 
strength  commensurate  with  the  object)  are  liable  to  separate  attacks 
)oth  by  sea  and  land  from  the  northward  and  southward,  the  support- 
ng  force  is  liable  to  be  divided.  This  difficulty  would  not  be  so  formid- 
ible  were  our  means  of  boat  transportation  greater,  but  as  we  stand 
t is  very  much  so.  The  series  of  swamp  lands  and  bayous  which 
separate  Oak  Island  for  a considerable  distance  from  the  mainland 
brm  an  additional  and  serious  obstacle  to  the  relief  of  Fort  Cas- 
vell,  the  work  designed  to  protect  the  main  entrance.  The  fall  of  one, 
hough  so  far  apart,  will  necessarily  result  in  that  of  the  other,  and 
lius,  without  mutually  assisting  in  the  defense  of  either,  the  safety  of 
Itlier  of  these  important  positions  depends  on  the  other.  This  is 
)wing  to  the  fact  that  the  Cape  Fear  from  8 to  10  miles  from  the  mouth 
spreads  over  extensive  shoals,  with  the  channel  so  far  from  the  land 
hat  artillery  can  scarcely  be  placed  so  as  effectually  to  prevent  the 
iccess  to  the  upi)er  river  from  being  cut  off’,  and  with  it  the  river  com- 
iiunications  to  the  forts.  In  addition,  though  the  forts  command  the 
‘ntrances,  which  are  comparatively  narrow,  neither  of  them  have  any 
jontrol  over  the  harbor  nor  the  inside  anchorages,  v/hile  we  are  pre- 
sented by  want  of  means  from  increasing  our  batteries  on  the  mainland 
;o  as  to  render  the  harbor  unsafe  for  the  enemy  after  a successful  pas- 
sage of  the  entrances.  The  distance  of  the  city  is  an  unfavorable  ele- 
nent  in  the  matter — 21  miles  to  Fort  Fisher  and  28  to  Fort  Caswell,  with 
he  three  routes,  the  river  and  the  roads  by  either  bank.  The  roads 
ire  extremely  heavy,  passing  through  tracts  of  deep  sand.  The  city, 
>gain,  though  24  miles  from  its  harbor,  is  but  6 miles  from  the  sea,  and 
nay  be  attacked  from  the  Sounds  by  way  of  Topsail  and  Swansborough 
■yitbout  any  attempts  on  the  forts,  and  this  in  the  present  j)Osition  of 
tie  enemy  is  not  unlikely.  In  event  of  his  success  the  forts  must  fall 
vitbout  resistance.  In  this  condition  of  things  the  presence  of  a strong 
naneuvering  force  is  indispensable  and  its  necessity  immediate,  no 
natter  how  strong  we  may  be  able  to  make  the  forts  or  how  perfect 
be  arrangements  for  obstruction  ; and  as  both  our  means  and  time  are 
imited  the  supporting  army  must  bo  in  readiness.  That  granted, 
bough  the  odds  are  more  favorable  to  the  attack  than  the  defense,  the 
memy  may  be  afraid  to  undertake  it.  I have  mentioned  the  difficulties 
>f  tbe  defense  to  show  how  urgent  is  the  necessity  of  the  force.  There 
s another  consideration  which  deserves  attention.  The  fact  that  once 
n bis  possession  all  the  circumstances  now  so  favorable  to  us  are  of 


776 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX' 


advantage  to  him,  and  the  means  to  drive  him  out  must  he  so  extraor 
dinary  and  so  disproportionate  to  those  now  needed  to  defend  it,  that  J, 
fear  we  should  be  altogether  unable  to  regain  the  place.  The  Cap< 
Fear,  navigable  to  Fayetteville,  gives  him  a barrier  on  the  south  im 
passable  to  us,  near  the  city  especially,  where  the  river,  separating  mU 
several  channels,  forms  directly  opposite  the  broad  and  swampy  ric( 
lands  of  Eagle’s  Island.  The  Northeast  Branch,  on  the  other  hand 
with  the  great  Holly  Shelter  Swamps  extending  along  its  east  bankfo 
20  or  30  miles  and  ciose  to  the  Sounds,  would  entirely  defend  him  (takei 
in  connection  with  his  inexhaustible  means  of  support  and  re-enforce 
ment  from  the  seaward)  against  attack  from  the  northward.  All  th* 
means  in  our  power,  theretore,  or  rather  all  that  can  be  spared  Iron 
points  equally  menaced,  though  jierhaps  not  so  important,  should  h 
Tint  forward  at  once.  To  retain  this  position  10,000  effective  men,  witl 
four  to  six  held  batteries,  is  the  least  force  I can  recommend  as  the  sup 
porting  corps  for  its  defense.  If  this  cannot  be  had  we  must  trust  t( 
God  in  what  we  have,  small  as  it  is,  and  the  blindness  of  the  enem} 
Why  he  neglected  this  place  and  struck  at  New  Berne  is  more  than 
can  tell.  I may  add  that  the  danger  of  its  reduction  is  more  imminen 
from  the  disorders  consequent  on  the  pestilence  which  has  desolatec 
the  unfortunate  city.  Preparations  have  been  suspended,  the  garrisoi 
reduced  and  withdrawn,  the  workshops  deserted,  transportation  reii 
dered  irregular  and  uncertain,  provisions,  forage,  and  supplies  ex 
hausted.  Unless  therefore  more  speedy  measures  for  re-enforcemeu 
and  relief  be  adopted  I have  great  apprehensions  of  a successful  couj 
de  main  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  Even  a lodgment  or  the  successlii 
passage  of  one  of  the  forts  by  even  one  or  two  of  his  gunboats  wouh 
be  a most  serious  matter,  and  as  things  now  stand  there  is  little  topic 
vent  such  disaster.  Having  been  assigned  to  this  important  cha.rg 
but  a few  days  since  I am  not  yet  prepared  to  say  whether  the  disposi 
lions  adopted  are  altogether  such  as  I would  recommend.  No  doul) 
in  general  they  are  the  best  which  circumstances  would  permit.  It  i 
now,  however,  too  late  to  undertake  changes,  perhaps  also  to  make  acl 
ditions,  unless  in  the  all-important  matter  of  the  supporting  troops,  am 
that  I have  hurriedly  endeavored  to  set  forth. 

In  conclusion  I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  a communication  of  this  dat 
to  Major-General  Smith  relative  to  the  securing  of  the  large  amount  c 
rice,  &c.,  in  the  vicinity. 

Eespectfully  urging  these  remarks  upon  your  attention,  and  requesi 
iug  their  consideration  by  the  President,  I remain,  very  respectlnll} 

yonr  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ WHITING,  , 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


[Indorsements.! 


Referred  to  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith. 
By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


November  20,  18C2. 
JOHN  A.  CAMPBELL. 


Respectfully  returned.  . ^ i 

It  is  certainly  desirable  to  increase  the  force  at  Wilmington,  but  d 
present  I have  not  the  means  of  doing  it.  An  extract  from  Genen 
Whiting’s  letter  to  me  has  been  forwarded  to  General  Lee,  but  umu 
present  circumstances  I have  reason  to  believe  that  he  has  no  force 
spare.  General  Whiting’s  remarks  about  the  rice  in  his  vicinity  inD 


:HAr.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


777 


been  submitted  to  the  commaiidiug  general.  When  the  pressure  of  the 
snemy  on  the  north  will  permit,  forces  should,  and  I have  no  doubt  will, 
be  detached  south  of  James  Eiver.  Until  such  time  I do  not  see  how 
the  permanent  force  at  Wilmington  can  be  materially  increased  j but  in 
emergency  all  disposable  force  within  reach  would  be  sent  at  once  to  the 
support  of  this  or  any  other  important  point  in  imminent  danger  of  im- 
[uediate  attack  by  superior  forces. 

Cx.  W.  SMITH, 

Major- General. 

This  has  been  adequately  attended  to  by  General  Smith. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

Richmond.  Ya..  Wovemher  14,  1862. 

daj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina^  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  : Your  two  letters  in  regard  to  boundary  of  the  Wilming- 
on  District  and  report  of  your  recent  movement  against  the  enemy, 
vitli  inclosed  note  to  Secretary  of  War,  are  received.  I will  lay  them 
>efore  the  Secretary  in  the  morning. 

A letter  from  Governor  Vance  to  the  President,  dated  the  12th,  was 
eferred  to  me  to-day.  The  Governor  requests  the  President  to  order 
hat  certain  points  on  the  Chowan  be  occupied  by  troops.  I recom- 
uended  that  the  letter  be  sent  you  j that  you  would,  without  further  in- 
tructions,  do  everything  for  the  best  interests  of  the  service.  I coi- 
.ratulate  you  upon  preventing  their  forward  movement,  and  only  regret 
bat  they  retired  before  giving  you  an  opportunity  to  punish  them, 
hree  guns  on  their  way  herefrom  Wilmington  have  been  ordered  to  be 
nrned  over  to  you  for  use  in  the  works  at  the  obstructions.  This  order 
^as  given,  I understand,  by  the  Ordnance  Bureau,  I hope  to  be  able  to 
et  more  guns  for  you  soon. 

The  Secretary  ot  War,  on  the  application  of  the  Commissary-General, 
as  directed  that  no  permits  are  to  be  given  allowing  flour  to  be  shipped 
ut  of  Virginia  for  private  use. 

Colonel  Ball,  from  Fredericksburg,  telegraphs  to-night  that  the  enemy 
re  moviDg  upon  him  in  some  force  and  asks  help.  Things  seem  to  be 
met  in  front  of  General  Lee.  General  Johnston  has  reported  for  duty, 
t IS  understood  that  he  will  be  ordered  to  the  army  in  Tennessee  and 


Respectfully  and  truly,  yours. 


G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 


Executive  Department, 
Raleigh,  November  15,  1862. 
oii/S.  R.  Mallory,  ’ 

^ Secretary  of  the  Navy  : 

Dear  Sir:  His  Excellency  Governor  Vance  has  received  your  letter 
;ating  that  he  had  the  control  of  a quantity  of  railroad  iron  and  asking 
IS  consent  to  have  the  same  rolled  into  plate  to  be  used  upon  boats  now 
'-mg  built  in  this  State. 

His  Excellency  presumes  that  your  informant.  Commander  Cooke, 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiTAr.  XXX. 


778  

alludes  to  the  iron  of  the  Atlantic  road.  The  State  is  but  a stockholder 
in  the  road,  a large  portion  belonging  to  private  individuals.  A meet- 
ins:  of  the  directors  of  the  company  has  been  called  and  your  proposi-i 
tion  will  be  submitted  to  them.  Their  decision  will  be  made  known  to 
you. 


Yours,  very  respectfully, 


DAVID  A.  BAENES, 
Aide-cle-Camp  to  the  Governor. 


Headquarters, 

Petersburg,  Ya.,  November  16, 1862. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolma  : 

Governor  : Your  letter  to  the  President  of  November  11*  has  beer 
referred  to  me,  in  which  you  represent  that  some  forty  persons  wen 
arrested  in  the  eastern  part  of  North  Carolina  and  sent  to  Sails 
burv  for  confinement.  I have  invariably  instructed  officers  on  the  fron 
tier  not  to  molest  any  citizen  unless  they  had  positive  proof  ot  im, 
having  committed  offense  against  our  Government  or  violated  its  ordi 
nances,  and  this  because  I found  it  resulted  in  no  good,  for  often,  how 
ever  guilty,  nothing  could  be  proven  against  them,  and  when  liberate( 
they  went  home  more  embittered.  Besides,  the  enemy  can  arrest  an^ 
number  of  our  friends  for  each  one  we  may  arrest,  and  it  cannot  no^ 
be  prevented.  I regret  that  Colonel  Eadcliffe  should  have  brougfi 
them  beyond  Tarborough.  I will  write  to  Colonel  Eadclifle  to  have  hm 
make  out  charges  against  such  as  have  committed  offenses,  and  thattk 
others  at  least  be  sent  back  under  guard  by  way  of  Goldsborough  t( 
Greenville,  to  return  to  their  homes  under  such  obligations  as  you  nja; 
impose  on  them.  These  obligations  will  readily  suggest  themselves  t. 
vou.  If,  however,  you  wish  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  them  I will  in 
struct  the  commandant  of  the  post  of  Salisbury  what  to  do  with  th os 
against  whom  no  charge  is  made ; but  this  will  take  some  little  time. 

Tours,  very  respectfully,  irEENCH, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Ya.,  November  17, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding  Army,  &c.,  Richmond,  \a. : 

General:  When  I was  on  the  Roanoke  Elver  the  other  day  I p^se 
over  the  route  for  several  miles  by  which  the  army  under  General  Fost« 
advanced  and  saw  many  evidences  ot  their  wanton  destruction 
private  property  and  heard  related  many  ot  their  acts  of  f ” 

offensive  citizens.  At  Hamilton  they  burned  from  s'-^teen  to  e glitee 
private  dwellings,  and  in  nearly  every  house  in  the  "X® . 

forcible  entry  and  destroyed  all  the  furniture,  broke  all  the  crocket 
and  demolished  the  doors  and  windows.  They  entered 
roadside  and  in  the  presence  ot  the  inmates 

the  dwellings.  They  burned  all  bedding,  all  the  latlies  dresses,  and  s ol 
ill  one  instance,  money  from  the  bosom  ot  an  aged  l^dj^y  foicc.  H . 

in  pure  wantoiiness,  shot  cattle  and  Ijogs  by  the  roadside  and  tl 

helds.  In  Williaiuston  they  quartered  their  horses  in  ;J'e  ]>«  of® 
dwellings,  and  in  that  place  also  itestroyed  the  jail  and  other_l^<bng 

* See  Series  IV. 


779 


AP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

ader  this  condition  of  affairs  I write  you,  and  request  you  to  lay  the 
atter  before  His  Excellency  the  President  to  enable  him  to  consider 
e propriety  of  having  Foster  and  his  officers  declared  to  be  no  longer 
titled  to  be  regarded  as  soldiers,  and  that  they  have  forfeited  all  claim 
the  benefit  of  the  cartel,  &c.  I have  written  to  Ex-Governor  Clark 
Tarborough  to  collect  the  facts  in  regard  to  this  malicious  destruc- 
m of  private  property.  I saw  two  carriages  which  they  had  stolen 
id  left  in  their  camps  and  which  they  could  take  no  farther,  stripped 
curtains  and  otherwise  rendered  useless. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 


S.  G.  FEENCH, 


Major- General^  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 


Respectfully  referred  to  General  French. 

It  is  better  that  General  French  should  address  a letter  to  General 
)ster  inquiring  whether  these  outrages  were  committed  with  his 
lowledge  and  sanction,  informing  him  that  such  outrages  are  consid- 
ed  as  forfeiting  the  right  to  be  treated  as  prisoners  of  war,  and  that 
e action  to  be  taken  in  the  case  will  depend  on  the  answer  received 
)m  him.  If  no  answer  is  received  within  — days  it  will  be  considered 
at  he  admits  and  holds  himself  responsible  for  the  acts  charged. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith : 

SAME.  M.  MELTON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh.,  R.  C.,  November  17,  1862. 

‘iieral  Gustayus  W.  Smith, 

Acting  Secretary  of  War : 

Dear  Sir  : His  excellency  Governor  Vance  received  a communication 
•m  your  immediate  predecessor,  Hon.  G.  W.  Eandolph,  in  which  he 
ites  that  in  consequence  of  the  threatened  attacks  upon  the  railroad 
auections  in  the  eastern  portion  of  North  Carolina  and  Virginia,  and 
r inability  at  present  to  withdraw  from  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia 
enforcements  sufficiently  large  to  secure  those  connections,  it  is  con- 
lered  very  important  to  complete  the  Danville  and  Greensborough 
Quection  as  speedily  as  possible,  and  asking  him  to  aid  in  procuring 
nds  to  work  upon  that  improvement.  His  Excellency  instructs  me 
say  that  he  will  most  cheerfully  give  whatever  assistance  he  can  con- 
tently  with  his  sense  of  duty  to  further  the  speedy  completion  of  this 
j>rk,  but  at  the  same  time  he  hopes  it  will  not  be  improper  to  remark 
It  the  Government  should  at  all  hazards  and  at  all  times  defend  our 
23ent  railroad  connections  at  Weldon.  That  section  of  the  country  is 
the  utmost  importance  to  the  Government,  abounding  in  abundant 
Ipplies  for  the  army.  His  Excellency  must  decline  authorizing  or  rec- 
jimending  the  Legislature  to  authorize  the  drafting  slaves  for  this  pur- 
jSe.  Vast  numbers  of  slaves  are  leaving  our  eastern  counties,  threat- 
jed  with  invasion,  and  their  owners  are  anxiously  seeking  employment. 
jC  contractors  upon  the  work  can,  without  the  intervention  of  the 
|lic  authorities,  obtain  the  most  abundant  supply  of  hands  if  they  wil* 
pr  fair  and  remunerating  prices. 

^^ITours,  very  respectfully. 


i 


DAVID  A.  BAENES. 


780  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  L.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXll 

Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  November  18,  18G2. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding^  c&c.,  Richmond j Va.  : 

General:  It  appears  now  to  be  pretty  certain  that  the  enemy  hav 
withdrawn  from  their  late  movement  toward  Tarborongh  and  AYeldo 
What  may  be  their  next  move  is  only  matter  of  conjecture.  Early  ij 
the  fall,  as  we  have  definitely  ascertained  by  spies  in  New  Berne,  an  exp 
dition  against  Wilmington  was  organized,  the  attack  to  be  made  from  tl 
direction  I have  always  been  apprehensive  of — to  land  with  transpor. 
at  Topsail  Inlet,  22  miles  from  the  city;  there  at  high  water  (10  to  ]| 
feet)  [troops!  may  enter  and  march  by  the  plank  road  directly  on  tl 
city.  This  plan  of  attack  is  the  most  to  be  feared,  and  the  one  of  a 
others  which  promises  success  to  the  enemy,  if  in  force.  Unless  we  a 
able  to  meet  and  beat  them  in  battle  all  the  forts  and  batteries  on  tl 
river  fall,  without  the  necessity  of  firing  a gun,  with  the  fall  of  tl 
city.  After  these  movements  commence  it  will  be  too  late  to  re-eiiforc 
Within  10  or  12  miles  of  the  point  of  landing  they  would  cut  the  ra 
road  bridges  on  the  northeast  branch  of  the  Gape  Fear,  a wide  and  dei 
river;  that  gone,  while  succor  is  cut  off,  retreat  is  also,  and  the  gari 
son  of  Wilmington  must  either  conquer  or  surrender.  My  want  of  troo] 
you  know.  I hope  at  least  six  field  batteries  may  be  spared  me,  whi( 
I think  might  be  done  from  the  immense  reserve  artillery  ot  tbe  Am 
of  the  Potomac,  a train  seldom,  if  ever,  used  in  our  late  campaign, 
have  also  great  need  of  cavalry.  A very  large  extent  of  country  has 
be  picketed  and  I have  not  exceeding  100.  They  are  especially  nece 
sary  to  prevent  communication  with  the  enemy’s  blockaders,  who  ski 
the  coast  daily  20  or  30  miles  on  each  side  of  the  harbor.  A regime^ 
would  be  none  too  many.  1 have  already  represented  the  number 
infantry  which  I think  is  the  least  should  be  on  hand.  I will  lorwa 
you  as  soon  as  possible  a report  and  sketch  showing  our  means  ol  cl 
fense  and  their  location.  I find  everything  in  confusion,  owing  to 
pestilence,  and  works  in  many  cases  stopped  or  left  unfinished. 

It  is  a matter  of  great  importance  that  a telegraph  office  should  ^ 
established  at  Magnolia,  half-way  between  Goldsborough  and  VV  ilmm 
ton;  this  on  account  of  running  the  trains  with  troops  over  the 
mington  and  Weldon  liailroad  (the  distance  to  Goldsborough  irom  lie 
being  82  miles,  too  far  without  a station),  and  also  because  at  tins  poi 
(Magnolia)  we  can  procure  from  the  pickets  the  eaHiest  intormation  | 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  from  New  Berne  and  Beaufort.  \V  ill  y 
ask  accordingly? 

Very  respectfully,  ^ ^ WHITING,  . 

Brigadier-  Genera ?,  Command buj. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington,  November  10,  18f>7. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan, 

Chief  of  Staff,  Charleston: 

General  : I have  to-day  sent  over  to  Charleston  three  negroes  bdoi- 
ing  to  Nassau,  W.  I.  They  formed  part  of  the  cmw  of  a small  sc  mo  • 
which,  loaded  with  salt,  was  endeavoring  to  run  the  blockade  on  ^lon 
kist,  but  being  cut  off  from  Wrightsville  Inlet  was  beachecl.  ^ 

The  enemy  sent  a party  on  shore,  of  whom  a lieutenant,  - 


(AP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


781 


en,  and  10  sailors  were  captured  by  our  pickets,  together  with  the 
?groes,  whom  the  enemy  had  taken.  The  captain  of  the  vessel  was 
so  rescued.  I think  they  should  be  i)laced  at  the  disposal  of  theBrit- 
h consul. 

Thej^  certainly  were  endeavoring  to  help  us.  I have  therefore  sent 
em  over  to  Charleston,  where  there  may  be  a chance  for  them  to  re- 
rn  to  Nassau. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General.,  Commanding. 


[Indorsemeut.] 

Hdqes.  Bept.  of  South  Oaeouina  and  Geokgia, 
Charleston,  8.  C.,  November  20,  1862. 

Uanuot  Messrs.  Johu  Fraser  & Co.  find  employment  for  these  neeroes 
their  steamers? 

Eespectfully, 

THOMAS  JOEDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff 


Headquarters, 

^ Bichmondj  Va.,  Kovemher  19,  1862. 

g.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  ’ 

Co7nmanding,  cfc.,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  this  date  has  been  received.  I have  sent 
ji  to-day  a battery  of  two  30-pounder  Parrott  guns,  fully  furnished 
th  horses  and  men.  They  will  arrive  to-morrow. 

Eespectfully  aud  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

Headquarters, 

Wibnington,  N.  G.,  J^ovember  20,  1862. 
Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

[Acting]  Secretary  of  ^Yar,  Piclmond,  Va. : 

Ieneral:  I have  been  informed  that  at  least  a week  since  you  di- 
ted  hve  regiments  to  be  sent  here,  including  the  two  (Eadcliffe’s  and 
utwell  s)  formerly  herej  but  one  (Cantweirs)  has  arrived ; the  others 
> said  to  be  retained  by  order  of  Major-General  French.  Time  is  press- 
I cannot  more  clearly  explain  the  necessity  for  troops  than  I have 
le  to  the  late  Secretary,  nor  can  I diminish  the  estimate  I conceive 
.5  necessity  of  the  case  requires,  viz,  10,000  infantry  and  six  batteries, 
intormation  from  New  Berne  and  from  the  examination  of  prisoners 
(18  to  the  belief  that  the  enemy,  fully  aware  of  the  defenseless  state 
'1  mington  against  a land  attack,  intends  a speedy  movement,  know- 
tliat  on  ac(jount  of  the  force  we  shall  be  found  unprepared.  Against 
aval  attack  l am  not  so  apprehensive,  but  it  is  now  easily  in  their 
ver  to  neutralize  all  our  sea^coast  and  river  defenses.  A small  de- 
nment  can  but  prove  a bait  and  must  necessarily  be  sacrificed.  It 

hll  if  be  sent,  to  do  without 

joer  tlian  lose  the  few  here  and  the  place  too,  as  must  inevitably  be 

attack  be  made  by  the  land  approach  : for  the  gar- 
u of  Wilmington  m that  event  there  is  no  retreat.  I earnestly  hope, 

^ IS  intended  that  this  important  point  be  held,  that  dispatch  will  be 


782 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  X|: 


used  in  providing  a sufficient  number  of  troops.  You  are  doubtlii 
aware  that  witbin  a few  hours  of  the  landing  of  the  enemy  at  Tops* 
Inlet  (should  he  attack  by  land)  communication  with  any  point  no3 
of  this  will  be  cut  oft*  entirely  by  his  destroying  the  railroad  bridge  n 
the  northeast,  not  far  from  alDreast  of  his  landiug,  and  1 cannot  hope  f 
any  aid  from  south  of  this.  I have  only  then  to  assure  you  that  after  i 
demonstration  commences  and  attack  here  is  indicated  it  will,  unl|; 
providentially  otherwise  ordered,  be  too  late  to  re-enforce. 

very  respectfully,  w.  U.  C.  WHITING,  : 

Brigadier-  General^  Commandin[\ 


[Indorsements.'] 


Keferred  to  General  Smith. 


J.  A.  SEDGON, 
Secretary  of  Wai 


Kichmond,  Va.,  November  26,  ISG.'i 
Respectfully  forwarded  with  suggestion  that  the  Governor  of  Kc 
Carolina  be  requested  to  furnish  all  the  aid  that  he  can  to  Gen«j 
Whiting,  at  Wilmington,  and  that  the  substance  of  this  letter  be  ]( 
before  General  Lee  for  his  consideration  and  such  action  on  his  par 
the  exigency  demands,  so  far  as  it  may  be  in  his  power  to  furnish 
ance.  There  are  no  available  troops  for  such  a purpose  in  and  alt 
this  city,  and  there  are  too  few  in  North  Carolina  to  successfully  re; 
a determined  attack  in  force  upon  any  one  of  its  many  important  pol 
within  easy  reach  of  the  enemy.  I send  a copy  of  this  letter  and] 
dorsement  to  General  Lee.  ^ ^ SMITH, 

Major- Genera 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington j N.  (7.,  November  21, 18G 

Maj.  Gen.  GusTAvus  W.  Smith, 

[Acting]  Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya.: 

General  : In  the  event  of  the  general  movements  of  the  eneiii  ] 
the  winters  campaign  bringing  about  a concentration  of  the  Arm ' 
the  Potomac  near  to  Richmond  and  the  transfer  of  a portion  oi  l 
troops  to  North  Carolina,  I respectfully  apply  for  the  brigade  oi  C 
eral  Pender’s  North  Carolina  Troops  and  that  of  General  Law,  » 
c^sisting  of  three  North  Carolina  regiments  and  the  Fourth  Alahai 
also  for  Captain  Reilly’s  battery  to  be  included  in  the  number  to  be  ji 
here.  Will  you  please  to  refer  this  to  the  Secretary  of  War  ? Leu 
Clingman,  who  reported  for  duty  yesterday,  informs  me  that  neailyt 
days  ago  you  ordered  the  two  regiments  lately  taken  from  here,  toge  * 
with  two  "others,  to  be  moved  back  to  this  place.  Only  one  has  arrii 
(Cantwell’s).  Radcliffe’s  and  the  other  two  have  been  detaine|i' 
Major-General  French  near  Kinston.  I can  add  nothing  more  ion » 
to  my  explanations  heretofore  given  of  the  weakness  and  necessitu 
this  point.  I am  sure  the  Department  and  yourself  are  fully  awai 
all  the  circumstances.  Information  has  been  received  from  a si)>  ' 
the  enemy  have  concentrated  quite  a large  force  of  troops  (upwar- 
20,000,  it"  is  said)  on  Roanoke  Island,  part  of  which  came  troui  ^ 
York  and  part  from  the  vicinity  of  Suffolk,  intended  for  an  expeui 
according  to  camp  talk,  against  this  place.  However  that  im  ' 
Roanoke  Island  is  certainly  a favorable  point  for  preparing  and  ni 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


783 


out  the  requisite  transportation  for  SLUih  an  expedition,  and  considering 
the  difficulty  we  should  have  in  obtaining  early  information  of  any 
movement  from  Roanoke  Island  its  selection  shows  judgment.  If  such 
an  attempt  is  to  be  made  from  there  our  first  intimation  of  it  will  prob- 
ably be  from  the  pickets  at  Topsail,  22  miles  ofi*,  too  late  for  efficient 
support.  As  things  stand  now  I could  hardly  hope  to  ofier  opposi- 
tion enough  to  enable  me  to  destroy  the  city.  By  examining  the  maps 
of  this  vicinity  you  will  see  that  attack  coming*  along  the  plank  road 
from  the  Sounds,  the  garrison  of  the  town  and  the  two  sides  of  the  river 
have  no  mode  of  escape.  The  river  and  its  branches  are  wide  and  deep 
and  our  water  transportation  is  not  sufficient  to  allow  of  the  escape  of 
even  the  field  batteries.  The  forward  condition  of  one  of  the  gunboats 
now  building  here ; the  large  amount  of  valuable  property  in  crops,  ma- 
chinery, &c.,  all  of  which  ought  to  be  destroyed  rather  than  that  the 
enemy  should  get  them,  makes  me  perhaps  importunate  in  my  appeal. 
As  things  stand  it  is  my  intention,  unless  otherwise  ordered,  in  case  of 
attack  in  force  by  land  previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  troops  estimated 
as  necessary,  to  destroy  all  I can,  even  to  burning  the  city  to  the  ground. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Charleston,  November  21,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Jordan: 

Sir:  We  have  received  and  read  General  Whiting^s  letter,  addressed 
0 you,  in  reference  to  some  negroes  captured  from  the  enemy.  We 
lave  no  knowledge  of  them,  and  are  sorry  to  say  have  no  steamer  here 
laving  recently  lost  one  on  the  Cape  Fear. 

Thanking  you  for  your  kind  attention  we  beg  to  say  that  we  will 
meerfully  carry  out  your  wishes  hereafter  and  by  first  opportunitv. 
Yours,  very  respectfully, 

JNO.  FRASER  & CO. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  C.,  November  22,  1862. 
uaj.  Geii.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding,  the.,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

General  : Several  days  since  I called  the  attention  of  the  Secretarv 
>1  n ar  to  the  very  important  matter  of  the  crojis  of  rice  in  this  vicinity, 
advised  the  purchase  by  the  Commissary  Department  of  the  lot.  f 
lave  had  no  reply.  The  planters  will  sell  to  the  Government  for  $2  a 
uost  reasonable  price,  considering  especially  the  shortness  of  the  crops 
>ua  the  relative  value  of  corn  and  rice,  the  former  having  reached  $1.75 
vhile  Its  customary  value  is  not  more  than  half  that  of  rice.  To  spec- 
ikitors  they  ask  a higher  price.  The  result  will  be  that  unless  taken 
low  we  must  eventually  either  destroy  it  or  the  Government  will  have 

0 pay  two  or  three  prices.  I shall  be  compelled,  I fear,  to  destroy  it 
nd  also  much  other  valuable  property.  It  is  two  weeks  since  my  first 
e^esentation  of  the  critical  condition  of  this  important  point,  second 
low  only  to  Mobile  in  its  effects  upon  the  war,  and  so  far  one  regiment 
'as  oeen  sent  to  me.  I have  asked  but  a moderate  number  (10,000  men 
uu  six  batteries)  wherewith  to  oppose  from  15,000  to  20,000  men  con- 

1 New  Berne  and  Roanoke,  with  at  least  the  reported,  cer- 

^ ® probable,  purpose  ot  attacking  this  place.  No  answer  has 

ten  given  me  m the  premises.  I have  explained  also  the  defenseless 


784 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


condition  of  the  place  against  the  attack  sure  to  come.  By  water  we 
may  be  regarded  as  tolerably  secure.  Unfortunately  the  enemy  will 
not  take  that  way,  or  will  only  approach  that  way.  My  antagonist  is 
soldier  enough,  and  in  addition  has  been  stationed  here  long  enough  to.j 
know  the  best  way  to  attack  the  city,  the  batteries,  the  harbor,  and 
the  forts.  He  will  adopt  that  way — the  attack  from  the  Sound. 
Against  that  advance  I have  now  but  700  infantry  and  about  300  heavy 
artillery,  with  two  or  three  companies  of  Partisan  Rangers.  In  oppos- 
ing this  attack  the  garrisons  of  Forts  Fisher,  Caswell,  Saint  Philip,  and 
other  batteries  cannot  be  taken  into  account.  They  must  man  the  bat- 
teries whether  the  enemy  attack  the  river  or  not.  If  the  Government 
intends  to  send  me  troops,  please  let  me  know.  If  it  cannot,  I will  en- 
deavor to  save  what  can  be  saved  from  him,  and  as  there  is  no  mode  of 
retreat  from  this  position  I will  also  make  preparation  to  destroy  the 
city.  The  enemy  may  then  find  the  garrison  among  the  ruins. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

November  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Richmond,  Ya.: 

General:  My  letter  of  yesterday  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General*  contains  all  the  information  I possess  relative  to  General 
Burnside’s  army.  There  are  no  indications  of  his  future  movements  or 
plans.  His  apparent  present  inaction  leads  me  to  apprehend  that  lie 
may  be  preparing  to  transfer  his  army  to  some  other  quarter,  as  his 
position  is  such  as  to  render  it  extremely  difhcult  to  obtain  information 
as  to  what  may  transpire  in  his  rear.  Scouts  -are  on  the  watch,  but 
they  have  to  make  so  large  a circuit,  both  right  and  left,  that  great  de- 
lay necessarily  occurs  in  receiving  the  information  they  obtain.  I have 
therefore  thought  it  advisable  to  request  that  you  will  endeavor  to  ob 
tain  accurate  information  of  what  may  be  transpiring  south  of  James 
River  and  to  take  measures,  if  possible,  to  be  informed  as  early  as  prac- 
ticable of  the  approach  to  our  waters  of  any  transports  or  vessels.  1 
shall  endeavor  to  have  watch  kept  on  the  Potomac  of  the  movements  ol 
vessels  down  that  river,  as  it  is  very  difficult  to  approach  Aquia  Creek. 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General 


Headquarters, 

Petersburg,  Va.,  November  24,  1862. 
Gov.  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  Raleigh,  N.  C : 

Dear  Sir  : AVhen  I joined  our  forces  that  were  assembled  near  Tar 
borough  I was  very  forcibly  struck  with  the  want  of  positive  and  aocu 
rate  information  as  respected  the  force  of  the  enemy  under  Geneia 
Foster  as  well  as  to  the  roads  along  which  he  was  advancing,  and  whici 
important  information  I think  could  and  should  have  been  convene! 
to  General  Martin  by  the  inhabitants  residing  along  the  line  of  In? 
march.  To  remedy  such,  or  rather  to  provide  for  the  ascertaining  o 
all  movements  of  the  enemy  on  any  future  advance,  permit  me  to  sug 


See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXI,  p.  1026. 


Chai>.  XXX.j  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


785 


gest  that  you  cause  in  all  the  eastern  counties,  as  far  as  practical  the 
enrollment  of  all  persons  capable  of  bearing  arms  into  companies  (that 
are  not  conscripts),  whose  duty  it  shall  be  to  watch  the  enemy,  and  on  any 
moYements  taking  place  to  hover  on  his  line  of  march  and  give  infor- 
mation and  join  our  forces  as  guides  and  skirmishers  ; these,  on  beino- 
enrolled,  to  meet  occasionally  for  drill  and  consultation  under  their  offi"- 
cers  as  to  what  each  shall  do  on  the  occasion  and  arrangement  of  places 
of  rendezvous  5 the  rolls  of  such  companies  to  be  sent  to  Eichmond  to 
put  them  m the  Confederate  service,  but  not  to  serve  unless  such  occa- 
sion for  local  service  be  required;  the  sole  object  of  putting  them  in 
the  Confederate  service  being  that  should  any  be  taken  prisoners  they 
can  be  exchanged.  No  troops  in  the  service  of  any  State  when  taken 
prisoners  can  be  exchanged,  the  United  States  Government  only  deal- 
ng  with  the  Confederate  Government.  These  men  can  and  must  re- 
nam  at  home  just  as  though  not  in  service  until  their  officers  call  them 
)ut  on  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  All  the  details  of  these  duties  can  be 
irranged  by  the  men  and  officers  when  they  assemble,  the  whole  beino- 
nore  particularly  to  gain  and  give  information  and  act  as  guides  when 
lecessary.  Such  a company  as  this  for  local  purposes  I commanded  in 
VIississippi  long  before  secession  and  for  domestic  tranquillity  at  home. 
1 ^eiy  heavy  penalty  was  attached  to  any  member  who  did  not  assem- 
)le  with  his  gun  and  ammunition  at  one  of  the  rendezvouses,  or  at  the 
learest  rendezvous  to  the  point  where  his  services  might  be  required 
in  notice  from  any  member  of  the  company ; consequently  each  knew 
le  would  meet  the  others  there.  By  such  a system  as  this  all  approach 
It  the  enemy  could  be  made  known  and  all  preparation  be  made  to  meet 
urn  more  successfully  by  our  army.  I deem  it  much  preferable  to  call- 
ug  out  militia  and  taking  them  from  their  homes.  Besides,  this  is  a 
evolution  of  the  people,  and  those  out  of  the  army  are  as  deeply  inter- 
sted  as  those  mustered  into  the  service.  All  good  citizens  must  aid. 
t has  been  truly  said  that  ‘‘  when  a people  are  suddenly  called  upon 

0 faght  for  their  liberty  and  are  sorely  pressed  upon,  the  last  field  of 
lattle  IS  the  floors  upon  which  their  children  have  played ; the  cham- 
'ers  where  the  family  of  each  man  has  slept ; upon  and  under  the  roofs 

V hich  they  have  been  sheltered ; in  the  gardens  of  their  recreations ; 

1 the  streets  or  in  the  market-place ; before  the  altars  of  their  temples 
nd  among  their  congregated  dwellings,  blazing  and  uprooted ; ” and  if 
ae  people  cannot  do  all  or  part  of  this,  they  can  organize  and  ambush 
lie  enemy  by  the  wayside  and  dog  his  steps  and  harass  him  at  every 
\vamp  and  crossing  in  those  counties.  Some  of  the  best  and  most  in- 
uential  citizens  should  by  their  presence  and  example  be  with  the  par- 
es engaged  in  obstructing  the  rivers,  and  not  sit  idle,  smoking  the 
ipeot  peace  by  their  family  firesides  and  calling  solely  on  our  poor 
ddiers  to  do  all.  We  must  all  unite  against  a common  and  barbarous 
tiemy,  who  disregards  most  of  the  customs  of  civilized  war 

Yours,  very  truly, 

S.  G.  EEENGH, 

Major-  General^  Comynandmg, 


Headquarters, 

^ ^ Wilmington,  N.  U.,  November  26,  3862. 

ajor-Gcneral  French, 

Commanding  District,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

‘I*,®  instant  is  received.  I Iiope  Radclifife’s 
ciment  will  be  on  shortly  as  well  as  Faison^s.  The  attack  on  Wil- 

50  R R — YOL  XVIII 


786  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX-j 

mington  will  be  by  land  from  Topsail.  Possibly  a feint  or  diversionl 
simultaneously  may  be  attempted  with  gunboats  on  the  outer  haibor. 
I have  reported  to  the  Department  10,000  infantry,  six  batteries  of  ar 
tillery,  and  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  as  the  very  least  force  by  which 
Wilmington  can  be  rendered  secure  against  an  advance  from  the  Sound. 
While  the  Department  agrees  with  me  in  this  necessity,  we  are  so  pressed 
evervwhere  that  doubtless  it  will  be  unable  to  comply.  You  remark, 
in  re"«-ard  to  co-operativeness,  if  Wilmington  is  attacked,  will  send  yon; 
assistance.”  It  must  be  observed  that  if  the  attack  is  waited  for  it  will- 
be  too  late  to  send  assistance.  With  their  advance  from  the  Sound  they 

would  of  course  cut  off  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  W E — 

and  the  garrison  here  can  neither  be  relieved  nor  can  it  retreat  againsi 
such  an  approach.  The  artillery  on  the  river  cannot  be  counted  an  ele 
meut  in  the  defense.  In  any  case  they  must  remain  at  their  batteries 
Clingman’s  brigade  (when  complete),  Y'oung’s  small  battalion,  and  one 
battery  is  all  that  is  here  for  the  defense  of  the  place. 

Very  respectfully,  ^ ^ WHITING, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington.,  N.  0.,  November  26,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding  District.,  Richmondy  Va. : 

General  : Yours  of  the  21st  is  received  to-day.  I regret  as  you  d( 
the  inability  to  supply  the  troops  I deem  necessary  to  secure  this  place 
I was  afraid  of  it,  but  it  was  necessary  to  represent  exactly  the  state  o 
affairs  and  the  necessity  in  the  premises.  We  must  do  the  best  we  can 
I have  been  in  hopes  that  possibly  a few  thousand  men  might  be  sparei 
from  the  western  army^  for  the  winter  on  this  coast  if  not  from  Genera 
Lee.  The  river  defenses  here  are  in  pretty  good  order,  and  seem  to  h 
well  designed.  Port  Caswell  is  weak.  If  the  river  was  the  only  rout 
of  the  enemy  to  this  city  I think  he  would  find  it  difficult.  Day  betor 
yesterday  a steamer  entered  New  Diver  and  steamed  up  several  miles 
I ordered  the  only  light  battery  I have  to  attack  her.  Have  not  ye 
heard  from  it.  General  French  seems  to  be  under  the  impression  tua 
I am  under  his  command.  Will  you  please  to  inform  him  that  by  tli 
express  direction  of  the  War  Department  I report  to  you  for  orders  t 
shall,  of  course,  keep  him  advised  of  everything  that  attains,  witii  , 
view  to  cordial  co-operation,  but  I am  not  under  his  orders. 


Very  respectfully. 


W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General y Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Richmondy  Ta.y  November  26,  18C2. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  ^ _ . , , 

Comdg.  Army  of  Northern  Ja.y  Fredenclcsburgy  Va.: 

General  ; Your  letter  of  the  23d  was  received  at,  tlio  Point,  of  KocU 
on  Monday  afternoon.  Instructions  were  given  to  General  I'l'enc^  ‘ 
Brigadier-Generals  Wise  aiuLDaniel  to  take  effective  measures  lor  i 
curing  the  earliest  practicable  information. 


CiiAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


787 


In  the  absence  of  perfectly  conclusive  and  definite  information  everv- 
thing  tends  to  confirm  the  impression  that  the  enemy  are  preparing  to 
strike  determined  blows  south  of  the  James  River.  I feel  grave  appre 
hensions  for  the  safety  of  Wilmington.  Besides  the  artillery  garrmons 
thiniobu*  and  batteries  there  are  only  four  regiments  of  ‘infantry  at 
that  point.  Evans’  brigade  is  at  Kinston,  with  a superior  force  of  the 
*'^''®®tening  Goldsborough.  At  Weldon  there  are 
1 cavalry  regiments,  under  General  Robertson,  being  in- 

e/tcni-  Ih  Jr®  enemy  are  pressing  upon  the  Blackwater  to  such  an 
extent  that  General  French  has  ordered  down  to  that  line  four  regi- 
'nfantry,  in  addition  to  the  two  of  cavalry,  and  sent  all  his 
aiailable  artillery,  including  the  two  30-pounder  Parrott  guns  with 
Dabney  s company,  from  here.  This  leaves  two  regiments  in  Peters- 
burg besides  one  regiment  local  guard  in  the  town.  In  accordance  with 
your  letter  the  Fitty-uinth  Georgia  and  the  battery  were  withdrawn 
Irom  the  South  Anna  Railroad  Bridges  after  the  20th  instant.  I would 
be  glad  to  have  the  four  Mississippi  companies  of  infantry  ordered  to 
rejoin  their  regiment  here,  and  would  suggest  that  Golouel  Ball’s  cav- 
J ti  o J ']^^tery  attached,  be  relieved  at  Fredericksburg  and  placed 

on  the  line  between  the  mouth  of  the  Pamunkey  and  your  right.  There 
IS  a great  deal  of  contraband  trade  and  unauthorized  communication 
:„e  I liope  you  will  soon  be  enabfod  to  senS 

me  the  Sixty-first  \ irginia  and  the  Thirteenth  Virginia  Oavalrv  for  serv- 
ice on  the  south  side  ot  James  River.  We  are  extremely  weak  in  num- 
bers at  all  points  from  Richmond  to  Wilmington  inclusive.  To  be  pre- 

ilTsa  Jfo  d®o^^®“*f  “fic  from  your  army  as  soon  as  it  is  at 

dl  sate  to  do  so.  I have  directed  some  of  General  Whiting’s  letters  to 
be  forwarded  for  your  information.  Please  do  not  forget  to  send  me 

^alfwior  Blues  as  soon  as  you  can  spare  them.  Gen- 

-lals  Whiting  and  French  are  both  calling  lor  artillery  and  both  need 

ili'i  negroes  called  for  working  on  the 

lortificatiODS,  and  roads.  I have  reo nested  a call  to  bp 
uade  tor  5,000  more  negroes.  I rode  over  the  country  and  lines  between 
VnproiJ  on  Monday,  spent  Tuesday  around  Petersburg  with 

roturned  last  night.  The  works  at  Petersburg  are 

ave  (IRe/tio  ® ’^e^g  absent  I 

pH  , ^ uegroes  to  be  sent  there  as  soon  as  they  are  re- 

eived.  Upon  your  refusal  to  part  with  General  Early,  Maj.  Gen  Sam 

irOo*’  H assigned  to  the  local  commaih  here  was 

lose  Jto"tldfi  and  I am  still  necessarily  confined 

losely  to  th  s place.  I am  very  anxious  to  visit  iJ^-orth  Carolina  but  ud 

0 this  time  have  not  been  able  to  do  so.  our  up 

Respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

. Headquarters, 

.'rriZENs  OF  Wilminoton:  " 28,  1862. 

1 dpfo.? citizens  of  Wilmington  who  are  willing  to  take  arms 
u efmise  of  their  homes  (and  I well  know  there  are  inairv  such)  to  “r 

K arv  LiefeS's 


788 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  | 


ercise  of  many  duties,  are  not  otherwise  called  on  to  bear  arms  in  this 
war.  I and  my  staff  will  be  glad  to  afford  them  instruction  at  such 
times  and  places  as  may  be  most  convenient.  They  will  be  called  on 
when  the  enemy  is  at  our  doors.  I am  confident,  from  my  long  and  in- 
timate association  with  the  men  of  Wilmington  and  vicinity,  that  they 
are  not  only  willing  but  eager  to  fight  the  invader,  and  am  sure  they  will 

do  their  utmost  to  the  last.  ^ WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Biclimond,  Va.,  November  29,  1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Petersburg,  Ya. : 

General:  For  your  information  I herewith  forward  you  copy  of  a 
letter  iust  received  from  Brigadier-General  Whiting,  dated  Wilmington, 
November  18.  I request  that  General  Evans  be  ordered  to  support 
General  Whiting  at  Wilmington  with  his  whole  force  if  necessary  when- 
ever called  upon  by  General  Whiting,  provided  the  support  can  be  given 
without  endangering  too  much  the  points  guarded  by  General  Evans. 
You  will  please  send  to  General  Whiting  a copy  of  your  instructions  to 
General  Evans.  I will  write  to  General  Whiting  instructing  him  to 
o-ive  to  General  Evans'all  the  support  within  his  power  consistent  with 
his  defense  of  Wilmington  in  case  General  Evans  should  be  pressed  by 
the  enemy.  I fear,  however,  that  until  General  Whiting  shall  be  re-eu- 
forced  he  will  not  be  able  to  render  much  assistance  to  General  Evans 
now  that  the  fever  has  abated  in  Wilmington.  The  object  of  this  is 
that  in  case  of  an  attack  by  the  enemy  upon  either  command  there  will 
be  perfect  co-operation  between  the  commanders. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c.,  ^ SMITH 

Yainr- General. 


Abstract  from  Eeturn*  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  commanded  by  Moj.  Gen.  S. 
G.  French,  for  November,  1862. 


Commands. 


Present  for 
duty. 


Petersburg,  Va. : , . , 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew,  brigade 

Col.  J.  K.  Connally,  Fifty-fifth  Regiment 
North  Carolina  Troops. 

Capt.  J.  F.  Milligan,  Signal  Corps - 

Fort  Clifton,  Capt.  F.  M.  Wright,  infantry  and 

Garysburg,  N.  C.,  Brig.  Gen.  [B.  H.]  Robert- 
son, cajralry  brigade.  ^ „ 

Piince  George  Court-House,  Capt.  I).  Bell, 
cavalrv. 

Port  Walthall,  Captain  Sturdivant,  artillery.. 


189 

26 


Grand  total 317 


3, 465 


107 

222 


1,327 

69 

73 


5,729 


4, 417 
684 


122 

300 


1,744 

82 

85 


fcccs 

tc 

<5 


5,  256 
814 


125 

351 


2,  321 
84 
96 


7,434 


9, 047 


34 


183 


Artillery. 


*No  reports  from  District  of  North  Carolina,  District  of  the  Cape  Fear,  Franklin,  "Va. 
ton,  N.  C. 


and  h.inv 


Ckap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


789 


^nTaval  Commandant’s  Office, 
Wilmington^  N.  C.,  December  2,  1862. 
To  the  Secretary  of  War, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir  : AcljutaRt-General  Cooper  sometime  since  informed  me  that  men 
m the  ranks  of  the  army  who  were  mariners  by  profession  would  bv 
your  predecessor  be  detailed,  on  application,  for  the  naval  service,  pro- 
vided they  were  not  m the  face  of  the  enemy. 

As  commander  of  the  naval  defenses  of  North  Carolina  I submitted 
last  month  to  General  French,  at  Petersburg,  and  to  Governor  Vance, 
at  l.aleigh,  a plan  for  defending  the  inland  water-courses  of  North  Car- 
olina against  marauding  expeditions  of  the  enemy  by  means  of  movable 
batteries  of  heavier  caliber  than  howitzers.  Both  promised  co-operation 
but  without  the  sanction  and  interposition  of  the  authority  of  your  De- 
partment there  is  no  hope  of  success. 

My  purpose  is  to  raise  men  accustomed  to  the  water— for  at  times  it 
® ’^ater— divided  into  three  companies, 

liii!  1 3-1-pounders  each,  to  be  posted,  respectively,  at  interme- 
li  * Cliovran  and  the  Boanoke,  the  Eoanoke  and 

the  Tar,  and  the  Tar  and  the  Pamlico  Eivers— the  inland  position  to 
be  as  near  as  possible  and  equidistant  to  the  two  streams  between 
which  It-  lies ; the  roads  to  be  kept  m good  condition  both  to  the  rivers 
and  for  some  distance  down  their  banks,  and  lines  of  signals,  consist- 
ing of  red,  white,  and  black  canvas  balls,  to  be  established  by  isolation 
ot  trees  denuded  of  their  branches,  from  central  positions  to  remotest 
look-out  points.  By  this  means,  upon  first  intelligence  of  the  enemy 
ascending  one  of  the  rivers,  two  of  the  batteries,  one  on  each  side,  could 

terieTnldap  r 1 * to  defend  it.  These  movable  bat- 

teri^s,  auhke  fixed  ones,  will  not  require  protecting  forces:  and  in  the 

went  of  a flank  movement  by  the  enemy  it  is  proposed  to  have  roads 
tiom  central  positions  to  the  railroads  for  transportation  of  batteries- 
ind  as  the  soil  of  North  Carolina  between  the  delta  and  the  mountains 
sanely  it  by  consequence  becomes  more  indurated  than  softened  bv 
-lie  winter  rams.  There  are  many  men  now  in  the  camps  who  from 

a'lmirably  fitted  for  such  an  undertaking. 
Hid  i respectfully  ask  your  permission  to  procure  their  names  and,  they 
-onseuting,  your  authority  for  their  transfer  to  the  rolls  of  the  Navy, 
t would  be  mere  platitude  to  speak  of  both  professions  bein^  embarked 

icubfe'^an^^f'^  intelligence  will  decide  what  is  prac- 

icable,  and  its  decision  will  be  enforced  by  patriotism. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  F.  LYNCH, 
Flag-Officer,  C.  IS,  Navy. 


daj 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N G.,  December  2,  1862. 
Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Richmond,  Va. : 

General  : I fully  appreciate  your  situation,  and  have  for 
lei  L-  ‘decided  one  way  or  another  between 

ir^nw  ’'ope  for  increase  of  force 

trate  tlio  Mj  chief  aim  and  hope,  after  attempting  to  demon- 

romi«iD  ^ ot  the  case  and  amount  of  troops  required  to  give 

use  of  a successful  resistance  in  this  position,  has  been  to  show  also 


790 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


that  after  attack  it  will  be  too  late  to  re-enforce.  I have  also  been 
somewhat  restive  under  the  delays  which  have  been  made  in  complyino^ 
with  your  orders  and  with  the  change  in  designated  regiments  made  by 
your  juniors  in  rank,  apparently  without  your  sanction.  General  French 
writes  me  a note  explaining  the  delay,  but  not  the  change  in  the  regi- 
ments. I needed,  also,  very  much  more  field  artillery,  and  that  was 
an  arm  which  I presumed,  from  my  knowledge  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac,  there  could  be  no  difficulty  in  supplying.  I have  received, 
both  from  Eichmond  and  General  Beauregard,  telegrams  relative  to  the 
starting  of  the  enemy’s  fleet.  They  do  not  so  far  seem  to  be  intended 
for  me;  most  probably,  in  my  opinion,  for  Mobile.  They  have  had 
ample  time  to  reach  Charleston  or  this  place.  I think  that  we  can  make 
a pretty  fair  fight  against  a naval  attack,  but  as  I have  frequently  ex- 
plained, my  force  is  utterly  inadequate  on  land.  The  report  shows  quite 
a large  aggregate  of  heavy  artillery,  but  that  cannot  be  included  at  all 
in  the  estimate  for  the  land  defense,  nor  indeed  can  the  heavy  artillery 
defend  itself  against  land  attack.  I wish  you  could  come  and  see  me. 
In  two  hours’  observation  you  would  learn  more  of  the  situation  than 
from  a dozen  of  my  letters,  though  I do  not  think  you  would  differ  ma- 
terially from  me. 

Very  trulj,  yours,  ^ ^ WHITING, 

Briqadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Forces  on  the  Blackwater, 

December  4,  1862. 

General  Beauregard: 

My  Hear  General  : My  position  in  command  of  the  forces  at  this 
advanced  post  places  me  in  frequent  and  full  communication  with  friends 
within  the  enemy’s  lines.  They  afford  me  information  which  I generally 
find  correct.  From  a letter,  dated  yesterday,  written  by  my  most  reliable 
correspondent  in  Suffolk,  I think  proper  to  furnish  you  the  follo^vmg 
extract : 


I would  further  state  that  I also  learn  a simultaneous  attack  will  he  made  on  Ired- 
erickshurg,  Weldon,  and  Charleston.  They  will  attack  Charleston,  tney  say,  witii 
200  vessels,  and  that  very  soon. 


This  you  will  take  for  what  it  is  worth.  In  the  Kew  York  Times  of 
the  28th,  in  the  local  column,  is  a paragraph  to  the  effect  that  Banks 
expedition  of  300  vessels  is  about  to  start,  with  the  design  of  inflicting 
a destructive  blow  on  the  heart  of  the  rebellion.  Perhaps  it  means 
Charleston.  In  abundance  of  precaution  I have  thought  proper  to 
possess  you  of  these  rumors. 

Confident  in  your  ability  to  repel  any  assault,  I have  the  honor  to  be,; 


truly,  your  friend. 


EOGER  A.  PRYOK. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  Y.  C.,  December  6,  1862. 

Governor  Vance,  Raleigh^  N.  C. : 

Sir  : I send  you  herewith  a copy  of  letters  addressed  to  the  War  De- 
partment since  my  assignment  to  the  defense  of  the  Cape  Fear,  tone 
ing  the  importance  of  the  matter  in  hand  and  the  men  and  means  re 


^HAP.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


791 


juired.  I believe  the  Department  to  be  fully  impressed  with  the  urgency 
)f  the  case  and  aware  of  its  necessities  j but  pressed  so  heavily  at  so 
nauy  points  it  has  so  far  been  unable  to  supply  here  but  a very  small 
)art  of  the  number  of  troops  I consider  indispensable  to  a successful 
Iftfense  of  Wilmington.  In  the  mean  time  I am  endeavoring  to  make 
he  best  use  I can  of  the  means  at  my  disposal.  In  view  of  my  small 
bice  and  the  undoubted  intention  of  the  enemy  to  attack  this  place  at 
10  distant  day,  I recommend  Your  Excellency  to  take  speedy  and  strong 
neasures  to  secure  to  your  people  the  large  supply  of  salt  now  on  hand 
n the  city.  It  should  at  once  be  placed,  at  the  expense  of  the  owners, 
•ut  of  the  chance  of  capture  by  the  four  routes — Wilmington  and  Man- 
hester  Eailroad,  Charlotte  and  Eutherford  Eailroad,  Cape  Fear  Eiver, 
md  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Eailroad.  Should  the  place  fall  (and  I 
annot  say  it  will  not,  unless  I am  heavily  and  speedily  re-enforced)  the 
alt-works  must  be  lost.  I should  do  all  in  my  power  to  aid  in  securing 
L The  accompanying  letter  will  explain  to  you  the  difficulty  of  this 
•osition. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding, 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  December  7, 1862. 
Irig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington^  N.  C.  : 

Look  out  for  Weldon,  if  they  are  not  going  to  James  Eiver. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  December  8,  1862. 
[aj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding,  (he.,  Richmond,  Va. : 

General  ; I understand  that  your  first  order  directing  four  regiments 
) be  sent  here  to  me  assigned  the  two  which  had  been  taken  from  here 
y General  French,  viz,  [Paul  F.]  Faison’s  and  Eadcliffe’s.  Neither  of 
le  latter  have  arrived.  It  is  reported  that  Colonel  Jordan’s  regiment, 
hich  has  come,  was  substituted  for  Colonel  Faison’s  by  General  French, 
a the  ground  that  Colonel  Faison’s  was  too  good  a regiment  for  him  to 
)are  and  he  preferred  sending  an  indifterent  one ; but  as  I have  but 
ery  few  troops  with  which  to  perform  or  attempt  a great  work  I much 
refer  they  should  be  as  good  as  can  be  had.  I therefore  respectfully 
iquest  that  you  will  cause  General  French  to  carry  out  the  original 
’der.  General  Clingman  is  my  authority  for  the  circumstance  of  the 
ibstitutiou.  So  far  three  regiments  have  arrived  here — Cantwell’s, 
flaws,  and  Jordan’s.  Should  it  be  in  your  power  to  forward  at  any 
me  additional  troops,  and  I cannot  have  any  of  my  old  Mississippi 
'gimeiits,  I should  like  to  have  Colonel  Leventhorpe’s  North  Carolina 
’■giment  sent  here. 

I have  not  so  far  been  able  to  ascertain  the  destination  of  the  fleet 
ported  to  have  left  New  Berne.  It  has  not  to  our  knowledge  passed 
the  southward. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


792 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX, 


[Indorsement.] 

Kichmond,  Ya.,  December  11,  1862. 
Eesnectfully  referred  to  General  Erencli. 

I am  disappointed  and  surprised  to  learn  that  only  three  regimenP: 
had  arrived  at  Wilmington  on  the  8th  instant.  I would  be  pleased  tt| 
have  all  the  facts  stated  in  reference  to  the  change  of  regiments  and  the 
cause  of  delav  or  non-arrival  of  the  tourth  regiment. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond.;  Ya.,  December  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith: 

General  : The  inclosed  letter  of  Governor  Y ance,  of  North  Carolina 
and  the  reply*  of  this  Department  upon  the  subject  of  the  destruction  o 
certain  staple  productions  of  that  State  in  the  contingency  of  the  dan 
ger  of  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  will  inform  you  ot  th( 
views  of  the  Department  as  to  your  own  conduct  in  that  contingency 
Much  property  has  been  sacrificed  improperly  in  the  Southwest  undei 
the  act  of  Congress  of  March  17,  1862,  to  regulate  the  destruction  o 
propertv  under  militarv  necessity,  and  anxiety  is  naturally  felt  wheuevei 
there  is^^any  prospect  of  an  exercise  of  the  powers  inirusted  to  the  mill 
tarv  authorities.  While  the  Department  is  persuaded  of  the  propriety  o. 
destroying  property  rather  than  it  should  be  captured  to  aid  the  enem^j 
in  the  prosecution  of  the  war,  it  is  solicitous  that  the  destruction  shouk! 
not  take  place  unless  there  is  imminent  danger  that  such  a contingency 
will  happen.  You  will  instruct  the  generals  and  other  officers  ot  you] 
department  conformably  to  the  views  herein  expressed. 

With  consideration  and  respect,  your  obedient  servant. 


By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 


J.  A.  CAMPBELL, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  Tfar. 


[Inclosure.] 

State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Dept., 

Raleigh,  W.  0.,  December  6,  1862. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  Viar : 

Dear  Sir  : The  State  of  North  Carolina  is  purchasing  some  15,00i 
or  20,000  bales  of  cotton  and  storing  in  the  interior  for  purpose  ot  oD 
taining  credit,  abroad,  &c.  The  order  to  burn  all  not  removed  vest  o 
tbe  Weldon  and  Wilmington  Railroad  by  the  ICth  instant  will  embrac 
a large  lot  bought  by  the  State.  Can  you  not  order  General  P’^ch  t 
respect  all  such  where  the  holder  exhibits  a contract  of  sa  e to  t 
State?  If  so,  I will  make  arrangements  to  destroy  it  ^ 

approach  of  the  enemy.  I would  respectfully  ^iggest  tMt  ^xec 
tion  of  that  order  will  have  a very  unhappy  eflect  on 
the  country,  not  only  producing  great  dissatisfaction 
iu  many  instances,  where  i.eople  have  lost  negroes  and  stoch  anrt  av 
nothing  left  but  their  cotton  to  live  upon.  1 respectfully  recoimiicu. 
that  the  order  be  generally  delayed. 

Yery  respectfully,  ymur  obedient  servant,  vaNCE. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


793 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg^  Ya.^  December  9,  18G2. 

General  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding  Army,  e&c.,  Richmond^  Va.: 

Dear  Sir  : I sent  you  a copy  of  my  letter  to  General  J.  G.  Foster, 
U.  S.  Army  ; inclosed  you  have  his  reply.*  You  will  perceive  he  con- 
veniently disavows  that  the  acts  were  done  with- his  knowledge  and 
consent.  I cannot  well  go  behind  that,  and  unless  instructed  other- 
wise by  Saturday  next  shall  reply  without  further  reference. 

Yours,  very  truly, 


S.  G.  FEENCH 


Major- General j Commanding. 


P.  S.— I have  not  yet  received  the  affidavits  sent  you  of  the  outrage 
in  Craven  County  on  women.  Send  it  as  soon  as  possible.  I forwarded 
them  to  you. 


Special  Orders,  \ Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

^ Richmond,  Va.,  December  9,  1862. 

***###* 

XVII.  By  direction  of  the  President  the  privilege  of  the  writ  of  ha- 
beas corpus  is  hereby  suspended  at  Salisbury,  X.  0.,  and  for  10  miles 
around  said  place. 

* * * * * * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JXO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Abstract  from  Field  Iteturn  of  troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith,  December 
10, 1862  {headquarters  Bichmond,  Va.). 


Present  for 
duty. 


Command. 


1,  584  24, 717  32,  297  42,  400 


716  11, 254  14, 103  19, 141 

174  2, 804  3, 911  4, 826 

85  1, 486  2, 017  2, 680 

136  1, 628  2, 229  2, 962 

192  3,080  4,128  5,253 

136  2, 341  2, 944  3, 943 

97  1, 481  1, 955  2, 457 

23  279  415  488 

17  245  377  391 

8 119  218  259 


See  French  to  Foster,  November  27,  and  Foster’s  reply,  December  4,  pp.  466,  470,  471. 


794 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. , 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N,  C.,  December  12,  18G2. 
Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received  from  Col.  James  Kad-i 
cliff  e : 

The  enemy  in  large  force  is  within  2 miles  of  Trenton,  on  the  north  side  of  the  Trent- 
River;  reported  advancing,  direction  either  Kinston  or  Magnolia.  The  fleet  is  re-! 
ported  to  have  left  New  Berne  to  attack  Wilmington.  i 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING,  I 
Brigadier- General, 


Circular.]  Headquarters,  j 

Richmond,  Ya.,  December  12,  1862.  ] 

General  : Major-General  Elzey  having  reported  to  me  for  duty  is  as- 
signed to  the  command  of  the  Richmond  defenses  and  that  portion  of 
my  command  lying  north  of  James  River.  Hrewry’s  Bluff  and  the  works; 
around  Manchester  being  a part  of  the  Richmond  defenses  proper  will 
be  under  the  command  of  General  Elzey.  It  is  difficult  to  prescribe! 
exact  geographical  boundaries  between  the  commands  of  Generals  ElzeyJ 
Erench,  and  Whiting,  but  even  were  these  lines  definitely  drawn  thejl 
would  necessarily  be  disregarded  in  emergency,  and,  in  case  of  active 
operations  against  the  enemy,  department  or  district  lines  would  be  set 
aside  and  a combined  effort  made  to  beat  the  foe.  I desire  to  impress 
upon  you  the  importance  of  co-operation  and  a thorough  iinderstanding 
of  the  condition  of  affairs  in  the  respective  commands.  Information  con- 
cerning the  movements  of  the  enemy  should  be  promptly  sent  to  the 
nearest  commander  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  communicated  to  thn 
office.  It  is  my  desire  that  you  should  exercise  within  your  respective 
commands  all  the  authority  which  the  regulations,  usage,  and  orders 
confer  upon  geographical  military  commanders  in  war  in  the  presence 
of  the  enemy.  I shall  endeavor  to  give  you  all  the  assistance  and  sup- 
port within  my  power  and  will  be  with  you  in  person  whenever  practi 
cable.  The  duties  of  Brigadier-General  Winder  being  of  a peculiai 
character,  and  more  or  less  connected  directly  with  the  War  Depart 
ment,  he  will  continue  to  make  his  report  to  this  office  and  to  the  Sec 
retary  of  War  or  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  of  the  army  as  here- 
tofore; but  as  regards  the  military  operations  proper,  and  the  defenses 
of  the  city,  all  will,  when  called  upon,  be  under  the  direction  ot  tiie 


senior  officer  present. 

Respectfully  and  truly,  yours. 


G.  W.  SMITE, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


General  Orders, 
No.  15. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Ya.,  December  12,  1862. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Rich 
mond  defenses,  and  of  such  other  portions  of  this  command  as  are  noi 
included  in  the  Cape  Eear  District  and  the  Department  of  North  Caro 
lina.  He  will  establish  his  headquarters  in  the  city  of  Richmond. 

II.  Capt.  John  W.  Riely,  assistant  adjutant-general,  is  temporariij 
assigned  to  duty  wdth  Major-General  Elzey. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith : ^ ,,-r^T  mrAxr 

SAME.  W.  MELTON, 
Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


795 


Brigade  Headquarters, 
Chaffin^ s Farm,  Va.j  December  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding^  &c.: 

General:  I report  to  you  the  condition  of  things  in  the  Chicka- 
bominy  and  York  Peninsulas,  below  this  post:  fW.  P.]  ShinglePs  and 
[L.  J.]  Hawley’s  cavalry  were  not  sufficient  for  pickets  or  for  posts. 
They  had  been  badly  disciplined.  The  pickets  were  negligent  and  were 
cut  off,  and  the  posts  not  sufficiently  guarded  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
making  very  dangerous  dashes.  I have  deemed  it  proper  and  necessary 
to  send  Lieutenant-Colonel  Councill,  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Virginia  Eegi- 
ment,  in  command  of  about  100  effective  infantry  and  the  re-enforce- 
ments of  Major  Eobertson’s  cavalry.  He  has  taken  post  at  Sherman’s, 
on  the  Diascund  road,  2 miles  below  Forge  Bridge.  Yesterday  evening 
be  sent  to  me  the  accompanying  field  return,  which  shows: 


SHINGLEIi’S  COMMAND  [HOLCOMBE  LEGION]. 


Commissioned  officers 

Non-commissioned  officers 

Privates ...  i.iq 

Affgrenate  

[Effective  total] 

Extra  duty 

Fit  for  field  duty 

ROBERTSON’S  COMMAND. 

Officers  

Non-commissioned  officers 

Privates inn 

Aggregate 

[Effective  total] 

Extra  duty 

Fit  for  field  duty 

HAWLEY’S  COMMAND. 


Officers 4 

Non-commissioned  officers * y 

Privates .'JJ.*  42 


Sick, 


Aggregate. 


54 

7 


[Effective  total] 
Extra  duty 


47 

3 


Fit  for  duty 

Total  cavalry  fit  for  duty. 


44 

272 


796 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.j 


INFANTRY  PRESENT. 


Officers 

Non-commissioned  officers 
Privates 


10 

15 

93 


Aggregate 
Sick 


118 

6 


[Effective  total] 
Extra  duty 


112 

1 


Fit  for  duty 

Add  total  effective  force  of  cavalry 


Total  effective  force,  infantry  and  cavalry 33" 

The  accompanyiug  report  from  Colouel  CouDcill  and  my  reply  will 
give  details  of  duties  reported  upon  and  in  hand.  You  will  see  that  J 
have  informed  him  how  to  get  forage.  The  suggestion  to  take  the  corn 
in  shucks  might  be  well  to  observe.  It  saves  labor,  saves  corn  from 
shelling,  and  gets  long  forage  as  well  as  short  in  the  most  compact 
form  for  transportation. 

Deserters  in  blew  Kent  were  not  found;  they  were  straggling  con- 
scripts ; I have  ordered  their  arrest.  I ask  that  printed  forms  for  com 
pany  morning  reports  may  be  sent.  My  quartermaster  cannot  get  any. 
I send  you  a report  from  Lieutenant  Harman,  who  is  my  scout  in  Isk 
of  Wight.  From  his  messages  I infer  that  the  enemy  are  massing  theii 
forces,  via  Norfolk,  in  and  below  Suffolk.  I have  as  yet  received  no  dis 
])atches  or  messages  from  the  scouts  sent  to  Matthews  and  Gloucester 
Have  any  been  received  at  department  headquarters  from  them  ? M} 
men  have  nearly  completed  their  winter  quarters  and  the  outer  line  ol 
our  field  breastworks.  The  camp  hospital  is  progressing,  but  this  build 
ing  and  all  others  have  been  delayed  by  want  of  lumber.  We  are  uov 
cutting  and  hauling  our  own  lumber  from  Cox’s  woods  and  Aiken’s  Mill 
As  soon  as  sufficient  is  obtained  a part  of  the  hospital  buildings  can  be 
completed  and  the  storehouse  for  provisions  can  be  commenced.  The 
latter  can  soon  be  put  up.  Thus  I have  endeavored  to  picket  and  guard 
our  outposts,  to  provide  for  them,  to  construct  the  necessary  wintei 
hospital  and  other  buildings,  and  to  complete  our  intrenchments.  Ir 
another  week  the  whole  will  be  well  on  the  way  to  completion.  I there 
fore  make  a timely  application  for  leave  of  absence  for  nine  days  fron 
Wednesday,  December  24  instant,  in  order  that  I may  meet  my  familj 
the  second  time  since  April  last,  and  attend  to  some  necessary  and  im 
portant  private  business.  The  first  leave,  you  will  remember,  was  cut 
off  by  a sudden  recall  to  duty.  I make  this  application  now  because 
danger  is  seemingly  somewhat  distant  and  I might  perhaps  be  bettei 
spared  sooner  than  at  the  time  I ask  for.  My  family  is  still  at  Dovei 
Mills,  only  20  miles  above  Eichmond,  and  a courier  can  bring  me  back 
to  my  post  at  any  time  in  eight  hours  from  the  moment  he  leaves  youi 
headquarters,  and  I will  hurry  back  at  the  first  notice,  day  or  night 
but,  as  before,  I beg  you  will  not  grant  this  request  if  you  doubt  tlu 
propriety  of  doing  so. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


CHAr.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  797 

[Inclosures.] 

Hdqrs.  Forces  Operating  on  the  Peninsula, 

Sherman’s  Farm^  Fa.,  Fecemher  12,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise: 

General  : Your  dispatch*  of  December  10,  forwarded  from  Chaffin^s 
at  5 o’clock,  reached  me  at  1.30  a.  m.,  December  11.  Yesterday  morn- 
ing 1 ordered  a commissioned  officer  to  visit  the  courier  stations  as  far 
as  Crenshaw’s,  and  directed  him  to  notify  the  couriers  as  far  as  that 
place  that  I required  of  them  to  travel  with  dispatches  at  the  rate  of 
8 miles  an  hour ; that  in  case  of  failure  to  do  so  I would  have  the  delin- 
quents punished,  if  it  could  be  ascertained  who  they  were.  Informa- 
tion reached  me  yesterday,  through  an  officer  who  had  been  down  to 
our  pickets,  that  the  negroes  below  reported  that  the  enemy  would  come 
up  again  yesterday,  and  would  afford  an  opportunity  to  all  negroes 
who  wished  to  avail  themselves  of  the  chance  to  return  with  them. 
Coming,  as  the  information  did,  from  negroes,  I scarcely  credited  it,  but 
it  is  a notable  fact,  I am  informed,  that  heretofore  when  the  negroes  have 
announced  their  coming  they  have  actually  come.  I at  once  ordered 
the  cavalry  and  infantry  to  move,  directing  the  latter  to  occupy  a posi- 
tion at  Sherman’s  Mill,  and  accompanied  the  cavalry  myself  on  to  the 
Diascund,  crossed  the  Diascund,  and  proceeded  as  far  as  our  pickets  at 
James’  gate,  and  returned  by  the  way  of  Barhamsville.  My  object  was 
to  be  near  at  hand  in  the  event  our  pickets  needed  any  support,  and  if 
nothing  else  was  effected  our  visit  could  at  least  give  them  confidence. 

I could  hear  nothing  from  the  enemy.  From  what  I can  learn  there  is 
no  doubt  that  they  have  heard  that  this  post  has  been  re-enforced,  and  I 
am  inclined  to  think  they  will  not  come  up  again  shortly.  After  mature 
reflection,  I have  abandoned  for  the  present  the  plan  I submitted  in  my 
last  dispatch  of  ambuscading  the  enemy  at  James’  gate.  In  the  first 
place  there  is  no  certainty  as  to  their  coming  at  any  particular  time,  and 
we  might,  even  if  they  came  up  at  all,  be  compelled  to  lie  there  for  sev- 
eral days  and  then  not  have  a sight  of  them.  Secondly,  as  I stated  in 
my  communication  to  you,  1 think  it  is  not  prudent  to  operate  so  far 
down  with  a mere  detachment  of  infantry  and  in  a country  entirely 
unknown  to  them.  The  detachment  of  cavalry  that  you  ordered  to  be 
sent  to  the  upper  portion  of  New  Kent  returned  last  night.  Mr.  Hop- 
kms  knew  nothing  of  any  deserters  in  that  section,  and  informed  the 
officer  in  charge  that  the  information  which  he  had  imparted  to  the  de- 
partment was  with  reference  to  conscripts  and  not  deserters.  There  are 
no  doubt  many  of  them  in  that  locality.  My  forage-master  succeeded 
m procuring  forage  at  Mr.  Selden’s,  on  James  Eiver,  and  I think  more 
can  be  had  there.  I think  the  distance  from  Hopewell  to  Crenshaw’s 
too  far  for  a courier  to  ride,  and  would  recommend  that  a post  be  estab- 
lished at  Gill  & Ladd’s  shop.  Is  it  your  wish  that  Major  Kobertson, 
as  the  ranking  officer  of  cavalry  at  this  post,  shall  exercise  a command 
over  the  whole  cavalry  force,  or  must  his  command  be  confined  to  his 
own  cavalry? 

We  need  forms  for  company  morning  reports.  Forward  me  a supply 
ji  you  can  conveniently.  This  cavalry  force  does  not  seem  to  have 
oeen  much  accustomed  to  returns  of  any  kind.  I herewith  forward  a 
^n-monthly  return  of  the  command.  It  is  the  best  that  I can  do  with 
them  for  the  present. 

My  last  dispatch  was  hurriedly  written,  and  I regret  that  I should 


* Not  found. 


798 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


have  sent  it  without  my  signature.  The  fact  is  there  is  considerable 
annoyance  and  difficulty  to  encounter  with  this  command,  and  I 
scarcely  have  a moment’s  leisure  from  morning  until  night. 

I am,  general,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  CALVIN  COUNCILL, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Post. 

Brigade  Headquarters, 
Chaffin’s  Fann,  Va.,  December  12,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  [J.  C.]  CouNCiLL, 

Commanding^  d'C.: 

Colonel:  Your  movement  to  meet  the  enemy  is  approved.  I have 
no  doubt  the  negroes  are  in  constant  and  regular  communication  with 
the  enemy,  and  it  may  be  that  the  latter,  whenever  they  desire  to  dis- 
appoint your  movements  or  to  make  their  own  unmolested  will  cause 
the  former  to  give  it  out  that  they  are  coming  upon  a given  day.  I sug- 
gest that  you  might  possibly  deceive  the  deceivers  sometimes  by  goiug, 
seeming  to  return  to  your  camp,  and  going  back  to  your  advance  posi- 
tion suddenly  and  secretly,  say  at  night.  I would  never  advance  openly 
if  I could  do  it  hy  night  or  stealthily  at  any  time.  B3'  watchfulness  you 
can  catch  them  certainly.  Is  Sherman’s  Mill  not  too  far  oil*  for  the  in- 
fantry to  aid  your  cavalry?  I would  advance  them  to  Diascund  Bridge 
at  least,  or  not  at  all,  whenever  I expected  the  enemy  to  come  up.  It 
is  desirable  to  have  conscripts  arrested  and  made  to  serve  as  well  as 
deserters.  Have  every  one  you  can  reach  arrested  and  sent  to  Kichmond. 

Lieut.  Col.  Kandolph  Harrison,  of  the  Fourth,  informed  me  to-day 
that  his  father  has,  he  supposes,  500  barrels  of  corn,  which  is  being 
gathered  at  the  place  called  the  Kow,  below  the  Charles  City  Court- 
House.  I suggested  that  it  would  be  best  to  haul  the  corn  in  the  shucks 
to  your  camp  at  the  forge  or  Sherman’s.  It  would  save  the  labor  ot 
shucking  to  the  farm  and  would  give  you  both  long  and  short  forage, 
and  the  corn  would  be  cheaper  and  more  compact  to  haul  than  corn  and 
shucks  apart.  He  seemed  willing  to  sell  in  that  way,  and  promised  me 
to  write  to  you.  I would  not  w^ait  to  hear  from  him,  but  would  send  at 
once  all  my  wagons  and  stop  the  shucking  of  the  corn.  Even  at  near 
the  same  ])rice  you  would  save  all  wastage  by  shelling  in  hauling. 

Let  a courier’s  post  be  established  at  Gill  & Ladd’s  shop.  You  will  send 
a trusty  trooper  or  two  there.  You  will  observe  that  Robertson’s  cavalry, 
at  the  suggestion  of  General  Smith,  are  to  be  kept  separate  and  apart 
from  Sliingler’s.  This,  I understood,  was  to  prevent  Major  Robertson 
from  taking  command  of  the  whole  cavalry.  Major  Robertson  is  to  be 
kept  as  a kind  of  reserve.  I am  sure  I inserted  this  in  your  orders.  Let 
the  respective  corps  report  to  you  separately.  Whenever  they  are  called 
to  act  together  in  marches  or  service  the  ranking  officer  will  of  course 
then,  under  your  orders,  command. 

I have  ordered  forms  of  company  morning  reports  to  be  forwarded  to 
you. 

Your  force  is  stronger  than  I supposed,  and  with  a good  supply  of 
forage  on  hand  I shall  expect  you  to  advance  whenever  you  can  or  when- 
ever the  enemy  threatens.  I recommend  you  by  all  means  to  reach 
down  as  far  as  you  safely  can  after  forage.  My  scouts’  last  reports 
from  far  down  James  River  are  that  there  is  no  appearance  as  yet  of 
any  gunboats  coming  up  the  river.  The  enemy  have  in  the  last  two  days 
crossed  the  Rappahannock  below  Fredericksburg. 


799 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

The  adjutant  informs  me  that  just  at  this  moment  he  has  no  printed 
forms  of  company  morning  reports,  but  he  will  get  them  for  the  whole 
command  as  early  as  possible.  I send  you  a few  envelopes. 

Very  respectfully,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A, 
Eiehmond,  Va.,  December  13,  1862. 
General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Petersburg^  Ya.  ; 

General  Lee  telegraphs  that  the  enemy  attacked  this  morning  at  sev- 
eral points  j that  there  was  fighting  all  day,  but  at  night  the  enemy 
were  repulsed  on  all  points  of  attack.  A renewal  of  the  battle  expected 
by  him  to-morrow.  His  troops  behaved  (he  says)  admirably. 

J.  A.  SEDDOK, 
Secretary  of  War. 


[December  13,  1862. — For  Seddon  to  Beauregard,  in  reference  to  re- 
euforcements  for  V ilmington,  N.  C.,  and  resulting  correspondence,  see 
Series  I,  Vol.  XIV,  p.  711.]  ^ 


Hdqrs.  Forces  Operating  on  the  Peninsula, 
Sherman^ s Farm,  Va.,  Saturday  Night,  December  13,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise  : 

General:  One  of  our  scouts  who  went  below  about  five  days  ago 
returned  this  evening.  He  brings  no  intelligence  of  any  importance 
concerning  the  enemy.  He  was  within  5 miles  of  Williamsburg  and 
had  not  a sight  of  any  Yankees.  He  met  with  a lady  from  Williams- 
hurg,  who  informed  him  that  the  Yankees  reported  to  Williamsburg 
that  a fleet  was  in  readiness  to  ascend  the  James  with  a view  of  attack- 
ing the  works  at  Drewry^s.  He  thinks  from  what  he  could  gather  that 
the  post  of  Yorktown  was  more  of  a school  for  instruction  than  anything 
else.  Mrs.  Vaiden  applied  to  me  to-day  for  a permit  to  allow  her  to 
[lass  our  incket  at  James^  gate  to  see  her  sick  daughter,  who  resides 
some  6 rahes  below  the  picket.  I inquired  who  would  accompany  her, 
Bid  was  informed  her  servant.  I refused  to  grant  the  request  upon 
the  ground  that  I had  positive  orders  from  you  to  allow  no  one  to  pass 
3ur  pickets  either  way,  up  or  down,  without  your  permission.  I told  her 
she  must  await  your  decision.  Mrs.  Vaiden  is  the  mother  of  Major  Vai- 
Jen,  of  this  county,  and  I reckon  is  a loyal  lady,  but  I do  not  think  it 
prudent  to  allow  her  servant  to  accompany  her  even  if  you  irrant  her 
request. 

If  we  move  our  camps  to  Diascund  Bridge,  as  I proposed  this 
norning,  I think,  upon  reflection,  it  would  be  better  to  change  the 
ocation  of  our  pickets  and  advance  them  nearer  to  the  enemy — say  a 
ittle  below  the  Burnt  Ordinary — and  let  our  inside  pickets  occupy  the 
Found  that  our  outside  ones  do  now.  We  have  heard  severe  cannon- 
K ing  nearly  the  whole  day  j there  must  have  been  hard  fighting  at 
- reuericksburg.  Please  send  me  a paper  with  particulars,  if  you  can 
lo  so  conveniently.  ’ 

A Dr.  Taylor,  who  had  been  one  of  our  scouts,  was  captured  by 
oe  enemy,  with  his  horse  and  cart,  about  the  time  I came  to  this 


800  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA  [Chav.  XXX.  | 

post.  He  is  not  in  the  service,  as  I am  informed.  The  enemj^  has  re- 
leased him  and  he  has  returned,  I learn,  with  his  horse  and  cart.  I 
want  to  understand  something  about  his  case.  Would  it  not  be  best  i 
to  send  for  him,  and  if  he  refuses  to  come  have  him  arrested  and 
brought  here I had  determined  at  one  time  to  send  for  him  without 
consulting  you,  but  have  concluded  it  would  be  advisable  to  confer  with  i 
you  in  reference  to  his  case.  He  may  have  taken  the  oath,  for  all  I 
know,  and  I ought  to  see  him.  Coming  back  with  his  horse  and  cart 
looks  suspicious,  indeed. 

I have  supplied  the  post  at  Gill  & Ladd’s  with  two  men  from  Robert- 
son’s command  [Thirty-second  Battalion  Virginia  Cavalry] ; they  come 
to  me  as  reliable  men.  I was  positive  with  Robertson  in  my  direction 
not  to  send  any  but  trusty  men.  I am  afraid  I shall  not  be  enabled  to 
correct  the  dilatory  habits  of  this  line  of  couriers  without  personally  vis- 
iting each  post.  I sent  an  officer  along  the  line  yesterday  to  Crenshaw’s 
with  positive  directions  to  the  men  at  each  post.  His  visit  has  not  had 
the  effect  that  I desired  5 they  are  still  as  slow  as  ever.  It  is  not  im- 
portant that  this  shall  go  before  the  morning ; I may  have  something 
to  add  by  then. 

I am,  general,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ ^ ^ ^ CALVIN  COUNCILL, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Post. 

Sunday  morning.— 1 shall  send  for  Dr.  T.  without  waiting  to  hear  from 
you. 


Headquarters, 
Bichmondj  Fa.,  December  13, 18G2. 

Major-General  Elzey,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  wall  forth- 
with place  General  Davis’  brigade  in  position  south  of  the  James  Rivei 
to  support  Generals  Daniel  or  Wise  or  to  take  the  cars  for  Petersburg 
as  circumstances  may  require.  Let  the  brigade  move  at  once.  The 
brigade  will  bring  rations  (of  which  they  have  six  days  on  hand),  ana 
their  camp  equipage  should  follow  them  to  their  position  over  the  river. 
Their  rations  may  be  cooked  after  arriving  at  their  position. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  ^^y^^khTON 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Brigade  Headquarters,^ 
Chaffin^s  Farm,  Ya.,  December  14, 1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  C.  CouNCiLL, 

Commanding,  &c. : 

Colonel  : Yours  of  last  night  reached  me  within  this  hour.  You  hav* 
done  right  to  examine  Dr.  Taylor.  Be  careful  how  you  trust  any  ot  tii< 
timid  occupants  of  a section  held  by  the  enemy.  Some  are  traitors 
some  love  their  property  better  than  public  liberty.  Do  not  trust  D 
Taylor  any  more,  but  make  him  serve.  Be  particular  as  to  your  con 
riers ; they  are  improving  at  this  end  of  the  line.  Major  Robertsem  in 
be  lield  responsible  for  the  discipline  and  conduct  of  his  men.  He  po. 
tive,  firm,  and  unyielding  to  all  the  cavalry;  they  all  need  the  strictes 
discipline.  I will  endeavor  to  visit  your  whole  line  of  couriers,  posi 


C*1AI‘.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


801 


an.l  pickets  during  the  next  week ; let  this  be  known.  If  I cannot  the 
expectation  ot  it  may  do  good.  I am  confident  the  enemy  are  now  weak 
on  the  ^\illiamsburg  Peninsula.  As  soon  as  possible  arrange  your 
\edettes,  couriers,  and  pickets  as  yon  proposed  in  your  last,  and  as  I 
approved,  and  advance  your  whole  force  as  tar  as  your  iiidgiuent  will 
approve  Let  them  come  to  Drewry’s;  we  are  ready.  Do  not  allow 
Mis.  Vaiden  or  servant— no  one— to  pass  your  lines  downward.  She  is 
a daughter  of  Mrs.  Piggott,  an  arch  traitoress.  Move  vour  camp  and 
ad\,ince  jour  pickets  it  you  can  get  forage.  I think  you  can.  News 
has  just  come  than  Genwal  Lee  has  beaten  the  enemy  at  all  poiuts  near 
luedeiicksburg.  ^ow  is  your  time  to  make  a rapid  demonstration.  Do 

1 , il  j on  dare.  We  have  no  paper  of  particulars  as  to  Fredericksburg. 
Be  unceasing  m moving. 

Yours,  truly, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  Fkench  : Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  Becemher  14,  18C2. 

After  severe  fighting  all  day  General  Evans  retired  this  evening  across 
the  in  ei  and  de^royed  the  bridge.  The  enemy  are  now  shelling  Kins- 
on,  and  General  Evau.s  will  make  another  stand  on  heights  overlookii,..- 
he  town.  Hereports  their  strength  at22,000.  Ourloss^severe:  enemy’s 
'Cr^  great.  ’ 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


War  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Va.,  Becemher  14,  1862. 
Geucral  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Weldon,  N.  C.  : 

oHows™^  telegraphs,  in  reply  to  the  substance  of  your  letter,  as 

..iVS,‘‘rnrSh.»‘’'’r''  you  propose,  and  all  available  from  North 

imi  soutli  Carolma.  Keep  guards  to  batteries  on  James  River. 

By  the  re-enforcements  you  propose.  General  Lee  means  such  as  you 
•ropose  to  draw  from  liere. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Seeretary  of  War. 

Ion.  JAMES  A.  SEDDON : Va.,  Becemher  14, 1 862. 

r i»y  note  sent  by  courier.  Geii- 

Ml  Whiting  reports  Banks’  fleet  at  Beaufort.  Is  there  any  news  from 
ledericksburg  ? I expect  to  leave  at  8 o’clock  to-niglit,  anil  would  like 
0 hear  from  there  before  I start.  ” ’ 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 


, . Wilmington,  N.  C.,  Beeemher  15,  18G2. 

•rig.  Gen.  S.  11.  Gist,  Florence^  C. : 

There  will  be  an  officer  to  meet  you  on  the  other  side  of  Cape  Fear 
ver.  1 i,ave  a room  for  you,  Clem,  and  Colquitt.  The  enemy  had 
61  R R— VOL  XVIII 


802 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX.  i 


fallen  back  1 mile  from  Kinston  last  night.  To-day  no  communication 
with  Kinston.  Have  not  heard  from  there  to-day.  We  have  driven 
the  enemy  some  2 miles  in  Virginia. 

J.  H.  HILL, 

Assistant  A djutant- General. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington.,  N.  0.,  December  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding,  Goldsborough,  N.  G. : 

General  : If  compelled  to  fall  back  from  Goldsborough  I think  the 
best  line  to  take  will  be  toward  Ealeigh  a short  distance.  If  Foster  has 
conceived  the  idea  of  marching  on  Wilmington  from  Goldsborough,  as! 
is  said  by  prisoners,  his  communication  will  be  cut  by  your  people  when 
he  moves.  I can  be  aided  by  Beauregard  with  the  hope  of  stopping 
him  on  the  northeast  bank  of  Cape  Fear  Rivet*.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  is  disposed  to  go  toward  Weldon  you  can  play  the  same  move. 

Very  respeotfelly,  ^ ^ WHITING, 

Brigadier- Genera  1. 


Headquarters, 
llichmond,  Va.,  December  15,  1862. 

Major-General  Elzey,  Commanding,  &c. : . 

The  major-general  commanding  directs  that  the  three  Mississippi 
regiments  of  Havis’  brigade,  with  the  batteries,  and  three  select  regi 
meuts  of  Daniel’s  brigade,  with  the  battery,  be  put  on  the  march  foi 
Goldsborough  at  once  by  railroad.  I have  notified  General  Daniel  ami 
Colonel  Stone  to  provide  their  commands  with  five  days’ rations  and  m 
in  readiness.  Colonel  Walker,  commanding  city  guard,  has  been  di 
rected  to  return  to  their  commands  the  companies  in  the  city  belonging’ 
to  the  above-mentioned  brigades.  You  will  direct  six  companies  of  the 
Fifty-ninth  Georgia  Regiment  (Col.  Jack  Brown)  to  report  to  Colone 
Walker  at  once  in  place  of  the  companies  so  relieved.  Each  regimeui 
will  carry  with  it  one  first-rate  ammunition  wagon  and  team. 

Very  respecttully,  your  obedient  ser^ant^  MELTON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Riclimondy  Ya.,  December  15, 1862. 


General  R.  E.  Lee,  Fredericlcsburg,  Va. : 

General  G.  W.  Smith,  by  courier  from  Petersburg,  reports  the  enemy 
22,000  strong,  to  be  pressing  Evans  at  Kinston.  The  railroad  connec 
tion  and  Raleigh  must,  he  fears,  be  lost  Avithout  further  swPl^^^ 
proposes  to  withdraw  re-enforcements  from  this  vicinity  and  theLiacK 
water,  trusting  to  you  to  sustain  the  city  if  absolutely  necessary. 

I see  no  instant  prospect  of  attack  here  1 approve  his  purpose,  ni 


deem  it  proper  to  inform  you. 


J.  A.  SEDDOK, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


8oa 

Richmond,  Ya.,  December  15,  1862. 
To  the  President,  Montgomery,  Ala. : 

General  R.  E.  Lee  : 

I arrived  here  (Goldshorougb,  N.  C.)at  3 p.  m.  The  telegraph  with  General  Evans 
^ cut  off.  By  latest  iniorniation  ho  was  at  Falling  Creek,  6 miles  this  side  of  Kinston 
Enemy  now  estimated  at  30,000,  and  scouts  report  re-enforcements  constantly  arriv- 
ing from  New  Berne.  Governor  Vance  is  here.  All  accounts  agree  that  oni  toons 
behaved  admirably  in  the  engagement  yesterday.  ^ 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

The  .above  just  received  at  8.30  p.  m.  We  have  sent  all  the  re-en- 
forceraeiits  to  be  spared  here,  from  the  Blackwater,  and  in  North  Caro- 
lina. GeMral  Beauregard  has  promised  5,000,  which  I hope  will  arrive 
m tmie.  I have  ordered  here,  if  possible  to  be  spared,  two  regiments 
Irom  Ceueral  bamuel  Jones  and  two  from  General  Humphrey  Marshall 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 


December  16,  1862. 
Goldsborougli,  N.  C. : 

The  line  being  cut  by  the  eriem}",  can  I help  you  by  moviug  uit  to  aiiv 
point  on  the  railroad,  or  shall  I wait  ? Glad  my  last  train  reached  you 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  December  16,  1862—8  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Moseley  Hall.  N.  C. : 

General:  I shall  send  down  five  trains  to-night,  and  I think  it  would 
Jewell  to  have  the  men  sleep  on  board  in  case  the  enemy  move  upon 
he  railroad  and  county  bridges.  General  Olingman  should  bo  re  eii 
orced  at  once  or  we  lose  all  chance  of  taking  the  offensive  when  our 
orces  arrive.  It  might  bo  very  important  to  have  a batterv  promptly 
Jroiight  np.  How  many  pieces  have  you?  None  of  the  troops  from 
viclmiond  have  arrived  yet,  and  the  batteries  are  behind  the  infantry 
Ihe  two  30-pouuders  got  here  to-day,  but  without  horses.  They  are 
ihnost  useless,  if  not  in  the  way.  Largo  number  of  trains  haye'been 
viit  up,  and  I hope  to  bo  able  to  bring  down  some  horses  and  wagons 
or  the  command  One  regiment  (the  Fifty-second  North  Carolina)  lias 
1st  arrived.  I shall  sene  it  oyer  the  river.  I think  if  it  is  practicable 
ti.it  General  Pettigrew  had  better  come  up  in  the  first  train  with 
hirgwyn’s  regiment,  and  that  his  trooiis  should  follow.  Let  General 
.obertson  hold  pos  tion  at  Spring  Bank  Bridge  with,  say,  two  regiments 
f aud  let  Geueral  Evans,  witli  Ids  brigade,  take  position 

o coxer  the  town  on  this  side,  supijort  Bobertson  if  it  should  be  nece.s- 
' i""  m,  "*  P support  the  troops  beyond  the  bridges  if  re- 

' , ®^’®  pieces  now  at  aud  beyond  the  briibais 

le.  1^°  tP’‘  of  .artillery  and  Cliugman’s  two  regi- 

1 ‘I"?®?  ®"^'‘’®  ai>seuce  of  information  and  the  conflicting 

i'  "’V*  i®  in  make  it  very  difficult  to  determine  upon 

y'  1 General  Pettigrew’s  brigade  crosses  over 
(UMie  that  you  should  take  command  of  the  forces  on  that  side:  that 
) Glingrnaii  aud  1 ettigrew.  When  my  six  regiments  aet  liere  ifflio 
'oveinent  is  made  on  the  other  bank,  we  will,  I hope,  be  strong  enough 


804 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA, 


[Chai*.  XXX 


to  leave  a sufficient  force  to  protect  this  place  from  auy  movement  the; 
may  make  from  the  other  side  of  the  riVer  by  their  pontoon  bridge,  amj 
still  be  strong  enough  on  that  bank  to  beat  them.  Such  is  an  outline  (;< 
my  present  intention,  as  far  as  the  present  information  enables  me  t; 
judge  of  the  probable  views  and  intentions  of  the  enemy.  If  yon  receiv| 
no  further  instructions,  let  Pettigrew’s  brigade  come  up  to  this  place  a| 
daylight  and  Evans  fall  back  in  this  direction,  as  above,  Itobertson  tali 
ing  position  at  Spring  Bank  Bridge,  leaving  outlying  guards  below  npo 
the  river  and  roads  for  the  purpose  of  giving  information. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General.  \ 


1>.  s. — Your  note  of  9.30  p.  m.  was  received  just  after  the  above  wa 
signed.  We  have  not  yet  been  in  condition  to  cross  the  river  at  tlii 
point  and  move  forward,  but  must  await  the  arrival  of  the  troops  froi 
Ivichmond  and  horses  to  mount  the  cavalry  before  we  can  hope  to  at 
with  effect  in  the  presence  of  such  a force. 


Headquarters, 

White  Sail  Bridge.,  N.  0.,  Secemher  10,  1862 — 4.30  p.  in. 
[Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French:] 

General:  About  two  hours  since  it  was  reported  that  the  enem' 
after  leaving  the  bridge,  moved  up  the  river,  but  the  news  was  not  coi 
tinned.  Their  ambulance  and  wagon  trains  are  now  passing  White  Hal 
going  in  the  same  direction.  They  are  undoubtedly  making  direct  ti 
the  railroad,  which  I have  suspected  since  yesterday  evening.  Hun 
up  the  ammunition  for  Leventhorpe.  Firing  has  nearly  ceased. 

In  haste,  most  respectfully, 

B.  H.  ROBERTSON, 

Brigadier- General. 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  Secemher  10, 1802. 
General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Goldshorougli^  W.  C. : 

Two  regiments  and  a battery  have  arrived  from  Beauregard.  Td 
graph  your  orders. 

^ W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-General. 


Spring  Bank,  N.  C., 
Secemher  — , 1862 — sundown. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding.,  &c. : 

General:  Two  hundred  of  the  Thirty-first  Eegiment  were  left  o' 
guard  at  White  Hall.  They  had  no  rations.  I think  a force  of  30  me 
with  2 mounted  couriers,  enough  to  guard  that  point,  considering  t 
present  position  of  the  enemy. 

Most  respectfully. 


B.  H.  EOBEKTSON, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


805 


Maj. 


Sprtnc  Bank 

Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding,  <&c.,  Goldshorough,  K C.  : 


Bridge,  N.  G., 
December  17,  1862. 


General  . Please  send  the  rations  to  this  point.  My  men  are,  some 
of  them,  much  in  need  of  them.  ’ 

Most  respectfully, 


B.  n.  EOBEBTSONT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


S. — Best  assured  I will  hold  the  ferry  to  the  last  extremitv  I 
you  could  send  Colonel  Leventhorpe  to  ’ 


Goldsborough,  K.  C.,  December  18,  1862. 

Rod.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War: 

One  of  my  best  officers  returned  at  2 o’clock,  Iiaviiig  followed  the 
.iiemy  13  miles  on  the  road  toward  New  Berne.  He  is  satisfied  that 
hey  are  rapidly  moving  for  that  place. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 


War  Department,  O.  S. 


A... 


. 1 T>  T Richmond,  Va.,  December  19,  1862. 

jreiieral  B.  E.  Lee:  ’ 

General  Smith  last  evening  announces  that  from  the 
epoi t of  one  of  his  best  officers,  who  followed  the  enemy  13  miles,  he  is 
■atished  they  are  rapidly  returning  to  New  Berne.  There  is  no  reliable 
,1  ti  movements  of  the  enemy  either  in  the  Peninsula  or 

11  the  Llackwater.  Your  glorious  victory  has  probably  broken  up  all 

intelligence  of  move- 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


■Wilmington,  N.  C.,  December  19,  18G2. 

iencral  Beaoeegard,  Charleston,  S.  O. : 

1 have  the  following  from  G.  W.  [Smith] : 

“fTf  "i"  so  hack  to  New  Berne  and 

1,  tlioHgli  they  may  march  direct.  The  eiiemv  burucd  the  milronri  UviVi,r/v 


ifhiy.  \Vc 

'•lil]erv”-)D  i ”■>  very  large  force,  supposed  more  than  20,000.  My 

•-(lav  in  t r.*  Richmond  and  Petersburg;  expected 

ove oi  transportation  sufficient  even  for  ammunition.  Will 


1 ^ enemy  burucd  the  railroad  brid‘»-o  ves- 

cros.sed  over  the  forces  at  hand  by  the  county  bridge,  drove  themback, 
iny  letired  during  tlio  night,  sujiiiosed  toward 


eve  as  soon  as  possible. 


W.  H.  G.  WHITING. 


806 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chai\  xx: 


_ Wilmington,  IST.  0.,  Becemher  19,  [1862. j | 

Colonel  SiMONTON,  Magnolia^  N.  C. : 

Colonel  : Return  with  your  brigade  as  soon  as  the  train  reaches  yoi 
If  the  cavalry  are  there  direct  them  to  look  out  for  approach  of  enem; 
Retire  on  their  advance  toward  Wilmington,  sending  me  courier.  Enem 
have  retired  from  before  Goldsborough ; supposed  to  be  moving  in  tl 
direction  of  Wilmington. 

Answer  tliat  you  receive  this. 

W.  II.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier  General. 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  Becemher  19, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith: 

On  receipt  of  your  dispatch  I recalled  the  troops  at  Magnolia, 
enemy  approaches  Wilmington  it  must  be  by  the  coast  east  of  Northea 
Branch  of  Cape  Fear  River. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General 


December  19,  1862. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston.)  8.  C. : 

1 received  the  following  dispatch  from  General  Smith  yesterday: 
The  enemy’s  army  have  gone  to  New  Berne  rapidly. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Charleston,  S.  C., 
Becemher  19,  1862 — 10.30  a.  ni. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington.)  N.  C. : 

Enemy  have  fallen  back  in  haste  to  New  Berne 5 probably  for  Jaiut 
River ; but  still  look  out  for  Wilmington. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD, 

General,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C., 
Becemher  19,  1862—10  a.  w. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Goldshorough)  N.  C. : 


Can’t  enemy  be  pursued  hotly  with  40  rounds  of  ammunition  ai 
live  days’  provisions  in  haversacks?  They  are  probably  going  to  dam' 


River. 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


:hai>.XXX.]  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  807 

Abstract  from  FielclIiCturn  of  troops  at  Gotdsborough,  N.  C..  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen. 
G.  W.  Smith,  for  December  20,  1SQ2. 


Present  for  duty. 

4-? 

a 

43 

00 

Command. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

'cS 

"o 

00 

o 

P4 

ft  (=> 

(V 

Officers. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

© 

> 

*% 

M 

11) 

tl) 

<1 

Aggregatt 

and  a 

Clingman’s  brigade 

Diiniel’a  brigade .*. 

Davis’  brigade 

Evans’  brigade 

Ill 

108 

108 

102 

1,614 
1,  603 
1,518 
1,269 

1,  662 
1,  625 
1,561 
1,269 
3,131 
65 
201 
667 

lift 

1,  987 
1,749 
1,  743 
1,  371 
3,  715 
67 
207 
743 
135 

2,  633 
2,710 

Dettigrew’s  brigade 

Bnrw ell’s  inovost  guard 

ffallett’s  battalion 

llobertson’s  cavalry  (dismounted) . . . 
Badbam’s  [AVilham]  (Xortb  Carolina) 

192 

2 

6 

3,  096 
63 
201 

64 

662 

8 

o 

TOO 

1,  057 

battery. 

Bunting’s  [S.  B.l  batterv 

IID 

158 

^umming’s  [James  D.l  batterv.. 

O 

A 

72 

/ 66 

81 

88 

95 

Dabney’s  [W.  J.]  battery  (heavy  artillery) . 
itarr’s  [J.  B.)  batterv 

4: 

2 

i i 
31 

71 

Q/f 

94 

38 

53 

66 

66 

68 

88 

G” rtiDcT  tot3<l - 

629 

9,364  1 

64 

662 

17 

349 

10,  534  1 

11,  992 

6,  888 

Abstract  from  Field  Feturn  g troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  A.  Elzey,  December  20 
1802  {headquarters  Eichmond,  Va.). 


Commanding  officer  and  troops. 


Present  for 
duty. 


5iig.  Gen.  H.  A.  "Wise 

•rig.  Gen.  J.  Daniel 

Oil  Virginia  Pvegiment,  Col.  [I'l.  C.i  'Trim>- 

/ h :V  hginia  Battalion,  Col.  [H.  A.]  EdmSndson 
Ot  1 Virginia  Kegiment,  Col.  [Thomas]  Poage... 
.Mil  \irgmia  Kegiment.  Col.  [A.  C. j Moore 
• 1 ^"^Sinient,  Col.  [.J.  J.]  McMahon..., 

ol.  [1.  b.]  Ehett 

ol.  T.  J.  Page 

hewry’s  Bluff,  Major  Smith' 

Gland  total  .• 


158 

127 

44 

21 

29 

20 

21 

100 

25 

15 


5G0 


1,  889 
1,727 
C39 
250 
471 
366 
272 
1,  521 
259 
242 


7,  636 


2,  222 
1,925 
647 
252 
484 
385 
286 
1,676 
354 
289 


8.  520 


2,  620 
2,  412 
721 
283 
521 
408 
311 
1,995 
411 
372 


10,  054 


si 

to 

<1 


3,387 
3,  327 
987 
565 
821 
943 
870 
2,  466 
486 
390 

14,  242 


iPi^ciAL  Orders, 


No.  298. 


Ad.jt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond,  Va.,  December  20,  18(32. 


^ ^ 

Provisional  Army,  will  report  to 
o nA?  f:?-’  for  tluty  in 


liy  comniantl  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant  General, 


808 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


1 

[Chap.  XXX.  i 

Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N,  C.,  December  21,  1862.  ! 

Captain  Newkirk,  Commanding  Cavalry  : i 

Captain  : In  case  of  an  advance  of  the  enemy  from  New  Kiver  oi‘i 
landing  at  Topsail  yon  will  direct  one  company  to  retire  by  Holly  Shel-| 
ter  road,  advising  them  that  we  have  infantry  pickets  at  Island  Creek.! 
The  remainder  will  join  yon  and  keep  close  observation  on  the  enemy’sl 
movements.  Scouts  should  be.  frequently  sent  toward  the  enemy  toj 
obtain  information.  1 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding.  \ 


December  22,  1862. 

Major-General  Smith,  Goldsborough  W C.  : 

I would  like^Cliugman’s  brigade  (including  Eadcliffe’s  and  Faison’s 
regiments)  sent  back,  if  you  can  spare  them.  General  Eains  is  in  Eicli- 
mond  before  now.  I burst  my  best  gun  at  Fort  Fisher  yesterday  against 
enemy’s  steamer.  Please  give  all  possible  facility  for  10-inch  gun  from 
Eichmond. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  December  23,  1862. 

• Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

General  Evans’  brigade  reoccupied  Kinston  yesterday.  The  bridge 
at  that  point  is  being  rebuilt.  General  Pettigrew’s  brigade  and  Leven- 
ihorpe’s  regiments  were  ordered  to  Weldon  and  Petersburg  last  night, 
blit  they  vWe  detained  by  a collision, in  which  two  engines  were  dis- 
abled; no  lives  lost.  The  brigade  started  this  afternoon.  General 
French  has  returned  to  Petersburg.  The  cars  are  running  regularly 
I'rom  Wilmington  to  the  Neuse  Eiver,  and  the  railroad  bridge  at  that 
Tioint  being  reconstructed. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 


Bur  well’s  Bay,  December  23, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise  : 

General  : No  change  at  Newport  News ; yesterday  misty ; couhl 
not  see  down  to  the  Point;  the  day  before  only  three  vessels  in  port. 
On  Monday  45  Yankees  came  to  Smithlield  to  see  about  the  election;, 
on  the  same  night  General  Pryor  visited  the  same  place.  Eeport  says, 
the  enemy  came  to  Isle  of  Wight  Court-House  yesterday. 

WILLIAIM  HAEMAN. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  December  27,  1862. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War: 

I returned  this  evening  from  Wilmington.  Have  ordered  Clinginan’s 


CirAK  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  809 

brigade  to  Geueral  Whiting  and  the  two  siege  guns  (30-pounder  Par- 
lotts)  to  General  JBrench  for  the  Blackwater.  All  is  reported  quiet  in 
the  direction  of  New  Berne.  Your  letter  of  the  23d  is  just  received . 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major- General. 


Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise: 


Burwell’s  Bay,  December  29,  1802. 


General  : Yesterday  was  the  first  time  I could  get  a view  of  New- 
port News  since  my  note  of  the  20th  instant,-  it  has  been  hazv  all  the 
time.  Pound  only  two  vessels  in  sight  to-day.  A small  sloop  passed 
down  from  Mulberry  Island  j she  had  the  United  States  flag  flying. 

On  the  night  of  Christmas  eve  a party  of  negroes  came  over  from 
the  other  side  and  robbed  a gentleman  by  the  name  of  Branch  of  meat 
aud  other  things  to  the  value  of  over  a thousand  dollars.  Branch  lives 
0 mdes  above  my  station.  This  is  the  second  time  they  haveYome  over 
since  I came  here.  These  negroes  are  said  to  be  camped  in  nearly  every 
vacant  farm  house  from  Jamestown  Island  to  Newport  News.  If  I had 
30  men  and  a sufficient  number  of  boats  I believe  I coLild  capture  a 
number  of  these  negroes. 

WILLIAM  HAKMAN. 


Claremont,  December  30,  [1862]. 

General  : I received  two  dispatches  to-day,  one  indirect ; tlie  other 
nas  been  delayed  several  days. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

WM.  DICKINSON. 


Abstract  from  Field  Report*  of  the  troops  of  the  District  of  the  Cape  Fear,  commanded  hy 
Bri^  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  for  December,  1862. 


Troops. 


I|ri"a(lier-General  Clingman’s  brigade 

Colonel  Ilarnson’s  brigade 

regiment  South  Carolina  Volnnteei-f 

i' ifid  artillery  (four  companies) 

Ittli  Ilattalioii  North  Carolina  Artillery  . 

City  guard  (two  companies) 

j.ridge  guard ' . 

hight-IIouso  Battery  (one  company) 

Caswell  -(six  companies) 

j'  ort  Fisher  (nine  companies) 

I'  ort  French  (one  company) 

•' ort  Johnson  (two  companies) 

I'ort  Saint  Piiilix*  (four  companies 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present,  j 

1 

Officers. 

§ 

Ill 

1,  858 

1 

2,  031 

2,  409 

70 

1,  071 

1, 144 

1,415 

35 

587 

614 

CS8 

18 

357 

3G1 

395 

13 

175 

203 

213 

7 

117 

119 

156 

1 

31 

31 

32 

4 

71 

71 

85 

It) 

258 

35.3 

483 

28 

540 

G73 

794 

4 

47 

47 

G1 

9 

105 

109 

132 

11 

1G2 

204 

2G8 

339 

5,  379 

5,  9G0 

7, 131 

inchide 

urther  delay. 


companies  of  cavalry.  It  is  forwarded  without  this  to  prevent 


810 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S,  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Ahsiracf  from  Field  Betnrn  of  troops  commanded  hy  Maj.  Gen.  A.  Elzey,  Dccemher  31, 
18G2  {headquarters  Richmond,  Va.). 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total. 

i 

rn 

o 

u 

■D 

ce 

tc 

<] 

1 

Aggregate  present  ' 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise 

152 

1,817 

2,  098 

2,  501 

3, 400 

Col.  E.  C.  Brabble 

127 

1,011 

1,  804 

2,  274 

3, 311 

Col.  T.  S.  llhett 

90 

1,424 

1,  677 

1,  983 

2,  4G7 

Col.  T.  J.  Page 

20 

252 

340‘ 

404 

489 

Capt.  S.  S.  Lee 

10 

206 

300 

383 

395 

Grand  total 

417 

5,  370 

0,225 

7,545 

10,  062 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  Ya.,  January  1,  1863. 

General  R.  E.  Lee: 

I have  information  that  tliere  is  in  Hampton  Eoads  a large  fleet,  said 
to  be  one  hundred  transports.  General  Smith  has  just  returned  from 
North  Carolina;  apprehends  very  seriously  invasion  on  a large  scale  in 
that  State.  Either  that  or  a surprise  of  this  city  may  be  meditated. 
Would  it  not  be  judicious  to  have  a considerable  detailment  of  jmur 
army  either  here  or  within  supporting  distance? 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Provisional  Forces,  C.  S.  A., 

Warm  Springs,  N.  0.,  January  — , 1863. 
His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Yance, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  Your  Excellency  that  upon  full  in- 
vestigation I am  convinced  that  the  late  attack  on  Marshall  was  made 
by  a band  of  men  numbering  about  50  ouly,  who  were  instigated  by  de- 
sii*e  of  plunder,  and  that  there  is  no  treasonable  organization  of  citizens 
of  North  Carolina  in  the  mountain  region  having  in  view  the  injury  of 
the  Government  of  the  Confederate  States  or  the  giving  aid  to  that  of 
the  United  States.  Having  an  ample  force  of  Confederate  soldiers  1 
have  informed  Colonel  McElroy  that  he  can  disband  his  militia,  who 
will  be  no  doubt  of  more  service  at  home  attending  to  their  own  domes- 
tic affairs,  there  not  being  any  necessity  for  keeping  them  longer  in  the 
field.  I am  pleased  to  hear  that  they  have  been  active  and  zealous  in 
s(‘arching  for  the  outlaws,  and  would  no  doubt  have  been  very  efficient 
had  the  trouble  been  as  serious  as  reported.  I have  directed  all  the 
(citizen  prisoners  to  be  turned  over  to  the  civil  authorities  of  Madison, 
requesting  Colonel  McElroy  to  guard  them  to  such  safe  jail  as  they  may 
l)e  committed  to.  You  will  be  furnished,  I sui^jose,  by  Colonel  iMcEl- 
roy  with  a list  of  the  ])risoners  and  the  evidence  against  them.  The} 
are  all  implicated  in  the  [burning  of  the]  town  of  Marshall.  I have 
placed  Maj.  [W.  N.]  Garrett,  Sixty-fourth  North  Carolina  Volunteers, 
in  charge  of  a force  of  about  200  of  his  regiment,  one  company  of  cav- 
alry, and  30  Indians,  which  force  is  now  on  Laurel  Creek.  Major  Gar- 
rett has  orders  to  ijursue  and  arrest  every  man  in  the  mountains,  of 


Chap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -CONFEDERATE.  811 

known  bad  character,  whether  engaged  in  any  of  the  late  outrages  or 
not.  He  will  be  aided  by  six  companies  of  cavalry,  scouring  the  mount- 
ain regions  in  Washington,  Carter,  and  Johnson  Counties,  Tennessee. 
Col.  W.  H.  Thomas,  with  200  whites  and  Indians  of  his  legion,  is  oper- 
ating in  Madison,  and  will  go  into  Haywood,  Jackson,  and  Cherokee 
Counties,  North  Carolina,  and  Clay  County,  Georgia,  with  orders  to  ar- 
rest all  deserters  and  recusant  conscripts  and  all  tories  who  have  been 
engaged  in  unlawful  practices  on  the  Tennessee  line  of  the  mountains. 
He  will  be  aided  by  cavalry  and  infantry.  I have  ordered  Major  Gar- 
rett to  arrest  all  deserters  he  may  find  and  to  clear  the  counties  lying 
adjacent  to  the  mountains  of  them  before  he  returns  to  his  command. 
I am  satisfied  they  are  leagued  wdth  disloyal  men  frequently  and  per- 
petrate many  of  the  crimes  which  are  committed  in  this  part  of  the 
State.  Believing  that  it  will  be  of  service  to  your  State  to  get  rid  of 
such  a population  as  that  inhabiting  the  Laurel  region  I have  proposed 
to  allow  all  who  are  not  implicated  in  any  crime  to  leave  the  State  and 
to  aid  them  in  crossing  into  Kentucky.  I am  informed  that  nearly  the 
whole  population  are  desirous  of  accepting  this  ofier.  They  will  be 
driven  to  do  so  from  necessity,  as  I learn  our  troops  have  consumed  all 
the  corn  and  meat  in  the  settlement.  If  the  people  alluded  to  agree  to 
emigrate  I will  cause  them  to  be  paid  for  their  property  used  "hy  our 
troops.  Those  who  are  of  good  character  and  who  have  not  been  guilty 
ot  any  ofiense  have  not  been  molested  by  our  troops,  and  will  not  of 
course  be  included  among  the  number  wlio  are  to  be  induced  to  emi- 
grate as  mentioned.  I propose  to  give  all  tories  of  bad  character  who 
may  be  arrested  the  option  of  going  to  prison  (unless  they  find  security 
for  good  behavior)  or  of  enlisting  in  the  army.  If  they  enlist  they  will 
he  sent  to  Mississippi,  from  whence  they  will  not  find  it  so  easy  to  desert. 

I am  in  hopes  the  measures  adopted  will  secure  peace  and  security  to 
the  families  of  our  soldiers  and  to  the  good  citizens  living  in  this  region 
ot  the  State.  I feel  gratified  in  being  able  to  assist  in  producing  such 
results,  and  shall  at  any  future  trial  be  glad  to  serve  your  State,  which 
has  become  endeared  to  the  army  by  the  patriotism  exhibited  by  her 
cliildren  at  home  and  the  valor  of  her  soldiers  in  the  field. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully.  Your  Excellency’s  obedient 
servant, 

W.  G.  M.  DAYIS, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Fn.,  January  2,  I8G3. 
General  G.  T.  Beaureg-ard,  Charleston.!  8.  C. : 

General  Smith  seriously  apprehends  renewed  invasion  in  North  Car- 
olina, directed  most  probably  on  Wilmington.  Can  you  not  again  send 
assistance,  and,  as  General  Smith ‘desires,  if  the  attack  be  made,  give 
the  potent  aid  of  your  presence 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


Eiciimond,  Va.,  Jayiuary  2,  1803. 

Hajor-General  French  : 

The  troajjs  recently  sent  from  here  under  Brigadier-General  Colston 
and  one  regiment  of  cavalry  will  be  left  to  protect  Petersburg,  Ya., 


812 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Weldon,  and  the  Black  water.  You  will  move  with  the  rest  of  your 
troops  as  soon  as  possible  to  Goldsborough  and  take  command  there 
until  my  arrival. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major- General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Eichmond,  Va.,  January  2,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Cliarle.^to7i,  8.  C.  : 

Fnidher,  more  reliable  intelligence  indicates  very  strongly  the  purpose 
of  the  enemy  to  move  with  force  (supposed  to  be  30,000  men)  in  North 
Oaiolina,  imobably  on  lYilmington,  landing  at  New  Berne  or  Morehead 
City,  marching  to  Swansborough  j thence  along  the  coast.  Aid  as  soon 
and  as  far  as  you  can  with  safety. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond.)  Fa.,  January  2,  1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Frederichshurg,  Va. : 

Information  of  fleet  in  the  Eoads  derived  from  two  diflerent  gentlemen 
residing  on  the  bay,  represented  (but  not  known  to  me)  as  reliable.  In- 
formation of  expected  movement  in  North  Carolina  and  probable  intent 
to  advance  on  Wilmington  from  i^rivate  sources  at  New  Berne  vouched 
by  past  experience  to  be  trustworthy.  I have  telegraphed  General 
Beauregard  requesting  aid,  as  far  as  safe  to  himself,  for  Wilmington. 
11  e Iiad  withdrawn  his  late  re-enforcement.  General  Smith  nearly  strips 
Eiclimond,  leaving  only  about  2,500  men. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond)  Fu.,  Jamiary  2,  1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Frederichshurg,  Va. : 

Eeliable  information  satisfies  me  there  has  been  in  the  bay  a large 
fleet.  Their  movements  are  puzzling.  They  brought  some  troops  to 
Gloucester  Point  and  Yorktown,  probably  new  levies,  and  carried  oil 
others.  The  fleet,  containing  at  the  least  7,000  or  8,000  men,  sailed  up 
the  bay  at  least  as  far  as  New  Point.  Whether  this  was  a ruse  and  they 
returned  and  passed  the  capes  at  night  I cannot  learn.  I think  it  ])rol)- 
able,  for  from  all  items  of  intelligence  I conjecture  an  expedition  med- 
itated on  North  Carolina.  General  Bragg’s  victory  more  complete  and 
its  fruits  greater  than  at  first  supposed.  The  enemy  in  retreat,  with  our 
cavalry  in  his  rear. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Fredericksburg,  Va.,  January  2,  1863. 

Hon.  elAMES  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  IV'ur  : 

Your  dispatches  of  1st  and  2d  just  received.  Is  the  inforuiatiou  of 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


813 


the  presence  of  the  transports  truef  They  have  not  passed  down  the 
Potomac,  nor  is  there  any  indication  in  General  Burnside’s  army  to 
show  a purpose  of  moving. 

B.  E.  LEE. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A.^ 
Richmond^  Va.^  January  2,  1863. 

Col.  J.  E.  Gilmer, 

Chief  of  Engineer  Bureau  : 

Sir  : By  a contract  made  by  my  predecessor  (General  Bandolph)  with 
the  Bichmond  and  Danville  Bailroad  Comiiaiiy,  they  undertook  the 
construction  of  tlie  connection  between  Danville  and  Greensborough, 
ill  Xorth  Carolina,  and  were  to  receive  bonds  of  the  Confederate  Gov- 
ernment, bearing  8 per  cent,  interest,  for  $1,000,000  (the  amount  appro- 
priated by  the  act  of  Congress),  less  by  the  sum  of  $75,000,  which  was 
advanced  them.  This  contract  was  made  on  Alay  G last,  and  the  rail- 
road company,  having  given  the  bond  and  executed  the  securities  re- 
quired for  the  future  repayment  of  the  amount,  are  entitled  to  receive  the 
bonds  for  $925,000,  to  be  issued  as  of  Alay  6 last.  A^ou  are  requested  to 
draw  a requisition  upon  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  for  the  amount 
of  bonds  to  which  the  company  is  entitled,  and  to  hand  them  to  Lewis 
E.  Harvie,  esq.,  X)resident  of  the  road,  or  his  authorized  agent,  taking  a 
receipt  for  them. 

Amur  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDOB, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  2,  1863. 
5Iaj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

GoJdshorougJi,  W.  C.  : 

War  Department  anticipates  [attackj  in  force  on  AVilmington,  but  I 
believe  their  real  objective  xioint  is  Weldon  ; therefore  look  out  in  that 
quarter.  But  their  troops  once  afloat  may  be  landed  anywhere  on  the 
coast.  Bragg  has  gained  brilliant  victory  ; driven  enemv  at  all  points. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  2, 1863. 
lion.  James  A.  Seddon,  ' 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond.,  Va.  : 

1 fear  real  point  of  attack  is  Weldon,  not  Wilmington.  AVill  render 
all  assistance  possible,  but  to  send  troops  hence  far  as  AVeldon  iniglit 
cndaiiger  Charleston.  Enemy’s  troops  once  afloat  can  be  landed  any- 
wliere.  Bailroad  to  Wilmington  in  wretched  condition;  1,000  men 
forty-eight  hours  on  way.  Please  see  return,  transmitted  three  days 
since,  for  effective  force  in  whole  dex)artment. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Engineer  Bureau,  January  2,  1863. 
Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  Greenville,  JSF.  C.  : 

Colonel  : I am  in  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  30th  instant  [ultimo], 
informing  me  that  you  woidd  go  over  to  the  Tar  Biver  the  following  day 


814 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


to  lay  off  works  at  a point  5 miles  above  Greenville  and  obstruct  the 
river,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith.  These 
works  must  be  pressed  forward  with  great  energy.’  You  will  at  once 
leport  fully  to  Major-General  French  all  your  operations  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  Tar  and  Eoanoke  Rivers,  receive  his  orders  as  to  the  points 
to  be  occupied,  and  act  in  all  things  in  full  concert  with  the  troops  under 
his  command.  Substantial  obstructions  should  be  placed  at  once  in  the 
two  rivers.  You  will  give  these  works  your  immediate  and  constant 
attention.  If  a pile-driver  is  necessary  to  the  building  of  the  obstruc- 
tions have  one  completed  at  the  earliest  moment  practicable. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMER, 

Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Iliehmond^  Fu.,  January  3,  1803. 

General  R.  E.  Lee  : 

Sir  : I write  to  give  you  rather  fuller  information  than  the  telegraph 
readily  allows  of  the  various  items  of  intelligence  we  have  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  on  the  bay  and  in  R'ortli  Carolina,  and  of  the  sur- 
mises they  give  rise  to.  For  some  days  past  from  various  sources, 
represented  as  reliable  but  communicated  at  second  hand  and  in  rather 
a vague  form,  I have  been  informed  that  there  was  a large  fleet  of  trans- 
ports in  the  bay,  estimated  by  one  as  100  in  number,  by  another  as  being 
1‘ully  as  numerous  as  when  McOlellaifls  army  was  being  transported  to 
the  Peninsula.  As  I did  not  know  the  informants,  and  the  accounts,  I 
felt  sure,  must  be  exaggerated,  I thought  it  prudent  to  give  you  notice, 
but  did  not  attach  much  weight  to  them.  Last  night,  however,  there 
was  handed  me  by  Air.  Jones,  the  delegate  in  the  Virginia  Assembly 
from  Gloucester,  a letter  from  his  brother,  whom  I knew  well,  giving 
not  only  what  he  had  collected  but  what  had  been  reported  by  two  of 
General  Wise’s  scouts.  That  letter*  I inclose.  Its  substantial  accu- 
racy may  be,  I think,  relied  on.  I infer  from  it  that  there  is  some 
decided  movement  in  contemplation  by  the  enem3\  They  may  be 
bringing  down  troops  from  Washington  and  Annapolis  and  carrying 
others  back,  or  they  may  be  bringing  troops  from  Burnside’s  army. 
Air.  Dudley,  the  president  of  the  York  River  Railroad,  has  just  called 
to  inform  me  that  a man  living  in  Alatthews  County,  near  New  Point, 
whom  he  believes  i)erfectly  reliable,  reports  more  than  100 — indeed, 
t han  200 — vessels  were  seen  by  him  a few  days  ago  to  come  from  to  want 
the  mouth  of  the  Potomac  and  proceed  toward  Old  Point.  I cannot 
believe  in  any  such  number,  especially  as  you  are  sure  Burnside  has 
not  sent  off  any  considerable  force,  and  that  no  large  number  of  trans- 
ports have  proceeded  down  the  Potomac.  I have  no  information  of  any 
considerable  number  now  in  the  bay.  I have  also  intelligence  that 
the  forces  at  Suffolk  were  lately  largely  re-enforced,  and  that  a force  of 
some  5,000  have  preceded  them  by  Gatesville  toward  Nortli  Carolina. 

J learn  that  immediately  after  the  return  of  the  late  Federal  expedition 
to  New  Berne  General  Foster  proceeded  to  Old  Point;  then,  alter 
a short  delay,  proceeded  to  Washington,  and  very  soon  returned  and 
set  off  at  once  for  New  Berne.  AVe  have,  too,  information  from  the 
same  person  who  gave  very  accurate  information  from  New  Berne  of 
the  late  foray  of  the  enemy  from  there,  that  another  expedition  is  being 


Not  found. 


CHAP.XXX.l  COEEESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEBEEATE 


815 


prepared  there,  to  be  accompanied  by  a feint  on  Goldsborotiffli  but 
really  intended  tor  Wilmington.  General  Smith  is  fully  possessed, 
feom  all  he  lias  learned,  with  the  conviction  of  such  design : and  General 
French,  without  being  so  decided  that  Wilmington  is" to  be  aimed  at, 
shares  tlie  conviction  that  some  serious  blow  in  North  Carolina  is  med- 
itated.  I thiuk  It  very  probable  that  on  liis  late  expedition  Foster 
obtained  information  tliat  encouraged  him  to  some  serious  o])eration, 
and  that  he  returned  to  Washington  to  urge  and  arrange  for  it 
there  m said  to  bo  between  political  parties  in  North  Carolina  at  this 
time  mucu  bitterness,  and  that  no  little  disaflection  to  the  Confederacy 
exists,  and  that  adverse  military  events  just  now  in  the  State  rnialit 
eientuate  in  very  grave  efforts  to  separate  from  the  Oonfederaov  and 
arrange  with  the  Federal  Government.  I cannot  credit  this  d^ger 
hut  all  accounts  agree  as  to  the  existence  of  great  discontent  and  com- 
pljiiut  ot  desertion  by  the  Government.  This  renders  more  important 
all  nieans  oiir  pow'er  to  repel  promptly  any  serious  invasion.  Under 
this  teeling  J have  telegraphed  General  Beauregard  to  render  all  aid  in 
his  power  to  Wilmington.  Ho  has  promised  to  do  so,  but  thinks  Golds- 
borough  or  W eldon  more  apt  to  bo  aimed  at,  and  says  in  the  present  state 
ot  traiisportation  on  the  Wilmington  and  Weldon  road  he  does  not  deem 
('  I "?  farther  than  Wilmington.  I have  also  allowed 

Gti  cial  Smith  almost  to  strip  this  city,  leaving  here  only  some  3,500  or 
(10  men,  of  whom  there  are  only  500  at  Drewry’s  Bluff.  1 have  coun- 

forces  he  is  collecting  (amounting  to 
iVrilf  ?i  n to  Goldsborough,  as  he  intended,  to  have  there  only  a 

brigade  and  concentrate  the  residue  either  at  Weldon  or  Eocky  Mount 
so  as  to  be  ready  to  move  readily  either  back  toward  Petersburg  or  on’ 
(.ward  Goldsborough  and  Wilmington,  as  the  enemy  may  move!"  With 
isf  Wilmington  could  resist  successfully,  ho  (General 

(...mith)  thinks,  until  he  could  arrive  from  Weldon.  .1  think  he  will 
pursue  this  course,  but  he  laments  much  the  paucity  of  his  numbers  and 

tl  h nl  icp'uml*/  re-enforced  I feel  no  serious  apprehension  about 
IS  place,  and  yet,  coiisidermgits  importance,  feel  bound  to  guard  against 

, gallant  offieers,  Stuart  ami  HaiiTptoii;  ■ 

I a\e  shamed  the  enemy  into  more  enterprise,  as  shown  by  their  rLeiit 
m tf  u the  railroad  at  Bristol.  A sudden  dash  of  the  forces 

p'  f ^ ®n'nsiila  or  from  Suffolk  might  endanger  ns  here.  I should 

am  5(m0  mAO  nor  l*a‘f  a portion  of  your  force,  say 

I)  two  rmd!  “iT{  near  as  tlio  Junction,  wlience 

ii'ifer  ned  von  ^ eonld  be  speedily  brought  in  case  of  need.  Having 
ilmuied  jon,  however,  fully,  I trust  the  decision  to  your  iudo-meut  as 

y°"aro  felly  Srof ’the 
necessity  ot  watching  over  and  defending  it. 

riswHUonr  ennelnde  without  adding  tliat  General  Samuel  Jones 
lent  1 mo  i"*'”®  1*1'“  cfeiivalont  to  what  he 

Amildnrofl  my  late  orders.  The  number  was  about  2,500.  He 
iscf'ul  -It  ■)  lorces,  as  he  thinks  those  sent  by  him  would  he  more 

■sum  at  .1  gi  eater  distance  trom  their  Iiomcs.  The  late  spirit  of  enter 

' m ibr  exnos  K ® attack  on  the  railroad  lias  afermed 

ies  w I la  Greenbrier  and  Monroe,  which  fertile  coiin- 

ts  « II  be  almost  indispensable  to  him  in  the  spring.  He  thinks  too 

S ei  r,;::  Sr  effort  to  mitai..  possession  of  all  tlmlm.: 

here  ! iViHr  tlm  newly-adinitted  State  of  West  Virginia.  I fear 
rou  eai,  fern  .llfoT  ''is  femes  or  tlieir  equivalent  iuiles.s 

treate  ied  noto  f”  «t*.am  t'^e'ii  at  least  until  after  the  result  of  the 
aliened  movements  in  !N^ortli  Carolina. 


81G 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


General  Pemberton  telegraphs  to-day  that  the  enemy  at  Vicksburg,  j 
being  repulsed  in  several  attacks  on  our  positions,  have  apparently  re- 
linquished their  enterprise  and  have  re-ernbarked.  ISTo  further  dispatch 
from  General  Bragg. 

With  high  consideration  and  esteem,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War, 


Bjchmond,  Ya.,  January  3,  1863. 

General  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding^  Petersburg^  Va.  ; 

Concentrate  all  your  forces  near  Weldon  and  Kocky  Mount  ready  to 
move  in  any  direction,  except  Colston^s  brigade  and  one  regiment  of 
cavalry,  which  will  be  left  to  guard  Petersburg  and  the  Blackwater.  I 
expect  General  Beauregard  will  re-enforce  Wilmington,  and  that  Gen- 
eral Lee  will  place  troops  in  position  to  guard  Eichmond  and  Petersburg 
from  being  taken  during  our  absence.  You  had,  I think,  better  take 
AYeldon  or  Eocky  Mount  for  your  headquarters  at  present.  The  cipher 
telegram  of  yesterday  directed  you  to  move  to  Goldsborough.  This  has 
been  changed  as  above,  pending  certain  information  of  actual  move- 
ments of  the  enemy.  Please  have  the  troops  of  DaniePs  brigade  which 
were  sent  from  here  to  Petersburg  last  night  forwarded  to  Goldsborough 
as  soon  as  possible.  I am  endeavoring  to  obtain  additional  troops  from 
General  Lee’s  army  for  service  in  E'orth  Carolina,  and  will  probably 
know  by  to-night  or  to-morrow  morning  the  result  of  my  efforts,  and  1 
shall  thereupon  return  to  North  Carolina.  Please  write  me  fully  by  re-i 
turn  of  messenger. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  3,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.'  Whiting, 

Wilmington^  N.  C, : 

Here  is  Smith’s  telegram  : 

General  Beauregard  Las  been  requested  by  Secretary  of  War  to  assist  yon  in  resist- 
ing tbe  threatened  attack.  I will  concentrate  as  soon  as  possible. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General,  Commanding. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  3,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

Caunot  translate  all  Smith’s  telegram,  but  it  refers  to  following  from 
Secretary  of  War : 


Enemy’s  intelligence  indicates  strongly  his  purpose  to  move  with  force  (supposcc 
30,000),  probably  on  Wilmington,  landing  at  New  Berne  or  Morehead  City,  marclim^ 
to  Swansborough ; thence  along  coast. 

I must  aid  soon  and  far  as  can  with  safety,  but  I cannot  do  imicli 
beyond  leaving  forces  still  with  you,  for  railroads  are  too  slow,  iiol 
knowing  where  enemy  are  going  to  strike.  ^ eEAUREGAKD. 


CiiAi*.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


817 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  January  3,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  W.  AIercer,  Savannah,  Ga.  : 

Ujirrisou’s  brigade  will  be  delayed  for  a time  at  Wilmin^vton  Please 
send  to  it  cooking  utensils  and  change  of  clothing. 

THOAIAS  JORDAN, 

Chief  of  Staff . 


S Cooper  Charlhston,  S.  C.,  January  3,  1863. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Savannah,  Ga. : 

Five  Whitworth  p-pounder  guns  have  lately  arrived  at  Wilmington. 
Cannot  two  be  sent  here  and  two  to  Savannah  for  Genesis  Point Thev 
are  much  required  to  drive  off  blockaders. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


P,  1 rt  m T>  Richmond,  Va..  January  3,  1863! 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  ji 

Charleston,  S.  C. : 

The  guns  have  been  already  disposed  of  by  the  Secretary  of  War-one 
|■etmne(l  at  Wilm  i.gtou,  one  sent  to  Cliai-leston,  one  to  Blobile,  and  one 
to  \ iclisbnrg.  Tbe  fiftli  belongs  to  tbe  Navy  Department. 

' S.  OOOPEK, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

don.  JAMES  A.  Sbddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

SiE : I reidied  by  telegraph  to  your  dispatches  of  the  1st  and  2d,  bnt 
IS  the  line  does  not  seem  to  be  in  operation  I think  proiier  to  write  bv 
nail  to-day.  It  is  very  important  to  ascertain  tlie  correctness  of  the  in- 
oriiiatiou  conveyed  in  your  dispatches,  and  if  transports  are  in  Damp, 
on  hoads  their  purpose  and  cargoes.  It  is  customary  at  this  season  of 
no  year  lor  coasters  to  take  refuge  in  those  waters  from  impending  or 
ipprcheiided  storms.  I have  myself  counted  over  one  hundred  vessels 
hat  had  taken  shelter  there  at  one  time.  I can  discover  no  indications 
)1  any  movement  of  General  Burnside’s  army,  and  feel  very  confident 
hat  the  transporus  mentioned  did  not  descend  the  J’otomac,  nor  do  I 
hink  any  considerable  portion  of  General  Burnside’s  army  could  have 
lec"  embarked  without  my  knowledge.  I have  scouts  on  the  riuht 
ogthe  enemy,  which  extend  to  the  Potomac,  and  re- 
\ e inlormation  of  all  movements  of  importance.  On  tlie  31st  ultimo 
trsiiatched  General  Stuart  with  a large  detachment  of  cavalry  topeu- 

Ifnn  StPi  n a.scortaining  his  iiositioii 

J d I>m  pose.  He  followed  his  line  of  communication  from  Dumfries  to 

Uevn,mf-/^‘V  Pafsing  .‘lietwecii  Pairfax  Coiirt-’House  and 

f cxandiia,  returning  through  Aldie  and  Warreiiton.  Ho  reports  all 

) oMnill  f”'-  r of  aoy  projected  operation.  ' In  addition 

unh.nt , ^ 'hformation  my  object  was  to  create  anxiety  for  his  com- 

irew  onr  f '"Pi  Possible,  to  discover  his  intentions.  He 

new  out  large  bodies  of  troops  in  the  direction  of  the  'Orange  and 
52  R R— VOL  XVIII 


818 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Ciiap.XXX.  | 

Alexandria  llailroad,  wliicli  they  reached  and  tore  np  ai)ortion  of.  Tbe  i 
destruction  of  the  road  might  have  been  caused  l>y  my  having  the  bridge 
at  Eai)pahannock  Station  reconstructed  and  a train  of  cars  sentto  War- 
renton  Junction  during  General  Stuart’s  expedition.  General  Stuart 
captured  over  200  prisoners,  destroyed  several  wagons,  cavalry  camps, 
&c.,  and  caused  the  destruction  by  the  enemy  of  several  depots  of  pro-! 
visions  on  the  routes. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General.  . 

1\  S. All  the  detachments  of  the  enemy  toward  the  railroad  liavej 

returned  within  their  lines. 


[January  2>,  1803.— For  Gist’s  report  of  inovements  to  re-enforce 
Wilmington  in  December,  1802,  see  Series  I,  Fob  XIV,  p.  741.] 


Headquarters  Army  of  Xortiiern  Virginia, 

Camp  near  Fredericlisbiirg^  Vc.,  January  4,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustayus  AV.  Smith, 

Commanding.,  Richmond,  Va. : 

General:  \our  letter  of  the  1st  instant  has  been  received.  Avs: 
you  seem  to  be  certain  that  the  enemy  are  re-enforcing  Sufiblk  and 
]iassing  troops  from  that  ])oint  to  Xew  Eerne  I would  recommend  that! 
you  collect  a force  at  Goldsborough  and  within  supporting  distance  of 
it  adequate  to  opiiose  them.  I do  not  think  that  the  enemy  can  bring! 
into  the  field  in  that  region  at  present  a large  or  stable  force — their 
troops  must  be  ncAV  and  not  very  reliable — nor  have  they  any  ollicer 
there  that  I am  aware  of  in  wlioin  much  confidence  is  reposed  by  hisj 
Government.  It  is  as  impossible  for  him  to  have  a large  ojieratiiig' 
army  at  every  assailable  point  in  our  territory  as  it  is  for  us  to  keep 
one  to  defend  it.  AVe  must  move  our  troops  from  jioint  to  point  as  rc-i 
(piired,  and  by  close  observation  and  accurate  information  the  true 
])oint  of  attack  can  generally  bo  ascertained.  1 may  be  mistakmi,  but; 
i have  thought  that  the  troops  at  your  disposal  would  be  suflicient  to' 
drive  back  the  threatened  incursions  of  the  enemy  south  of  James  Kiver 
until  he  is  re-enforced  from  some  of  his  armies  now  in  the  field.  Geii-i 
oral  Lurnside  has  all  Ids  army  between  Eredeiicksburg  and  Aipua, 
Creek,  with  the  addition  of  Sigel’s  corps.  His  own  headquarters  are 
near  Brooke’s  Station,  nor  is  there  any  indication  of  an  embaikation  or; 
retrograde  movement  or  going  into  winter  quarters.  1 think  it  daiigin-, 
ous  to  diminish  this  army  until  something  can  be  ascertained  ot  the  m-, 
tentions  of  that  opposed  to  it,  and  1 hope  you  will  be  able  by  judiciousi 
arrangement  and  concentration  of  the  troops  under  your  command  to 
lu-otect  the  frontier  line  of  Xortli  Carolina.  Partial  encroachments  ol 
the  enemy  we  must  expect,  but  they  can  always  be  recovered,  ami  an> 
defeat  of  their  large  will  reinstate  everything.  Erom  inlormatioii 

received  from  the' Secretary  of  AVar  1 yesterday  put  Kansom’s  division 

in  motion  to  Hanover  Junction,  and  will  continue  him  to  PichmoiM 

unless  1 receive  other  intbrmation.  You  will  find  it  necessary  in  Aorto 
Carolina  to  dispose  your  troops  so  that  they  can  march  to  the  points 


819 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

required  instead  of  trustin^^  to  tlie  railroads,  otherwise  it  will  be  impos- 
sible to  collect  your  troops  as  speedily  as  necessary.  The  railroads 
must  be  reserved  for  transporting-  munitions  of  war.  I would  recom- 
mend that  you  take  the  field  in  person  and  endeavor  to  get  out  troops 
tiom  the  State  of  IS^orth  Carolina  for  her  defense.  TVilmington  should 
be  defended  at  all  hazards. 

I Lave  the  liouor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquaetees  Aemy  op  Eoethben  Vieginia, 

TT  c ^ Jamiarii  5,  1863. 

Hou.  Seceetaey  of  Wae,  Eiehmond,  Ta. : 


SiE : I have  to  thank  you  for  your  long  ex])lanatory  letter  of  the  3d 
instant  in  relation  to  ojierations  in  hforth  Carolina.  Owing  to  the  posi 
tion  of  the  enemy,  the  features  of  the  country,  and  the  strength  of 
our  army  in  that  htate  we  can  only  at  present  expect  to  act  upon  the 
defensive.  I hope  wo  shall  be  able  to  obtain  troops  for  that  purpose. 
I have  relied  much  on  tlie  troops  of  that  State  turning  out  for  its  defense 
and  have  heretofore  found  that  they  have  cheerfully  and  prom])tly  done 
so  when  necessity  required.  If  you  think  any  benefit  will  be  derived 
0}  sending  aR  officer  to  Ealeigh  to  ins^firit  or  encourage  tbe  people  I 
will  detach  from  this  army  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  HilL  a native  of  iorth 
Carolina,  and  a most  valuable  officer,  for  the  purpose.  By  co-operating 
with  the  governor  and  State  authorities  great  advantage  might  be 
gained.  At  this  distance  I do  not  see  how  offensive  oiierations  could  be 
iindertaken  wiMi  advantage,  as  the  most  we  could  hope  for  would  be  to 
drive  the  enemy  to  his  gunboats,  where  he  would  be  safe.  The  assign- 
ment therefore  of  any  of  our  active  forces  to  North  Carolina  would  be 
to  withdraw  them  from  the  field  of  operations,  where,  as  far  as  I can 
yet  discover,  they  may  be  much  needed.  General  Burnside’s  arm 

1 T1 V/liO  Cji  1 1 rv  T'o -rf-T-v  A-k -K V - • nii  j ^ ^ 


increasing  rather  thanTliminishing.  The  troops  from  in  front  of  AVash 


T J.1  T-r ^ 111  iiUUL  Ui  VVaSIl- 

ngton  and  the  Upper  Potomac  that  have  not  made  a junction  with  him 
liaA  e been  moved  down  toward  Stafford.  General  Slocum’s  division  is 
Jit  Occoquan  and  Dumfries.  General  Sigel’s  corps  is  at  Stafford  Court- 
House  General  Milroy  has  moved  down  as  far  as  Martinsburg.  From 
the  letter  of  Mr  Jones,  which  you  sent  me,  it  seems  that  re-enforce- 
neiits  iroin  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  are  being  forwarded  to  him.  I 
Uave  ndt,  lioweyer,  yet  heard  of  their  arrival."  It  is  very  clear  that 
r neia  Burnside  will  not  advance  toward  Eiehmond  unless  he  is  re- 
. „ y * ■ “ 1‘®  to  go  into  winter  quarters  I tliink  it  proba- 

te tliat  a p;irt  ot  his  torco  may  bo  sent  south  of  James  River : but  if 
e does  not  he  must  be  strengthened  ratlier  than  weakened.  Before 

' ooo^  \ l«ss  than 

s]  u’.n  ^ y my  IJiive  been  more.  Since  then  Generals  Sigel’s, 

8locmn  .S',  and  Geary’s  forces  have  Joined  him.  Taking  the  lowest  num- 

nr  )mi,n  "T  *^^’**s  You  can  judge  then  of  the 

Iv  1 1 h''  ’t  > R is  to  keep  the  field.  1 liave  always  be- 

nm  t ! / A' ® >i>'>ch  overrated.  The  re- 

r ,1  however  intelligent  and  honest,  cannot  be  relied  on. 

I'oster  received  all  the  re-enforcements  that  have  been 
hwet  ■'‘■'“y  recrossed  the  Potomac  he  ought  to  have  the 

^ certain  that  he  will 

empt  any  expeditions  except  those  of  a predatory  character.  I think 


820 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


lie  will  ratlier  bo  deterred  tliau  encouraged  by  the  result  of  his  late 
expedition,  especially  when  he  considers  the  i^robability  of  re-enforce- 
ments being  sent  to  Ntorth  Carolina.  It  is  as  natural  that  he  should  be 
lireparing  for  defense  as  offense.  It  is  proper,  hftwever,  that  we  should 
be  prepared,  and  we  ought  to  concentrate  there  as  large  a force  as  pos- 
sible, and  to  be  successful  in  our  operations  our  officers  must  be  bold 
and  energetic.  Information  should  be  obtained  by  our  own  scouts — 
men  accustomed  to  see  things  as  they  are  and  not  liable  to  excitement 
or  exaggeration. 

After  receiving  your  dispatch  of  the  2d  instant  I put  General  llan- 
sonfs  division  in  march  for  Itichmond.  on  the  morning  of  the  3d.  He 
has  orders  to  report  to  General  Smith.  I hope  it  may  not  be  necessary 
to  advance  him  beyond  Hrewu*y’s  Bluff*.  I think  it  very  hazardous  to 
divide  this  army.  Much  labor  has  been  exiiended  in  its  organization. 
It  is  now  in  excellent  condition,  physically  and  morally,  and  I wish  to 
maintain  it  so  if  possible.  If  I get  further  intelligence  to-day  rendering 
it  advisable  I vrill  place  another  division  near  Hanover  Junction,  but 
until  1 can  learn  something  definite  of  General  Burnside’s  intentions  I j 
do  not  think  it  advisable  to  send  it-  farther.  I think  it  very  certain  that 
General  Burnside’s  Avhole  army  is  between  this  place  and  the  Potomac, 
and  that  as  yet  he  has  made  no  movement  to  put  it  into  winter  quarters 
or  to  transfer  it  elsewhere.  The  glorious  victory  obtained  by  General  i 
Bragg  will,  1 think,  produce  a pause  in  the  military  operations  of  the  : 
Pederal  Army  everywhere.  ITew  organizations  and  ne\v  combinatious  ■ 
Avill  have  to  be  made  before  much  of  importance  can  be  attempted,  lii 
the  mean  time  we  should  juosecute  our  preparations  with  the  greatest  , 
energy  and  vigor. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

11.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Flag-Officer  Lynch, 

Commanding  C.  JS.  Navy : 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington.,  N.  (7.,  January  5,  1SG3. 


Commodore:  I have  received  your  note  of  yesterday,  placing  the 
naval  ffmees  under  your  comrnand  at  my  disi)Osal  for  the  defense  of  this 
j)Iace  and  requesting  information  as  to  their  disposition.  I am  much 
obliged.  Begarding  the  security  of  the  gunboats  as  of  the  (irst  impor- 
tance, and  indeed,  in  case  of  disaster  here  the  most  efficient,  if  not  the 
only,  means  of  reprisal  upon  the  enemy  to  regain  the  place,  I do  not 
think  their  safety  should  be  risked.  In  the  event  of  a formidable  at- 
tack they  should  be  carried  out  of  the  way  u])  the  Ca]:>e  Fear  Biver. 
For  furtlier  security  1 have  caused  batteries  at  three  points  on  the  river 
to  be  located,  and  the  guns  and  crew  of  the  Arctic  should  be  disposed 
to  occui)y  and  liold  these  batteries  against  any  attempt  by  the  enemy’s 
boats  to  ascend  the  river.  This  is  obvious  to  me  as  the  proper  arrange- 
ment under  the  circumstances,  and  indeed  those  guns  are  nearly  all 
that  I have  to  de])eud  upon  for  this  im})ortant  service.  I will  in  addi- 
tion if  possible  assign  a small  Wliitworth  gun  to  your  command. 

Verv  resj)ectfullv, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITIXG, 
Brigadier' General,  Commanding, 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


821 


Headquarters, 

„ , ^ WUmini/to?iy  C.,  January  5,  1863. 

Col.  John  A.  Baker,  • ’ 

Comdy.  Forty-first  [North  Carolina  Troops  or  Third]  Cavalry  • 
Colonel:  Colonel  Stevens,  commanding Twentj-foiirtli  Sontli  Caro- 
lina Begiment,  with  Preston’s  battery  of  four  pieces,  has  been  directed 
to  occupy  the  vicmity  of  Island  Creek,  on  the  Holly  Shelter  road,  in 
advance  ot  JNortheast  Bridge,  as  outpost  there.  He  is  erecting  works 
ol  defease  at  that  point.  In  like  manner,  on  the  plank  road  at  Siid- 
^^0111  here,  an  outpost  has  been  established,  to 
which  Co  onel  Harrison,  commanding  Third  Brigade,  has  been  ordered 
'V  r T the  advance  of  the  enemy  in  force  for  the  attack 

ol  VVilmmgton  you  will  endeavor  to  ascertain  the  route  he  takes  with 
Ins  main  column.  A part  of  your  cavalry  should  fall  back  on  the  Holly 
blielter  road  and  report  to  Colonel  Stevens,  and  a xiortion  on  the  plank 
load,  lepoiting  to  Colonel  Harrison.  The  division  of  your  command 
and  the  route  you  yourself  take  will  of  course  depend  on  the  circum- 
stances of  the  enemy’s  approach,  and  is  left  to  you.  The  enemy’s  ad- 
vance should  be  delayed  by  every  means  in  your  power.  The  Ma«-nolia 
couriers  and  troops  most  advanced  in  that  direction  might  annoy" their 
rear,  retreating,  if  compelled,  by  the  west  side  of  the  NTortheast  Branch 
ami  rejoining  the  command  by  the  ferry  in  rear  of  Colonel  Stevens. 
Colonel  Hamson  being  in  the  vicinity  of  Captain  Newkirk’s  camp,  that 
oliiccu’  will  for  the  present  report  to  the  colonel  for  special  orders  con- 
tinuing ot  course  his  routine  reports  to  you. 

Very  respectfully, 

\V.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier -General. 

Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  5,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington.^  N.  C. : 

^ Send  the  Whitworth  gun  soon  as  possible.  Carriage  may  be  made 

G.  T.  BEAUREGAIH). 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

^ Faleigh,  N.  6\,  January  5,  1863. 

lion.  Jamks  A.  Seddon, 

Seeretary  of  War : 

Silt.  I beg  to  trouble  you  in  regard  to  a matter  of  great  im[iortance 
to  t lie  army— the  increase  of  desertion.  In  most  of  the  midland  and  low- 
.and  counties  of  this  State  I shall  be  able  to  make  arrests  and  iirevent 
serious  combinations  of  them  by  means  of  the  local  militia,  with  the 
occasional  assistance  of  the  regiment  of  conscripts  at  this  place;  but  in 
I lie  mountains  ot  tlie  west  the  case  is  different.  The  enforcement  of  the 
<jonscn])t  law  in  East  3'ennessee  has  filled  the  mountains  with  disaffected 
desperadoes  of  the  worst  character,  who,  joining  with  the  deserters  from 
0111  aim\,  form  very  formidable  bands  ot  outlaws,  who  hide  in  the  fast- 
nesses, waylay  the  passes,  rob,  steal,  and  destroy  at  pleasure.  The  evil 
los  become  so  great  that  travel  has  b(',en  almost  suspended  tiirough  the 
inountains.  Hie  niihtia  has  become  too  feeble  to  resist  them,  as  that 
•section  has  turned  out  its  ])roportion  for  the  war  with  the  greatest  jiatri- 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


822 


otism  and  unanimity.  I propose  to  organize  about  200  men,  put  tbem 
under  tbe  command  of  experienced  officers,  arm  and  equip  tbem  at  State 
expense,  if  tbe  President  will  accept  tbem  into  Confederate  service  and 
pay  tbem  only  when  actually  engaged.  I boiie  tbe  Department  will  ac- 
cede to  tbe  proposition.  Tbe  impunity  wbicb  tbe  deserters  enjoy  and 
tbe  contagion  of  their  example  is  operating  most  ruinously  upon  tbe 
efficiency  of  tbe  army,  to  say  notbing  of  tbe  injury  to  property  and  citi- 
zens of  tbat  section.  I am  now  maturing  a vigilant  system  of  general 
police  for  tbe  whole  State  for  tbe  prompt  arrest  of  deserters  and  con- 
scripts, wbicb  my  adjutant- general  will  submit  for  your  approval  soon 
and  perhaps  ask  your  assistance.  I also  intend  to  urge  upon  our  Legis- 
lature, soon  to  reassemble,  tbe  passage  of  a law  disfranchising  all  who 
illegally  avoid  their  duty  in  tbe  public  defense. 

i am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^ 


Charleston,  S.  January  (>,  18G3. 

TTon.  James  A.  Sedpon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

I have  one  brigade  and  three  batteries  in  Wilmington  ; have  ordered 
one  bri^^ade  from  Savannah  here  and  transportation  ready  to  Wilming- 
ton but  it  is  dangerous  to  weaken  forces  here  too  much,  considering 
difficulty  of  getting  back  in  case  of  sudden  attack  by  the  enemy.  1 
General  Evans  ninst,  overestimate  lattM. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  G,  18G3. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  IT.  C.  AVhiting, 

Wilmington,  N.  C.  : 

Deported  force  at  New  Berne  must  be  greatly  exaggerated.  No  troops 
appeir  to  have  left  the  Chesapeake  lately  for  tbat  point.  Will  prepare 
for  rapid  transportation  of  all  troops  lean  possibly  spare  in  plain  eiiier- 

gency  bnt  fear  slowness  of  railroad.  beAXJEEGAED. 


Bighmond,  Va.,  January  G,  18G3. 

Governor  Vance  : o .l  i n- 

Could  you  not  give  aid  against  tbe  invasion  of  your  State  by  calling 
out  the  militia  wbicb  would  embrace  tbe  exempts  as  well  as  those  o^eI 
forty-five We  are  straining  to  send  force  to  you.^  gp^DDON 

Sirc.reta.ru  of  War. 


AVeldon,  N.  C.,  January  G,  18G3. 

lion.  Secretary  OF  War: 

General  Evans  rci.orts  Generals  Peek,  Davis,  at  ^ewBe.  la 

with  50,000  men:  says  one  colmnn  will  move  on  Wilmington, f lie 
0,1  klnsVon  and  this  place.  They  have  no  tents;  are  supplied  v th 
iiard  bread  and  beef-cattle  from  Yorktown.  I have  '"‘yAot,, dv 

from  the  Chowan.  Yesterday  there  was  a largo  force  "‘  Gates  Co  m 
reported  ea  roKfe  for  New  Derne;  thirteen  gunboats  and  tr.inspoits 


CiFAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


823 


the  Cliovvan,  apparently  to  take  tliem  to  NTew  Berne.  We  have  between 
]iere  and  Wilmington  only  about  12,000  available  men  5 it  must  be 
doubled.  Can  you  send  us  immediately  15,000  more  men  ? I will  write 
you  in  detail  by  this  evening^s  mail.  This  has  been  shown  to  Major- 
General  Smith. 

S.  G.  FEENCH. 

[Indorsement.] 

Eead  and  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  Ilave  you  asked  Gov- 
ernor Vance  to  furnish  militia'?  What  of  the  troops  to  come  from 
Western  V irgi  nia  ? 

J.  D, 


Weldon,  E.  C.,  January  0,  1SG3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  EicJimond,  Va. : 

Sm : Immediately  after  the  fall  of  New  Berne  I was  ordered  to  the 
District  ot  the  Cape  Fear  and  the  defenses  of  Wilmington,  which  city  I 
lortified  by  a vast  amount  of  labor  j thence  in  July  I was  called  to  Pe- 
tersburg in  command  of  the  Department  of  J^orth  Carolina.  Petersburg 
then  had  no  works  of  defense  except  a trifling  work  on  the  Apj^omattox. 
This  left  me  a line  to  defend  from  Drewry’s  Bluff  to  South  Carolina, 
with  the  enemy  occupying  an  inland  frontier  line  from  the  James  Eiver 
to  Beaufort,  E.  C.  My  force  then  was  scarcely  adequate  to  the  task, 
vhon,  on  the  last  of  August,  I was  summoned  to  Eichmond  by  your 
predecessor,  and  cheerfully— to  strengthen  the  Army  of  the  Potomac- 
reduced  the  force  to  about  ten  regiments,  and  some  of  them  very  small 
ones.  With  this  small  force  the  Black  water  has  been  successfully  de- 
fended against  three  attempts  by  the  enemy  with  large  force  to  cross 
it,  and  FostePs  advance  on  the  Eoanoke  and  their  various  gunboat  ex- 
cursions have  been  defeated,  and  lastly,  without  a soldier  sent  from 
Richmond  to  Goldsborough  being  brought  into  action,  General  Foster 
was  again  obliged  to  retire  to  Eew  Berne.  But  to  meet  Foster,  in  the  first 
instance  I took  all  the  infantry  force  from  Wilmington  and  all  but  a city 
guard  from  Petersburg  5 in  the  latter  instance  General  Smith  did  the 
same,  to  the  virtual  abandonment  of  those  cities  by  the  forces  of  this 
uepartment.  Eow,  again,  there  is  but  one  available  regiment  in  Peters- 
Imrg,  and  the  force  on  the  Blackwater  is  very  much  reduced,  and  we 
cannot  bring  over  12,000  effective  for  the  defense  of  the  line  between  here 
and  Goldsborough.  During  all  this  time  the  enemy  have  been  steadily 
increasing  their  forces,  until  now  I believe  they  iiave  at  least  40,000 
men  m New  Berne,  supported  by  an  undue  proportion  of  artillery  and  a • 
large  fleet  of  gunboats.  They  also  have  about  5,000  infantry  in  Suffolk. 
As  we  must  act  on  the  defensive,  it  will  not  be  possible  with  our  means 
ot  transi)ortation  on  the  railroad  to  concentrate  them  in  front  of  the 
enemy  sliould  he  advance  even  on  one  line  ere  he  reaches  the  railroad, 
much  less  should  he  divide  and  threaten  Wilmington  and  Weldon.  1 
mention  all  tliis  to  give  you  a brief  account  of  the  progress  of  the  opera- 
Itions  in  North  Carolina  and  to  sliow  you  how  it  coirstantly  causes  the 
ic  lange  ot  troops.  Now,  every  infantry  soldier  and  oilicer  who  have 
■hm  t u[)  the  defenses  of  Petersburg  and  tlie  Blackwater  and  are  familiar 
with  the  toimgraphy  of  the  country  are  gone.  This  is  a military  error, 

my  opinion;  but  it  could  not  have  been  avoided,  yet  it  may  be  reme- 
'he<l.  JPit  my  object  chiefly  is  to  inform  you  of  the  condition  of  affairs 


824 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


on  the  line  and  to  ask  for  re-enforcements.  As  I have  stated,  there  are  1 
at  least  40,0(K)  men  in  New  Berne,  say  5,000  in  Snhblk,  and  small  forces  : 
ill  other  towns.  We  have  hut  about  12,000  men  and  other  2,000  on  the  | 
Black  water  to  meet  them.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  send  the  timely 
aid  of  at  least  from  12,000  to  15,000  menl  Should  the  fortunes  of  war  ; 
be  averse  to  us  it  will  require  double  that  number  to  restore  our  line (.* 
where  it  now  is.  Therefore  it  is  and  because  I have  labored  assidu- 
ously to  maintain  the  line  so  long  from  the  James  to  Wilmington,,  that 
now*  that  it  is  imperiled  I ask  timely  aid,  which  I trust  you  may  be  able 
to  send.  I mentioned  to  General  Smith  I should  write  you,  and  as  ouri 
views  of  the  necessity  for  aid  are  the  same,  he  approved  my  doing  so.j 
The  State  of  North  Carolina  is  in  danger.  I inclose  you  some  communi-  i 
cations  just  received. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  most  respectfully,  i 

S.  G.  FEENOn, 

Major-General^  Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Near  Barfield,  N.  C.,  January  5, 18G3. 

Col.  [D.  D.]  Ferebee: 

Sir:  There  are  12,000  Yankee  troops  in  the  counties  of  Gates  and 
Chowan  on  their  way  to  re-enforce  General  Foster  at  New  Berne. 
Thirteen  gunboats  and  transports  made  their  appearance  at  Colerain, 
in  Bertie  County,  this  morning.  It  is  thought  that  they  are  going  to 
take  on  the  12,000  Yankee  troops  at  Holly  Wharf,  or  Hillard’s  farm. 
Others  think  they  are  gone  by  the  way  of  the  new  canal  down  to  Ply- 
mouth and  from  there  to  New  Berne.  There  is  no  doubt  in  the  world 
of  their  going  to  New  Berne.  I have  seen  several  gentlemen  who  have 
seen  them,  and  they  all  agree  that  New  Berne  is  certainly  their  destina-i 
tion.  There  are  a good  many  desertions  from  their  array,  and  they  all 
sav  that  they  are  going  to  re-enforce  New  Berne. 

.y  ^ ^ ^ LEWIS, 

Lieutenant^  Comdg.  Pielcets  on  the  Chowan  Hirer. 


[Intlorsement.] 


Weldon,  N.  C.,  January  7, 18G3. 

1 respectfully  forward  this  note,  but  I have  some  doubts  about  tbe 
correctness  of  the  information. 

S.  G.  FBENCH, 

Major-  General. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Kinston,  N.  C.,  January  G,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen,  S.  G.  French: 

Captain  Whitford  reports  fifty  steamers  at  ISew  Berne;  about  50,0^> 
troops:  Generals  Naglee,  Peck,  and  Havis.  Naglee,  he  supposes,  will 
march  on  Wilmington,  while  Foster  will  attack  this  place  and  Yeldon. 
Naglee’s  division  is  15,000  strong.  The  prisoners  state  that  the  troo])S 
have  no  tents.  Hard  bread  and  beef  cattle  all  brought  from  Yorktowii. 
The  enemy  savs  that  he  will  destroy  the  railroad  between  Weldon  aiid 
Wilmington  to  prevent  re-enforcements  reaching  Wilmington. 

N.  G.  IWANS,  _ 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


825 


Fredericksburg,  January  C,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Faiisom  sliould  be  in  Kichmond  to-niglit.  Advance  him,  if  necessary, 
troops  from  Eichmond,  Petersburg,  *&c. 

Let  me  know  what  is  done  and  what  more  is  wanted. 

I do  not  believe  the  force  at  ISTew  Berne  is  as  large  as  reported. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


General  Beauregard,  Charleston: 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  January  7,  1863. 


Your  dispatch  received.  Special  messenger  from  G.  W.  rSmitlil  just 
arriveil.  G.  AA . writes  General  Lee  says  Wilmington  must  be  defended 
at  all  hazards.  Enemy  are  concentrating  very  heavily  at  Kew  Berne. 
Don  t you  think  movements  of  your  troops  ought  to  begin  ? It  will 
make  great  diherence  in  my  maneuvers  if  they  are  here  in  time. 


W.  H.  C.  AVniTIKG. 


/ 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  7,  1863. 
brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington.  N.  G.: 

MaJ.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Goldshorough,  N.  G. : 

1 cannot  read  telegram.  I send  by  mail  a new  copy  of  cipher.  I 
nay  be  able  to  send  5,000  in  all  to  Wilmington,  provided  rapid  trans- 
portation can  be  had.  If  enemy  divide  his  forces  we  must  concentrate 
)ii  one  point,  sacrificing  less  important  one,  and  then  defeat  him  every- 
vbere  in  succession. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond.,  January  7,  1863. 

lapt.  E.  T.  D.  Myers, 

Chief  Engineer  Piedmont  Railroad^  Danville,  Va.: 

Captain  : Inclosed  is  sent  authority  from  the  Secretary  of  War  re- 
cently granted  for  you  to  take  possession  of  50  jier  cent,  of  the  unlaid 
ron  belonging  to  the  Western  Korth  Carolina  Eailroad,  the  Ealemh 
md  Gaston  Eailroad,  the  Atlantic  and  I^orth  Carolina  Eailroad,  and 
le  Virginia  Central  Eailroad  5 also  authority  to  take  possession  of  all 
lie  iron  in  the  Clarksville  and  Keysville  road,  the  Port  Walthall  road 
iiHl  the  York  Eiver  road  beyond  the  Pamunkey.  ’ 

I presume,  captain,  it  is  unnecessary  to  urge  upon  you  the  imiiortance 
appointing  promptly  energetic  agents  to  secure  this  iron  without 
leJay.  I lie  enemy  seem  to  bo  systematically  threatening  our  ^neat 
•lies  of  communication,  and  your  link  may  in 'conse(iuence' become  one 
vital  consequence. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  E.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Chief  of  JPureau. 


826 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 
Weldon^  N.  G.,  January  7,  1863. 

Hou.  James  A.  Seddon, 

^Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  you  u copy  of  a letter  recently  re- 
ceived from  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  TJ.  S.  Army;  also  a copy  of  a letter 
from  Edward  Stanlj^  addressed  to  General  Foster,  and  a copy  of  m^’ 
reply  to  him.*  As  I may  expect  an  answnr  from  General  Foster  f 
should  be  pleased  to  know  in  advance  if  these  negroes  will  be  returned 
to  their  owners  provided  this  Government  will  return  those  they  havt^ 
abducted.  I have  received  several  letters  and  have  written  him  sev-j 
eral  touching  the  outrages  that  have  been  committed  by  his  troops.  1 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  | 

S.  G.  FliENGH, 
Major-General^  Commanding.  , 

I hope  my  letter  will  meet  your  approval.  ; 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Eichmondj  Fu.,  January  8,  1863. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Charleston.,  S.  C. : 

Throw  into  Wilmington  the  number  sent  before,  say,  as  we  suppose, 
5,000  men  in  all.  Beyond  that  exercise  your  own  judgment  in  contin- 
gencies. The  Secretary  has  telegraphed  to  urge  the  additional  trans- 
portation you  desired  in  your  late  dispatch. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  January  8,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  0.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  N.  G. : 

I will  send  you  same  amount  of  troops  as  before.  First  regiment  will 
leave  to-morrow  morning;  then  rapidly  as  possible. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAEl). 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  8,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Eichmond,  Va.: 

Will  send  same  number  of  trooj)S  to  Wilmington  as  supi)osed  by  De 
partment.  First  regiments  will  leave  to-morrow  morning  ; others  rapkllv 
as  possible. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


*Seo  Foster  to  Freucli,  December  31,  1862,  p.  497,  and  French’s  reply  of  Janiiarj 
G,  1863,  p.  ,505. 


IA1-.  XXX.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


827 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  D<x.,  January  8,  1863. 
lis  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Yance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina,  Raleigh,  Y.  G. : 

Sir  : 1 liave  tlie  honor  to  inclose  the  copy  of  a letter  addressed  to  the 
rovernor  of  Virginia,  which  will  indicate  to  yon  the  measures  which 
ave  been  agreed  upon  between  His  Excellency  and  the  Department  to 
leet  the  existing  emergency.  May  I not  suggest  to  Your  Excellency  the 
uportance  of  similar  action  in  Yorth  Carolina  to  aid  in  repelling  the 
ireatened  movement  of  the  enemy  upon  the  railroad  connections  of 
our  state  ? 

With  high  consideration,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Seeretary  of  War. 

[Inclosiire.] 

War  Department,  0.  S.  A.,  , 

Riehmond,  Ya.,  January  7,  1863. 

[is  Excellency  John  Letcher, 

Governor  of  Virginia : 

Sir  : In  view  of  the  menacing  movements  of  the  enemy  in  hTorth  Car- 
ina with  the  intent  of  striking  at  the  railroad  connections  in  that  State, 
Hi  perhaps  of  invading  Virginia,  I am  instracted  by  the  President  re- 
)ectfully  to  suggest  to  your  consideration  the  propriety  of  calling  out 
le  militia  in  all  the  counties  near  to  the  Yorth  Carolina  line,  in  prepa- 
ition  to  aid  in  repelling  any  such  enterprise.  The  call  might  be  limited 
• those  of  the  exempted  classes  and  those  above  the  age  of  forty  at  the 
ime  time.  This  Department  will  call  on  all  subject  to  the  conscript 
w in  such  counties  to  come  forward  and  report  at  suitable  places  of 
iidezvous.  Thus  the  whole  arms-bearing  pojuilation  may  be  promptly 
numanded  for  temporary  emergency. 

With  high  consideration  and  esteem,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  A.  SED'DON, 
Seeretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  8,  1863. 

reneral  G.  T.  Beaureuard  :] 

My  Dear  General  : I send  you  an  incomplete  sketch,  whicli  you 
II  have  copied  and  returned.  It  will  help  you  to  some  idea  of  my 
isition.  I also  send  G.  W.  Smith’s  note,  received  last  night.  These 
ill  be  handed  you  by  Mr.  Hazell,  of  my  headquarters,  a young  gentle- 
an  Irom  South  Carolina,  who  has  already  borne  a brave  part  indeven 
ittles.  I think  General  Lee’s  remark  somewhat  funny.  To  turn  to 
e map.  AVe  should  consider,  i n attacking  Wilmington,  the  enemy  hav- 
g Ins  base  in  New  Berne  and  Beaufort  he  may  make  his  choice  of  two 
odes  of  attack— one  to  send  on  his  iron-dads  in  advance  and  attempt, 

■ the  reduction  of  the  forts,  to  clear  the  way  for  his  trans])orts  into 
e lower  harbor,  whence  he  could  advance  u])on  the  city  both  by  fleet 
Id  land  ; the  other  to  march  either  from  Swansborough  or  Topsail  In- 
r,  take  the  forts  and  river  batteries  in  reverse,  and  attempt  the  town, 
ih  the  fall  of  which  that  of  the  forts  would  ensue.  The  latter  course 
not  probable.  To  Swansborough  he  can  come  either  overland  from 
iw  Berne  or  by  railroad  to  Beaufort,  and  then  overland  or  by  Avater 


828 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  R.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  | 


fromBeaufort  tlirougli  the  Sounds  in  light-draught  steamers.  He  Avoahl: 
probably  use  all  these.  If  he  eaineto  Topsail  [Iidet]  he  would  be  com- 
pelled to  have  a sea-going  fleet  of  transports,  and  until  or  unless  bei 
Avere  sure  of  his  harbor  he  would  scarcely  attemi^t  that.  Suppose  liim 
on  the  advance  and  on  the  line  of  l^ew  Kiver,  distant  by  the  road  be-* 
tween  40  and  50  miles  from  tbe  city.  There  are  two  roads,  one  called' 
tbe  Holly  Shelter  road,  which  follows  the  Northeast  Branch  of  the 
Cape  Bear,  and  the  other  the  Sound  or  Plank  road  near  the  coast. 
These  fork  a short  distance  from  Onslow,  which  is  50  miles  from  lierei 
and  separated  by  the  great  Holly  Shelter  Swamp.  There  is^  no  com-, 
munication  between  them  until  within  15  miles  of  the  city.  Except  for! 
cavalry  and  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  Northeast  Bailroad  Bridgd 
I do  not  think  he  will  use  Holly  Shelter  road  in  force.  Every  consid-i 
eration  would  keep  him  to  the  coast.  Communication  all  along  with! 
his  gunboats,  supplies,  &c.,  would  all  influence  him,  together  with  the 
fact  that  he  would  have  no  bridges  and  rains  would  not  hurt  the  sandy 
road.  But  it  is  of  the  first  importance  that  I should  be  able  to  check  him 
on  this  road  at  a distance  of  one  day’s  march,  say,  from  the  city  (I  would, 
not  put  it  farther  on  account  of  my  own  troops,  supplies,  ■&€.),  and  be- 
cause I should  be  enabled  to  hold  the  Northeast  Bridge  to  delay  hisl 
advance  until  I could  be  supplied  with  re-enforcements  sufficient  to  en- 
able me  to  prevent  him  from  attacking  the  town  and  Fort  Fisher  and 
river  batteries  in  the  rear  at  the  same  time,  which  he  would  assuredly 
do  were  I compelled  from  paucity  of  force  to  fall  back  at  once  npmi| 
my  intrenchments.  The  longer  he  can  be  kept  off  the  more  uncertain 
he  is  as  to  our  weakness,  and  time  is  given  to  C.  W.  [Smith]  to  eflectj 
with  his  troops  a heavy  diversion  in  my  favor,  either  by  crossing  or 
heading  the  Northeast  Branch  of  Cape  Fear  (see  map— there  is  a bridgej 
over  Cape  Fear  near  Bannerman  and  South  Washington)  j or,  suppos- 
ing me  to  have  saved  the  Northeast  Bridge,  to  throw  his  force  m t.Ud 
city  and,  combined,  attack  instead  of  defending.  If  Foster  imesses  on, 
to  the  close  neighborhood  of  town,  my  troops  being  within  the  outer 
line,  he  with  his  force  can  keep  us  in  (if,  indeed,  with  my  present  mmi-i 
bers  we  can  keep  him  out)  while  he  at  his  leisure  by  the  Old  Brunswict 
road  (see  sketch)  takes  Fort  Fisher  and  the  river  batteries  in  reverse. 

It  is  this  difficulty  which  makes  so  necessary  the  presence  of  amovablc 
column  to  maneuver  in  defense  of  Wilmington,  especially  against  n 
land  attack,  and  to  force  the  enemy  to  a choice  in  his  operations— one 
or  the  other.  The  immediate  vicinity  presents  no  strong  features  and 
no  obstacles — open,  piney  Avoods,  where  numbers  must  tell.  The  extent 
of  the  outer  line  of  intrcnchments,  Avhich,  by  the  Avajy  are  not  forinid- 
able  in  people,  is  too  great  entirely  for  the  troops  I have  here  uoav.  \\  e 
are  using  such  time  as  will  be  alloAved  us  to  strengthen  the  outpost  i)OSi- 
tions.'  I have  Stevens  at  the  Northeast  Bridge  and  Island  Creek  Avitli 
two  batteries  and  Harrison  on  the  plank  road  about  IG  miles  from  tin' 
city  Avith  two  batteries.  At  the  latter  point,  had  Gist  his  troops  here, 
we  might  troulfle  the  enemy  greatly.  I send  you  these  maps. 

riease  have  a tracing  made  of  the  country  lying  between  the  Ireid, 
the  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Eailroad,  and  the  Cape  Fear,  and  semi 
back  as  soon  as  i)0ssible.  Gist  says  you  haAm  no  map.  Aon  a\i  st( 
what  a t errible  effect  the  taking  of  Wilmington  Avill  have  on  Cliarlesum 
and  your  Avh()ledei)artment  by  examining  this  map;  also  that  l)eateii 
the  relics  of  m v force,  if  any  escape,  Avill  have  a very  troublesome  route. 
If  satisfied  that  the  enemy  are  approaching  mcAvith  a very  heavy  oie(' 
l)erhai)s  I mav  have  to  see  you  in  ])erson  to  Avork  out  the  proidem 
whether  Fost(w,  with  o0,()0()  or  40,()()0  Yankees,  is  e<pial  to  three  old  en 


HAP.  XXX.] 


COEKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONEEDEKATE. 


829 


•iiieers,  with  7,000  or  8,000  Southroos.  I am  very  much  obliged  for 
list.  He  is  cool,  sensible,  and  brave.  Do  not  tbrget  to  send  back 
hat  map.  I cannot  spare  it.  Yon  might  in  a short  time  have  the 
Dtate  east  of  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Itailroad  traced  off.  You  will 
)erccive  some  notes  on  the  sketch  in  pencil.  The  Drimswick  Diver  has 
)een  strangely  neglected  heretofore.  Only  a few  rows  of  piles  have 
)eeii  placed  to  obstruct  it.  I have  for  the  purpose  neither  material  nor 
iiachinery.  Have  erected  as  many  batteries  as  I had  guns  to  spare, 
md  shall  put  a number  of  Eains’  torpedoes  down.  What  they  will  do 
do  not  knovz.  The  town  can  be  approached,  supposing  the  enemy  in 
)ossession  of  the  lower  river  and  batteries,  by  the  way  of  Druuswick 
liver,  cutting  the  railroad  bridge  of  tlie  Manchester  Eailroad  without 
rossiijg  under  fire.  This  was  a great  oversight  during  the  i)ast  year, 
foil  will  observe  the  pencil-marked  position  of  Fort  Saint  Philip.  The 
)0hition  is  good  and  the  work  pretty  well  made,  but  the  guns  are  too 
ight,  and  what  is  worse  are  unbanded— those  that  are  rifled.  It  forms 
lie  left  of  a line  of  works  put  up  to  command  the  Smithville  and  Wil- 
iiiiigton  road.  (See  map.)  These  works  force  the  enemy,  unless  he 
oiild  carry  them  around  Green  Swamp.  But  he  would  never  take 
hat  side  of  the  river,  and  I do  not  attach  much  importance  to  them, 
have  mentioned  the  importance  I attach  to  have  sufficient  force  to 
oiupel  the  enemy  to  make  his  choice  between  Fort  Fisher  and  the 
Dwn ; that  is,  the  one  or  the  other,  not  both  at  once.  Or  to  explain  : 
ought  to  liave  a force  the  presence  of  which  at  Wilmington  would 
oinpel  an  attacking  enemy  to  reduce  the  town  by  itself  first,  not  hav- 
ig  it  in  his  power  to  sit  down  before  the  town  and  at  the  same  time  be 
bio  to  move  on  Fort  Fisher  and  thus  make  an  easy  entrance  for  his 
eet.  You  will  see  on  consulting  the  sketch  tliat  the  presence  of  a 
umeuvering  force  resting  on  Wilmington  would  make  a march  to 
'onfederate  Point  or  a division  of  the  enemy^s  forces  liazardous.  The 
bseiice  of  such  a force  puts  everything  in  ids  power.  If  forced  from 
aucity  of  men  simply  to  man  my  lines  why,  of  course,  the  whole  vicinity 
ist  of  the  town  is  open  to  him,  and  he  can  send  at  his  leisure  and  take 
le  river  batteries. 

I would  like  to  have  a talk  with  you.  Maps  and  hurriedly-written 
'tiers  give  so  little  idea  as  compared  with  sight  and  hearing.  The 
ellow  fever  has  been  a terrible  obstacle  to  the  works  about  this* place. 
Ml  my  arrival  here  six  weeks  ago  everything  had  been  at  a stand-still 
)r  a long  time  and  almost  all  had  to  be  reorganized.  Fort  Caswell, 
eing  a fort  of*  the  old  United  States,  seems  to  have  been  considered 
lushed  and  perfect  (probably  out  of  regard  for  General  Totten),  and 
as  not  strengthened.  I am  building  iron  casemates  as  fast  as  I can. 

■ battery  whi(;h  I put  up  eighteen  months  ago  to  command  the  bar  was 
ikeii  down,  I believe,  for  tear  it  might  be  taken  and  used  in  the  fort. 

It  is  a hard  place  to  defend,  this,  and  a liard  position.  1 hope  you 
ill  not  think  me  importunate.  I have  demonstrated  over  and  over 
gain  to  the  War  Department  the  importance  of  the  place  to  the  whole 
auntry,  the  war,  to  liichmond,  and  to  Gharleston  ; shown  how  it  affects 
1C  blockade— for  it  is  the  easiest  place  on  the  coast  for  the  runners  and 
ardest  lor  the  enemy— and  asked  for  what  I thought  necessary.  I do 
ot  complain.  I su])pose  they  could  not  aid  me  or  they  would  have 
one  It.  Since  you  and  [General]  G.  W.  [Smith]  have  come  to  my  assist- 
Qce  I leel  much  better.  The  gunboats  are  not  near  completion'.  They 
on  (I  be  invaluable,  if  ready.  The  fever  again  stopped  them  or  they 
ouid  now  bo  ready.  As  they  are  they  increase  my  embarrassments,  for 
nave  to  provide  for  sending  them  up  the  river  in  case  of  disaster  and 


830 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


ICIIAI*.  XXX 


protect  them  after  they  are  moved.  If  they  were  only  ready,  one  a*! 
Fort  Fisher  and  one  at  [Fort]  Caswell,  then  let  them  come.  One  h 
launched  and  has  her  wooden  shield  on,  the  other  on  the  ways.  I hav( 
steamers  ready  to  tow  them  up  the  river,  and  have  already  constructed 
batteries  on  the  high  bluff  of  the  Cape  Fear  below  the  point  to  whirl 
tbe  o-unboats  can  go.  Can  you  send  over  an  engineer  officer  whos( 
judgment  could  be  relied  on  for  throwing  up  temporary  field  works  au( 
obstructions  1 I have  just  received  your  telegrams  relative  to  strategic 
matters.  I do  not  think  Ealeigh  enters  into  the  matter  for  the  present 
nor  do  I regard  either  of  them  in  the  light  of  cities  j that  is  to  say,  so 
much  property.  The  enemy  having  already  possession  of  Tybee  am 
Pulaski,  I cannot  regard  Savannah  as  of  any  strategic  importance.  I 
is  a place,  to  be  sure,  and  one  which  we  hope  to  hold  j but  it  is  an  ex 
tremity,  not  an  artery.  To  me  it  appears  plain  that  for  the  winter  tb* 
main  operations  of  the  enemy  will  take  place  in  North  Carolina,  whethei 
their  object  be  Eichmond  or  Charleston.  The  enemy  will  not  divide  hi 
attack  on  all  three  of  the  places  you  suggest ; he  will  take  one  or  tb' 
other.  If  he  goes  toward  Weldon  and  Petersburg  it  is  plain  that  Fos 
ter’s  large  concentration  is  to  co-operate  with  Burnside,  and  EichmoiK 
is  the  point.  If  here,  it  is  a separate  invasion,  though  collaterally  affecf 
in  Eichmond  and  Charleston,  and  the  Carolinas  are  the  object.  I hav 
always  been  of  the  opinio;fi  that  Wilmington  would  be  attacked  befor; 
Charleston,  if  the  enemy  *have  any  sense.  If  it  is  saved,  Charlesto! 
will  not  be  troubled  ; if  it  falls.  Charleston  Avill  not  be  long  in  following 
though  locally  it  might  hold  out  for  a time.  Book  at  the  map.  It  i 
for  you  to  decide  whether  you  will  ysk  your  troops,  as  also  the  relativ 


value  of  different  points, 
but  am,  truly,  yours. 


I have  no  more  time  just  at  this  lAresent 


[W.  n.  C.]  WHITING, 

[ lirUjadier-  General.] 


[luclosiire.] 


Goldsborougii,  N.  C.,  January  7,  1803. 


[Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting  :] 

General  • I returned  last  night.  General  Lee  advises  that  ive  dra^ 
troops  from  the  State  of  North  Carolina  for  her  defense,  and  adds  tbn 
Wilmington  must  be  defended  at  all  hazards.  I have  just  inquired  c 
yoii  by  telegraph,  asking  what  number  of  Beuuregardks  troo])s  you  bav 
and  ill  what  contingency  you  will  have  to  give  them  up.  I l^ive  bei 
Daniers  and  Davis’  brigades.  Pettigrew  is  at  Eocky  Mount  ; Irene 
with  a brigade,  at  Weldon.  Pryor  has  four  regiments  on  tlie  Blacl 
water,  and  Eansoni,  with  two  brigades,  arrived  in  Eichmond  last  nigb 
The  enemy  are  concentrating  at  New  Berne,  and  there  is  a iorce  (h 
ported  12,000)  in  Gates  County  threatening  Weldon,  or  ready  to  1; 

J-  , / ^ T of  11  Lnvn  hniM. 


transported  by  water  to  New  Berne  or  other  points.  I still  have  ho]), 
that  we  Avill  receiA^e  additional  troops  from  General  Bi 


tnai  we  wiu  ranco  r troops  from  General  Lee’s  - >'  * 

they  are  not  taster  they  will  ho  too  late.  It  Beauregard  can  lain  s 
YOU  with  troops  enough  to  hold  them  at  bay  long  enough  tor  us  to  com 
'to  your  relief,  all  will  be  well.  If  lie  cannot  I will,  if  possible,  sen 
enougli  to  enable  you  to  hold  on  until  more  troops  can  bo  brought  trot 
above.  AVrite  mo  full3\ 

Very  truly,  your  friend,  ^ ^ 

Major-General 


CHAI*.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


831 


AVAR  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Va.,  January  8,  18G3. 
His  Excelleucy  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina: 

Sir:  I send  you  here  with  an  extract  from  a letter  of  General  Bobert 
E.  Lee,  just  received.*  It  explained  his  views  in  relation  to  tlie  threat- 
ened movements  of  the  enemy  on  your  State  and  his  inability  to  snp])ly 
the  re-enforcements  which  would  be  desirable  for  your  defense.  You 
will  observe  that  he,  like  myself,  relies,  in  the  existing  deficiency  of 
regular  troops,  on  the  patriotism  and  valor  of  the  citizens  of  your  State 
and  seeks  to  know  whether  the  presence  of  one  of  his  most  distinguished 
generals  (General  D.  H.  Hill  of  your  State)  might  not  prove  advanta- 
geous in  rousing  and  stimulating  the  people  and  in  counseling  and  co- 
operating with  the  State  authorities.  On  this  subject  I wish  to  defer  to 
your  judgmmit  and  wishes,  of  which  I should  be  pleased  to  be  advised. 
Before  receiving  this  letter  from  General  Lee  I had  taken  the  liberty 
respectfully  to  suggest  for  your  consideration  a call  I had  made  on  the 
Governor  of  Virginia  for  the  aid  of  the  militia,  and  to  request,  if  it  met 
your  app'obation,  that  a similar  call  should  be  made  in  North  Carolina 
b}"  tlie  State  on  its  militia,  and  by  the  Confederate  Government  on  the 
conscripts.  By  such  means  I hope  adequate  aid  may  be  obtained  to 
repel  the  threatened  invasion  of  your  State. 

AVith  high  respect  and  esteem,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
tSecretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmi7igt07i,  N.  C.,  Ja7iuary  9,  1863. 
Colonel  Harrison,  Go7n77ia7idi7ig  Brigade : 

Colonel:  Having  secured  your  immediate  position  on  the  road  and 
cleared  away  the  brush  in  front  of  the  works,  proceed  to  the  full  extent 
of  your  implements  and  force  to  the  construction  of  obstacles  and  de- 
leiisive  works  to  the  right  of  your  position,  at  all  i)oints  where  the  enemy 
might  endeavor  to  turn  your  right,  just  as  if  you  were  to  have  5,000  men 
instead  of  only  your  present  command.  Eor  one  species  of  obstacles  I 
would  recommend  parties  of  ax-men,  under  intelligent  officers,  to  follow 
Che  course  of  the  little  miry  runs  on  the  low  ground  to  the  left-  and 
nght  of  the  old  field,  to  fell  trees  and  make  a difiicult  abatis  on  this  side 
ol  the  crests  or  rises  on  this  side — a continuous  line  of  log  breasi  works 
or  skirmishers  and  riflemen;  clear  out  brush  and  undergrowth  in  the 
leld  of  fire  on  the  opposite  side,  and  fell  trees  in  line  and  at  random  to 
throw  opposyig  movements  into  confusion,  taking  care  to  have  our  own 
side  ’tasked.  Eor  road  cutters,  press  the  negro  and  salt- workers  gener- 
I > . VVith  a little  instruction  and  under  superintendence  of  intelligent 
Hiicers  they  will  soon  learn.  As  well  as  I recollect  the  little  sketch  here 
IS  something  like  the  old  field.! 

1 would  here  a little  in  advance  of  the  road  throw  up  two  creniaillere 
lues  selecting  the  most  commanding  ground,  one  following  somewhat 
he  direction  a o toward  the  pond,  the  other  that  of  c u,  tlirown  well  to 
■ our  rear.  On  the  right  of  the  pond,  again,  similar  works  might  be 
mide  wiiere  sufficiently  open  country  occurs.  The  cover  also  for  the 
'id(*nes  heretofore  proposed  for  Sudberry’s  Crossing  may  also  bo  con- 
>uiictcd,  together  with  infantry  cover.  1 must  leave  a great  deal  to  your 

* Sco  Leo  to  Seddou,  January  5,  p.  819.  t OrnittedTs  unimi^rtout 


832 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA 


[Chap.  XXX. 


jiulgmeiit,  not  being  able  to  be  on  tbe  ground  myself,  and  to  that  of  j 
Lieutenant  Obeneliain.  It  is  possible  that  reconnaissanee  in  irontofj 
your  position  and  a short  distance  beyond  the  road  which  leads  from  I 
the  idank  road  to  Holly  Shelter  may  afford  a good  site  tor  a small  out- 1 
post  or  advanced  work  for  pickets.  All  of  the  troops  here  with  General : 


Gist  commenced  leaving  Charleston  to-day;  so  you  will  soon  have  your 
full  command  and  be  assured  of  able  support.  It  behooves  us  there- 
Ibre  t o work  very  hard  and  rapidly ; and  although  I did  not  at  lirst  glance 
think  very  weirof  that  position,  yet  with  some  labor  and  a strong  sup- 
porting force  we  shall  be  able  materially  to  check,  if  not  defeat,  th(i; 
enemy’s  advance.  General  Gist  will  visit  your  shortly. 


Very  respectfully, 


W.  H.  G.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Goldsboeough,  January  9,  1863. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War: 

I returned  this  evening  from  Haleigh,  which  place  I visited  at  thei 
solicitation  of  Governor  Vance.  I sent  you  telegram  from  there  lastt 
nigid,  saying  it  was  not  advisable  to  call  out  the  militia  at  this  time,, 
and  1 wiil  add  that  I do  not  think  it  ever  will  be  advisable  to  do  so.  I 
telegraphed  at  the  same  time  that  I purposed  ordering  Ransonfs  divis-, 
ion  into  North  Carolina.  I would  have  done  this  whilst  at  Richmond 
had  I felt  at  libc^rty  to  act  in  the  case  upon  my  own  judgment,  and  will 
do  it  from  here  at  once  as  soon  as  a movement  of  the  enemy  in  force  is! 
known.  But  as  my  general  views  have  been  laid  before  the  Hepartmenti 
and  General  Lee,  and  the  latter  only  detached  Ransom’s  division  for  the 
protection  of  Richmond  and  Petersburg,  I refrain  from  ordering  it  far- 
ther on  mere  anticipated  action  of  the  enemy;  but  it  is  needed  here,  and, 
many  more  troops  will  be  required  to  put  us  on  anything  like  equality 

of  numbers  with  the  enemy.  , i t i.  ixr-i 

General  Beauregard  has  left  two  regiments  and  a battalion  at  Wil- 
mington. This,  in  addition  to  Clingman’s  brigade,  which  is  about  2,000 
effectives,  makes  General  Whiting’s  force  too  small  for  maneuver  farj 
from  his  interior  line  of  intrenchments  and  materially  lessens  the  chanccti 
(ff  his  being  effectively  aided  by  a force  from  here.  General  Beauregard 
evidently  considers  it  hazardous  to  place  any  large  number  of  his  trooi)^ 
in  Wilmington  when  there  is  any  prospect  of  the  iron-dads  taking  pos 
session  of  the  Gape  Pear.  There  is  much  reason  in  this  view  of  the  case 
Prom  information  received  from  Beaufort  and  New  Berne  it  is  not  oul\ 
certain  that  the  enemy  is  concentrating  rapidly  at  New  Berne  througl 
the  Sound  and  by  sea  through  Beaufort,  but  that  had  not  their  principa 
iron-clad  vesserbeen  lost  and  others  injured  they  would  in  all  proba 
bility  ere  this  liave  made  a combined  attack  by  land  and  sea  upon  w n 
mington.  I have  no  great  confidence  that  either  Port  Gaswell  or  loi’f 
Pisher  can  prevent  the  passage  of  heavy  iron-clad  steamers  into  tm 
river.  If  either  of  these  forts  are  passed  by  such  vessels  both  forts  wil 
fall.  A storm  at  sea  has  deferred  the  time  of  attack.  We  have,  I hope 
still  time  enough  to  get  ready  for  them.  . , , z.  r i r 

General  liee’s  letter  to  me,  which  I showed  you  the  night  before  I lei 
Richmond,  has  almost  deterred  me  from  referring  further  to  the  suhjec 
of  re-enforcements  from  that  end  of  the  line;  but  I beg  that  you  vMi 
bear  in  mind  that  it  is  far  more  easy  to  hold  Wilmington  than  to  retain 
it.  The  same  is  true  of  other  points  in  this  State  and  true  of  the  btat( 
itself. 


1 


'HAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


«33 


1 send  you  with  this  copies  of  coinniuniciitions  just  received  from  Gen- 
*ral  Whiting  and  General  Beauregard.  I may  have  to  re-enforce  Wil- 
nington  from  here.  I have  one  brigade  at  Kinston,  about  1,200;  two 
lere,  one  ot  1,300,  the  other  about  3,000.  Bclnsonds  two  brigades  should 
lave  been  sent  at  once  and  should  be  rapidly  following.  Blease  let  me 
mow  as  soon  as  possible  whether  General  Lee  can  look  after  Eichmond 
md  Petersburg  it  Eansom’s  troops  are  ordered  here,  and  decide  what 
.dditional  forces  if  any  are  to  be  sent.  It  is  very  important  that  I should 
[now  what  torce  I am  to  have  and  that  I have  it  in  hand  as  soon  as 
)0ssible. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  Genera  I, 

[Incloaures.] 

Headquarters, 
Wilmington,  Januari)  7,  18G3. 

laj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith: 

My  Hear  General:  Yours  just  received.  I would  have  been  all 
ight  had  Beauregard  allowed  his  troops  to  remain.  As  it  is,  he  stop- 
'ed  taking  all  away,  leaving  me  Stevens’  regiment,  Harrison’s  regiment, 
ud  a battalion.  These  with  Clingman’s  brigade,  three  of  Beauregard’s 
atteries,  and  my  three,  make  my  present  disposable  force.  It  is  not 
iiough  to  hold  the  enemy,  in  such  a country  as  the  plank  road,  at  a 
istance  from  town,  if  he  comes  in  the  force  represented  or  even  half 
t that.  And  to  keep  him  at  a distance  is  all  important,  because  that 
5 my  only  way  to  save  the  Northeast  Bridge.  I send  you  Beauregard’s 
degraph  to  me.  But  if  Wilmington  is  the  point  menaced  and  I believe 
is,  those  troops  ought  to  be  here  to  enable  me  to  maneuver.  General 
(ce’s  remarks  about  drawing  troops  from  North  Carolina,  and  then  add- 
ig  that  Wilmington  must  be  defended  at  all  hazards,  rather  crowds  me. 

1 1 could  possibly  have  those  5,000  here  I could  stop  the  enemy  15  miles 
•oin  here  mid  keep  his  hands  full,  besides  saving  the  Northeast  [Bridge  I 
Inch  is  important  to  your  movement  whether  you  intend  to  strike 
im  in  Hank  or  rear;  and  of  course  very  important  to  Wilmington.  1 
mil  write  Beauregard  and  also  telegraph  him.  Hadn’t  you  better  tele- 
raph  him  that  the  movement  of  his  troops  should  commence  at  once, 
know  he  had  them  all  ready  to  move,  but  transportation  is  so  fear- 
illy  slow. 

^'ery  tired;  just  off  a 40-mile  reconnaissance  to  eastward. 

Yours,  truly, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 

. ^ Charleston,  January  8,  [1863.] 

ajor-Cxeneral  Whitino:  • ? l j 

Should  enemy’s  iron-dads  or  other  steamers  enter  Cape  Fear  Eiver 
oiild  not  my  troops  at  Wilmington  be  cut  off  from  possibility  of  return? 
so,  ought  Charleston  and  Savannah  to  be  endangered  for  that  city? 
ehlon,  Ealeigh,  and  Wilmington  are  three  objective  points  of  enemy; 
^sttwo  are  decisive  objectives.  If  all  three  cannot  be  defended  to- 
ahcr  ^dth  strong  probability  of  success,  enemy’s  movements  and  our 
'iiilable  forces  must  determine  which  to  sacrifice  in  timely  succession 
r defense  of  most  important  one.  Such  is  my  view  of  present  military 
'Orations  in  North  Carolina.  Please  answer.* 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 

* Same  to  Cooper  aud  Smith. 

53  R li— VOL  xvill 


834 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


[Indorsement.] 


January  10, 1863.  ‘ 

[Note  in  pencil  on  Smith’s  letter.] 

Tlie  exempts  for  Coufederate  service  slioiikt  be  fitted  out  for  emer- 
f^eucj^  Tbe  Government  has,  I suppose,  the  power. 


J.  D. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston^  N.  (7.,  January  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Coindg.  District  of  North  Carolina,  Weldon,  A.  C.: 

General  : 1 1’eeeived  your  letter  last  night  and  telegraphed  Avhat  I 
learned  from  our  underground  railroad.  lleliable says  that  on  Alon- 
day,  the  4th  instant,  Foster  was  shipjiing  his  Napoleon  guns  all  day,' 
but  could  not  learn  their  destination.  He  reports  also  that  a long 
black  steamer,  with  light  Hahlgren  guns  and  two  pivot  guns,  one  each 
in  the  bow  and  stern,  [had  arrived.]  She  is  intended  for  Wilmington 
and  is  to  enter  the  harbor  as  the  Alabama,  the  enemy  firing  at  her  as 
she  passes.  She  is  to  sail  under  Confederate  colors.  This  I think  proh 
able.  I have  my  pickets  within  8 miles  of  New  Berne,  who  keep  me 
advised  of  every  movement.  I liave  learned  that  the  enemy  will  attach 
Weldon,  Wilmington,  and  this  place  at  the  same  time.  Foster  wil, 
probably  come  this  wav,  Heintzelman  go  to  Wilmington,  Peck  and  Cor 
coran  to  Weldon.  Troops  have  been  again  sent  to  Sutiblk,  or  were  tc 
leave  when  Corcoran  left  Yorktown.  1 am  convinced  Foster  will  noi 
attack  me  again  on  the  south  side  of  the  Neuse,  but  will  march  tlu 
left  bank  to  co-operate  with  the  force  (if  necessary)  that  attacks  Wei 
don.  With  the  two  brigades  now  at  Goldsborougli  I think  I can  pre 
vent  his  junction  by  attacking  him  as  far  down  as  Coutentnea  Creek 
which  he  will  be  obliged  to  cross  if  he  marches  out  from  New  Berne  h 
attack  Goldsborough.  I can  also,  if  he  passes  Snow  Hill,  easily  attacl 
his  rear.  My  scout  thinks  every  precaution  should  be  taken  to  guani 
the  Weldon  bridge,  as  the  enemy  are  trying  to  bribe  citizens  to  burn  it 
I Avill  keep  you  advised. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient,  ^ ^ EVANS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Executive  Department, 
Bichmond,  January  9,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  7th  instant,  directed  to  the  Governor,  ha 
been  received.  He  requests  me  to  inform  you  that  the  requisition  lo 
the  militia  has  been  complied  with,  by  the  issue  of  the  necessary  ordei 
to  the  adjutant-general  of  this  State,  a copy  of  which  is  herein  inclosea 
Very  respectfully, 

GEOEGE  W. MUNFOKD, 

Secretary  of  the  Commonwealth 


[Inclosiivo  ] 

The  iuliutaiit-areiicvul  will  issue  to  the  )>ro)ier  ollicors  ordore  callni 
.{lilt  immediately  for  a seryi(y>.of  .six  mouths,  unless  .sooner  .disoliai>e< 


835 


CiiAi*.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

the  Diilitia  of  tlie  counties  hereinafter  named,  not  called  for  under  the 
conscript  law  of  the  Confederate  States,  embracing  all  the  able-bodied 
men  between  the  ages  of  forty  and  forty-live  years. 

Employes  of  railroad  and  transportation  companies  and  officers  of 
banks,  and  other  persons  who  are  exempt  by  the  laws  of  the  State  and 
Confederate  States,  are  not  liable  to  duty. 

The  rendezvous  will  be  at  Petersburg, 
heu  arrived  at  the  rendezvous  the  troops  will  be  reorganized  into 
30inpanies,  battalions,  and  regiments.  The  oldest  commissioned  officers 
present,  of  the  respective  grades  required,  will  be  assigned  to  dutv,and 
mpernumeraries  will  be  reduced  to  the  ranks. 

The  troops  will  be  supplied  with  arms  and  ammunition  when  they 
irrive  at  Petersburg. 

The  officers  in  command  of  detachments  will  cause  the  men  to  be 
urnished  with  necessary  provisions  until  mustered  into  service  of  the 
confederate  States,  and  for  this  purpose  may  purchase  or  impress 
lecessaries  and  transmit  the  accounts  therefor  to  the  auditing’  board. 

The  counties  upon  which  the  call  is  made  are  the  counties  of  Green- 
'ille,  Dinwiddie,  the  city  of  Petersburg,  the  counties  of  Brunswick, 
ainenburg,  Mecklenburg,  Halifax,  Charlotte,  Pittsylvania,  Henry 

atrick,  Franklin,  Hottoway,  Prince  Edward,  and  Campbell,  including: 
he  City  of  Lynchburg. 

This  call  is  made  by  the  War  Department  by  order  of  the  President 
f the  Confederate  States.  It  is  of  great  importance  that  the  force 
ailed  for  be  promptly  furnished  and  organized. 


IPECiAL  Orders,  ) Adjutant-General’s  Office,  Va., 

^ January  9,  1863. 

The  commandants  of  the  Fiftieth  Kegiment,  Greenyille  County 
Jghty-third,  Dinwiddie;  Thirty-ninth,  Petersburg;  Sixty-sixth  and 
iiiiety-sixth,  Brunswick;  Seventy- third,  Lunenburg;  Twenty-second 
lid  Einety-eighth,  Mecklenburg;  Sixty-ninth,  Eighty-fourth,  and  One 
uiidred  and  seyenty-second,  Halifax;  Twenty-sixth,  Charlotte;  Forty- 
Bcoiid,  One  hundred  and  first,  and  One  hundred  and  sixty-eightii 
ittsylvania ; Sixty-fourth,  Henry ; Eighteenth  and  One  hundred  and 
tty-sixth,  1 atrick;  Forty-third,  One  hundred  and  tenth,  and  One  hun- 
red  and  ninety-fifth,  Franklin ; Forty-ninth,  Nottoway ; Sixty-third 
rmce  fdward;  Fifty-third  and  One  hundred  and  seyenteenth,*  Camp- 
ell,  and  Thirty-first,  Lynchburg,  will  immediately  call  out,  fora  seryice 
t six  months,  unless  sooner  discharged,  all  the  militiamen  not  called 
)r  under  the  conscript  laws  of  the  Confederate  States,  embracing  all 
blePodied  men  between  the  ages  of  forty  and  forty-fiye  years. 

Ufiicers  and  employes  of  railroad  and  transportation  companies,  offi- 
^rs  ot  baidvs,  and  other  persons  who  are  exempt  by  the  laws  of  the 
tate  and  Confederate  States,  are  not  subject  to  this  call. 

Where  there  are  no  field  officers  iu  a regiment  the  senior  captain  is 
3inmandant ; where  no  captains,  the  senior  lieutenants  of  highest  rank 
Jminand ; and  all  such  are  peremptorily  required  to  execute  this  order 
ithoiii;  a moment  s delay.  They  will  cause  the  men  to  be  assembled 
o 1 conyenient  places  within  the  respectiye  regiments  and 

Petersburg,  the  point  of  general  rendezyous,  in 
i^irgc  ot  the  officer  highest  in  rank  iu  the  regiment.  Eequire  the  men 
» ormg  with  them  clothing  and  blankets. 

Officers  commanding  detachments  .will  procure  subsistence  for  them. 


836 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  XXX. 


until  luustGred.  into  SGrvicG  ot  tli6  CoutcdGratG  StatcSj.bj'  purchase^  it 
practicable;  if  not,  by  impressment,  and  certify  such  purchases  or  im- 
pressments to  the  auditing  board  at  Kichmond. 

Officers  commanding  detachments  will  report  as  fast  as  they  arrive 
at  Petersburg  to  such  officer  in  the  service  of  the  Confederate  States 
as  may  be  appointed  to  receive  and  muster  them  into  service.  The 
troops  will  there  be  organized  into  companies,  battalions,  and  regi- 
ments, and  supplied  with  arms  and  ammunition.  They  will,  as  lar  as 
practicable,  obtain  railroad  transportation  for  the  detachments  to  the 
place  of  general  rendezvous,  giving  certificates  of  the  number  of  men 
transported,  which  will  be  xiaid  by  the  State. 

By  command : ^ lUOHAEDSON, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  Jamiary  10,  1803. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wihmngton.)  N.  (7.  : 

Maps  received.  Your  views  ot  enemy^s  mode  of  attack  on  Wilming- 
ton are  doubtless  correct,  and  I fully  agree  to  best  point  for  meeting 
him,  provided  he  can  land  no  considerable  force  in  your  rear.  I send 
all  forces  I can  spare  from  this  department ; same  as  before.  Will  return 

G.  T.  BEAUREGAED. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  10, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Goldshorougli,  A.  C. : 

I am  sending  Whiting  same  forces  as  before.  Do  not  let  them  he 
taken.  Why  don’t  you  apply  for  Lovell  He  is  in  Richmond,  anxioue 

for  the  field.  ^ ^ BEAUREGARD. 


Maj.  Gen. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Eiclimond,  Va.,  January  10,  1803. 

Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Goldsborough,  A.  C. : 

We  think  it  desirable  the  militia  of  North  Carolina  should  be  callee 
out.  Can  you  not  encourage  it  ? General  Lee  urges  tLat 
division  should  not  be  ordered  beyond  Drewry  s Bluli.  The 
thinks  that  division  likely  to  be  specially  serviceable  in  North  Garolm. 
but  would  approve  of  an  equal  force  being  returned  to  Drewry  s Jiiun 
No  late  news  of  special  interest.  ^ ^ SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Goldsborougii,  N.  C.,  January  10, 1803. 

General  G.’  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding^  Charleston^  S.  C.  : 

My  Dear  General  : Your  telegram  of  the  8th  instant  was  receiver 
last  night.on'my..ireturn.from»Raleigh,  . I answered  by  telegrap 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  837 

your  opinions  were  well  founded,  but  that  I thought  the  difficulty  you 
suggested  in  getting  the  troops  back  in  case  the  iron-clads  pass  the 
forts  and  get  into  the  Cape  Fear  could  be  obviated.  It  is  very  im- 
portant for  the  Confederate  Government  to  hold  Wilmington,  and  it  is 
almost  absolutely  necessary  to  this  State.  They  cannot  take  Wilming- 
ton by  land,  I think,  if  General  Gist  with  the  troops  he  had  there  be- 
fore is  in  the  place  in  time  to  maneuver  in  front  and  check  their  ap- 
proach. I have  here  and  at  Kinston  a little  over  5,000  men.  There  are 
three  regiments  at  Eocky  Mount,  half-way  from  Goldsborough  to  Wel- 
don, and  three  at  Weldon.  I hope  that  General  Lee  will  yet  see  in 
time  the  necessity  for  transferring  a portion  of  the  forces  now  in  front 
of  Fredericksburg  to  this  State,  which  I feel  assured  is  to  be  the  theater 
of  active  operations  this  winter  and  spring.  If  we  can  hold  Wilmington 
and  Weldon  the  enemy,  if  they  penetrate  the  interior  of  the  State,  can- 
not hold  themselves  there.  But  if  they  succeed  at  Wilmington,  and 
once  get  possession  of  it,  we  will  never  get  it  away  from  them.  My 
opinion  is  that  but  for  the  storm  at  sea  which  sent  the  Monitor  to  the 
bottom,  disabled  the  Passaic,  and  sent  the  Galena  no  one  knows  where, 
they  would  before  this  time  have  made  a combined  attack  by  sea 
and  land  upon  Wilmington,  and  would  probably  have  succeeded  in 
passing  the  torts  with  their  iron-clads ; and  if  we  had  been  caught  with 
inadequate  forces  to  resist  and  check  them  on  land  they  would  have 
had  a comparatively  easy  time  of  it.  But  the  iron-clads  are  foiled  so 
far,  and  if  advantage  is  taken  of  the  delay  they  will  find  themselves 
headed  off  in  every  direction. 

I cannot  close  this  hurried  letter  without  thanking  you  for  the  prompt 
and  efficient  assistance  you  so  generously  gave  in  December  when  we 
were  seriously  threatened,  and  hope  that  you  will  be  able  to  continue  it 
to  us  now.  I know  you  will  do  all  you  can.  We  must  combine  and 
(iontrive  to  beat  them.  I am  always  glad  to  hear  from  you  and  will 
endeavor  to  write  to  you  often. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

Since  writing  this  I have  received  your  cipher  sent  to  War  Depart- 
ment October  16,  1862.  The  copy  sent  me  dated  January  7,  1863. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  0.,  January  10,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding^  cfc.,  Goldsborough,  W.  C.  : 

My  Dear  General  : I send  you  the  inclosed  note,'*  although  it  is 
loubtless  exaggerated ; still  the  very  report  indicates  that  the  war  is 
’apidly  being  transferred  from  Virginia  to  this  State.  I trust  our  au- 
horities  are  equally  active.  You  may  depend  upon  it  that  Burnside, 
smarting  imder  his  terrible  defeat  at  Fredericksburg,  recollecting  his 
accesses  in  North  Carolina,  the  plans  he  had  made  to  invade  upset  by 
lie  Bichmond  battles,  has  induced  Lincoln  to  transfer  the  war,  and 
'ensibly,  too,  a winter  campaign  in  Northern  Virginia  being  out  of  the 
juestion.  I have  no  doubt  that  for  the  last  month  troops  have  been 
iioving  from  Burnside^s  army  through  by  Suffolk  and  from  outside. 


'Not  foiiud. 


838 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX) 


Foster’s  name  and  re-enforce  Foster”  are  words  retained  only  as  i! 
blind  because  they  know  that  the  designation  of  any  i)rominent  genera 
would  indicate  their  plans.  I should  not  be  surprised  if  you  wake  uj 
and  find  yourself  in  front  of  Burnside  or  ‘‘Little  Mac,”  and  Lee  far  of 
up  yonder.  The  same  circumstances  which  point  the  enemy  to  this  fiehi 
of  war  jirevent  Lee  from  moving  on  Washington.  Indeed  that  magnil] 
cent  army  should  be  hastening  southward.  Tell  me  your  opinion  aiui 
what  you  think  will  be  done.  How  it  will  turn  out  here  I cannot  tell 
We  shall  have  a light  and  a heavy  one.  I fear  your  own  hands  will  lx 
so  full  that  you  can  hardly  help  me,  but  I hope  not. 

Verv  respectfully,  _ 

‘ ^ H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- Ge^ieraJ. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington,  January  10,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  AV.  Smith,  Goldshorough : 

They  must  be  moving  troops  from  Burnside’s  army  through  by  wa; 
of  Suffolk.  Fifty -five  transports  and  twenty-one  gunboats  are  reportei 
at  Beaufort.  If '^true,  this  means  outside  work.  A very  large  force  i 
concentrated  at  Morehead  City.  Depend  upon  it  Burnside  has  induce( 
them  to  change  their  programme  from 


Goldsborough,  N.  0.,  January  11,  1803. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

The  following  telegram  just  received  from  General  Whiting  at  Wr 
mington : 


Have  information  from  [Lieut.  John  S.]  Fairly,  of  my  staff,  at  Swausborougli.  H 
sent  a man  into  the  lines,  who  reports  that  the  enemy  h^TBer 

Berne  as  fast  as  possible ; that  their  numbers  now  amount  *"7^,000  at  hew  Berne  au 
15  000  at  Morehead  City,  the  former  to  advance  on  Weldon  by  Kinston,  the  latter  o 
Wilmington  ; reports  that  on  yesterday  and  to-day  they  will  get  all 
Now  Berne  and  that  the  move  on  Kinston  will  commence  Tuesday  oi  ^Yednesda^ 
yZ n^eTl  the  forces  that  can  he  got  from  northward.  Yankee  fleet  is  assen 
bling  here. 


Tbe  numbers  are  exaggerate^  but  yeiv,  is  no  doubt  but  ^ 


been  largely  re-enforced.""  They  have,  I think,  over  30,000  and  less  tha 


40  000  men.  The  troops  at  Petersburg  should  be  placed  at  my  dispos: 

at^once  and  others  brought  there  or  to  Bichmoiul.  cjTVTTrmr 

G.  vv.  biviim, 

Major-General 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  11, 1803. 

Brig.  Geu.  W.  11.  C.  AVhiting, 

Wilmington,  A.  G.  : 

Kuemv  camiot  be  90,000  strong  under  Poster,  wbo  Inid  15,000  befon 
and  be  may  have  received  as  many  more.  I will  send  witb  your  nmi 
my  system  for  calculating  enemy’s  forces.  Altp 


C^iAf.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  • ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


§39 


Charleston,  S.  0.,  January  11,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington^  N,  G. : 

Few  enemy’s  blockaders  in  sight  this  morning.  Have  you  fortified 
your  advanced  position  by  rifle-pits  and  abatis  ? 

G.  T.  BEAUREGAKD.. 


Charleston,  S,  C.,  January  11^  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Commanding  at  Wilmington,  N.  C. 

My  Dear  General:  Your  tavor  of  the  8th  instant  and  accompany- 
ing drawings  were  duly  received.  I telegraphed  you  my  coincidence  in 
your  views  relative  to  the  meditated  attack  of  the  enemy  on  Wilmington 
and  its  proposed  defense  by  you.  We  differ,  however,  in  this  respect — 
that  should  he  have  any  iron-dads  to  operate  with  he  will  first  pass 
and  take  or  silence  your  forts  on  the  river,  and  then  land  his  forces 
immediately  before  the  city  to  make  a land  and  Avater  attack  on  its  de- 
fenses, thereby  cutting  off*  your  retreat  across  the  river  to  prevent  you 
Irom  re-enforcing  Charleston.  Should  it  become  necessary,  your  com- 
munications at  the  same  time  with  Goldsborough  would  be  cut  off  by  a 
strong  movable  column,  Avhich  would  destroy  all  the  rail  and  common 
road  bridges  in  that  direction.  He  would  also  make  a demonstration 
against  Goldsborough  or  Weldon  to  keep  Smith’s  [forces]  there  inactive, 
and  so  oiierate  as  to  compel  him  to  sacrifice  the  least  important  positions 
in  succession  for  the  protection  of  the  most  important  ones.  This  is 
what  I meant  in  my  telegram,  and  not  that  they  would  attack  Wilming- 
ton, Raleigh,  and  Weldon  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Wilmington  would 
3ertainly  be  a great  loss  to  the  Confederacy,  but  not  as  much  so  as  Ra- 
leigh and  Weldon,  which  would  give  the  enemy  both  lines  of  communi- 
cation between  the  South  and  Richmond.  Moreover,  the  capital  of  any 
State,  which  to  us  signifies  nothing,  is  an  event  of  great  importance 
in  Europe.  I will  repeat  here  a French  proverb,  which  is  as  true  in  war 
is  in  the  ordinary  walks  of  life,  “ Qui  trop  embrasse  mal  etreinV^  You 
ill  seem  to  be  very  much  in  the  dark  about  the  enemy’s  movements  and 
brces,  exaggerating  the  latter  terribly.  This  must  have  a depressing 
effect  upon  your  troops.  I always  make  mine  believe  we  are  stronger 
ind  the  enemy  is  weaker  by  about  one-third  than  is  actually  the  case. 
\fter  a,  battle  I reverse  this.  With  a proper  system  of  spies  all  the 
memy’s  important  movements  ought  to  be  known  to  you,  and  by  count- 
ng  his  generals  you  ought  generally  to  know  pretty  nearly  what  his 
orcesare;  for  instance:  One  brigade  (four  regiments  of  500  effective 
nen),  2,000;  one  division  (four  brigades),  8,000;  one  corps  (four  divis- 
ons),  32,000  ; cavalry  brigade,  2,000;  artillery  (about  three  pieces  for 
1,000  infantry),  ninety-six  pieces.  This  would  give  1 general  command- 
i)g,  4 major-generals,  and  17  brigadier-ghnerals,  or  22  in  all;  but  the 
Vholitionists  have  generally  colonels  commanding  brigades  for  the  sake 
)f  economy.  I have  my  doubts  whether  Foster  commands  at  this  mo- 
nent  more  than  the  above  force,  although  it  may  be  increased  greatly 
‘re  long.  By  using  this  table  you  will  find  that  Burnside’s  army  of 
liree  corps  and  a reserve  at  Fredericksburg  amounted  to  about  125,000 
T 130,000  men,  with  about  three  hundred  pieces  of  cannon.  JSTow  that 
we  iron  clads  are  played  out  for  the  present,  I feel  less  nervous  at  having 
eiit  you  my  best  available  troops ; but  I hope  they  will  be  returned  in 
line  should  they  be  required  for  the  defense  of  this  department. 

Wishing  you  the  amplest  success,  I remain,  sincerely,  yours, 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


840 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  ;; 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Va.,  Januarij  11,  18G3. 

Gov.  Zebulon  B.  Yance,  Raleigh^  N,  C,: 

With  the  President’s  concurrence  I recommend  the  calling  out  of  tliej 
militia  in  North  Carolina  to  such  extent  as  we  can  arm— say  5,000  men. 
The  Governor  of  Virginia  will  call  out  the  militia  from  the  counties  near 
North  Carolina,  and  the  Department  at  the  same  time  calls  for  conscripts 
from  those  counties  to  rendezvous  at  Petersburg.  We  send  every  man 
to  North  Carolina  who  can  be  spared  from  points  not  vital,  but  have  nc 
further  regular  trooxis  at  command.  We  must  rely  on  irregulars  loi 
any  further  force. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  January  11, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding.,  cfc.,  Weldon.,  N.  G. : 

Dear  General  : Yours  of  the  9th  is  received.  In  regard  to  Kansom’r 
division  there  is  some  conflict  of  opinion.  General  Lee  ordered  it  b 
Eichmond.  I ordered  it  to  move  to  Petersburg  without  stopping  ii 
Eichmond,  take  position  in  that  immediate  vicinity  and  be  held  con 
stantly  in  readiness  to  move  in  any  direction  on  the  shortest  notice 
General  Lee  objects  to  their  being  this  sidoof  Dre wry’s  Bluli.  l ob 
iect  to  their  returning  to  Drewry’s  Bluff  unless  that  place  is  attacked 
and  have  asked  to  be  allowed  to  order  them  into  North  Carolina.  Tin 
is  objected  to  at  iiresent.  I consider  this  division  in  transitu  and  cai 
determine  nothing  in  regard  to  it  at  present.  Fifty  telegrams  and  le 
ters  have  passed,  L think,  about  this  division  from  quartermasters,  rai 
road.  State,  and  General  Government  officers.  Have  you  determine, 
where  you  desire  the  four  32-pounders  to  be  placed  ? As  far  as  1 ai 
now  advised  it  seems  to  me  that  W eldon  and  Halifax  would  be  suitao 
positions  for  them,  relying  upon  lighter  guns  and  rifles  for  the  deleiise 
of  points  lower  down.  Have  you  seen  Colonel  Gwynn  ? I directed  bn 
to  report  to  you  at  Weldon  and  carry  out  your  instructions.  Ihe  ton 
32-pounders  from  Charleston  (ready  to  be  put  in  position  complete)  ai 
here  on  the  cars.  As  soon  as  you  determine  where  to  place  them  the 
Avillbe  sent  forward.  General  Whiting  seems  satisfied  that  Wilmin^ 
ton  will  be  attacked,  and  thinks  that  they  will  occupy  our  attention  a 
Weldon  and  Goldsborough  at  the  same  time.  I have  written  again  t 
the  War  Department  in  reference  to  sending  re- enforcements,  and  na\ 
warned  them  that  they  are  losing  time.  I hope  that  we  will  not  be  to 
late ; but  we  will  do  the  best  we  can  with  the  means  we  have  and  ca 
get  together.  I am  always  glad  to  hear  from  you.  Write  as  often  an 
fully  as  you  can. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General 

p.  s._Cau  you  not  have  a bridge  constructed  over  the  Foanoke . 
Halifax  ? 1 think  it  is  very  important,  and  will,  if  you  require  it,  trj 

send  you  some  one  to  take  charge  of  it. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  841 

Goldsborough,  N.  0.,  January  12,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding^  cGc.,  Weldon^  N.  C.: 

General  : Yon  are  unquestionably  in  command  of  the  forces  on  the 
Blackwater,  those  belonging  to  Petersburg,  and  General  Pettigrew’s 
command  at  Kocky  Mount,  &c. ; and  there  is  no  order  relieving  Evans 
from  your  command,  nor  have  I intended  there  should  be,  so  far  as  re- 
})orts,  returns,  &c.,  are  concerned.  I mean  the  last  to  apply  to  Evans. 
But  as  long  as  I am  so  much  closer  to  him  will  give  him  direct  orders  in 
regard  to  his  movements.  Bansom  is  considered  in  transitu.  General 
Lee  wishes  him  to  return  to  llrewry’s  Bind*.  I wisli  to  bring  him  to 
North  Carolina.  In  case  he  comes  on  at  all,  if  he  stops  short  of  [this 
l)lace]  I will  order  him  to  re])ort  to  you.  I will  direct  the  adjutant-gen- 
eral to  return  any  reports,  returns,  &;c.,  which  may  be  forwarded  by  yonr 
command  without  being  transmitted  through  your  office.  In  regard  to 
the  official  reports,  no  original  reports  had  been  received  in  my  office 
previous  to  your  leaving  here.  They  w^ere  only  coi)ies  sent  for  my  infor- 
mation, and  they  were  returned.  The  reports  were  handed  to  me  by 
Evans  the  day  before  I left  for  Eichmond,  except  that  of  the  chief  engi- 
neer. My  own  report  was  written  hurriedly,  and  I am  not  certain  what 
is  in  it,  but  remember  distinctly  making  up  my  mind  neither  to  blame 
nor  praise  any  one,  nor  go  into  particulars,  but  to  make  the  report  in  the 
barest  outline*  and  refer  for  particulars  to  the  sub-reports.  I am  sorry 
that  any  omissions  have  given  you  concern,  but  allow  me  to  say,  first, 
that  Evans’  report  should  have  been  made  to  you,  and  you  should  have 
reported  to  me.  It  is  i)erhaps  my  fault  that  I allowed  him  to  hand  me 
his  report  while  I was  visiting  at  Kinston,  I will  have  copies  of  the 
reports  sent  to  you  that  were  handed  me  by  Evans,  and  would  be  glad 
if  you  would  get  General  Pettigrew  to  make  out  a report,  and  I will 
transmit  them  to  the  adjutant  and  inspector-general,  to  be  filed  with  the 
others.  This  is  but  just  and  right. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 

P.  S. — Try  a simple  order  on  and  test  the  question  of  command  prac- 
tically. The  idea  of  an  officer  stationed  at  Petersburg  saying  that  he  is 
not  under  your  command  borders  on  trifling. 


Executive  Department,  North  Carolina, 
Adjutant-General’s  Office  (Militia), 
Raleigh^  N.  C\,  January  12,  1803. 

Colonel:  You  will  forthwith  assemble  all  able-bodied  men  fit  for  mil- 
itary duty  not  called  for  as  conscripts  up  to  this  date,  and  who  are  liable 
to  militia  duty  under  existing  laws  and  orders,  in  your  regiment,  and 
organize  them  into  one  or  more  companies  of  75  men  each.  Should  tiie 
number  of  men  in  any  regiment  equal  or  exceed  120  they  will  be  formed 
into  two  equal  companies.  Detachments  of  40  men  will  be  allowed  a 
captain  and  second  lieutenant;  25  men  a lirst  lieutenant,  and  15  men 
a second  lieutenant.  A full  com])any  of  75  will  be  allowed  all  these 
officers,  to  be  in  all  ca^s  selected  by  tlie  rank  and  file.  Tbe  militia 
having  been  so  much  reduced  by  recent  calls  for  conscrij)ts,  and  this  call 
including  all  who  are  fit  for  duty,  renders  it  necessary  that  the  commis- 


842 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


sioned  officers  sliOuld  be  now  included,  except  the  field  officer  of  highest 
grade  and  captain  or  senior  officer  of  each  district.  When  the  coin- 
l^anies  are  formed  the  colonels  Avill  immediately  report  the  fact  to  this 
office  by  letter,  inclosing  roll  of  company  and  the  probable  number  and 
hind  of  arms  in  the  regiment. 

2d.  Companies,  when  thus  formed,  irill  assemble  each  Saturday  for 
drill  and  inspection  at  a place  to  be  designated  by  the  captain,  wlio  will 
report  to  this  office  eacli  week  the  condition  of  the  company,  which  will 
always  be  held  in  readiness  for  active  duty  at  the  shortest  notice. 

3d.  This  organization  and  drill  is  for  the  purpose  of  being  prepared 
to  repel  an  expected  advance  of  the  enemy,  and  will  remain  in  force 
until  further  orders  from  the  Governor.  The  utmost  promptness  is  ex- 
pected in  the  execution  of  this  order,  and  ten  days  from  its  reception  is 
deemed  sufficient  to  com])lete  the  organization  herein  directed. 

By  order  of  Governor  Vance: 

J.  G.  MAETIN, 
Adjutant-  General. 


Wilmington,  [N.  C.,]  January  12,  18G3. 

Colonel  [William]  Lamb,  Fort  Fisher: 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Gwathmey,  Fort  Castvell : 

From  information  received  here  it  is  probable  the  enemy  will  move  to 
attack  this  place,  both  by  land  and  sea,  on  Wednesday.  Haye  every- 
thing ready  to  receive  them. 

B.  W.  FEOBEL, 

Chief  of  Artillery. 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  13,  18G3. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston.,  S.  C.  : 

General  Gist  has  asked  for  six  wagons  to  a regiment.  Can  they  not 
be  sent  me  at  once 

Five  of  the  enemy’s  steamers  are  engaging  Fort  Caswell.  Fort  re- 
plying slowly,  No  other  fleet  off. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  13,  18G3. 
Brigadier-General  Whiting,  Wilmingtonj  W.  C. : 

Do  not  think  Abolitionists  will  make  much  if  any  attack  without  iron- 
clads. Latter  are  not  much  to  be  feared  at  present  on  account  of  eoii- 
dition.  I send  maps  to-day. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAEI). 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  13,  1SG3. 


General  Beauregard  : 
Firing  has  just  ceased. 


W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


843 


Headquarters, 

^Yilm^ngton^  N.  (7.,  January  13,  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  Gwathmey,  • 

Commanding  Fort  Caswell^  JY.  C. : 

Colonel:  We  have  reports  from  the  enemy^s  lines  which  indicate 
that  the  enemy  will  commence  a movement  upon  this  place  both  by  land 
and  water  to-morrow.  Though  our  works  are  by  no  means  as  forward 
as  we  could  wish,  I am  sure  that  everything  has  been  done  in  our  power 
and  with  our  limited  time,  especially  by  your  command.  You  will  hold 
your  position  to  the  last  extremity.  If  attacked  by  iron-dads  upon 
which  you  can  make  no  impression  or  which  succeed  in  passing  you, 
endeavor  to  save  some  of  your  guns  for  fire  upon  the  wooden  ships  or 
transports.  As  soon  as  the  enemy  make  their  appearance  send  off  yonr 
negro  force.  For  this  purpose  a steamer  will  be  sent  you ; but  in  case  a 
steamer  should  not  arrive  soon  enough  you  are  authorized  in  the  mean 
time  to  inipress  and  hold  at  the  fort  all  the  sail-boats  and  small  vessels 
about  Smithville.  Should  it  unfortunately,  from  want  of  provisions  or 
destruction  of  your  armament,  become  necessary  to  abandon  the  work, 
make  arrangements  to  blow  it  up  and  destroy  it  as  far  as  practicable. 
Send  out  an  intelligent  officer  to  select  the  best  point  in  such  an  event 
lor  crossing  the  marsh  to  the  mainland  and  endeavor  to  bring  off  your 
command.  The  time  for  putting  down  the  submarine  shells  is  left  to 
your  judgment.  Thekeys  would  seem  tobethe  best  position.  I sincerely 
wish  that  the  direction  relative  to  destruction  will  not  be  tested,  but 
relying  upon  God,  our  cpse,  and  your  brave  command  I hope  for  yic- 
tory.  If  we  are  beaten  it  will  be  through  no  fault  of  yours. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters, 

^ Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  13,  1863. 

Col.  [William]  Lamb, 

Commanding  Fort  Fisher,  N.  C. : 


Colonel  : I have  received  reports  from  the  enemy’s  lines  which  indi- 
cate that  an  attack  will  be  made  both  by  land  and  water  upon  this  place, 
the  movement  to  commence  to-morrow.  I need  not  repeat  the  expres- 
sions of  my  confidence  in  you  and  your  garrison  and  in  your  determina- 
tion  to  hold  your  iiosition  to  the  last.  Some  contingencies  may  arise 
in  which  you  may  require  iustruction.  Should  you  find  that  irou-clads 
are  too  much  for  you  and  succeed  in  passing,  endeavor  to  save  and  re- 
vive some  of  your  guns  for  fire  on  the  wooden  shijis  and  transports. 
You  will  report  by  telegraph  every  hour  the  progress  of  events.  I do 
not  think  ships  alone  can  drive  you  out,  though  it  is  ])ossible  that  iron- 
c ads  may  be  able  to  dismount  your  guns.  You  will  therefore,  even  if 
the  iron-clads  pass  you,  continue  to  hold  the  fort  as  long  as  you  are  sup- 
plied with  provisions.  Instruct  your  vedettes  to  patrol  for  any  indica- 
tions ot  an  attempt  to  land  in  force  below  Masonborough  Sound  and 
gneirie  instant  information.  As  soon  as  the  enemy’s  fleet  makes  its 
appearance  send  off'  your  negro  force;  a steamer  will  be  sent  for  that 
purpose  ; but  should  it  not  appear  in  time  you  will  send  them  off'  on  foot 
under  charge  to  make  a forced  march,  say  to  the  Kiverside  Salt-Works 
|or  other  point  where  a steamer  can  be  sent,  at  the  same  time  letting 


844 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


this  office  kuow  the  point.  With  a firm  reliance  on  Divine  Providence, 
I hid  yon  and  your  brave  garrison  Godspeed.  Fight  as  well  as  you 
have  labored  and  I have  no  fears  for  tlie  result. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-General.)  Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond y January  13,  18G3. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Fredericlcsburg^  Va. : 

Without  fully  crediting  I send  the  following  dispatch  from  General 
G.  W.  Smith  for  your  information  : 

Goldsborougii,  January  1*2,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

I have  just  received  from  General  Whiting  the  following  dispatch,  dated  to-day  ;j 
“Have  received  further  information  from  Lieutenant  Fairly,  confirmatory  of  that 
sent  to-day.”  Adds  that  General  Dix,  at  Shepherdsville  Friday  last,  reports  that 
many  of  the  enemy  are  from  Burnside’s  army  ; rejwrts  the  enemy  at  New  Berne  from 
,^0,0U0  to  70,000  men  ; 15,000  at  Morehead  City,  Avith  forty-two  steamers,  and  that  they 
move  on  Kinston  hy  Dover  road  ; that  they  intend  landing  a force  on  the  Sound  and 
attacking  the  force  here  at  the  same  time,  and  alFthe  movements  will  commence  on 
•Wednesday. 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

Tlie  following  dispatch  just  received  from  General  Smith: 

Goedsborough,  January  12,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

General  Beauregard  telegraphs  that  he  has  reliable  information  from  New  York 
that  General  Naglee’s  land  force  was  hut  12,000  strong. 

G.  W.  SMITH,  * 

. Major-General. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

. Wilmington.,  N.  0.,  January  13, 18G3. 

Col.  John  A.  Baker, 

Comdg.  Forty-first  Regiment  [AT'.  G.  T.,  or  Third  Cavalry] : 

Colonel  : Unless  General  Robertson  has  given  you  special  iustriic 
tions  as  to  your  movements,  you  will,  in  case  of  a land  advance  of  tlif 
enemy  in  this  direction,  send  one  company  to  fall  back  ufion  Coloue 
Harrison  and  with  the  remainder  of  your  force  watch  their  flank,  mov 
ing,  if  forced  back,  across  the  Cape  Fear  (Northeast  Branch)  to  afibn 
as  much  i)rotectiou  as  yon  can  to  the  railroad  and  telegraph.  If  the^ 
land  below  the  mouth  of  N ew  River  watch  their  rear  and  follow  them  up 
Yerv  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


845 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Va.^  January  13,  1863. 
GcDeral  E.  E.  Lee,  Comma7iding,  d^c. : 

Sir  : At  the  suggestion  of  the  President  I inclose  for  your  considera- 
tion a letter  from  General  Smith,  covering  another  from  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Pryor.  They  were  received  day  before  yesterday,  but  under  the 
impression  that  the  greater  needs  of  the  army  in  ITortli  Carolina  would 
require  all  the  re -enforcements  you  could  safely  spare,  I had  forborne 
to  press  them  on  your  attention. 

With  high  esteem,  most  respectfuljy^,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 

[Inclosure.] 

Goldsborough,  IST.  0.,  January  9,  1863. 

(Eeceived  January  10,  1863.) 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

1 have  the  honor  to  inclose  copy  of  letter  from  Brigadier-General 
Pryor,  and  to  request  that  either  Colonels  BalPs  or  Chambliss’  regiment 
of  Virginia  Cavalry,  and  the  Sixty-hrst  Virginia  Infantry  (properly 
belonging  to  the  Eichmond  command,  but  now  with  General  Lee’s 
army),  be  sent  to  General  Pryor.  I have  not  the  force  to  spare,  but  am 
satisfied  that  General  Pryor  should  be  furnished  with  the  little  aid  he 
asks  for  to  enable  him  to  accomplish  such  important  results. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

ft 

[Sub-inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Forces  on  Blackwater, 

January  6,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  [Gustavus  W.]  Smith  : 

General  : It  is  just  a month  since  I assumed  command  of  the  forces 
on  the  Blackwater.  The  day  before  I arrived  within  sight  of  headquar- 
ters the  enemy  routed  a iiortion  of  our  forces,  captured  a section  of  ar- 
tillery, and  carried  away  a number  of  prisoners.  We  never  thought 
then  of  crossing  the  line  with  any  aggressive  puri)ose,  and  our  utmost 
exertions  were  devoted  merely  to  the  maintenance  of  our  ])osition  on 
this  side  the  Blackwater.  The  enemy  had  absolute  control  of  the 
country  between  this  point  and  Suffolk.  I am  happy  to  assure  you, 
general,  that  such  is  not  now  the  case.  A most  formidable  attack  upon 
one  point  of  my  line  I repulsed  Avith  a handful  of  men  and  drove  the 
enemy  back  to  Suffolk.  I assumed  the  offensive,  and,  as  you  know, 
with  a very  inferior  force  I have  repeatedly  driven  in  the  enemy’s  pickets 
almost  Avitliin  sight  of  his  stronghold.  The  result  is  that  I liaA’^e  shut 
up  the  enemy  in  Suffolk.  I have  delivered  all  the  intervening  country 
from  their  desolate  sway.  When  I arrived  here  forage  and  iirovisions 
were  all  drawn  from  Petersburg.  Since  I assumed  command  not  a 
pound  of  meat  nor  a grain  of  corn,  not  a bundle  of  fodder,  has  been  de- 
rived from  that  source.  I have  subsisted  my  own  command  within  the 
enemy’s  lines  and  have  furnished  General  French’s  quartermaster  5,000 
pounds  of  beef  and  50,000  pounds  of  salted  pork,  all  procured  from  within 
|the  enemy’s  lines.  Meanwhile  I have  strengthened  my  line  throughout 


846 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


its  length  by  obstructing  ])onds,  digging  rifle-pits,  throwing  up  intrench- 
inents,  and  by  other  artificial  means  of  defense.  I consider  my  position 
perfectly  secure,  even  with  the  small  force  under  my  command.  But 
there  are  certain  results  to  be  achieved  by  an  aggressive  policy,  to  the 
successful  prosecution  of  which  a small  increase  of  strength  is  essential. 
To  be  brief,  if  you  will  furnish  me  with  another  regiment  of  cavalry  (I 
have  but  one,  and  that  extremely  weak)  and  another  strong  regiment 
of  infantry,  so  as  to  give  me  an  available  force  of  3,000  men  for  the  field, 
I will  engage,  general,  to  accomplish  three  things,  viz  : 1st,  to  shut  the 
enemy  up  in  Suffolk,  and  so  to  threaten  the  place  as  to  prevent  any  de- 
tachment of  troops  to  the  army  in  North  Carolina ; 2d,  to  intercept 
communication  between  Sufiblk  and  the  Chowan  across  the  county 
of  Gates,  and  so  compel  the  enemy  to  a most  circuitous  route ; 3d, 
to  realize  for  our  army  within  the  enemy’s  lines  300,000  pounds  of 
pork  and  a still  larger  proportion  of  corn  over  and  above  the  wants 
of  my  command.  It  may  appear  hardly  possible  to  do  this  with  so 
small  a force  as  I request,  but  the  nature  of  the  country  is  such  as  to 
neutralize  disparity  of  numbers  and  to  make  3,000  men  equivalent  to 
twice  their  number.  The  cavalry  I have  is  not  sufficient  to  picket  my 
liue — 300  men  scattered  along  50-odd  miles.  A few  days  ago  General 
French  found  it  necessary  to  transfer  my  other  cavalry  regiment  to 
North  Carolina.  One  regiment  of  the  infantry  of  my  command  is  de- 
tained in  Petersburg.  Would  it  not  be  possible  to  spare  me  that 
The  suggestions  I have  hazarded  are  most  respectfully  submitted  to 
your  superior  judgment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

KOGEE  A.  PEYOE, 
Brigadier- General j Commanding. 


Petersburg,  Va.,  January  14,  1803. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

General  Pryor  reports  the  enemy  0,000  strong  at  Windsor,  near  Ivor. 
Should  they  try  to  force  the  Blackwater  the  regiment  now  here  could 
move,  but  then  the  guard  for  city,  &c.,  would  have  to  come  from  Ean- 
som’s  brigade:  or  can  two  of  his  regiments  move  there  if  needed? 

^ ' S.  G.  FEENCH. 


January  14, 1803. 

General  French  : 

Send  the  regiment  referred  to  in  your  dispatch  just  received;  or,  if 
the  emergency,  in  your  judgment,  should  require,  the  two  regiments  of 
Eansom’s  brigade,  as  suggested  by^you. 

S.  COUI  Elv. 


Fredericksburg,  Va.,  January  14, 1803. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  dispatch  just  received;  Advance  Eansoni  and  any  other  avail- 
able troops  in  Eichmond  or  Petersburg.  See  my  dispatch  of  0th  instant. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Chap.  XXX.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


847 


Special  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

14.  ) January  14,  1863. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  I),  H.  Hill,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States, 
will  immediately  proceed  to  Eichmond,  Va.,  and  report  to  the  Adiiitant 
and  Inspector  General,  C.  S.  A. 

*•****«:* 

By  order  of  General  Lee : 

W.  H.  TAYLOE, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjuta^it  and  Inspector  Genera^  C.  S.  A. 


Goldsborougii,  January  14,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

/Secretary  of  War,  Kiehmond : 

My  Dear  Sir  : I have  sent  several  telegrams  within  the  last  three 
or  four  days  all  tending  to  show  that  the  enemy  are  re-enforcing  rap- 
idly in  North  Carolina  and  actively  preparing'  for  an  offensive  cam- 
paign. The  force  here  is,  as  I have  often  stated  before,  inadequate  for 
the  protection  of  the  important  points  from  Wilmington  to  Eichmond, 
inclusive,  and  we  have  no  force  as  a reserve  ready  to  take  the  offensive 
and  meet  the  enemy  whenever  they  come  out  in  force.  I have  asked 
that  Eansom’s  force  be  placed  at  my  disposal,  and  have  urged  that  ad- 
ditional troops  be  sent.  Of  course  if  this  cannot  be  done  we  must  get 
along  the  best  we  can  without  them.  But  it  is  my  business  to  speak 
plainly  upon  these  subjects  and  to  continue  to  speak  thus  so  lon^-  as 
there  is  any  probability  that  the  necessary  measures  for  p) reparing  to 
resist  successfully  the  invasion  that  is  now  impending  will  be  adopted. 
1 remember  well  what  force  we  had  last  winter  in  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  holding  position  farther  north  than  that  now  held  by  General 
Lee,  and  it  was  then  not  only  decided  to  be  impracticable  to  re-enforce 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  but  detachments  were  made  from  it  and  sent 
here.  W^hat  I mean  to  say  is  this,  that  General  Lee  in  command  of 
an  army  at  Fredericksburg  is  not  in  the  same  point  of  view,  and  evi- 
dently does  not  see  things  precisely  as  they  appeared  to  him  when  Gen- 
eral Johnston  commanded  that  army,  and  he  (General  Lee)  was  over- 
lookiug  and  judging  of  the  whole  general  operations  from  Eichmond. 
Ihis  IS  natural,  and  perhaps  could  hardly  be  avoided  by  any  one.  But 
It  is  lor  the  Government  to  decide  whether  when  active  operations  are 
evidently  commenced  in  force  against  important  points  in  this  State  it 
IS  not  necessary  to  diminish  somewhat  the  army  under  General  Lee  at 
f redericksburg. 

Before  I was  reduced  in  relative  rank  in  this  army  it  was  a question 
whether  General  Lee  or  myself  should  command  the  active'forces  in 
^Northern  Virginia,  the  other  to  command  in  Eichmond,  &c.  Now  I 
would  like  this  subject  brought  up  for  a moment  and  considered  under 
the  supposition  that  I commanded  in  Fredericksburg  and  General  Lee 
here.  Would  he  allow  me  to  retain  the  army  at  Fredericksburg  whilst 
the  attack  in  force  was  preparing  against  Wilmington  ? You  are  aware 
that  my  visit  to  Eichmond  in  the  latter  part  of  December  was  for  the 
purpose  of  conveying  to  the  Government  and  to  General  Lee  my  convic- 
tions in  regard  to  the  condition  of  affairs  in  this  State  and  to  prepare  in 
line.  You  saw  my  letter  to  General  Lee  and  his  reply.  I received  a tel- 
*‘^ram  from  you  on  the  10th  instant  stating  that  General  Lee  opposed 


848 


NOKTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


\ 

[Chap.  XXX.  ' 


Kansom’s  division  being  brought  this  side  of  Drewry’s  Bluff.  I have  • 
received  nothing  since  from  the  Department  and,  I think,  nothing  but 
this  telegram  since  I left  Eichmond  on  the  5th  instant.  1 fear  your 
telegrams  to  me  have  again  miscarried. 

I remain,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

[Indorsement.] 

January  10,  1863. 

Bead  and  returned  to  Secretary  of  War.  The  question  of  forces  has 
been  considered.  The  question  of  rank  of  Major-General  Smith  is  not 
for  action. 

J.  D. 


Headquarters, 

WibningtoUj  W.  (7.,  January  15,  1863. 
Maj.  [John  J.]  Hedrick,  • 

Comdg.  Fort  Saint  Philip,  F.  C.  : 

Major  : I need  not  tell  you  to  hold  your  position  as  long  as  possible. 
If,  however,  many  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  should  succeed  in  passiug  your 
batteries  and  proceeding  up  the  [river],  or  compel  you  to  withdraw,  you 
are  directed  to  proceed  to  the  railroad  bridge  on  Brunswick  Eiver  for 
its  protection,  placing  a strong  picket  at  the  obstruction  on  that  river. 
You  should  in  this  event  take  with  you  all  the  provisions,  &c.,  you  can 
carry,  taking  teams  for  the  purpose.  Please  to  recollect  that  for  oue, 
two,  or  even  three  steamers  passing  you,  you  will  not  necessarily  leave ; 
but  a large  fleet  sufficient  to  overcome  the  upper  batteries  after  getting 
by  might  remove  the  obstructions  and  destroy  the  bridge.  Further 
orders  will  be  sent  you. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  15,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Va. : 

General  : Assigned  to  take  charge  of  defense  of  Wilmington,  1 
arrived  here  November  17, 1862.  The  yellow  fever,  which  had  desolated 
the  city  and  stopped  all  work,  had  not  yet  ceased.  The  condition,  im- 
portance, and  necessities  of  tlie  place  were  immediately  set  forth  and 
have  since  been  reiieatedly  urged  to  the  department.  I found  the  de- 
fensive works  generally  imperfect  and  many  important  imints  neglected ; 
a partial  line  of  earthworks,  well  constructed  but  weak  in  profile,  had 
been  thrown  up  between  the  two  mill-ponds  on  the  east  and  south  of  the 
city  IJ  miles  in  extent.  They  had  twelve  pieces  of  artillery  mounted, 
mostly  naval  24s  and  32s,  of  the  old  pattern.  These  batteries,  mount- 
ing eight  guns,  had  been  placed  just  below  the  upper  jetty  lights,  and 
two  to  command  an  imperfect  obstruction,  composed  of  logs  and  chains, 
near  Mount  Tirza.  An  attempt  had  been  made  to  build  an  iron  l)attery 
for  this  purpose,  but  so  defective  in  design  and  position  that  I directed 
it  to  be  stopped.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  14  miles  from  the 
city,  Battery  Saint  Philip  had  been  erected,  well  constructed,  mounting 
eleven  guns,  but  defective  in  the  quality  and  caliber  of  its  ordnance  and 
in  the  location  of  proper  protecting  traverses  from  enfilade  and  even  re- 
verse fire.  On  Confederate  Point,  to  protect  New  Inlet,  had  been  con-i 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  849 

structed  the  earthwork  known  as  Fort  Fislier.  Here  tlie  skill,  ingenuity, 
and  perseverance  of,  successively,  Maj.  [John  J.|  Hedrick,  of  the  ar- 
tillery, Maj.  [R.  K.]  Meade,  of  the  engineers,  for  a short  time,  and 
especially  of  Col.  [William]  Lamb,  now  commanding,  and  his  men, 
have  been  signally  displayed.  The  fort  is  a strong  sea-coast  work,  partly 
casemated  and  partly  barbette.  It  would  not,  however,  be  tenable  for 
any  length  of  time  against  a formidable  land  attack.  Fort  Caswell, 
commanding  the  main  entrance,  appeared  to  have  had  little  or  nothing 
done  to  increase  its  efficiency  ; numerous  guns  of  little  or  no  efficiency 
bad  been  crowded  together  without  any  protection  by  traverse  or  em- 
brasure for  either  guns  or  men.  The  advanced  batteries  nearest  the 
bar  previously  arranged  had  from  some  unknown  reason  been  leveled. 
I regarded  it,  and  still  do,  as  one  of  the  weakest  points  on  the  system. 
In  the  very  important  matter  of  river  obstructions  little  had  been  done, 
nor  had  preparations  been  made  for  obstructing  the  approaches  to  the 
city  in  case  of  attack.  Brunswick  River  is  an  important  branch,  form- 
ing the  island  known  as  Eagle’s  Island,  directly  opposite  the  city,  af- 
fording, out  of  fire,  an  easy  access  to  the  Upper  Cape  Fear  River,  and 
opportunity  for  an  enemy  in  the  lower  river  to  destroy  the  Wilmington 
and  Manchester  Railroad  Bridge  and  cut  off  all  communications  south 
of  Wilmington.  In  this  branch  the  only  obstruction  was  a few  rows  of 
piles  not  protected  by  any  effective  fire.  In  the  city  itself,  as  if  it  was 
to  be  abandoned  at  the  first  appearance  of  a hostile  gunboat,  not  a sin- 
gle work  had  been  put  up,  though  many  admirable  sites  presented  them- 
selves. On  the  gunboats  the  pestilence  had  stopped  labor ; both  were 
on  the  stocks  and  no  provision  whatever  had  been  made  or  even  pre- 
lected for  saving  them  in  case  of  disaster  or  providing  for  them  during 
ittack.  During  the  two  months’  grace  the  enemy  have  given  us  it  is 
oot  for  me  to  say  what  has  been  done  to  remedy  the  defects  here  stated. 

[ have  to  give  my  warmest  praise  to  the  manner  in  which  officers  and 
nen  have  labored  day  and  night.  Colonel  Lamb  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Iwathmey,  of  the  Navy,  Major  Forrest,  of  the  Navy  (until  his  unfortu- 
late  illness),  Major  Young  and  Captain  Andrews,  and  Captain  James 
md  Lieutenant  Obenchain,  of  the  Engineers,  have  been  indefatigable 
vith  their  excellent  commands  in  strengthening  the  defenses.  Their 
:alue,  incomplete  as  they  still  are  (necessarily  from  want  of  time,  im- 
)lements,  and  material),  must  shortly  be  tested.  If  they  succeed,  these 
[fficers  and  men  should  have  great  praise ; if  they  fail,  it  is  not  their 
ault.  I have  now,  in  addition  to  the  works,  a movable  column  of  a 
ittle  more  than  7,000  men,  with  five  smooth-bore  field  batteries.  Of 
bese,  all  but  Clingman’s  brigade  and  two  batteries  have  been  furnished 
ne  from  the  defense  of  Charleston  by  General  Beauregard,  under  com- 
□and  of  General  Gist.  I have  stated  too  often  the  importance  of  this 
)lace  to  the  country  to  repeat  it  here,  but  I will  repeat  what  I have  said 
)efore — that  from  here  there  is  no  route  or  retreat,  and  once  taken  by 
he  enemy  it  cannot  be  retaken  by  the  means  belonging  to  the  Confed- 
racy.  Strong  diversions  and  powerful  aid  should  be  at  once  started. 
Vhile  we  will  do  all  we  can  do  and  will  hold  and  defend  the  place  wdiile 
fc  is  possible,  every  endeavor  should  be  used  to  relieve  it.  The  Charles- 
ou  garrison  ought  not  to  be  vainly  sacrificed. 

The  above  statement  has  been  made  because  I think  it  is  due  to  the 
fficers  and  men  of  this  army  and  to  myself.  The  enemy  are  moving  in 
heavy  force,  and  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 

54  R r~yol  xviii 


850 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


January  15,  1863. 

General  Beauregard  : 

G.  W.  [Smith]  says  the  real  attack  is  probably  on  Wilmington,  with 
their  whole  force.  He  inquires  how  he  can  best  aid  me,  whether  by  re- 
enforcing or  falling  on  his  reserve.  The  best  way  is  the  speediest  junc- 
tion. Asks  how  many  men  I have  and  whether  I can  withdraw  if  iron- 
clads pass  the  forts.  I shall  not  withdraw  except  by  order.  If  50,000 
men  are  thrown  on  Wilmington  you  must  stir  up  troops  in  the  north. 
They  ought  to  have  hurried  before  this,  unless  they  expect  impossibili- 
ties 

W.  H.  C.  WHITIXG. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  January  15,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington^  N.  C.  : 

Good  plan  attacking  monitor  is  to  board  in  small  boats  at  night, 
throwing  bottles  burning  fluid  in  tower  and  bags  powder  in  funnel  ot 


chimney. 


G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  A.  0.,  January  16,  1863. 

Col.  John  A.  Baker, 

Comdg.  Forty-first  [A.  G,  T.  or  Third]  Cavalry: 

Colonel:  impede  the  enemy^s  advance  by  every  device  within  youi 
means : destroy  all  bridges  in  his  route,  however  trifling.  Keep  on  the 
alert,  and  as  he  draws  nearer  to  our  lines  dispatch  frequent  couriers 
Accustom  your  men  to  skirmish  with  his  advance,  to  ambuscade,  &c. 

Very  respectfully,  ^ ^ ^ WHITIKG,  . 

'Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington.,  A (7.,  January  16,  1863. 


General  GUSTAVUS  W.  Smith, 

Commanding^  Goldsboroitgh : 


Scouts  report  just  received.  Still  no  enemy  this  side  of  Trent  yes 
terdav  or  night  before  last,  but  very  large  force  on  opposite  bank- 
making  toward  Kinston.  Citizens  report  two  regiments  of  Indian: 


with  them. 


AY.  H.  C.  AYHITING. 


AAAr  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.  Va.,  January  16,  1803. 

General  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Goldshoroughj  X.  C. : 

General  Lee  has  placed  Eansom’s  division  at  your  control.  I tele 
graphed  you  to  that  effect  two  days  ago.  ^ ^ SEDDOY 

Secretary  of  Wcir. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


851 


^ 1 o Bocky  Mount,  January  17, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper,  ’ 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General : 

On  15tli  a large  fleet  left  Beaufort,  17.  0.,  to  attack  Wilmington  hy 
water-,  also  a arge  force  (70,000)  started  by  way  of  Swansborougli  to 
3o-op^ate  with  th^i  by  land.  They  are  arming  the  negroes  to  gar- 
rison Washington,  17.  C.  & & 

W.  F.  MAETI17, 

Commanding  District  of  the  Tar  Diver, 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond,  Va.,  January  17,  1863. 
lis  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina  : 

Sir  : Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  of  your  State,  who  is  so  favorably  known 
0 yourself,  as  indeed  to  the  whole  Confederacy,  for  his  distii^uished 

Virginia,  has,  to  the  regret  of  the  Depart- 
aent,  been  constrained  to  retire  from  his  late  command  by  ill  health 

present  not  to  resign,  but  will  be  for  a time 
t home  m Isorth  Carolina.  It  has  occurred  to  me  that  from  the  appre- 
lation  ot  the  Department  of  his  proven  valor  and  skill  it  might  be  par- 
onable  in  me  to  suggest  that  in  view  of  the  dangers  from  the  enLiv 

benefits  of  his  counsel  and  co-operation 
light  be  obtained  by  you  on  conference  with  him.  His  deservk  influ- 
ace  with  the  people  of  North  Carolina  might  prove  advantageous  in 
mmating  and  encouraging  them  to  effort  and  endurance,  and  his  ex- 
judgment  give  valuable  suggestions  as  to  the  best  mode 
f commanding  and  guiding  the  means  of  the  State  for  defense. 

onor1n“  h.  Suggestion,  I have  the 

onor  to  be,  with  very  high  consideration  and  esteem,  most  respect- 
niy,  j ours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington,  January  18,  1863. 
olonel  Harrison,  Comma7iding  Outpost: 

Send  the  following  order  to  Colonel  Baker: 

Your  10.30  p m.,  18tb,  received.  Your  outposts  must  not  be  too  precip- 

nst  fi.iZr  * accui ate  information  of  the  route  and  advance  of  the  enemv.  They 
ust  therefore  neither  fall  back  too  far  nor  too  rapidly.  Advance  bv  Tuckahoe  on 

Le-^^n  communicated  to  the  felegraph  office 

ere,  on  the  Jacksonville  road  should  be  forwarded  here.  ^ ^ 

W.  II.  C.  WHITING. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  A^irg-inia, 

on.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  TFur  : 

’''''‘I  'etterof  tbe  Kith  iustant  inclosing  one 
eral  Smith  and  another  from  General  Pryor.  I am  iileased  to 


852 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 

hear  of  the  successful  operations  of  the  latter  below  Petersburg.  I will 
send  some  cavalry  clown  when  I can  spare  it.  As  he  is  operating  in 
front  of  Petersburg  I think  he  might  be  re-enforced  by  the  regiment  of 
which  he  speaks  in  that  city  or  any  other  available  troops  near  that 
place,  leaving  a sufficient  garrison  there. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Wilmington,  K C.,  January  20, 1863. 

Governor  Yance: 

Information  just  received  would  indicate  a formidable  movement  of 
the  enemy  against  this  place  or  Goldsborough.  Eo  what  you  can  at 
Richmond  to  have  troops  sent  south. 

T.  L.  CLINGMAN. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  January  20,  1863. 

Major-General  French, 

Commanding  Division^  Kenansville,  A.  G. : 

My  Dear  General:  I send  you  a map,  in  case  you  should  have 
none  at  hand.  My  advanced  post  in  Holly  Shelter  is  at  Island  Creek, 
miles  above  the  ferry  at  the  railroad  bridge,  and  fortified.  On  the 
Sound  road  my  advance  is  about  17  miles  from  the  city,  also  fortified, 
and  additional  works  under  construction  as  fast  as  possible.  An  ad- 
vanc^e  by  the  enemy  in  forcje  by  land  will  most  probably  come  by  the 
Sound  road,  for  many  reasons,  but  a column  might  come  down  the  Holly 
Shelter.  It  would  be  all-important  to  prevent  the  position  on  the  Sound 
road  from  being  turned  on  my  left,  which  they  would  undoubtedly  try 
to  do.  It  would  become,  then,  a question  of  consideration,  in  case  you 
support,  whether  you  would  move  directly  in  Holly  Shelter,  crossing  at 
Bannerman’s  bridge  (supposing  the  enemy  did  not  burn  it),  or  at  South 
Washington,  to  fall  in  their  rear,  or  march  at  once  to  the  ferry  and  oper- 
ate from  Island  Creek  in  their  front.  My  opinion  inclines  to  the  latter 
course  for  your  troops,  leaving  to  the  main  body,  under  the  general 
commanding,  to  operate  in  the  rear.  In  case  the  enemy  adopt  the  plan 
of  endeavoring  to  land  somewhere  between  my  advanced  position  and 
Confederate  Point,  the  latter  course  suggested  would  undoubtedly  be 
your  best  course  and  would,  indeed,  become  very  necessary  to  insure 
the  security  of  Fort  Fisher  and  the  iron  batteries  from  reverse  attack. 
As  any  such  movement  of  the  enemy  would  undoubtedly  be  accompanied 
by  a corresponding  advance  on  the  Sound  road,  which  it  would  become 
necessary  to  check,  I have  directed  the  greater  portion  of  the  cavalrj  m 
advance,  in  case  of  being  forced  back,  to  retire  on  Kenansville.  Iheir 
intelligence  is  communicated  by  both  ways.  They’  will,  of  course, 
under  your  immediate  control,  and  you  will  obtain  information  ot  tne 
enemy’s  movements  sooner  than  I shall,  and  in  time  to  adopt  either 
alternative,  as  General  Smith  may^  direct.  If  their  attack  is  ascertainec 
to  be  really  on  Wilmington,  and  you  have  to  cross  the  ferry,  I would 
suggest  that  your  force.keep  abreast  and  a little  in  advance  of  their 
motion  to  enable  you  to  take  position  on  their  front.  To  save  troooie 
of  correspondence,  if  you  approve  of  these  suggestions,  I send  a copy 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


853 


of  this  note  to  General  Smith,  with  whom  you  can  consult  by  telegraph. 
My  weakest  point  is  the  forts.  The  passage  of  them  and  occupation  of 
the  lower  harbor  will  require  new  and  different  combinations. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Briga dier-  General^  Commanding. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Bichmond^  Va,,  January  20,  1863. 
Gilbert  Elliott,  Esq.,  Halifax^  N.  G. : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  2d  instant  relative  to  the  defenses  of  Eoanoke 
River  was  referred  to  the  Chief  of  Engineers,  who  replies  that  every 
exertion  has  been  made  to  procure  guns  for  the  defense  of  that  river. 
Four  guns  have  been  ordered  to  be  sent,  one  of  which  is  a rifled,  banded 
32-pounder. 

Eespectfully, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  East  Tennessee, 
Knoxville^  Tenn.^  January  21,  1863. 
Sis  Excellency  Gov.  Zebulon  B.  Yance  : 

Governor  : Inclosed  please  find  an  extract  from  a letter  received  this 
norning  from  Brig.  Gen.  W.  G.  M.  Davis.  From  his  statement  I think 
he  outbreak  in  Madison  has  been  greatly  exaggerated,  and,  as  tele- 
paphed  you  this  morning,  I think  there  is  no  present  need  of  the  State 
orce  called  out  by  you.  The  outbreak  has,  I think,  been  supiiressed, 
mt  an  adequate  force  will  be  kept  in  the  mountains  as  long  as  necessary 
or  the  protection  of  loyal  citizens  and  their  property. 

I am.  Governor,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  HETH, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

» linclosure.] 

Headquarters, 

Greenville j Tenn.,  January  20,  1863. 

General:  As  I informed  you  by  telegraph  on  yesterday.  Captain 
selsou  has  returned  and  reports  that  his  company  went  into  Laurel 
/alley,  N.  C.,  and  had  a brush  with  the  tories,  in  which  he  killed  12  and 
iibsequently  captured  20.  From  information  I have  received  from  all 
luarters  from  men  of  intelligence  and  reliable  character,  I am  satisfied 
here  is  no  organization  in  the  mountains  of  armed  men  banded  together 
or  the  purpose  of  making  efforts  to  destroy  bridges  or  to  burn  towns 
•r  property  of  Confederate  officers  and  soldiers.  I think  the  attack  on 
larshall  was  gotten  up  to  obtain  salt,  for  want  of  which  there  is  great 
ufl'eriug  in  the  mountains.  Plunder  of  other  property  followed  as  a 
matter  of  course.  Col.  [L.  M.]  Allen’s  Sixty-fourth  North  Carolina  Eegi- 
lent  and  the  men  of  his  commaud  are  said  to  have  been  hostile  to  the 
^aurel  men  and  they  to  the  former  for  a long  time—a  kind  of  feud  exist- 
Jg  b^ween  them.  Of  the  men  killed  by  Nelson’s  cavalry  all  but  one  or 
Wp  were  deserters  from  Colonel  Allen’s  regiment.  They  formed  part  of 
4e  expedition  against  Marshall  and  no  doubt  plundered  Allen’s  house. 


854  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  ^ 

There  has  been  no  [attack]  made  on  parties  traveling  on  the  Asheville  , 
road;  the  stage  has  not  been  destroyed  and  no  acts  of  hostility  com-,^ 
mitted  that  I can  hear  of  but  the  plunder  of  Marshall  and  of  Allen’s  s 
house.  The  whole  force  that  went  to  Marshall  did  not  exceed  50  men.  i 
All  the  reports  stating  the  existence  of  organized  bands  of  armed  men  t 
numbering  300  or  400  are  false  beyond  a doubt.  The  attack  on  Marshall  i 
has  given  rise  to  wild  rumors  of  organizations  of  armed  tories  through- 
out the  mountains,  bent  on  sacking  towns  and  the  plimder  of  loyal  men. 
The  reports,  greatly  magnified  as  they  went  to  Ealeigh,  have  no  donbt 
led  the  Governor  of  North  Carolina  to  call  on  the  Confederate  Government 
for  a protecting  force.  I think  you  can  safely  assure  him  that  the  mili- 
tia are  not  needed. 

# # # * * * * ' 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  G.  M.  DAVIS, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Ealeigh,  N.  C.,  January  21, 1863. 

General  [Henry]  Heth,  Knoxville^  Tenn. : 

Yours  received.  I hope  you  will  not  relax  until  the  tories  are  crushed. 
But  do  not  let  our  excited  people  deal  too  harshly  with  these  misguided 
men.  Please  have  the  captured  delivered  to  the  proper  authorities  for 

7,.  B.  VAKCB. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  [January]  21,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding : 

When  Griffin’s  cavalry  arrives  use  such  couriers  as  may  be  necessary, 
but  except  in  case  of  emergency  I prefer  that  the  regiment  should  be 
kept  concentrated  as  much  as  possible  and  under  the  orders  of  (^neral 
Eobertson.  A train  has  been  sent  to  Tarborough  for  supplies.  Get  all 

you  can  from  the  country  you  are  in.  oATTmrr 

G.  V v . SSMllH, 

Major-General. 


Goldsborough,  January  21, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

My  Dear  Sir  : The  reports  from  the  front  to-day  are  that  the  enemy 
in  some  force,  exact  numbers  not  known,  was  last  night  within  3 miles  (>t 
Jacksonville,  Onslow  County— cavalry,  artillery,  and  infantry;  proD 
ably  the  same  force  that  appeared  at  Trenton  some  three  days  since. 

I have  had  no  information  through  our  secret  agent  in  New  Lerne 
later  than  the  16th,  which  was  received  on  the  18th.  I am  still  clearly 
of  the  opinion  that  their  forces  at  New  Berne  and  Beaufort,  &c.,  num- 
ber from  20,000  to  40,000.  But  our  latest  advices  go  to  show  that  tiie 
effect  of  the  storm  upon  their  iron-dads,  the  opposition  to  the 
mation  of  Lincoln  freeing  the  negroes,  and  the  rapid  retreat  of  i^ste 
from  this  place  in  December  have  together  caused  great  discontent  an  i 
shaken  the  morale  of  their  army.  I suppose  there  is  really  some  triitu 
in  these  reports.  That  their  plans  have  been  interfered  with  to  some 
extent  is  certain,  and  I think  but  for  the  disaster  to  the  monitoi  an 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  855 

the  recent  storms  on  the  coast  they  would  have  been  out  in  force  before 
now. 

There  is  at  this  time  only  one  battery  behind;  it  is  expected  to-night 
and  is  intended  for  Kinston,  which  place  has  been  fortified  since  the 
recent  raids,  and  the  bridge  rebuilt.  I think  Evans  can  now  hold  it  for 
several  days  against  almost  any  force  that  may  be  brought  against  it. 
He,  however,  calls  loudly  for  re-enforcements  upon  any  collision  of  the 
extreme  pickets.  His  brigade  has  been  recently  strengthened  by  re- 
turning soldiers ; some  500  or  600,  I understand. 

Governor  Vance  sent  me  a copy  of  his  order  reorganizing  the  militia 
and  offering  to  call  them  out  whenever  I wanted  them.  I sent  him  a 
telegram  immediately  asking  him  to  order  them  out  at  once  and  when 
reorganized  and  ready  for  service  to  let  me  know.  In  the  new  shape 
they  will  i:)robably  be  of  some  service.  Hut  he  tells  me  that  there  is 
no  law  for  the  reorganization,  and  the  whole  subject  will,  I expect,  be 
brought  up  for  discussion  in  the  Legislature. 

I have  written  Governor  Vance,  sending  him  copies  of  the  letter  of 
instructions  to  recruiting  officers  and  of  a recent  order  published  from 
here  in  regard  to  deserters  and  all  absent  without  proper  authority,  re- 
questing the  Governor  to  issue  a proclamation  and  appeal  to  the  people. 
He  told  me  wlien  he  was  here  on  Sunday  last  that  he  would  do  so.  The 
Governor  has  shown  the  utmost  willingness  to  co-operate  with  us  in  all 
matters  here  affecting  transportation,  supplies,  recruiting,  and  general 
efficiency  of  the  command. 

General  French  is  at  Kenans ville,  Warsaw,  and  Magnolia,  with  Pet- 
tigrew’s, Eansom’s,  and  Cooke’s  brigades.  Daniel’s  and  Davis’  brigades 
are  here.  Eobertson  is  covering  the  front. 

My  forces  in  this  part  of  the  State,  all  told,  amount  to  about  13,000. 
This  does  not  include  the  garrison  of  Wilmington.  There  are  fortifica- 
tions, with  heavy  guns,  and  one  regiment  of  infantry  at  Weldon ; one 
regiment  at  Hamilton  and  Greenville,  besides  the  forces  at  Petersburg 
and  the  Blackwater.  I shall  endeavor  to  concentrate  upon  the  enemy 
and  beat  them  whichever  way  they  may  come.  If  their  main  attack  is 
against  Wilmington  and  the  iron-clads  don’t  succeed  in  passing  the  forts 
we  will,  I think,  beat  them  badly.  It  is  a long  line  to  defend ; they  are 
in  very  superior  numbers,  but  we  expect  to  win.  My  health  is  nbt  as 
good  as  I would  wish,  but  I won’t  breakdown  if  they  will  only  come  on. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  January  21,  1863. 

General  Smith,  Goldshorough  : 

General  French,  Magnolia : 

Euemy  encamped  last  night  2 miles  from  Jacksonville;  1,000  cavalry, 
six  pieces  of  artillery ; said  to  be  waiting  for  their  infantry  force,  which 
is  reported  very  large.  Information  comes  from  scouts  and  a man  at 
whose  house  enemy  stopped.  General  Eobertson  at  Jacksonville. 

W.  H.  0.  WHITIKG. 


January  22,  1863. 

Major-General  French  : 

Eeport  from  the  front  states  that  the  enemy  has  withdrawn  from 
Jacksonville  beyond  White  Oak. 


W.  H.  0.  WHITING. 


856  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. |! 

Confidential.]  Camp  Fredericksburg,  January  23, 18G3.  i 

Mr.  President  : I have  thought  it  my  duty  to  give  you  all  informa- 
tion in  my  possession  which  might  enable  you  to  form  a correct  esti- 
mate of  the  character  of  the  principal  officers  of  the  army.  I have; 
thought  this  due  to  yourself  and  called  for  by  the  momentous  contest  ini 
which  we  are  engaged.  In  that  spirit  I inclose  a letter  from  Generali 
Eansom  addressed  to  General  Chilton.  It  is  without  the  knowledge 
of  the  former  but  with  the  assent  of  the  latter.  I beg  you  will  make! 
the  same  allowance  for  the  feelings  of  the  writer  that  I do.  He  is  evi-: 
dently,  as  he  states,  smarting  under  a supposed  degradation  of  position  5, 
cannot  be  supposed  therefore  to  take  the  most  favorable  view  of  atfairs,! 
yet  he  narrated  circumstances  which  if  true  are  not  calculated  to  cause 
anticipations  of  happy  results.  You  have  the  means  of  obtaining, 
information  which  I have  not.  I have  no  fear  therefore  of  injustice! 
being  done  to  General  Smith.  I have  not  only  the  kindest  feelings  but: 
have  conceived  the  highest  opinion  of  this  officer,  not  so  much  from  my 
own  observation  as  from  the  estimate  of  all  the  officers  under  whom  he 
has  served.  I confess,  however,  that  the  letter  of  General  Eansom 
makes  me  more  anxious  that  General  Kirby  Smith  should  be  in  com- 
mand in  North  Carolina,  and  as  I fear  you  may  find  difficulty  in  chang- 
ing his  assignment  I have  determined  to  write  to  you.  I think  it  prob- 
able that  General  G.  W.  Smith’s  state  of  health  makes  him  apprehensive 
of  exertion  or  excitement,  and  a more  quiet  command  may  be  necessary 
for  his  condition.  If  so,  the  service  or  position  may  require  a change. 
It  may  be  better,  if  General  Kirby  Smith  cannot  be  obtained,  that 
General  Elzey  should  take  the  field  and  General  Smith  resume  his  posi-; 
tiou  at  Eichmond.  I had  supposed  that  General  Eansom  would  have 
liked  the  tour  of  duty  in  North  Carolina,  and  I wished  him  to  have  had 
the  opportunity  of  filling  the  ranks  of  his  regiments.  I am  sorry  it 
was  found  necessary  to  break  up  his  division,  though  it  was  a small 
one.  I was  surprised  to  learn  from  General  A.  P.  Hill  on  my  return 
that  the  other  two  North  Carolina  brigades,  Pender’s  and  Lane’s,  which 
had  been  ordered  off,  were  delighted  at  the  suspension  of  their  order. 
They  did  not  wish  to  go  to  North  Carolina.  Please  destroy  General 
Eausom’s  letter  after  perusal. 

Wishing  you  all  health  and  happiness,  I remain,  with  great  esteem, 
vour  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  N.  (7.,  January  24,  1803. 
General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Goldsborough,  W.  C.  : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Yours,  accompanying  the  orders,  &c.,*  received  this 
morning.  My  proclamation  will  appear  in  the  morning  papers,  and 
everything  that  I can  do  shall  be  done.  I received  information  this 
morning  from  Wilmington  that  General  Whiting  had  seized  all  the 
teams,  hands,  and  boats  belonging  to  the  State  salt  agent  and  com- 
pletely stopped  the  works.  This  is  a great  calamity  to  our  people  to 
sto])  tiie  making  of  350  bushels  of  salt  per  day  right  in  the  midst  of  the 
pork-packing  season.  I can  scarcely  conceive  of  any  such  emergency 
as  would  justify  it.  A little  trouble  on  the  part  of  General  Whiting’s 
quartermaster  would  have  enabled  him  to  press  teams  in  the  adjacent 
counties,  and  a requisition  upon  me  for  labor  would  have  furnished  as 


Not  found. 


857 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

much  as  he  wanted,  as  was  done  with  Colonel  Stevens.  Let  me  ask  yon 
to  have  these  hands  and  teams  restored  to  the  agent,  unless  it  be  im- 
possible to  supj)ly  their  places  in  time.  It  is  almost  as  important  to 
the  State  as  the  safety  of  the  city,  as  our  people  cannot  live  without  the 
salt. 

Most  truly,  yours, 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N,  (7.,  January  24,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Goldsboroughy  V.  G. : 

General  : I am  in  receipt  of  information  from  within  the  enemy^s 
hues  which  bears  an  appearance  of  probability.  It  is  that  thev  are  now 
ouly  waiting  for  favorable  weather  to  attempt  the  reduction  of  the  forts 
by  the  iron -clads,  and  that  their  main  force  will  not  march  on  this  place 
until  that  shall  be  accomplished.  Thedraught  of  theiron-clads  is  stated 
at  9 feet  2 inches.  Their  success  will  depend  greatly  on  the  weather, 
biipposing  that  they  gain  the  entrance  and  harbor,  entirely  new  com- 
binations will  be  necessary  and  the  question  becomes  one  of  much  diffi- 
3iilty.  They  will  move  their  force  by  transports  in  that  event,  or  at 
least  the  greater  part  of  them,  and  will  endeavor  to  secure  a base  upon 
the  mainland  either  at  Smithville  or  on  the  left  bank,  perhaps  both.  I 
iave  ordered  a line  of  defenses  from  the  river  to  the  Sound  between 
lere  and  Fort  Fisher  on  the  other  side.  We  have  already  the  line  rest- 
ng  at  Fort  Saint  Philip.  Leaving  out  for  the  present  the  assault  of  the 
Tver  by  the  iron -clads  alone,  the  other  side  in  Brunswick  County,  look- 
ng  to  the  communication  south  and  the  security  of  the  Upper  Cape  Fear 
Paver,  becomes  very  important  and  forces  may  be  required  over  there 
0 hold  them  in  check.  Whether  the  iron-clads  come  up  or  not  to  en- 
leavor  to  cut  the  communication,  we  must  be  prepared  with  movable 
)atteries  to  stop  transportation.  Your  battery  of  20-pounder  Parrotts 
■vill  be  invaluable.  Three  more  iron -clads— the  Weehawken,  Nahant, 
lud  Patapsco — are  on  their  way  to  Beaufort.  We  must  have  as  many 
)f  the  heaviest  guns  as  we  can  jiossibly  get.  Unless  the  submarine 
aortars  can  do  something,  I do  not  see  how  the  iron-clads  can  be  kept 
)ut,  though  we  may  stop  the  fleet. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmmgton.  X.  January  24,  1863. 

.ol.  [V  iLLiAM]  Lamb, 

Commanding  Fort  Fisher.,  X.  C. : 

Colonel  : A probable  plan  of  the  enemy  will  be  the  reduction  of  the 
orts  by  iron-clads  preparatory  to  movement  in  force.  From  their  in- 
uluerability  and  the  great  range  of  their  guns  it  is  not  likely  that 
iiey  can  be  much  aflected  by  your  shot.  You  should  endeavor  to  pre- 
erve  your  guns  and  men  as  much  as  possible  from  damage  to  enable 
ou  to  stop  the  wooden  vessels.  Fire  should  be  given  very  deliberately 
^oiu  your  heaviest  metal  and  the  Whitworth  upon  the  iron-clads.  Sup- 
'Osmg  her  to  close  her  ports  and  come  in,  you  should  provide  parados 


858 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


or  reverse  traverses  to  keep  your  casema  te  batteries  from  being  destroyed,  j 
I will  send  some  submarine  mortars  down  to  be  placed  on  the  keys, 


near  Letel[?]  Island.  They  may  be  of  service. 

"V Grv  rcspGCtfull j « 

• AV.  H.  G.  WHITIXG, 

Brigadier-  General. 


llEADQUARTEHS, 

Golding  Place,  January  25,  1863.  . 
Major  Hill,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

A dispatch  sent  by  Major  Nethercutt  to  General  Eobertson  (and 
brought  here  by  mistake),  dated  10  o’clock  j).  m.  to-day.  states  that  the 
enemy  had  passed  Trenton  on  their  way  toward  Kinston.  Nothing  is 
said  as  to  the  force.  The  cavalry  had  passed  before  Nethercutt  wrote. 

JOHN  A.  BAKEE, 

Colonel,  Comdg.  Forty-first  Forth  Carolina  Infantry. 


General  Smith: 

The  above  just  received. 


[Indorsement.! 


January  26, 1863. 


W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 
Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Naval  Commandant’s  Office, 
Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  26,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letter  of  22d  instant, 
and  in  compliance  with  its  request  inclose  extract  copy  of  my  commu- 
nication of  2d  December,  1862.* 

The  threatening  attitude  of  the  enemy  lias  confined  me  to  this  place.; 
where  we  have  great  naval  interests  at  stake  5 but  if  the  men  were  fur 
nished  they  might  undergo  preparatory  training  at  the  battery  erected 
on  the  right  bank  of  Gape  Fear  Eiver  for  the  protection  of  the  iron-clad 
gunboats  we  are  constructing,  and,  as  part  are  drilled,  detailed  for  th€ 
movable  batteries  to  which  my  letter  refers. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  ser^nt, 

Flag-Officer. 


Goldsborough,  January  26,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Eichmond  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : Since  writing  you  last  I have  visited  WTlmingtou 
Magnolia,  and  Kinston.  The  fortifications  at  the  former  place  are  ver> 
strong  and  we  will  be  enabled  to  make  very  effective  resistance  againsi 
an  attack  by  land.  With  the  troops  from  General  Beauregard,  Genera 
Whiting  can  hold  them  until  onr  forces  from  Magnolia  and  this  pwcc 
can  be  brought  to  his  relief.  The  matter  to  be  apprehended  at  1 
mingtou  is  the  passage  of  the  iron-clads  past  the  lorts,  which  wou  ( 

^ NcT inclosiire  fon nd.  See  letter  from  Lynch  to  Seddon,  December  2,  1862,  p.  "89. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  859 

not  onlj"  give  them  the  outer  harbor  but  would  seriously  embarrass  and 
endanger  the  defense  of  the  city.  Two  10-inch  guns  in  addition  to  the 
one  recently  sent  would  add  greatly  to  our  chances  against  'the  iron- 
clads. These  guns  have  been  applied  for.  I hoi>e  that  the  Ordnance 
Department  will  be  able  to  furnish  them.  It  is  very  important,  and 
there  is  no  time  to  spare.  In  placing  the  three  brigades  near  Kenans- 
ville  under  Major-General  French  they  are  in  jmsition  to  move  against 
the  flank  or  rear  of  the  enemy  in  case  they  attack  Wilmington ; can 
ett’ectually  prevent  their  turning  General  Whiting’s  advanced  position, 
which  is  on  the  Sound  road,  16  miles  from  the  town  ; and  we  can,  if  re- 
quired, move  to  the  front  on  Trenton  or  take  them  in  flank  or  rear  if 
they  move  on  Kinston.  These  three  brigades  are  in  good  position  to 
meet  any  movement  of  the  enemy  from  New  Berne  or  Beaufort  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Neuse. 

But  the  shortest  and  best  road  from  New  Berne  to  Kinston  crosses  to 
the  left  or  north  bank  of  the  Neuse  some  10  or  12  miles  below  Kinston.  I 
scarcely  think  they  will  cross  the  river ; if  they  do  I ha  ve  two  brigades 
here  ready  to  move  by  railroad  toward  Weldon,  Kinston,  or  Wilming- 
ton, and  will  endeavor  to  beat  them,  let  them  come  as  they  may.  Eail- 
roads  are  an  uncertain  reliance ; they  will  worry  me  out  of  my  life  yet  I 
think.  But  I must  say  in  simple  justice  to  Mr.  Whitford,  president  of 
the  North  Carolina  and  Atlantic  Eailroad,  who  was  appointed  Govern- 
ment agent  of  railroad  transportation  at  this  point  by  General  Holmes, 
and  of  Mr.  Harvey,  his  subordinate,  that  no  men  could  be  more  willing, 
attentive,  and  obliging  and  none  more  eflicient  than  they  have  shown 
themselves.  At  all  hours,  night  and  day,  they  have  served  me ; within 
five  minutes  they  w'ere  ahvays  ready  to  com])ly  with  any  requirement  of 
mine.  The  State  of  North  Carolina  owns  two-thirds  of  the  stock  in  all 
the  railroads  within  the  State  except  one,  and  has  placed  everything 
possible  at  my  disposal.  The  only  trouble  heretofore  has  been  in  the 
condition  of  the  roads  and  their  fixtures.  Colonel  Wadley  left  here 
about  two  weeks  ago  for  Charleston  and  told  me  that  Mr.  Whitford 
would  represent  him  in  his  absence,  and  all  has  gone  on  smoothly  until 
to-day.  Mr.  Whitford  and  his  subordinate  or  assistant,  Mr.  Harvey,  re- 
signed when  Colonel  Wadley  first  arrived  heie,  but  he  urged  them  to 
retain  their  positions,  which  they  consented  to  do,  at  least  for  the  pres- 
ent. I am  informed  that  their  arduous  and  valuable  services  have  been 
rendered  the  Government  without  compensation.  The  communication 
from  Quartermaster-General  disi)ensing  with  Mr.  Whitford’s  services 
from  the  20th  instant  has  crippled  me,  as  far  as  railroad  transportation 
is  concerned,  for  the  present.  At  the  moment  Mr.  Whitford’s  note,  a 
copy  of  which  is  sent  herewith,*  was  handed  me  I received  a telegram 
saying  that  the  pickets  reported  the  enemy  advancing  in  force  from 
Irentou  upon  Kinston.  I immediately  telcgra])hed  you,  and  hope  that 
the  Quartermaster-General  has  reversed  his  action,  or,  if  not,  that  in 
future  he  will  consult  with  or  notify  me  before  taking  a step  so  vitall^^ 
affecting  the  interest  and  safety  of  my  command. 

The  works  at  Kinston  are  strong  against  attack  from  the  south  side 
and  the  enemy  will  find  it  a very  different  place  to  take  from  what  it 
was  before,  even  with  the  same  force  only  there. 

The  papers  I sent  forward  in  General  Evans’  case  (charges  preferred 
against  him  by  one  of  his  colonels)  I would  like  to  have  acted  upon  in 
some  way.  Please  notice  that  General  Evans  had  preferred  charges 
iagainst  the  colonel  lareviously,  a fact  not  known  to  me  for  some  two 


Not  found. 


860 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


weeks  after  the  charges  preferred  against  him  by  the  colonel  had  been 
forwarded.  If  I had  known  that  General  Evans"  had  preferred  charges 
against  the  colonel  those  of  the  colonel  against  him  would  not  have  been 
entertained  until  at  least  after  the  colonel  had  been  tried,  which  trial  i 
I would  have  ordered  at  once.  If  nothing  else  can  be  done  in  the  case  i 
I would  suggest  that  the  papers  in  the  case  be  returned  to  me  in  order 
that  I may  do  something  with  them. 

The  enemy  have  put  on  double  guards  around  Xew  Berne  and  Beau- 
fort, and  our  usual  channels  of  communication  with  the  interior  of  their 
lines  have  been  cut  oft*  or  delayed  for  ten  days ; but  we  continue  to  get 
information  that  their  force  and  fleet  are  both  large ; that  all  prepara- 
tions have  been  made  for  a movement,  and  that  there  is  much  dissatis- 
faction in  their  army. 

I remain,  verv  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

[Indorsements.] 


Bead  and  returned, 
as  soon  as  practicable. 


The  heavy  guns  asked  for  should  be  furnished 

J.  D. 


The  guns  have  been  ordered  as  soon  as  those  before  directed  for  Vicks- 
burg and  Atchafalaya  shall  have  been  furnished. 

J.  A.  S., 
Secretary. 

[January  26,  1863.] 

A PROCLAMATION. 

Whereas  it  has.  been  made  known  to  me  that  a large  number  of  soldiers 
from  our  armies  are  absent  from  their  colors  without  proper  leave  in 
this  hour  of  our  greatest  need,  and  it  is  being  confidently  believed  that 
a large  majority  of  such  were  impelled  to  this  by  a natural  and  almost 
irresistible  desire  to  see  their  friends  and  homes  once  more,  after  so  long 
an  absence,  and  not  because  of  a cowardly  determination  to  leave  their 
brave  comrades  to  share  all  the  dangers  and  hardships  of  the  field  alone; 
and  whereas  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith,  in  commantl  of  the  Department  of 
Borth  Carolina,  by  consent  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  has  iiublished  an 
order  declaring  that  all  who  may  voluntarily  return  to  duty  by  the  10th 
day  of  February  next  shall  be  received  into  their  several  commands 
with  no  other  punishment  than  a forfeiture  of  their  pay  for  the  time 
they  have  been  absent  without  leave;  and  declaring  further  that  all 
who  do  not  so  return  by  the  said  10th  daj^  of  February  shall,  when  ap- 
prehended, be  tried  for  desertion  and  upon  conviction  be  made  to  suffer 
death : 

Kow,  therefore,  I,  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  Governor  of  the  State  of  Xorth 
Carolina,  do  issue  this  my  j^roclamation  to  all  soldiers  from  the  State 
serving  in  the  army  of  the  Confederacy  who  are  now  illegally  absent 
from  their  colors,  commanding  them  to  return  to  duty  with  their  com- 
rades, and  exhorting  them  to  avail  themselves  of  this  opportunity  of 
saving  their  friends  from  the  disgrac’c  and  infamy  which  will  cling  for- 
ever to  the  name  of  a deserter  from  his  country’s  cause  and  themselves 
from  a felon’s  death.  Many,  after  carrying  their  country’s  flag  in  tri- 
umph through  various  bloody  conflicts  and  making  for  themselves  a 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  8G1 

name  of  which  their  children's  children  might  have  been  justly  proud, 
have  forfeited  it  all  by  absenting  themselves  at  a moment  when  their 
own  State  is  invaded  and  about  to  be  desolated  by  a brutal,  half-savage 
foe.  Now"  is  the  time  to  reinstate  themselves  by  a prompt  return  to 
duty.  I appeal  to  them  to  stand  bj^  their  country  yet  a little  longer,  and 
not  to  sully  by  desertion  the  bright  and  glorious  reputation  of  the  State 
which  they  have  helped  to  win  on  a hundred  hard-fought  fields  ; and  I 
appeal  to  all  good  and  loyal  citizens  throughout  the  State  to  give  their 
influence  to  induce  these  men  to  return.  Let  no  one,  unmoved  by  this 
appeal  to  his  patriotism  and  honor,  suppose  that  he  can  remain  at  home 
with  impunity;  the  full  powers  of  the  State  authorities,  aided,  if  need 
be,  by  the  Confederacy,  shall  be  put  in  force  to  arrest  him  and  bring 
him  to  punishment  after  the  10th  day  of  February  next,  and  there  shall 
be  no  rest  for  the  deserter  in  the  borders  of  North  Carolina.  And  let 
none  excuse  their  desertion  by  declaring  that  they  go  home  to  take 
care  of  their  families ; they  will  add  nothing  to  the  comforts  of  their 
families  by  hiding  like  guilty  men  in  the  woods  by  day  and  plundering 
their  neighbors  by  night;  they  only  bring  shame  and  suffering  upon 
the  heads  of  the  innocent,  and  their  little  children,  when  gray-headed 
old  men,  will  have  the  finger  of  scorn  i)ointed  at  them  and  the  bitter 
taunt  will  ring  in  their  ears,  “Your  father  skulked  in  the  woods 
to  keep  from  fighting  for  his  country.”  The  State  is  now  trying  to 
provide  food  for  your  families  and  each  county  is  making  a similar 
provision,  and  as  your  chief  magistrate  I promise  you  that  the  wives 
and  children  of  the  soldiers  who  are  in  the  army  doing  their  duty  shall 
share  the  last  bushel  of  meal  and  pound  of  meat  in  the  State.  Let 
every  patriot  in  the  land  assist  with  all  his  influence  in  the  execution  of 
this  proclamation  and  our  victorious  ranks  will  again  be  filled  and  our 
country  soon  be  rid  of  the  enemy. 

In  witness  thereof  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  our  Governor,  captain-general, 
and  commander-in-chief,  hath  signed  these  presents  and  caused  the 
great  seal  of  the  State  to  be  affixed.  Done  at  our  city  of  Ealeigh  on 
the  26th  day  of  Januarv,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1863. 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 

By  the  Governor : 

R.  H.  Battle,  Jr., 

Private  Secretary, 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  January  27,  1863. 

General  D.  H.  Hill,  Charlotte^  N.  C.  : 

The  President  desires  to  know  if  the  command  of  the  army  in  North 
Carolina  would  be  acceptable  to  you  ? 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Va.,  January  27,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French: 

General  Smith  has  been  called  to  this  city.  You  will  proceed  with 
the  least  possible  delav  to  Goldsborough  and  assume  the  command. 

S.  COOPER. 


862 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  G.,  January  28,  1863. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War^  Richmond^  Ya. : 

Sir:  I send  you  a sketch*  showing  the  lines  about  Wilmington. 
Though  not  of  a formidable  kind,  yet,  manned  by  brave  troops,  they 
will  make  a stout  resistance.  My  last  information,  received  this  morn- 
ing from  Beaufort,  is  that  during  the  past  week  large  bodies  of  troops 
have  been  moved  by  railroad  from  New  Berne  and  put  on  board  the 
transports,  twenty  or  thirty  of  which  have  swung  out  into  the  stream 
preparatory  to  mooring.  They  are  mostly  sailing  craft.  There  are  no 
blockaders  off  the  harbor  this  morning,  which  indicates  that  they  have! 
been  called  off*  to  assist  the  transportation.  Seven  steamers  from  the  I 
southward  arrived  at  Beaufort  last  Friday.  My  great  trouble  is  the 
possibility  of  the  monitors  forcing  their  way  i]i  the  outer  harbor  and 
destroying  the  forts,  thus  opening  an  easy  and  admirable  base  for  their 
future  operations  against  the  city  and  the  interior.  The  attack  by  land, 
if  such  is  made,  I do  not  fear,  by  reason  of  our  advanced  x)ositions  and 
the  dispositions  of  his  army  by  Major-General  Smith  ,*  but  the  tremen- 
dous ordnance  possessed  by  the  enemy  makes  me  apprehensive  of  the 
results  of  an  action  with  the  forts  should  wind  and  weather  enable  him  S 
to  cross  the  bars.  I have  strengthened  Fort  Caswell  by  iron-clad  case- 1 
mates  j 450-pounder  shot,  however,  are  hard  to  fend  off,  either  for  forts  i 
or  monitors.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  a judicious  system  of 
obstruction  has  not  been  made  for  this  important  harbor  during  the  I 
two  years  x)ast,  time  enough  for  executing  any  work  of  the  kind.  One  i 
similar  to  the  Charleston  boom  (impracticable  there)  could  readily  have  t 
been  xdaced  and  maintained  here  on  the  keys  ” or  inner  bulkheads,  j 
near  [Fort]  Caswell  and  New  Inlet,  and  in  the  narrow  river  near  the  i 
city,  where  this  would  be  invaluable.  Such  means  of  obstruction  as  I 
have  been  able  to  gather  in  the  last  two  months  I have  employed ; that  1 
is,  scows  laden  with  stone  and  two  small  vessels,  the  only  ones  to  be 
had.  Obstructions  of  this  nature  are  objectionable  here  from  the  shift- 
ing nature  of  the  bottom  and  the  great  extent  of  shoal.  A channel  is  j 
soon  formed  around  them  to  restore  the  equilibrium  which  they  disturb,  i 
Strong,  open  framework  or  chevaux  defrise  of  timber,  iron,  and  chain,  | 
which  would  not  interfere  with  the  water-way,  is  the  best  for  this  coast; 
but  that  is  work  for  which  I have  not  been  able  to  find  the  time,  thej 
workmanship,  or  the  material.  The  submarine  mortars  of  General] 
Bains  may  aid  us.  They  are  xfiaced  to  the  best  of  my  judgment.! 
Though  the  number  of  guns  at  [Forts]  Caswell  and  Fisher  is  consider-  i 
able,  their  quality  is  bad  and  caliber  small.  Many  of  the  rifle  guns  are  j 
not  banded  and  not  to  be  trusted.  We  have  but  one  10-inch  guu| 
and  but  one  rifle  as  large  as  42  in  the  district.  I have  great  hopes  in  j 
the  inefficiency  of  the  monitors  at  sea  and  in  the  difficulty  of  the  chan-  ’ 
nel.  A scoundrel  of  a x^ilot  has  managed  to  go  over  to  the  enemy  in  the  j 
X)ast  three  weeks  and  is  now  on  board  their  fleet.  I cannot  disguise  the  i 
fact  that  the  consequences  of  a successful  passage  will  be  very  serious,  j 
In  this  resxiect  I refer  to  my  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War  of  Novem- 
ber 14  last,  x^revious  to  my  assuming  command  here,  and  to  a consider-  ■ 
ation  of  the  map  of  this  section.  Major-General  Smith,  being  now  in 
Eichmond,  will  be  able  fully  to  inform  the  Department  in  this  matter, 
our  views  being,  I am  hai)X)y  to  say  for  ray  x)art,  identical. 

Very  respectfullv, 

W.  II.  C.  AVHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


Not  fouud. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


863 


Wilmington,  K.  C.,  January  28,  1863. 

General  French  : 

Information  received  from  Beaufort  that  during  past  week  large 
bodies  of  troops  have  been  moved  from  New  Berne  by  railroad  and  put 
on  board  transports.  Twenty  transports  loaded  and  swung  out  into 
the  stream.  They  are  mostly  sailing  vessels. 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Flag-Officer  [W.  F.]  Lynch, 
Commanding  C.  JS.  Navy, 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  (7.,  January  28,  1863. 
Wilmington,  N.  C. : 


Commodore  : Yours  of  yesterday  relative  to  protection  of  the  gun- 
boats IS  received.  The  subject  of  troops  to  support  the  batteries  on  the 
upper  river  has  been  duly  considered  for  the  disposition  of  the  forces 
tor  the  defense.  It  is  not,  however,  thought  necessary  to  post  them 
immediately,  their  movement  depending  on  contingencies  which  may 
or  may  not  arise.  No  difficulty  is  anticipated  in  placing  troops  at  that 
point.  In  the  mean  time  every  possible  preparation  in  the  way  of  ob- 
struction IS  recommended  to  be  got  ready.  Combined  with  sinking  of 
the  Arctic,  trees  with  the  branches  on  held  with  chains  will  form  a for- 
easily-made  obstacle.  Very  few  obstructions,  however, 
will  be  able  to  withstand  the  spring  freshets,  which  in  this  river  are 
very  heavy.  I do  not  advocate  the  immediate  obstruction  of  the  river, 
but  that  preparations  should  be  made  for  it.  Positions  and  pits  for 
nnemen  should  be  selected  and  made  in  every  suitable  place. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Salem,  Ya.,  January  28,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina: 

Sir:  I desire  to  call  your  attention  to  a matter  of  much  concern  to 
Liie  public  interest.  In  order  to  enable  the  armies  at  Fredericksburg, 
Richmond,  and  other  points  having  railroad  communication  with  this 
section  to  obtain  the  necessary  supplies  of  corn,  &c.,  all  the  horses, 
Jimes,  Ac.,  ot  this  department  have  been  sent  to  a considerable  distance 
to  be  foraged  until  spring,  from  the  line  of  this  railroad  (Virginia  and  Ten- 
nessee road).  In  thus  distributing  these  animals,  and  after  overstock- 
lug  almost  every  part  of  Virginia,  it  became  a matter  of  necessity  to 
»eua  some  of  them  to  portions  of  North  Carolina,  where  both  grain  and 
long  forage  were  abundant.  But,  unfortunately,  there  is  a great  indis- 
position  on  the  part  of  people  there  to  sell  thieir  produce  for  Confed- 

^ desire  to  ask  relief  at  your  hands  in  the 
oim  ot  authority  of  some  kind  for  impressment.  This  authority  vou 
.an  limit  with  such  restrictions  as  will  make  it  entirely  certain  that  no 
ojustice  will  be  done  to  your  people.  If  some  step  of  this  sort  is  not 
•alien  promptly,  and  we  should  be  compelled  in  this  portion  of  South- 


864 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


western  Virginia  to  bring  the  horses  in  the  service  of  the  Government  ; 
back  to  this  section,  and  thus  consume  the  forage  which  is  essential  to 
the  wants  of  our  armies  elsewhere,  it  is  manifest  that  most  serious  detri- 
mentto  the  nublic  service  must  occur.  * 

Knowing  your  disinterested  patriotism,  not  only  from  your  public  ; 
character  but  also  from  a personal  acquaintance  which  I had  the  pleasure 
of  having  while  we  were  both  members  of  the  old  Federal  Congress,  and 
vour  full  and  entire  devotion  to  our  cause  (which  is  not  the  cause  of  a 
State,  but  of  the  whole  South),  I have  taken  the  liberty  of  addressing 
vou  upon  this  subject.  I shall  forward  this  to  you  after  having  referred 
ft  for  the  consideration  of  the  general  commanding  this  military  depart- 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  JEKKINS, 

Tirinadier- General. 


Goldsboeough,  N.  C.,  January  28,  1S63. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

I came  up  here  this  morning  and  assumed  command.  It  is  rumored 
the  troops  have  embarked.  It  needs  confirmation. 

s.  G.  FRENCH. 


Goldsboeough,  N.  C.,  January  30, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

General  Whiting  reports  twenty-four  regiments  on  transports  at  Beau- 
fort ready  to  sail,lnd  25,000  troops  still  in  New  Berne,  under  Sigcl,  to 

move  by  land.  FRENCH. 


General  Gustavus  W. 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  January  31,  1863. 
Smith,  Richmond: 


A portion  of  the  enemy’s  fleet  left  Beaufort  ® 

and  Lveuteen  transports  passed  Swansborough  last  night.  RecoUec 
that  should  they  pass  below  me,  either  to  feint  or  make  a real  attack  or 

ChtlSn  Belu'regard  may  recall  his  t^P^-anrif ‘vr^iirptvThe  i 
least  an  equal  number,  should  be  always  here,  and  if  Jon  supply  tnei 
Xe  wu  must  have  more  from  the  North.  Sigel  is  at  New  Be^ne  wit 
(reported)  twenty-five  regiments.  Greater  part  of  the  torce  at  Morelieai 

Gity  and  on  board  transports.  ^ WHITING, 

Briaadier- General  Commanding. 


<3hap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


865 


Abstract  from  Eeturn  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G. 

French,  for  January,  1863. 


Command. 


Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  Colston,  forces  at  Petersburg,  Va 

J.  J . Pettigrew,  Erench’s  division,  at  Magnolia] 

Brig.  ^n.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  District  of  the  Cape  Fear. . . . 
Brig.  Gen.X.  G.  Evans,  one  brigade,  at  Kinston,  N.  C. .. 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  Daniel,  one  brigade,  at  Goldsborough,  X.  C 
Bn^.  Gen.  J . E.  Davis,  one  brigade,  at  Goldsborough,  X.  C 
o T ^ HaskeU,  four  batteries,  at  Goldsborough,  X.  C. 
Lapt.  J.  B.  btarr,  oce  light  battery,  at  Goldsborough,  X.  C 

Col.  J.  A.  J.  Bradford,  post  of  Goldsborough,  X.  C 

Col.  J.  A.  J.  Bradford,  four  artillery  companies,  at  Golds- 
borough and  near  Xew  Berne. 

Col.  George  C.  Gibbs,  one  regiment,  at  Weldon,  X.  C 

J • I^bney,  one  heavy  battery,  at  Weldon,  X.  C . . 
^ TT  Martin,  one  regiment  and  one  battery,  at 

Hamilton,  X.  C.  ’ 

^mii^u’x’  ^^^’^tson,  three  regiments  cavalry,  at 


Grand  total. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

os 

o 

V 

<s 

o 

1 Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

95 

1,  465 

1,  741 

2,  338 

8 

14 

444 

7,270 

8,  509 

12,  503 

18 

650 

8,  951 

11,  719 

11,  719 

167 

1,  840 

2, 269 

3,  399 

2 

8 

176 

2,  969 

3,  656 

4,  024 

6 

121 

1,  756 

2,  094 

2,605 

4 

11 

318 

362 

433 

16 

4 

91 

96 

110 

6 

27 

415 

455 

504 

14 

237 

295 

385 

30 

603 

828 

1,  045 

...... 

2 

48 

53 

67 

46 

754 

925 

1,  077 

"*6 

1,  787 

26,  717 

33,  002 

40,  809 

12  1 

78 

ihtraclfr<m  &part  of  theTro^s  of  the  DUtriot  of  the  Cape  Fear,  commanded  by  Brig. 
Gen.  TV.  S.  C.  TTHting,  for  January  Zl,  1863. 


Command. 


Ingadier-General  Clingman’s  brigade 

'Ojonel  Colquitt’s  brigade 

;olone]  H arrison’s  brigade 

olouelWilson’s  brigade 

iRt  Eegiment  Xorth  Carolina  Troops  (cavairy) 

Xorth  Carolina  Artillery /. ... 

Caswell  (six  companies) 

ort  Fisher  (nine  companies) !!'!!! 

ort  Johnson  (two  companies) !!!.’ 

ort  Saint  Philip  (four  companies) 

Artillery 

ortprench  (one  company) ". ."'."J* 

i^ght-House  Battery  (one  company) 

c w CarolinaTroops!!!] 

SK®’  Eegiment  Xorth  Carolina  Tinops. 

Urk  iSilleAr''^'^^^”^’  Carolina  Troops 

.ridge  guard 

Ignal  Corps 


Grand  total. 


Present  for 
duty. 


135 

176 

87 

109 

24 

11 

20 

34 

7 

14 

13 

4 

4 

4 

2 

4 

3 

1 

1 


653 


1,811 
2,412 
1,344 
1,  497 
3.54 
216 
278 
534 
98 
194 
183 
55 
105 
41 
10 
20 
55 
31 
22 


9,  260 


2,  065 
2,  534 
1,  446 
1,  583 
365 
217 
357 
667 

104 
233 
201 

58 

105 
47 
12 
23 
54 
31 
22 


f:C-3 

Si 


2,  633 
2,  9(6 
1,  707 
1,  801 
423 
237 
500 
791 
130 
268 
231 
66 
129 
65 
19 
32 
79 
32 
23 


10, 124  12,  082 


3,  380 
3,  747 
2,  208 
2,  369 
550 
272 
537 
885 
142 
288 
265 
78 
158 
93 
48 
33 
107 
32 
23 

15, 215 


22 


r 


55  E E — VOL  XVIII 


866 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Orqanization  of  Troops  in  the  District  of  the  Cape  Fear,  commanded 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  G.  Whiting,  for  January  31,1863. 


GENERAL  GIST’S  DIVISION." 


Brigadier-General  Clingman’e  Brigade. 

8tli  North  Carolina. 

31st  North  Carolina. 

Slst  North  Carolina. 

61st  North  Carolina. 

Colonel  Wilson^s  Brigade. 


25th  Georgia. 

29th  Georgia. 

30th  Georgia. 

Humphry  Troop. 

Detachment  artillery.  - 

Preston’s,  [W.  C.,  South  Carolina]  light 
battery. 

Waties’  light  battery. 


Colonel  Colquitt’s  Brigade. 

46th  Georgia. 

, 7th  Battalion  South  Carolina  Volun- 
teers. 

16th  South  Carolina. 

24th  South  Carolina. 

25th  South  Carolina. 

Culpeper’s  light  battery. 

Colonel  Harrison’s  Brigade. 

32d  Georgia. 

47th  Georgia. 

4th  Louisiana  Battalion. 

Adams’,  [Z.  T.,  North  Carolina]  ligli 
battery. 

Paris’,  [A.  B.,  Virginia]  light  battery. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


Unattached. 

4l8t  North  Carolina  (cavalry). 

Fort  Caswell  (six  companies). 

Fort  Fisher  (nine  companies). 

Fort  Johnson  (two  companies). 

Fort  Saint  Philip  (four  companies). 


City  and  Eiver  Defense. 

Lieut.  Col.  [C.  E.]  TnORBUiiN  command- 
ing. 

10th  Battalion  North  Carolina  Artillery. 
Fort  French  (one  company). 

Light-House  Battery  (one  company). 


City  Garrison. 

Company  F,  Tenth  Regiment  North  Car 
olina  Troops. 

Company  B,  Sixty-first  Regiment  Nortl 
Carolina  Troops.  • 

Captain  Buie’s  two  companies  North  Car 
olina  Troops. 

Clark  Artillery. 

Unattached. 

3d  Battalion  North  Carolina  Artillery. 
Signal  Corps. 

Bridge  Chiard. 

Detachment  Capt.  Bradberry’s  companj 


Abstract  from 


FieU  Return  of  Troops,  Maj.  Gen.  A.  Elzep  commanding,  for  Feinary 
186Z  {headquarters  Eichmondf  Fa.). 


Comniand. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total  pres- 
ent. 

Aggregate  present. 

g 

« . 
I" 

OC 

IS 

ri 

tc 

tt 

< 

to 

s 

V 

& 

O 

s 

s 

161 

25 

82 

33 

16 

2,  002 
322 
1,428 
624 
246 

2, 115 
388 
1,  588 
700 
322 

2,  503 
432 
1,879 
908 

1 365 

3,4 

5 

2,3 

1,1 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  "Wise - 

317 

4,  662 

5, 113  1 6,  087 

P 

" Report  leaves  it  in  doubt  whether  any  or  all  brigades  given  below  constitute  tb 


division. 


867 


Chap,  XXX.]  COKRESPONDENCE^  ETC. — CONFEDERATE, 


General  Gustavus  W.  Smith,  Richmond : 


February  2, 1863. 


X think  the  attack  on  Savannah  can  only  be  a feint  by  gunboats  tO' 
draw  troops  from  North  Carolina ; impossible  they  can  mean  otherwise 
with  the  very  large  force  at  New  Berne  and  Morehead  City.  Take  care 
that  troops  are  not  withdrawn  from  here.  Wilmington  and  Charleston 
are  now  worth  ten  Savannahs,  especially  in  view  of  our  late  naval  suc- 
cess. Let  us  secure  this  place  until  the  gunboats  are  done  bevond  ner- 
adventure.  ^ 


W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  N.  (7.,  February  2,  18^. 
acneral  W.  G.  M.  Davis,  Warm  Springs,  N.  G.: 

Sir  : Yours,  giving  an  account  of  operations  in  your  command  in  the 
nountains  of  this  State,  has  been  received.  The  result  is  quite  satisfac- 
? and  I am  especially  pleased  to  learn  that  there  appears  to  be  no 
’Cgular  organization  of  enemies  to  the  Government  in  that  country.  I 
.vas  loath  to  believe  so,  and  from  the  first  was  of  the  opinion  that  the 
aid  was  only  for  plunder  and  that  the  whole  matter  was  probably  ex- 
aggerated. I hope  now  that  quiet  and  order  are  restored  in  that  region 
to  return  you  my  thanks  for  the  very  prompt  and  energetic 
lid  aflorded  by  your  command  in  producing  this  state  of  things.  I was 
epful  in  the  great  excitement  prevailing  among  our  people  that  the 
nisgmded  people  of  Laurel  might  be  dealt  too  harshly  with,  and  warned 
he  officers  to  be  civil  and  just.  I was  therefore  sorry  to  learn  this 
noruing  that  Colonel  Allen  had  hanged  several  of  the  captured  pris- 
mers.  I hope  this  is  not  true,  as  it  would  be  much  better  to  have  them 
lealt  with  by  the  law.  In  regard  to  running  them  into  Kentucky  I ap- 
irove  of  tbe  plan,  provided  they  desire  to  go.  I would  not  wish,  how- 
ver,  to  exile  the  women  and  children  or  old  men  if  they  desire  to  re- 
oain,  as  the  law  ought  to  be  strong  enough  to  keep  them  in  subjection, 
nope  Colonel  McElroy  will  take  proper  steps  to  prevent  the  escape  of 
ns  prisoners.  ^ 

Y/ith  sentiments  of  regard,  I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

> • ^ ^ P^^hmond,  Va.,  February  3, 1863. 

hig.  Gen.  [W.  H.  C.]  Whiting:  if  ^ • 

General  Beauregard  expects  an  early  attack  on  Charleston.  Send 
im  one  of  the  brigades  he  forwarded  you— GisFs,  if  you  can  spare  it. 
lold  another  ready  to  be  forwarded.  I will  telegraph  General  French 
t Goldsborough  as  far  as  practicable  to  re-enforce  you. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond,  Va.,  February  3,  1863. 
laj.  Gen.  [S.  G.]  French,  Goldsborough,  W.  G. : 

General  Beauregard  expecting  early  attack  at  Charleston,  I must  re- 
rn  the  troops  sent  by  him  to  Wilmington.  I order  one  brigade  to  be 


868 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


I 


forwarded  at  once  and  another  to  be  held  in  readiness  for  transporta*| 
tion.  Yon  must  re-enforce  General  Whiting  as  far  as  you  can  venture: 
.to  weaken  your  line. 


A.  SEDDOK, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington.,  JST.  (7.,  February  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  [S.  G.]  French, 

Goldsborough,  N.  C. : 

MY  Deae  Geneeal:  The  question  of  traverse  against  reverse  fire  at 
iFortsl  Fisher  and  Caswell  has  already  been  amply  provided  for.  Am 
other  heavy  casemate  has  been  erected  at  Fisher,  a little  to  the  right  ot 
tL  detached  battery  Bolles.  Were  my  guns  of  heavier  caliber  I should 
La  miiph  at  casc  as  to  that  work.  When  the  10-inch  columbiads  get 
far  as  Goldsborough  push  them  through.  At  Fort  Caswell,  which  wa^^ 
the  weakest  point  of  the  system,  I have  six  guns  m iron  casemates  oJ 
good  construction.  With  a little  more  time  will 

ffuns  iron-covered.  Heavy  sand  traverses  separate  them.  On  the  re 
verse  faces  most  of  the  guns  looking  inward  have  been  placed  on  the 
cornice-way,  for  fire  on  the  anchorage,  and  their  place  terre-plem  occu 
Died  by  huge  traverses,  which  defilade  the  reverse  of  the  casemates  a 
Lver  fhe  Stadel.  The  casemates  in  the  channel  fronts  also  cowr  thi 

citadel  Guns  of  the  heaviest  caliber  are  also  mountedAhere.  In  Bruns 

wick  River  strong  obstructions  have  been  placed,  covered  by  a strong  bat 
tery,  miles  below  Fort  French  upon  a high  hill,  ^he  railroad  bridge  u 

W'lrtherton  rLumbertonl  Railroad  is  covered  by  a battery  ot  three  -4 
Sunders  a^nl  bTrifl^  [««•  The  railroad  bridge  over  the  Lu.nbe 

raver  ir  covered  bv  a battery  of  three  24-pounders  and  by  rifie-p  ts. 
The  bluffs  in  the  city  from  old  Bobert  Brown’s  house,  near  the  ship 
yard,  down  toFrolick’s  sword  factory,  below  th^oundery, 
by  several  strong  batteries.  Another  above  the  Wilmington  and  Weldoi 
Railroad  Wharf  commands  the  thoroughfare.  The  “ovements  ot  t ■ 
enemy  puzzle  me.  Unless  they  are  gone  mad  they  cannot  mean  to  at 
taclfsavannah  It  could  haw  no  possible  effect  on  the  war  it  tne, 
wre  ratake  it.  Wilmington,  Charieston,  or  Mobile  is  worth  fort 
I^annahs  to  us  and  to  them:  They  may  mean  to  try  and  mthdrai 
troons  from  here  and  North  Carolina  for  they  still  have  a ver>  liea 
Sat  Canfort;  but  that  should  be  resisted  I ^ar  Beau^garf  w 
take  alarm  and  recall  his  troops  from  here.  I have  let  G.  W. 
know  my  views  on  the  matter.  Nothing  new  this  morning.  Heavy  g 
of  wind  from  northward. 

Very  respectfully,  ^ ^ WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  G.,  February  3,  1863. 

Colonel  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance,  Richmond,  a.: 

Colonel-  I wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the  necessity  for 
the  hearfcst  caliber  within  the  means  of  the  department  for  tbe  yc 
ful  defense  of  this  place.  I learn  with  great  pleasure  that  one  10  me 
Llumbiad  is  now  on  its  way.  One  more  is  absolutely  neeessarj . 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


869 


heavy  rifled  guns  for  the  Navy  gunboats  ought,  if  possible,  to  be  sent 
forward,  as  they  might  be  mounted  until  required  on  board.  I presume, 
however,  that  your  Department  has  nothing  to  do  with  them.  Secretary 
Mallory  oflers  the  co-operation  of  the  Navy  in  guns  and  men.  No  doubt 
your  recommendation  to  the  founderies  on  the  importance  of  completing 
these  guns  would  hasten  them.  The  vital  points  of  the  Confederacy 
now  are  Eichmond,  Wilmington,  Charleston,  Mobile,  and  Vicksburg. 
Let  us  hold  these,  and  whatever  else  goes  we  are  safe. 

Very  respectfully, 

W;.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General j Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  February  3,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding  Department : 

General  : I need  not  urge  upon  you  the  necessity  of  our  having  here 
as  many  heavy  guns  as  we  can  get ; the  heavier  the  better.  Please  to 
urge  it  upon  the  Department.  I am  happy  to  learn  that  a 10-inch  colum- 
biad  is  on  the  way.  One  more  of  the  caliber  is  absolutely  needed  and  I 
hope  may  be  procured.  I prefer  the  10-inch  smooth-bore  to  rifle-guns 
as  against  iron-dads.  We  can  use  the  120-pound  bolt  in  them  with 
effect.  In  the  mean  time,  taking  the  ofier  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
the  heavy  guns  and  ammunition  destined  for  the  gunboats  building  here 
should  be  sent  forward  at  once.  Pending  the  completion  of  the  boats 
they  can  be  placed  in  battery  to  do  effective  service.  Colonel  Stevens 
has  sent  me  an  engineer  experienced  in  submarine  galvanic  batteries. 
If  we  can  arrange  the  material  I am  sure  there  is  no  better  locality  for 
such  than  this,  and  to  blow  up  one  or  two  monitors  is  perhaps  the  best 
and  cheapest  way  to  procure  a few  15-inch  guns.  1 shall  send  this 
officer  (Lieut.  [Henry]  Bolton)  to  Eichmond  to  get  up  the  machinery. 
Please  to  give  him  your  countenance  and  recommend  the  matter  to  the 
attention  of  the  Secretary  of  War.  Eichmond,  Wilmington,  Charleston, 
Mobile,  and  Vicksburg  are  five  vital  and  most  important  points  to  our 
30untry  and  cause.  Hold  them,  no  matter  what  else  goes,  and  the  re- 
public is  safe.  In  this  view  I cannot  regard  expeditions  and  attacks 
ipon  places  of  minor  importance  as  other  than  feints  to  draw  off*  forces 
Tom  the  defense  of  those  positions,  unless,  indeed,  the  enemy  is  struck 
^vith  judicial  blindness  and  does  not  know  what  we  know,  f hope  that 
heir  security  will  be  placed  beyond  peradventure,  first,  by  the  posting 
)f  a sufficient  jjermauent  garrison  or  infantry  force  for  any  sudden  de- 
scent of  the  enemy — this  to  be  always  on  hand ; and,  secondly,  by  the 
system  you  have  adopted  in  your  command  of  a movable  army,  which 
^an  act  in  any  part  of  the  department  according  to  circumstances.  Here 
low  I have  no  more  than  are  absolutely  necessary;  yet  this  garrison, 
i-vithdrawn  from  the  next  southern  department,  is  liable  to  be  recalled 
ind  leave  Wilmington  open.  I beg  you  will  urge  what  I have  so  often 
wrought  forward — the  necessity  of  the  presence  here  of  a movable  col- 
imn  of  my  own,  ready  to  act  either  upon  a land  or  sea  approach  or 
)oth,  until  relief  should  come  from  your  corps  d^armee.  Many  previous 
etters  set  forth  and  explain  this  necessity  by  reference  to  the  topo- 
graphical features  of  this  district. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  W^HITING, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


870 


KORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 

Goldshorouglij  N'.  (7.,  February  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Richmond^  Va.  : 

Hear  Sir  : If  the  information  be  true  that  the  iron-dads  (monitors) 
are  now  at  Port  Royal,  and  that  some  thirty  transports  and  a number 
of  gunboats  have  left  Beaufort  and  gone  south,  I think  the  attack  on 
Wilmington  is  abandoned,  if  it  was  ever  seriously  entertained.  JNow, 
it  appears  to  me  the  United  States  Government  has  two  great  objects 
jn  view— first,  the  capture  of  Richmond,  and,  second,  the  openii^-  ot 
the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  River  by  the  reduction  of  Port  Hud- 
son and  Vicksburg.  Taking  this  for  granted,  and  that  unless  they 
think  their  army  ample  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  first,  might  we 
not  suDpose  that  the  forces  under  General  Foster,  now  at  BeaufoH,  may 
when  the  proper  time  arrives  embark  and  proceed  up  the  James  River . 
In  this  case  we  would  have  no  knowledge  of  his  movements,  or  rather 
destination,  until  he  showed  himself  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  all  the 
coast  being  in  the  enemy’s  possession.  If  they  sail  south  it  appears  to 
me  they  would  go  to  the  Mississippi  rather  than  waste  their  strength  in 
attacking  minor  points.  It  may  be,  however,  that  they  may  land  near 
Savannah.  I write  this  to  caU  your  attention  to  the  unprotected  state 
of  the  James  River,  and  to  say  that  as  soon  as  ever  I find  positively 
that  the  fleet  have  sailed  I wish  to  move  a part  of  my  forces  toward 
Petersburg.  If  you  deem  these  suggestions  worthy  of  consideration 
vou  may  forward  this  letter  to  the  War  Dejiartment. 

Tours,  very  truly,  FRENCH,  . 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


[Indorsements.] 


Headquarters, 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February 


6.  1863. 


, — . - - • j j ^ , 

Respectfully  forwarded  as  requested  for  the  information  of  the  Secre- 
taryofWar.  G.  W.  SMITH, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February  6,  1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  President.  ^ ^ SEDDOIs^ 

(Secretary  of  War. 

Secretary  of  War  : 

The  suggestion  of  forces  in  position  to  defend  the  approach  of  James 
River  is  worthy  of  attention.  If  the  enemy  has  gone  toward  the  soiitii 
the  destination  is  most  probably  the  coast  of  South  Carolina,  and  require, 
that  Charleston  and  the  railroad  to  Savannah  should  be  covered  witl 
a larger  force  than  heretofore.  There  are  many  reasons  to  anticipate 
an  attempt  against  Charleston,  and  the  inducements  to  capture  au 
other  point  on  the  coast  south  of  Wilmington  are  so  small  that  a con  - 
tration  of  force  is  clearly  indicated  at  Charleston  and  on  its  approacim 
There  should  be  simultaneously  the  greatest  activity  m ^^®tern  ^ o ^ 
Carolina,  and  coupled  with  military  operations  there  should  vigoroii. 
and  well-directed  efforts  to  get  out  the  supplies  oi  forage  and  suDsi. 

euco  remaiuing-  iu  that  region.  jefFEESON  DAVIS. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


871 


General  Gustayus  W.  Smith: 

Would  it  not  be  well  to  send  from  troops  around  Goldsborough  fur- 
ther re-enforcements  to  Wilmington  and  forward  thence  all  the  force 
that  can  i)ossibly  be  spared  for  defense  of  Charleston  ? I do  not  appre- 
hend attack  on  Petersburg  or  Pichmond,  nor  do  I see  how,  consistently 
with  the  other  objects  referred  to  by  the  President,  forces  can  be  drawn 
hack  in  this  direction.  All  subsistence  supplies  that  are  attainable 
should  be  collected  and  sent  from  North  Carolina  to  this  city. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War, 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  February  10,  1863. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  General  French,  calling  his  attention  to  the 
indorsements  of  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War. 

G.  W.  SMITE, 

Major-General, 


[February  3-6, 1863. — For  correspondence  between  President  Davis, 
the  Secretary  of  War,  and  General  Lee,  in  reference  to  re-enforcements 
from  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  for  North  and  South  Carolina,  see 
Series  I,  Yol.  XIY,  pp.  759,  762-764,  766.J 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  February  4, 1863. 
General  Beauregard,  Charleston,,  S,  C. : 

Dispatch  received  from  Secretary  of  War  ordering  me  to  send  you  a 
brigade  and  to  hold  another  in  readiness.  Troops  will  accordingly 
move  to-day,  as  fast  as  transportation  will  admit,  commencing  with 
Colquitt’s  brigade.  Has  been  a smash  on  the  railroad.  Charleston 
mail  not  in.  What  news  from  the  enemy*?  Are  they  threatening 
Charleston?  Do  you  want  Gist?  Do  not  think  the  enemy  intend 
Savannah  at  all. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


[February  4-7, 1863. — For  Beauregard  to  Whiting,  see  Series  I,  Yol. 
XIY,  pp.  762,  764,  767,  768.] 


Richmond,  Ya.,  February  [March  f]  5, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : The  Secretary  of  War  requested  me  to  write  to  you  and 
say  that  he  desires  you  to  have  a close  reconnaissance  made  of  Suffolk 
with  the  view  of  attacking  and  carrying  it,  if  you  think  it  advisable 
aud  it  can  be  done  with  advantage.  If,  however,  the  works  are  found 
too  strong,  he  does  not  propose  to  carry  it  out.  I think  you  had  better 
OOme  over  and  see  him  yourself  if  you  can  spare  the  time. 

Very  truly  and  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ARNOLD  ELZEY, 

Major- General. 


872  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.!] 

Wilmington,  February  7, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon  : 

Have  sent  General  Beauregard  two  of  his  brigades.  If  I send  more 
off  must  have  another  brigade  here. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  February  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding.,  Goldsborough,  N.  G. : 

My  Dear  General:  Inclosed  I send  the  map  of  fortifications  of 
New  Berne  and  the  description  accompanying  it,  and  also  inclose  mem- 
oranda of  roads  furnished  by  Colonel  Pool  and  another  by  two  of  my 
staff  officers.*  Your  suggestions  in  regard  to  the  probability  of  attack 
by  the  James  and  the  possible  necessity  for  a prompt  move  in  this 
direction  are  in  accordance  with  my  own  views  of  the  probable  contin- 
gencies that  must  be  anticipated.  I have  long  thought  that  the  whole 
organization  of  my  command  ought  to  be  rearranged,  and  looked  to 
the  chances  of  my  being  permanently  assigned  as  major-general  to  com- 
mand Eichmond  and  its  immediate  defenses,  in  which  case  I hoped  to 
have  had  DanieFs  and  Davis’  brigades  as  part  of  the  permanent  garri- 
son here  as  before,  and  perhaps  to  have  you  again  at  Petersburg ; not 
in  my  command,  but  as  a neighbor,  closely  identified  with  the  defense 
of  Eichmond,  and  that  our  friend.  General  Pettigrew,  if  not  promoted 
would  be  with  you.  Of  course  it  was  taken  for  granted  that  active  op- 
erations in  North  Carolina  would  require  the  presence  of  a commander 
of  higher  rank  than  a division  commander,  and  as  I had  made  up  my 
mind  not  to  serve  under  any  of  the  lieutenant-generals  who  were  my 
juniors  as  major-generals  it  was  tolerably  clear  to  my  mind  that  I would 
have  to  retire  from  that  field  before  the  struggle  was  over.  It  seems 
that  the  Government  first  intended  to  send  E.  K.  Smith  and  then  1). 
H.  Hill  to  command,  but  something  went  wrong  and  * * * to  have 

settled  down  upon  the  * * *,  excepting  I was  to  remain  in  the  * * * 
in  Goldsborough.  I have  to-day  [determined]  to  send  in  my  resignatiou,i 
and  thus  * * * my  plans  at  least  for  the  present. 

To  yourself  and  General  Pettigrew  and  all  the  officers  and  men  of 
your  command  I tender  my  best  wishes.  May  success  and  prosperity 
always  attend  you.  To-day  I am  not  in  the  mood  to  write,  even  if  I 
had  time.f 

I remain,  very  truly,  your  friend, 

G.  AV.  SMITH. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Yo.  32.  I Richmond,  Ya.,  February  7,  1863. 

»##**** 
XXX.  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  trooi)S 
in  the  State  of  North  Carolina,  and  will  report  by  letter  to  Maj.  Geii.. 
G.  W.  Smith,  in  this  city. 

»*###** 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Not  found. 


t Portions  of  original  illegible. 


Chap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  873 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  February  8,  1863. 
General  French,  Goldshorougli,  N,  C. : 

General  Whiting  has  been  telegraphed  to  return  to  General  Beaure- 
gard all  the  force  received  from  his  command. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  C.,  February  10,  1863. 

Col.  [H.  L.]  Benbow, 

Commanding  Brigade^  Sudberry^  Y.  C.  : 

Colonel:  Your  brigade  will  take  the  position  at  Sudberry  lately 
occupied  by  Colonel  Harrison^s  brigade.  You  will  complete  the  works 
commenced  and  indicated  by  the  engineer  officers.  You  will  examine 
the  dispatches  brought  from  the  front  by  couriers  from  the  outposts, 
and  learning  their  contents  forward  them  to  me  by  telegraph.  Persons 
passing  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy  are  required  to  have  a special 
pass  from  these  headquarters.  Market  carts  and  provisions  are  allowed 
to  pass  the  lines.  You  will  reconnoiter  and  make  yourself  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  vicinity  of  your  post,  its  approaches,  and  defenses, 
and  require  all  your  mounted  officers  to  do  the  same.  Cause  strict  dis- 
cipline to  be  maintained ; drills,  parades,  and  all  camp  duties  to  be  reg- 
ularly and  properly  performed.  You  are  required  to  protect  private 
property  from  depredation. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General.,  Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Bichmond,  Va.,  February  10,  1863. 
His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Yance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina : 

Sir  : In  the  present  state  of  the  roads,  and  with  the  deficient  means 
of  transportation  afforded  by  the  railroads,  the  subsistence  of  General 
Lee’s  army  is  seriously  endangered  and  may  become  actually  dependent 
on  the  means  of  commanding  the  forage  and  provisions  which  have 
been  and  are  now  being  collected  by  the  Bureaus  of  this  Department  in 
your  State.  The  vital  importance  of  the  subject  will,  I trust,  excuse 
me  in  your  estimation  for  invoking  your  attention  to  the  subjoined 
copy  of  a telegram  just  received  from  Colonel  Wadley,  the  agent  of  the 
Government  for  railroad  transportation,  and  asking  your  co-operation 
with  him  in  so  managing  and  controlling  the  transportation  on  the 
line  of  roads  within  your  State  as  to  render  them  most  efficient  in  for- 
warding promptly  and  regularly  the  supplies  so  essential  to  our  main 
army.  Colonel  Wadley  or  his  leading  assistant  is  now  in  Ealeigh,  and 
will  gladly  avail  himself  of  the  privilege  of  conferring  with  you  on  your 
call,  and  I would  bespeak  your  favorable  consideration  of  the  sugges- 
tions his  experience  may  dictate. 

With  high  esteem,  most  respectfully,  vours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


874 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


[Inclosnre.] 

Ealeigh,  February  10, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Everything  is  in  the  utmost  confusion  on  the  North  Carolina  Eail- 
road,  and  I can  get  no  satisfactory  answer  from  the  Wilmington  and 
Weldon  road  about  transportation  of  corn.  The  State  holds  a controll- 
ing interest  in  both.  Cannot  some  arrangement  be  made  with  the  Gov- 
ernor bv  which  a more  efficient  management  can  be  had? 

W.  M.  WAD  LEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 
Goldsborough,  JSf.  0.,  February  12,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the 
10th  instant,  inclosing  a letter  written  to  you  by  Maj.  C.  S.  Carrington 
ill  relation  to  forage  at  Tarborough  and  the  sources  from  which  I am  to 
draw  supplies  for  my  forces.  I have  had  many  years  of  experience  in 
the  Quartermaster’s  department,  and  foreseeing  last  summer  that  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac  would  have  to  depend  on  the  supplies  from  North 
Carolina,  gave  implicit  instructions  to  all  my  quarternaastos  accord- 
ingly. Before  the  crop  was  ripe  enough  to  shell  I ordered  it  to  be  brought 
in  the  shuck  in  box  cars,  and  from  that  time  to  the  present  have  sent  it 
forward  to  Petersburg  and  Richmond  as  fast  as  cars  could  be  procured. 
The  quartermasters  at  Weldon  and  Tarborough  have  been  furnished  by 
me  with  everv  means  necessary  to  collect  the  forage,  but  the  greatest 
difficulty  I have  had  to  encounter  has  been  with  the  railroad  companies. 
I have  caused  many  letters  to  be  written  and  have  had  interviews  with 
the  officers  asking  their  aid  to  get  the  forage  out  of  the  country , and 
have  gone  so  far  as  to  impress  trains  to  send  grain  to  your  city.  Several 
weeks  since  I directed  Captain  Venable  to  force  the  cars,  whenever  they 
were  about  to  return  empty  from  Weldon  to  Petersburg,  to  proceed  to 
Halifax  for  grain  for  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  a letter  addressed 
to  W.  T.  Joynes  some  time  since  I earnestly  solicited  his  aid  as  president 
of  the  Petersburg  and  Weldon  Railroad  in  this  matter,  and  have  urg^ 
this  also  on  Colonel  Frdmont  of  the  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Railroad. 
Storehouses  have  been  built  and  large  wagon  trains  sent  to  Tarborougli 
by  my  orders  to  secure  grain  f and  I was  not  before  aware  that  Major 
Carrington  had  much  control  over  these  supplies,  which  have  claimed 
the  particular  attention  of  my  chief  quartermaster  as  well  as  my  sell. 
Without  exception,  I have  always  directed  that  supplies  for  all  commands 
should  be  drawn  from  the  surrounding  country,  except  on  the  Black- 
water  and  other  extreme  frontier  lines,  when  they  were  required, 
as  possible,  to  forage  within  the  lines  of  the  enemy.  I am  apprehensive 
that  Major  Carrington  is  not  well  informed  respecting  the  resources  o 
the  State,  or  he  would  not  have  thought  it  possible  for  the  troops  south 
of  Goldsborough  to  find  supplies  in  that  part  of  the  country.  1 
ting  all  that  can  be  found,  especially  from  Sampson  County;  but  there 
is  only  a little  that  can  be  purchased.  In  Onslow  County  some  could  he 
found,  but  it  will  all  be  required  for  the  cavalry  on  duty  there  before  the 
crop  of  oats  mature.  Before  the  receipt  of  your  letter  I ordered  Genera 
J.  J.  Pettigrew  with  his  brigade  to  march  via  Greenville  to  ^^ashiugtou 
County  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  the  town  of  Plymouth  and  from  the 


Chap.XXX.1  correspondence,  etc. CONFEDERATE.  875 

counties  adjoining  Washington,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  get  the  supplies  out 
of  that  part  of  the  State  and  to  give  protection  to  the  people  and  induce 
them  to  plant  largely  for  the  coming  season.  A force  has  also  been  sent 
into  Bertie  County  for  a similar  purpose,  and  to  operate  in  Gates  and 
Obowan  Counties.  The  people  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  State  have  some 
cause  of  complaint  for  want  of  protection,  because  the  small  force  I have 
had  in  my  command  precluded  my  advancing  them  far  east  of  the  rail- 
road. Now  for  the  first  time  I have  an  available  force  to  send  east  and 
attack  the  enemy  and  give  some  protection  to  the  citizens.  To-day  finds 
the  enemy  not  advanced  a foot  from  where  he  was  in  July  last,  when  I 
was  placed  in  charge  of  this  department.  1 inclose  with  this  a letter 
from  the  quartermaster  at  Tarborough  in  reply  to  one  from  my  chief 
quartermaster.  You  may  rest  assured  I shall  draw  all  my  supplies  as 
far  as  possible  from  the  surrounding  country.  The  requirements  for 
Wilmington  are  10,000  bushels  per  month. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


[February  12,  1863. — For  Beauregard  to  Whiting,  see  Series  I,  Yol. 
XIV,  p.  774.]  ’ 


Navy  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fu.,  February  13,  1863. 
His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Yance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina.,  Raleigh.,  N.  C. ; 

Sir  : I am  informed  by  Flag-Officer  Lynch  that  there  are  at  Lawrence- 
hurg,  N.  C.,  4,224  bars,  or  about  707  tons,  of  railroad  iron,  and  that  all 
operations  upon  the  extension  of  the  railroad  beyond  that  point  have 
been  suspended  and  will  not  be  renewed  during  the  war.  I have  the 
honor  to  request  that  this  iron  may  be  turned  over  to  this  Department 
to  be  rolled  into  plates  for  protecting  the  gunboat  and  battery  under  con- 
struction on  the  Eoanoke  Eiver.  The  iron  will  be  paid  for  at  its  market 
value,  or  the  Department  will  agree  to  return  it  six  months  after  a dec- 
laration of  peace.  All  efforts  made  to  obtain  iron  in  North  Carolina 
and  elsewhere  have  failed,  and  I beg  leave  to  urge  upon  your  consider- 
ation the  expediency  of  turning  over  the  lot  of  iron  referred  to,  with  the 
understanding  that  it  will  be  used  exclusively  for  plating  gunboats  and 
batteries  now  nearly  ready  for  it  in  your  State. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLOEY,  . 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


Fredericksburg,  February  13, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

I think  a division  under  Eansom,  as  well  as  I can  judge  at  this  dis- 
tance, can  be  sent.  I refer  to  my  letters  to  the  President  and  Secre- 
pry. 

E.  E.  LEE, 

A General. 


^[Iebruary  13,  1863. — For  Seddon  to  Whiting,  see  Series  I,  Yol. 
W.  1>.  776.] 

I 


876  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chvp.  XXX. 

Headquarters, 
Fredericksburg^  February  14,  1863, 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I think  it  proper  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  Depart- 
ment, that  I have  received  this  morning  a letter  dated  Heathville,  lOtb 
instant,  from  Lieut.  0.  Littleton  Upshur,  signing  himself  enrolling  offi- 
cer, stating  that  on  the  9th  and  10th  transports  of  the  enemy  loaded 
with  troops,  horses,  &c.,  passed  down  the  Potomac.  I do  not  know 
Lieutenant  Upshur,  but  he  states  that  he  is  directly  on  the  river  and 
can  see  all  their  movements.  If  they  are  anything  more  than  conva- 
lescents returning  to  their  commands  south  I think  it  probable  they 
are  re-enforcements  for  General  Foster.  I do  not  think  that  they  were 
embarked  at  Aquia  Creek,  inasmuch  as  I have  received  a letter  of  the 
same  date  from  a scout  watching  that  position  in  which  he  states  that 
a large  number  of  the  enemy  is  encamped  at  that  point,  and  no  men- 
tion is  made  of  embarkation  or  transports.  Other  scouts  on  the  Poto- 
mac have  as  yet  reported  no  passage  of  troops  down  that  river. 

Capt.  E.  P.  Bryan,  signal  officer,  whom  I had  directed  to  cross  over  into 
Maryland  for  the  purpose  of  watching  the  Potomac  on  that  side,  I fear 
may  not  now  be  on  that  duty,  as  an  order  has  been  received  here  (Spe- 
cial Orders,  No.  20,  Paragraph  XX,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generafs 
Office)  directing  him  to  report  to  General  Beauregard,  and  he  may  have 
reported  accordingly  without  my  knowledge. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

February  14,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : After  dispatching  my  letter  to  you  this  morning  I received  in- 
formation from  one  of  my  scouts  on  the  enemy^s  left  that  a small  steamer 
with  troops  had  on  Sunday  passed  down  the  Potomac ; that  since  that 
time  seven  large  steamers  and  five  or  six  transports,  towed  by  the 
steamers  and  laden  with  troops,  had  also  descended  the  Potomac. 

On  the  11th  and  12th  instant  no  movements  had  been  observed. 

This  evening  I received  information  from  scouts  on  the  enemy^s  right 
up  to  the  12th  instant.  Two  report  that  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  of  Gen- 
eral Hooker's  army  had  embarked  at  Belle  Plains  and  sailed  for  Suf- 
folk ) that  a large  fleet  of  transports  was  at  Aquia  Creek,  and  there  was 
other  evidence  of  a general  move.  Their  cavalry  had  been  ^withdrawn 
from  the  Spotted  Tavern  and  Hartwood  Church  toward  the  railroad, 
leaving  pickets  in  their  stead.  SigePs  corps  is  still  at  Stafford  Court- 
House.  Three  brigades  had  reached  Washington.  The  infantry  at 
Union  Mills  Ford  (Bull  Bun)  were  leaving  for  Washington,  and  the 
cavalry  for  Stafford  Court-House.  Prisoners  captured  by  General 
Hampton  report  that  General  Hays,  with  three  regiments  of  infantry, 
seven  pieces  of  artillery,  and  a squadron  of  cavalry,  was  to  leave  Union 
Mills  Ford  yesterday  for  Washington. 

I have  directed  General  PicketPs  division  to  march  to-morrow  for 
Ptichmond  and  General  Hood’s  division  to  be  held  in  readiness.  One 
of  the  scouts  reported  that  it  was  the  Second  Army  Corps  which  had 
embarked  for  Suffolk.  Although  it  is  stated  that  their  destination  is 


Ohap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


877 


Suffolk,  should  DO  other  troops  follow  I think  it  probable  that  this 
corps  is  intended  to  re-enforce  their  army  in  South  Carolina  j but  should 
its  real  destination  be  Sufiblk,  General  Pickett’s  division  will  be  ample 
to  resist  it. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.  Va..  February  lo,  1803. 
General  11.  E.  Lee  : ? ? j 

I subjoin  a telegram  just  received  from  General  Pryor;  likewise  the 
closing  paragraph  of  a telegram  by  order  of  General  French,  at  Golds- 
borough,  calling  for  large  supplies  of  ammunition.  I consider  the  latter 
the  result  of  similar  intelligence  from  General  Pryor.  I doubt  the  ^^^ew- 
port  News  report.  Have  you  information  to  determine  it  ? Would  you 
advise  delay  in  sending  troops  to  Charleston  from  North  Carolina  f 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Franklin,  Va.,  Fehruary  14,  1863. 

Two  persons  from  Norfolk  Thursday  (one  a lady  and  the  other  a gentleman),  where 
there  had  been  no  concert,  inform  me  that  thirty-six  regiments  landed  at  Newport 
News  Wednesday.  They  say  it  is  Hooker’s  army.  Within  the  past  week  Suffolk 
largely  re-enforced. 


An  attack  is  expected  here. 


ROGER  A.  PRYOR, 
Brigadier-Gene/i'al,  Commanding. 


Meaning  at  Hamilton,  N.  C. 


fJ.  A.  S.] 


General  E.  E.  Lee  : 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  Fa.,  Fehruary  15,  1863, 


General  French  telegraphs  that  he  must,  on  the  call  of  General  Pryor, 
send  re-enforcements  to  him.  General  Davis  with  a brigade  is  ordered. 
A brigade  has  also  been  ordered  from  Wilmington  to  Charleston.  Colonel 
Tabb  reports  considerable  fleets  of  steamers  and  transports  at  mouth 
of  James  Eiver  as  coming  from  a reliable  source.  The  President  thinks 
you  had  better  move  an  adequate  force  at  or  toward  Hanover  Junction 
to  aid  here  if  required. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  cf  War, 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Va.,  Fehruary  15,  1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Commanding,  dtc. : 

Sir:  I send  you  herewith  full  copies  of  the  telegram  from  General 
French  and  letter  from  Colonel  Tabb,  to  which  I have  referred  in  a tel- 
egram I have  just  sent  you.*  In  the  letter  you  will  perceive  a mistake, 
either  in  regard  to  the  York  or  James  Eiver.  I concluded  in  my  tele- 
^am  that  the  James  was  meant  in  both  places,  though  it  may  be  well 
loubted  if  the  York,  as  first  named,  was  not  designed  throughout.  It 
natters  not,  however,  as  the  danger  could  not  be  materially  different  in 

Not  found. 


878 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


the  event  of  a landing  in  force  on  either.  I cannot  believe  that  a serious  f 
blow  at  this  city  is  contemplated  at  this  season,  and  if  the  approach  is  ^ 
to  be  from  the  York  Eiver  I am  satisfied  it  will  not  be  ventured.  Still, 
it  is  well  to  be  guarded  fully  and  in  time,  and  the  President  thinks  if 
you  do  not  apprehend  immediate  attack,  which,  with  the  present  state 
of  the  roads  he  does  not  think  practicable,  that  you  had  better  move 
what  you  may  deem  an  adequate  force  to  protect  this  city  in  supporting 
distance,  say  at  Hanover  Junction.  We  have  not,  I fear,  more  than 
some  3,000  effective  troops  here  and  at  Drewry’s  Bluff.  On  the  receipt 
of  General  Frenches  dispatch  General  Davis,  with  his  brigade,  was  or- 
dered to  the  Blackwater  to  re-enforce  General  Pryor.  The  intelligence 
of  an  expected  attack  on  Charleston,  and  the  removal  of  nearly  all  the 
troops,  together  with  General  Foster  and  his  staff,  south  from  North 
Carolina,  induced  the  President  likewise  to  order  a brigade  (Clingmaifs) 
from  Wilmington  to  Charleston,  and  another  from  General  Daniel’s 
division  to  replace  it,  and  be  held  prepared  to  move  forward  likewise  to 
Charleston  if  events  required,  to  be  itself  replaced  by  a further  brigade 
from  General  [Junius]  Daniel’s  division.  The  other  forces  in  North 
Carolina  have  been  for  the  present  ordered  to  be  disposed  by  General 
French  as  he  deems  best  for  the  protection  of  Weldon,  Goldsborougli, 
and  the  line  of  the  railroad.  Not  having  the  key  to  your  cipher,  and  a 
mistake  having  been  committed  by  the  telegraph  operator  in  the  first 
two  words  in  cipher,  I have  been  much  puzzled  to  make  out  your  tele- 
gram received  this  morning ; and  though  I had  the  aid  of  Maj.  [William] 
Norris,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  it  was  not  until  after  my  telegram  this 
evening  was  sent  that,  by  trying  other  words,  I succeeded  in  decipher- 
ing it.  The  march  of  Pickett’s  division  to  Richmond  may,  very  proha- 
blv,  sufSce  at  present  to  guard  against  any  sudden  attack  on  this  city. 
I will  keep  you  advised  of  any  further  intelligence  received.  General 
Pryor  promised,  by  telegram  of  the  14th  instant,  to  give  by  to-night 
certain  intelligence,  both  in  relation  to  the  reported  forces  on  the  James 
and  the  re-enforcements  at  Suffolk.  As  yet  the  intelligence  has  not 
come. 


With  high  esteem,  very  truly,  yours. 


J.  A.  SEDDOR, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Fa.,  February  15, 1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding^  &c.: 

Sir:  After  consultation  with  the  President  I desire  that  you  will  or- 
der Brigadier-General  Davis,  with  his  brigade,  to  re-enforce  General 
Pryor,  on  the  Blackwater,  and  Clingman’s  brigade  from  Wilmington  to 
Charleston : that  you  will  send  a brigade  of  Daniel’s  division  at  once  to 
W^ilmington  to  replace  Clingman’s  and  hold  another  ready  to  move  m 
the  same  direction,  so  that  in  case  events  require  it  likewise  may  be 
forwarded  to  Charleston  and  be  itself  replaced  at  Wilmington— perhar)> 
afterwards  followed  to  Charleston  by  another  brigade  of  Daniels  di 
vision.  The  residue  of  his  force  General  French  will  dispose  as  bt 
deems  most  judicious  for  the  defense  of  Weldon,  Goldsborough,  and  tbt 
line  of  the  railroads. 

With  high  esteem,  very  truly,  yours,  ^ ^ SEDDON 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


879 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  0.,  February  15,  1863. 
His  Excellency  the  Governor,  Raleigh,  F,  C.  : 

Sir:  I send  for  your  information  a letter*  just  received  from  Lum- 
berton,  in  Kobeson  County,  respecting  a deplorable  condition  of  things 
in  that  section,  due  to  the  presence  and  depredations  of  deserters. 
Accordingly,  I have  ordered  Oapt.  J.  E.  McDonald,  Fifty-first  N'orth 
Carolina,  and  his  company  (all  Eobeson  County  men)  to  proceed  there 
and  either  capture  or,  if  necessary,  destroy  these  freebooters.  A copy* 
of  his  orders  is  herewith.  The  statement  of  the  inadequacy  of  the 
militia  force  and  the  disaffection  of  the  free  negroes  renders  this  action 
on  my  part  necessary,  and  I think  it  will  meet  your  approval. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding, 


Abstract  from  Field  Report  of  the  Troops  of  the  District  of  the  Cape  Fear,  commanded  by 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting^  February  15,  lb63. 


Troops. 


Brigadier-General  Evans’  brigade 

Brigadier-General  Ransom’s  brigade 

Forts  Caswell,  Fisber,  Johnson,  and  Saint  Philip  (twenty-one  com- 
panies). 

City  and  river  defense  (one  battalion  artillery  and  three  companies) 

Three  unattached  companies 

3d  Battalion  Xorth  Carolina  Artillery 

Four  light  batteries 

Three  companies  of  cavalry 

Signal  Corps !!!!!”'. 

Bndge  guard ! 1*. ",  1 ! ! ! ! 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

OflBcors. 

Men. 

134 

1,  854 

2,  028 

2,288 

160 

2,791 

2.  906 

3, 151 

65 

1,  228 

1,  504 

1,800 

21 

416 

461 

558 

11 

144 

159 

188 

10 

134 

135 

158 

18 

446 

460 

487 

8 

203 

205 

225 

1 

17 

17 

20 

1 

24 

24 

27 

429 

7,  257 

7,899 

8,902 

Note.— Aggregate  present  and  absent  not  reported. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Ya.,  February  16,  1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Frederichsburg,  Va. : 

General  Pryor  reports ; 

Scout  from  opposite  Newport  News  reports  transports  landing  there  since  Wednes- 
day evening.  Knows  nothing  of  the  number.  Saw  eleven  steamboats  at  one  time. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Not  found. 


880 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  !' 


Headquarters  Gamp  Fredericksburg, 

February  16,  1863. 


Hou.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  Bichmond^  Va. : 


Sir  : I informed  you  on  the  14th  that  General  Pickett’s  division  was 
on  the  march  to  Eichmond.  It  is  directed  to  halt  on  the  Chickahominy, 
where  it  can  find  shelter  in  woods  and  procure  from  Eichmond  provis- 
ions and  forage. 

General  Pickett  will  send  forward  an  officer  to  select  a position  and 
make  arrangements.  Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  afford  him  the  nec- 
essary facilities  ? Should  circumstances  require  him  to  be  further  ad- 
vanced, I must  request  you  to  give  him  orders.  He  can  take  position 
below  Eichmond  on  the  right  or  left  bank  of  the  river  as  you  may 
designate. 

Upon  the  reception  last  night  of  your  dispatch  of  yesterday  I directed 
Hood’s  division  to  move  to  Hanover  Junction.  It  will  halt  there  unless 


required  to  advance. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant. 


E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Yadkinville,  N.  C.,  February  16,  [1863]. 

Governor  Yance: 

Hear  Sir  : It  is  my  painful  duty  to  inform  you  of  a most  melancholy 
affair  which  occurred  in  this  county  on  last  Thursday.  I sent  out  a 
squad  of  14  men  in  search  of  conscripts.  They  found  a number  of  them 
(now  supposed  to  be  between  20  and  30)  lodged  in  a school-house  and 
attacked  them.  The  conscripts  were  well  armed  and  resisted  most 
stubbornly.  They  shot  through  cracks  and  windows  at  our  men,  and 
killed  two  of  the  best  citizens  of  this  county— James  West,  a magis- 
trate, and  John  Y illiams,  a most  excellent  man.  These  men  were  shot 
dead  in  their  tracks.  Two  of  the  conscripts  were  killed  and  the  bal- 
ance escaped,  though  two  of  them  are  seriously  wounded.  The  con- 
scripts known  to  have  been  in  it  and  who  have  escaped  are  William 
Bobbins,  Jesse  Dobbins,  Benjamin  Willard,  Lee  Willard,  Thomas  Ad- 
ams, Enoch  Brown,  Jack  Douglas,  Anderson  Douglas,  Sandford  Doug- 
las, Hugh  Sprinkle,  and  Horace  Allgood,  though  we  have  since  cap- 
tured the  Douglases  and  Hugh  Sprinkle  and  lodged  them  in  jail.  Tlie 
four  first  named  are  the  leaders  of  the  band ; and  I am  informed  that 
they  will  probably  try  to  make  their  way  to  Tennessee.  I leave  it  to 
Your  Excellency  whether  or  not  a sufficient  reward  shall  be  offered  for 
these  four  bad  and  dangerous  men  to  insure  their  apprehension.  Eob- 
ert  Hutchins,  William  Willard,  James  Wooten,  Elk  ana  Willard,  and 
others  are  believed  to  have  been  in  it.  If  a reward  had  no  other  effect 
it  would  I think  deter  others  from  resisting  the  execution  of  the  law, 
seeing  that  the  Governor  of  tlje  State  had  taken  the  matter  in  hand. 
If  they  do  not  leave  the  county  they  will  rally  tbeir  crowd  (as  I under- 
stand some  of  them  are  trying  to  do)  and  fight  again.  They  are  much 
better  armed  than  the  militia,  having  been  i)reparing  for  it  for  months. 
We  have  arrested  and  sent  out  of  this  county  within  three  months  past 
over  100  men,  and  yet  we  have  a considerable  number  left.  Inasmuch 
as  we  have  scarcely  any  arms  or  ammunition  I would  suggest  that  Your 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  881 

Excellency  send  us  as  soon  as  possible  a detachment  of  40  or  50  men  to 
scour  the  county.  It  would  not  only  enable  us  to  execute  speedily  but 
might  save  some  valuable  lives.  We  intend  at  all  hazards  to  execute 
the  law. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  A.  JOYCE, 
Lieutenant- Colonel, 


Asheville,  N".  C.,  February  16,  1863. 

Governor  : Your  letter  of  the  9th  instant  is  just  received.  I be^  to 
assure  you  tha;t  I shall  at  the  next  term  of  the  court  prosecute  vifforouslv 
such  of  the  prisoners  to  whom  you  direct  my  attention  as  may  be  turned 
over  to  the  civil  authorities.  The  late  expedition  to  Laurel  sent  only 

them  was  admitted  to  bail  on  yester- 
day by  Judge  Bailey.  I understand  there  are  no  more  to  send.  I have 
no  knowledge  of  my  own  touching  the  shooting  of  several  prisoners  in 
Laurel.  I have  learned,  however,  from  a most  reliable  source  that  13 
of  them  were  killed  j that  some  of  them  were  not  taken  in  arms  but  at 
their  homes ; that  all  the  men  shot  (13,  if  not  more)  were  prisoners  at  the 
time  they  were  shot  j that  they  were  taken  oft  to  a secluded  cave  or  goro-e 
m the  mountains  and  then  made  to  kneel  down  and  were  thus  shot 
One  man  was  badly  and  mortally  shot  in  the  bowels,  and  while  he  was 
writhing  in  agony  and  praying  to  God  for  mercy  a soldier  mercilessly 
and  brutally  shot  him  in  the  head  with  his  pistol.  Several  women  were 
whipped  • this  I learned  from  one  who  got  his  information  from  some  of 
the  guilty  parties.  I learned  that  all  this  was  done  by  order  of  Lieut 
Ool.  James  A.  Keith.  I know  not  what  you  intend  doing  with  the 
guilty  parties,  but  I suggest  they  are  all  guilty  of  murderT  I do  not 
suppose  they  had  any  order  to  do  so  barbarous  a deed  : but  if  they  had 
the  order  was  void  absolutely,  no  matter  by  whom  issued.  Such  savage 
and  barbarous  cruelty  is  without  a parallel  in  the  State,  and  I hope  in 
pry  other.  I am  gratified  that  you  intend  to  take  the  matter  in  hand 
L will  make  such  investigation  as  I can,  but  I have  no  means  of  com- 
pelling any  one  to  disclose  facts  to  me.  It  will  not  be  difficult,  I learn,  to 
prove  that  the  prisoners  were  killed.  I assure  you  that  I will  prosecAte 
ill  persons  who  have  committed  criminal  offenses  in  this  circuit  at  the 
lext  term  of  the  court,  and  in  the  mean  time  I will  do  all  in  my  power 
0 suppress  crime  and  violence.  These  are  fearfully  on  the  increase  in 
Lis  sepon  of  the  State.  A report  might  be  made  that  would  astonish 

TAnV  ^ all  I could  in  reference  to  the  complaints  made  to 

70U  Irom  Jackson  and  Cherokee  Counties. 


I am,  &e.,  yours,  truly, 


A.  S.  MEERIMOK. 


Savannah,  Ga.,  February  16,  1863. 
®rig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whitinh, 

Wilmington,  N,  G. : 

>o?Laboud ^Foster ^ i*eport  to  Jordan.  Received  at  Pocotaligo  same  re- 


56  R R — VOL  XVIII 


G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


882 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  | 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

February  17,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Gustavus  W.  Smith, 

Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : Please  retain  in  Richmond  all  men  belonging  to  Generals 
Pickett’s  and  Hood’s  divisions,  Longstreet’s  corps,  who  are  on  their 
way  to  join  them,  until  the  arrival  of  these  divisions  within  your  reach 
and  then  I would  thank  you  to  send  them  immediately  to  them.  They 
are  in  march  for  Richmond  and  will  be  joined  by  General  Longstreet. 
.Very  respectfully,  5’our  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Ya.^  February  17,  1863. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding,  <&c.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  let- 
ters of  the  14th  and  16th  instant.  They  give  me  interesting  informa- 
tion but  correspond  only  partially  with  the  accounts  I receive  here  of 
the  movements  of  the  enemy.  An  officer  of  the  Signal  Corps,  nnich 
trusted  as  a scout,  has  just  returned  from  within  a few  miles  of  Fort 
Monroe  and  Newport  News.  He  reports  as  certain  that  about  ^0,000 
men  have  been  landed  and  are  encamped  at  Newport  News.  They  were 
brought  there  by  transports  in  tow  of  steam-tugs.  They  are  building 
tent- chimneys  and  bake-ovens,  and  seem  settling  themselves  .for  a time 
at  least.  They,  as  the  scout  learned,  reported  themselves  as  part  ot 
Hooker’s  army,  being  Rurnside’s  old  division,  and  believed  they  were 
again  to  be  placed  under  Burnside’s  command.  In  addition  to  these 
troops  at  Newport  News,  8,000  or  10,000  were  reported  (as  the  scout 
believes  truly)  to  have  been  sent  to  Suftolk.  In  front  ot  Newport  News 
were  five  iron-clads,  with  steam  kept  constantly  up  and  occasionally 
moving  about.  They  professed  to  expect  an  attack  from  our  gunboats 
coming  down  the  James,  and  do  not  intend  to  be  taken  by  surprise  as 
at  Charleston.  On  the  bay  there  were  some  twenty-five  or  thirty  trans^ 
ports.  They  had  come  down  the  bay  with  these  troops,  or  a part  ot 
them ; but  whether  down  the  Potomac  or  not  the  scout  could  not  learn. 
He  passed  on  up  the  York  River  on  his  return.  There  were  no  trans- 
ports in  that  river,  nor  had  any  additional  troops  been  moved  to  oi 
landed  at  Yorktown  or  Gloucester  Point.  Such  is  pretty  fully  all  that 
is  material  in  the  reports  of  the  scout.  . , . ^ 

I send  inclosed  a copy  of  the  only  dispatch  received  to-day  tr 
General  Beauregard.  There  is  no  later  intelligence  from  either  Genera  h 
Pryor  or  French.  All  the  troops  sent  by  General  Beauregard  to  w il- 
mington  have  been  returned,  and  two  brigades  from  North  Carolina 
(Clingman’s  and  Cooke’s)  have  been  sent  from  Wilmington.  Generai 
Ransom’s  other  brigade  will  very  probably  likewise  be  ordered  m m 
same  direction,  and  he  replaced  in  command  of  his  division.  As  yer. 
however,  the  brigade  under  him  is  only  ordered  to  be  held  in  readmes 
I am  pleased  to  learn  that  with  characteristic  vigilance  you  are  torwara 
ing  Pickett’s  and  Hood’s  divisions  to  keep  ward  here.  As  you  have 
confided  in  my  discretion  the  location  to  which,  until  further  ortiei- 
they  shall  be  assigned,  I shall  order  Pickett’s  on  the  other  side  ot  Ui 
river,  so  as  to  be  in  a position,  if  necessary,  more  readily  to  suppon 
Pryor  and  defend  Petersburg.  I am  inclined  to  think  the  enem.v^ 
movements  too  serious  for  a feint  or  a diversion  and  that  Hooker  rea  > 


Chap.XXX.J  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  883 

desigiis  withdrawing  from  the  Eappahannock  and  changing  his  whole 
plan.  He  seemed  fully  committed  to  an  advance  on  the  Rappahannock 

Republican  or  Abolition  -SrerL  ^ he 
can  venture  to  advance  and  do  what  Burnside  could  not.  We  must 

sa  Sr'”'’"'""’''”' 

With  great  esteem,  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDOK, 
Secretary  of  War, 

^aj  Gen  D H Tuesday,  [February]  17,  1863. 

the  letter  to  which  you  refer  in  your  note  of  to-day 
rton  about  the  re- enforcements  from  Whitford^s 

Qe  . I sta^  to-morrow  and  will  proceed  across  Tranter’s  Creek*  shall 
0^7  Of  Washmgton  so  as  to  threate^the 

may  prevent  re-enforcements  going  out  of  Washington 
hit  the  danger  is  that  if  I am  attacked  in  front  of  Washington  ^ar’ 
ett  cannot  po^ibly  come  to  my  assistance  nor  can  I to  hfs  if  he  is 
ttacked  from  Plymouth,  so  that  we  are  in  very  bad  military  position 
ach  liable  to  be  attacked  separately.  An  immense  swamp  will  be  be- 
iv^een  usj  to  march  to  him  I must  either  go  down  the  Plymouth  road 
nd  abandon  my  line  of  communication,  which  is  utterly  out  of  the 
uestion  in  this  country,  or  pass  around  behind  this  swamp,  probably  a 
iree-days  journey.  I will  take  my  position  without  much^pprehen- 
on  from  the  enemy,  but  I think  he  had  better  withdraw  himself  before 
ny  danger  on  his  left  flank  and  rear.  I fear  they  will  bounce  out  unon 
-inston  some  day  when  we  are  all  off  and  handle  Daniel  roughly  ^ 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

J.  J.  PETTIGREW, 

Brigadier-  General, 


Headquarters  Army  of  R’orthern  Virginia 

eut.  Gen.  James  LoNasTEEET, 

Commanding  Corps: 

General.-  The  transfer  of  a portion  of  the  Federal  Army  of  the 
Hampton  Roads  has  rendered  it  necessary  to  move  two 
towards  J ames  River.  I desire  you  to  join  them 
ipnni  tv.  comfort  will  be  secured  and 

S bv  th ^ advance  upon  Rich 

•fflv  the  enemy  from  hvs  new  base.  It  is  reported  that  he  has  been 
Snfiblk.  It  will  therefore  be  prudent  for  vou  to 
S 9nd*’tn®f  f .^’'ckett  to  halt  on  the  Chicka- 

mS  kfvpV^^  v to  Falling  Greek,  on  the  south  side  of 

id  to  some  better  point,  from  which  you  can  readily  de- 

Lap  rpnf^’-v*®'  ^^®  “"cement  of  t4  enemy  from^the 

J }Z  your  Other  divisions  will  be  ordered  to 

therefore  you  be  prepared  to  receive  them  and  to 
® comfortable  accommodation.  You  will  be 

need  not  remind  you  of  the  importance 
kh  L ^1,  ^ ‘ where  there  is  plenty  of  wood,  and 

Won^  L^t®®p“^®“‘®“*^*®f?PP“®®-  . desirable  that  these 

8 be,  as  far  as  possible,  not  liable  to  prove  injurious  to  the 


884 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


ajrriciiltural  interests  of  the  country.  You  will  require  at  least  two 
Salions  of  your  artillery  and  probably  one  of  your  reserve  corps. 
The  Crses  are  in  such  a reduced  state  and  the  country  so  saturated 
wbh  water  tS  it  will  be  almost  impossible  for  them  to  drag  the  guns. 
They  might  be  transported  by  railroad,  by  which  route  all  hea^  bag- 
iraffe  if  possible,  should  also  be  conveyed  and  the  battery  lieges'  be 
led  ’ I wsh  you  to  inform  me  where  I can  communicate  with  yon- 
To  inform  yourself  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  your  front  and  to 
keen  me  advised  I suggest  that  you  report  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  on 
you?  arrival  in  Kichmond,  as  he  will  have  information  and  possibly 

®Tt%”fbe  welfto  h?vtLane’s  battery  at  some. favorable  Pomt  on  the 
James  Eiver,  to  destroy  the  enemy’s  transports  if  toey  should  ascen  . 
I am,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 


T?  T Ti'  T?, 


Kichmond,  Va.,  February  18, 1863. 
Mai  Gen.  George  E.  Pickett,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : The  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  “ n 

keeping  yourself  advised  and  ready  to  move  ^ 

vances^from  the  Black  water  and  to  defend  the  city  of  Petersburg. 

Yery  respectfully,  &c.,  COOPEB, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Biclmond,  Fa.,  February  18,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  H.  Stevens, 

Corps  of  Engineers,  C.  S.  A.,  Richmond^  Ta.: 

opment  such  that  they  could  be  held  by  a small 

original  directions  carried  out  as  far  as  the  nature  oi  me  g 
your  judgment,  permit. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  ^ p GILMER, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


Engineer  Bcreah, 
Richmond,  V«.,  February  18,  180.1. 

Col.  Walter  Gwynn,  V/eldon,  V.  C.:  mstant  I hav 

Colonel  : In  reply  to  your  conimunication  o“he  llthj^  ^t^^ 
to  state  that  it  is  important  that  the  woiks  in  i g 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


885 


of  East  Forth  Carolina  should  be  under  the  control  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  H. 
Stevens,  chief  of  construction,  and  for  this  reason  you  were  instructed 
to  report  to  him  directly.  The  local  engineers  at  Goldsborough,  Kin- 
ston, the  works  on  Tar  Eiver,  and  at  Eainbow  Bend  should,  and  will 
hereafter,  report  to  Colonel  Stevens.  For  the  present  your  duties  are 
limited  to  the  works  at  Weldon,  F.  C.,  under  the  direction  of  the  chief 
of  construction.  I will  take  occasion  to  read  your  report  to  Colonel 
Stevens  in  regard  to  the  works  for  the  defense  of  Weldon  Bridge. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Forth  Carolina, 
Goldsborough,  W.  C.,  February  18,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Eighteenth  Army  Corps,  New  Berne,  N.  C. : 

General  : In  a communication  addressed  to  me,  and  written  by  Maj. 
Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  A.,  and  dated  at  Few  Berne  on  the  31st  day  of 
December  last,  he  desired  that  a watch  which  was  taken  from  the  per- 
son of  Surgeon  Hunt,  who  was  killed  in  a skirmish  near  the  town  of 
Washington,  should  be  returned,  to  be  placed  in  the  possession  of  his 
relatives.  On  the  publication  of  General  Foster’s  letter  the  man  who 
had  the  watch  voluntarily  sent  it  to  me,  and  it  now  affords  me  much 
pleapre  to  be  able  to  return  it  to  you,  that  it  may  be  placed  in  the  hands 
of  his  relatives.  Will  not  this  act  of  a private  in  our  army,  voluntarily 
returning  this  watch,  offer  a noble  example  to  some  of  your  generals  and 
to  their  wives,  who  have  taken  (1  will  not  say  stolen)  pianos,  bedsteads, 
dining  sets,  works  of  art  and  virtu,  horses,  carriages,  &c.,  and  carried 
them  to  their  homes  in  the  Forth,  to  return  them  to  their  owners  ? I re- 
gret to  make  such  charges  against  your  officers,  and  above  all  against 
their  wives;  but  when  such  acts  are  committed  by  men  in  high  position, 
or  by  women  of  intelligence  and  refinement,  it  deserves  condemnation. 
I refrain  from  naming  them,  but  if  you  wish  it  names  shall  be  sent  and 
the  alleged  acts  specified  and  the  whole  sent  you  for  publication  to  show 
the  world  that  neither  rank  nor  position  nor  religion  nor  female  loveli- 
ness can  resist  the  temptation  to  violate  the  commandments  when  what 
they  covet  is  the  property  of  a rebel.  These  remarks,  general,  are  not 
personal  to  you,  and  are  intended  only  for  those  to  whom  they  truly 
I send  you  a letter  which  has  been  handed  me  mentioning  some 
instances  where  private  property  has  been  taken  in  Few  Berne.* 

I am,  general,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

S.  G.  FEEFCH, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

^ . Richmond,  Ya.,  February  19,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  A.  Pryor  : 

Ascertain  as  early  and  as  far  as  possible  the  proposed  movements  of 
the  enemy  at  Fewport  Fews  and  Suffolk.  Is  there  reason  to  believe 
they  are  intended  for  Forth  or  South  Carolina  ? 


J.  A.  SEDDOF, 
Secretary  of  War. 

* Not  found. 


886 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 

Biascund  Bridge,  February  19,  1863—8  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Commanding : 

General:-  Lieutenant  Harman  [Company  B,  Fif^-ninth  Wrg-inia 
Infantrvl  bas  iust  returned  from  his  expedition  to  Burwell  s Bay,  in 
Isle  of  Wight  County.  Dense  fogs  prevented  his  seeing  across  the 
river  to  Newport  NeWs,  but  baviug  obtpiued  what  he  regards  as  en^ 
tirelv  satisfactory  and  reliable  inforinatiou  he  did  not  wai^t  for  the 
weather  to  clear,  but  returned  at  once  to 

tain  Drummond,  of  Norfolk,  and  Irom  Captain  Nelson,  of  Isle  of  Wight, 
he  learned  that  the  enemy  have  landed  a considerable  force  at  Newpo  t 
News  under  the  command  of  General  Burnside.  The  Galena,  the  Min- 
nesota, two  monitor  boats,  and  ten  gunboats  are  Jyiog  oft  Newport 
News.  The  troops  were  landed  from  large  side-wheel  bay  steamers, 
each  with  a sloop  in  tow.  Up  to  the  time  that  the  fog  prevented  fur- 
tter  observation  of  their  movements  ten  of  these  steamers  came  up 
dailv  commencing  on  the  12th  instant.  As  soon  as  the  troops  disem- 
barked the  steamers  returned  to  Norfolk  for  coal,  and  having  supplie 
themselves  put  back  toward  the  Potomac.  No 

been  sent  to  Norfolk  or  Suffolk.  It  is  generally  understood  that  Bie 
expedition  consists  of  Franklin’s  corps  and  is  ‘‘ff '“®‘^ 

Lieutenant  Harman  returns  to-morrow  and  will  report  any  further 

movements.  , x l 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ tABB 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


Yadkinville,  N.  C.,  February  19,  1863. 

Dear  Sib:  We  have  had  a startling  occurrence  in  this  county,  of 
which  you  have  doubtless  heard  before  this  time^,  which  has  srcatlj  . ^ 
asTOrated  every  intelligent  and  good  citizen  of  the  county.  I f"® 
murder  of  two  of  our  best  citizens,  magi^ratos  of  the  county,  by  a band 
of  deserters  and  fugitive  conscripts.  The  circumstances  are  these^ 
There  has  been  a strong  feeling  against  the  *„f 

nninformed  part  of  the  citizens  here  ever  since  its  passage.  , ? 

that  class  swore  that  they  would  die  at  home  before  lOO^in^this 

off  and  when  the  time  came  for  them  to  go  perhaps  nearly  , 

county  took  to  the  woods,  lying  out  day  and  night 
although  the  militia  ofOcers  exerted  themselves  ^reat  zeal,  > et  th^ 
skulkers  have  always  had  many  more  active 

could  always  get  timely  information  of  every  movement  to  arrest  tnero 
and  so  avoid  U.  The  militia  officers  have  been  able  to  arrest  very 
of  them.  This  state  of  affairs  has  encouraged  the  ^ 

armvTrom  this  county  to  desert  and  come  home,  until,  emboldened  by 
their  numbers  and  the  bad  success  of  the  militia  officers  ^ 

them,  they  have  armed  themselves,  procured 
defied  the  law.  They  have  even  sent  menacing  messages  to 
officers,  threatening  death  to  the  most  obnoximis  of  them  an  a 
sist  them.  Last  Thursday  12  of  the  militia  officers  came  on  16  of  these 
desperadoes  in  a school-house  about  4 miles  from  this  town,  ^ 

f Pd  am I r^^^^  tor  the  fight.  The  firing  immediately  commenced ; wb  ch 
sSl’  fir^S  if  i»tively  certain^  but  from  the  best  m form 
can  get  I believe  it  was  those  in  the  ^^^booLhouse.  The>  fiiu  My  ^ 
leaving  2 of  their  number  dead  and  carrying  oft  2 wounded,  att 
f f Ihe  officers.  In  the  school-house  were  found  cartridges  of  the  most 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  887 

deadly  and  murderous  quality,  made  of  home-made  powder  (one  of  the 
men  known  to  have  been  among  them  has  been  engaged  in  making 
powder).  Four  of  the  conscripts  who  were  in  the  fighhhave  since  come 
in  and  surrendered  and  are  now  in  jail  here,  but  the  leaders  and  the 
most  guilty  of  them  are  still  at  large  5 and  the  section  of  the  country  in 
which  they  lurk  is  so  disloyal  (1  grieve  to  say  it),  and  the  people  so 
readily  conceal  the  murderers  and  convey  intelligence  to  them,  that  it 
will  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  find  them,  even  if  they  do  not  draw  to- 
gether a larger  force  than  they  have  yet  had  and  again  give  battle  to 
the  sheriff  and  his  posse.  But  my  principal  object  in  writing  this  let- 
ter is  to  ask  you  what  we  shall  do  with  those  four  murderers  we  have  and 
the  others  if  we  get  them  ? Suppose  we  try  them  for  murder,  do  you  not 
believe  that  our  supreme  court  will  decide  the  conscription  act  uncon- 
stitutional and  thus  leave  these  men  justified  in  resisting  its  execution? 
I believe  they  will,  and  tremble  to  think  of  the  consequences  of  such  a 
blow  upon  the  cause  of  our  independence.  It  would  demoralize  our 
army  in  the  field  and  bring  first  the  horrors  of  civil  war  to  our  own 
doors  and  then  perhaps  subjugation  to  the  enemy,  which  no  honorable 
man  ought  to  want  to  survive.  I think  I know  Judge  Pearson’s  opin- 
ion on  the  conscription  act,  and  1 believe  that  he  is  just  itching  to  pro- 
nounce it  unconstitutional.  Suppose  these  men  get  out  a writ  of  habeas 
corpus  and  have  it  returned  before  him  and  he  releases  them  (which  he 
would  be  bound  to  do  if  he  holds  that  they  were  only  resisting  the  exe- 
cution of  an  unconstitutional  law  with  such  force  as  was  necessary  to 
repel  force  from  their  persons),  do  you  not  believe  it  would  produce 
a mutiny  in  the  army  of  the  Eappahannock  5 and  if  it  did  not,  how 
would  you  get  another  conscript  to  the  field  or  keep  those  there  who 
have  already  gone,  or  who  could  keep  the  loyal  and  indignant  citizens 
at  home  from  executing  vengeance  on  these  infamous  murderers  and 
traitors  to  the  country?  These  are  considerations  which  alarm  me,  and 
I would  like  to  know  what  you  think  of  them.  Please  write  to  me,  and 
I will  receive  your  opinion  as  confidentially  as  you  may  desire  and  ask. 
Could  these  men,  and  ought  they  if  they  could,  be  turned  over  to  the 
Confederate  courts  to  be  tried  for  treason?  Could  the  military  author- 
ities, and  ought  they  to,  deal  with  them?  I hope  you  know  I am  con- 
servative and  for  the  rights  of  the  citizens  and  the  States,  but  for  my 
country  always,  and  for  independence  at  all  hazards. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

E.  F.  AEMFIELD. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N,  (7.,  February  20,  1863. 
Governor  Yance,  Raleigh^  Y.  0.  .* 

I received  your  orders  of  the  9th  instant  directing  the  militia  officers 
in  Eobeson,  Cumberland,  and  Eichmond  to  turn  over  all  able-bodied  free 
negroes  between  eighteen  and  forty-five.  None  such  have  yet  arrived. 
Eobeson  and  Cumberland  have  heretofore  done  well  and  supplied  much 
free  and  slave  labor.  They  have  certainly  done  their  share.  A vast 
deal  of  work  is  still  required  here,  and  the  labor  of  400  to  500  negroes 
is  essential  to  complete  our  works  as  rapidly  as  possible.  I respectfully 
request  that  you  provide  me  with  this  labor  as  soon  as  possible.  Every 
advantage  must  be  taken  of  the  enemy’s  movements  in  other  directions 
to  strengthen  this  place. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General, 


888 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  February  20,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  A.  P.  Hill, 

{Care  of  General  E.  F.  Lee :) 

General:  In  reply  to  yours  of  the  7th  instant,  inquiring  as  to  the 
source  from  whence  the  commissions  for  officers  of  the  North  Carolina 
State  troops  should  issue,  I am  directed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  say 
that  the  question  is  before  the  Attorney-General  of  the  Confederate 
States  for  decision.  In  the  mean  time  the  right  to  commission  appears 
in  several  instances  to  have  been  conceded  to  the  Governor  of  North 
Carolina.  There  is  not  much  doubt  that  the  decision  of  the  Attorney- 
General  will  be  that  the  Governor  has  the  right  to  appoint,  as  he  has  so 
decided  in  similar  cases  in  other  States. 

Very  truly,  &c., 

E.  A.  PALFEEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  Troops,  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  February 
20,  1863  {headquartei's  Goldsborough,  N.  C.). 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

00 

(h 

O 

m 

o 

§ 

115 

136 

150 

1,602 
2,570 
2,  553 

1,946 
2, 851 
2,904 

2,  58» 
3, 70l» 
4,  022 

270 

194 

40 

51 

13 

4.  879 

6.  028 

8,  257 
5,  597 
794 
1, 121 
444 

3,375  4,081 

541  710 

778  984 

386  ! 379 

of  QTlfl  TIAQT'  SlHAT*rtTl  fl  

969 

16,634  j 19,883 

26, 533 

Franklin,  February  21,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Troops  still  lauding  at  Newport  News.  Impression  in  Norfolk  that 
30,000  arrived,  and  that  movement  against  Eichmoud.  All  communi- 
cations with  Suffolk  cut  off’  evidently  to  conceal  some  movement.  Large 
numbers  of  horses  landed  at  Newport  News  and  wagon  trains  moving 
some  miles  up  the  river. 

Gold  in  New  York  161  and  rising. 

Bill  to  employ  privateers  passed  United  States  Senate.  JMcDougall 
said  war  with  France  before  fall. 

I^GSpGCtl  Lilly  5 

ROGER  A.  PRYOR, 
Brigadier- Getieral,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  889 

Franklin,  February  21,  1863. 

Hod.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Two  persons,  perfectly  reliable,  whom  I sent  to  Suffolk  Monday  and 
who  remained  there  several  days,  satisfy  me  that  former  reports  exag- 
gerated the  re-enforcements  in  Suffolk.  The  whole  force  there  does  not 
exceed  15,000.  They  are  enrolling  and  organizing  the  negroes. 

Nothing  is  revealed  of  the  enemy’s  designs  at  Newport  News.  The 
force  visible  from  this  side  is  not  very  large,  apparently  15,000  or  20,000. 
Citizens  say  a portion  negro  recruits. 

EGGEE  A.  PEYOE, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  44.  j Richmond^  Fu.,  February  21,  1863. 

# * # * # # * 

XXI.  Maj.  Gen.  G.  E.  Pickett,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  will  report  without  delay  to  Lieut.  Gen.  J.  Longstreet,  command- 
ing Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 

* * # * * # * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General, 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Va.,  February  22,  1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Commanding,  Ac. : 

General  : I inclose  a telegram*  from  General  Pryor,  which  gives  the 
latest  intelligence  I have  of  the  numbers  of  the  enemy  concentrating  at 
Newport  News  and  Suffolk.  It  agrees  substantially  with  the  reports  I 
have  from  scouts  sent  to  the  vicinity  of  Old  Point  by  General  Elzey 
and  from  an  intelligent  officer  just  exchanged,  who  had  been  allowed 
to  recover  from  his  wounds,  received  at  Sharpsburg,  in  Baltimore, 
and  on  his  return  was  detained  some  days  at  Fort  Monroe.  He  says 
as  far  as  he  could  collect  about  25,000  m'en  had  been  sent  to  Newport 
News,  and  in  addition  some  2,000  or  3,000  were  sent  up  the  York  Eiver 
to  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  Point.  They  gave  out  (it  is  said  by  our 
scouts,  not  by  the  officer)  that  they  are  going  to  Charleston  and  expect 
to  be  commanded  by  General  Burnside.  The  officer  could  learn  noth- 
ing of  their  designs,  but  from  unmistakable  manifestations  is  satisfied 
great  dissatisfaction  and  demoralization  prevail  and  that  they  extend 
to  many  officers  as  well  as  to  the  men.  He  represents  the  feeling  of  our 
friends  in  Maryland  as  increasing  in  confidence  and  those  of  the  Unionists 
as  sinking  into  despondency.  The  prospects  North  are  certainly  en- 
couraging and  may  lead  to  decisive  results  unless  we  sustain  several 
reverses  in  the  next  few  months.  I have  no  late  intelligence  of  move- 
ments from  Wilmington  or  Charleston.  I still  expect  an  attack  in  great 
force  on  Charleston,  but  cannot  understand  the  causes  of  delay  in  mak- 
ing it.  Some  controversy  about  rank  between  the  commanders  may 


Probably  that  of  February  21. 


«90 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


perhaps  afford  the  explanation ; but  I think  it  more  likely  that  it  has 
resulted  from  the  dissatisfation  of  the  troops  recently  sent  South  at 
finding  themselves  associated  with  negro  regiments.  A brief  period 
must,  however,  afford  a solution.  Pickett’s  and  Hood’s  divisions  have 
passed  through,  and  their  general  appearance,  spirit,  and  cheerfulness 
afforded  great  satisfaction.  General  Longstreet  is  here,  and  under  his 
able  guidance  of  such  troops  no  one  entertains  a doubt  as  to  the  entire 
safety  of  the  capital. 

With  great  esteem,  cordially,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War, 


Goldsborough,  K.  0.,  February  23,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  G.  S.  A. : 

Will  you  permit  me  to  give  a frank  statement  of  the  condition  of 
things  in  this  district  and  hear  a few  suggestions  made  with  the  utmost 
deference  Wilmington  is  the  point  of  great  importance,  and  Fort 
Caswell,  a small,  antiquated  structure,  is  the  key  to  the  position.  It  is 
of  brick,  without  casemates,  and  has  in  its  limited  area  a large  brick 
building  covered  with  slate.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  a concentrated  fire 
would  be  most  murderous  to  the  garrison.  No  work  seems  to  have  been 
done  there  until  the  arrival  of  General  Whiting.  He  has  casemated 
the  guns  bearing  on  the  sea  and  has  just  begun  casemating  those  on 
the  face  bearing  on  the  inner  channel.  He  is  also  raising  the  parapet 
on  the  harbor  front  so  that  an  iron-clad,  having  run  into  the  channel, 
cannot  have  a reverse  fire  on  the  water  front.  This  work  will  be  com- 
pleted in  two  or  three  weeks.  Should  an  attack  be  made  earlier  the 
fort  must  fall,  or  at  least  the  destruction  of  life  would  be  very  great  in 
it.  But  even  when  the  work  is  done  the  caliber  of  the  guns  is  so  light 
that  vessels  might  run  past  with  but  little  risk.  I most  earnestly  ask 
to  be  furnished  with  an  8-inch,  a 10-inch,  and  an  11-inch  gun.  The 
works  around  Wilmington  to  resist  a land  attack  are  too  slight.  It  is 
difficult  to  imagine  what  the  troops  employed  themselves  at  for  the  last 
two  .years.  I feel  concerned  about  Wilmington.  The  Yankees  seem  to 
have  become  alarmed  at  the  magnitude  of  the  task  before  them  at 
Charleston  and  may  first  try  their  hand  at  Wilmington  by  way  of  ea- 
<30uraging  their  troops,  just  as  they  captured  Arkansas  Post  to  get  up 
heart  for  Vicksburg ; or  it  may  be  that  the.y  will  attack  Wilmington 
after  the  fall  of  Charleston  or  the  failure  there.  In  the  first  case,  in- 
spirited by  success,  the  attack  would  be  with  enthusiasm  ; in  the  latter 
>case  it  would  be  to  cover  the  mortification  of  failure  and  disgrace.  In 
either  event  of  success  or  reverse  at  Charleston  we  may  confidently  ex- 
pect a fight  at  Wilmington ; and  as  the  enemy  believe  Wilmington  to 
be  the  weakest  of  the  three  points  threatened  he  may  begin  with  it  in 
order  to  remove  the  demoralization  of  the  troops.  I fear  that  we  can- 
not make  a successful  resistance  without  more  guns  of  heavy  caliber. 
As  soon  as  the  movement  begins  at  Charleston  I want  to  threaten  New 
Berne,  Washington,  and  Plymouth,  and  possibly  Morehead  City,  in 
order  to  keep  Hunter  from  getting  re-enforcements  from  this  State; 
but  I cannot  make  the  proposed  expeditions  without  at  least  one  more 
brigade.  The  works  at  Kinston  are  unfortunately  on  the  wrong  side  of 
the  river,  and  can  onl}^  be  held  by  a brigade.  Gohlsborough  needs  fully 
a brigade  for  its  protection,  as  it  has  no  works  at  all  except  a bridge- 


CHAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  891 

bead.  I have  now  in  the  department  only  the  infantry  brigades  of 
Evans,  Pettigrew,  and  Daniel,  and  the  wonderfully  inefQcient  brigade 
■of  Robertson.  With  one  more  brigade  I could  harass  the  enemy,  de- 
tain his  troops  in  this  State,  possibly  force  him  to  send  others  here ; 
could  bring  out  a vast  quantity  of  bacon,  pork,  and  corn  from  the  coun- 
ties on  the  coast,  and  could  increase  our  ranks  by  numerous  conscripts. 
The  department  commissary — an  energetic  and  efficient  officer — tells 
me  that  the  western  part  of  the  State  is  exhausted,  and  unless  he  can 
draw  from  the  east  he  will  soon  be  unable  to  supply  the  troops.  . There 
are  millions  of  pounds  of  bacon  in  Hyde  and  Tyrrell  which  can  be 
brought  out  with  a j)roper  force,  and  the  question  of  supply  is  getting 
to  be  a very  alarming  one.  The  troops  on  the  Rap])ahannock  must  be 
inactive  for  some  time  and  could  be  well  employed  here.  There  is  still 
another  view  of  it,  which  is  important  in  its  future  bearing : The  plant- 
ers on  the  Neuse,  Tar,  and  Roanoke  have  sent  large  numbers  of  negroes 
into  the  interior  and  do  not  propose  to  raise  a crop  for  another  year. 
The  Confederacy  cannot  afford  to  lose  the  planting  interest,  and  a bri- 
gade judiciously  disposed  would  afford  such  protection  as  is  necessary 
to  secure  confidence  and  encourage  the  farmers  to  plant.  I learn  that 
Hampton  is  now  idle  at  Gordousville,  recruitiug  his  horses.  He  would 
find  more  forage  in  Beaufort,  Washington,  and  Hyde  than  in  the  whole 
of  Virginia,  and  he  would  protect  the  planting  interest.  Such  a man 
as  Hampton  is  much  needed  here ; but  if  a brigade  is  needed  at  Gor- 
donsville  could  not  Robertson,  with  his  rangers,  who  are  not  partisans, 
be  swapped  for  Hami)ton  ? If  the  latter  were  in  this  State  the  Yan- 
kees would  hug  their  gunboats  everywhere.  To  sum  up  the  whole  mat- 
ter : We  need  more  heavy  guns  at  Wilmington ; we  need  another  bri- 
gade of  infantry  to  harass  the  Yankees,  to  detain  their  troops  from 
Charleston,  to  protect  the  planting  interest  in  the  rich  counties  of  the 
east,  and  to  bring  out  supplies  and  conscripts ; we  need  an  efficient 
brigade  of  cavalry  to  keep  the  Yankees  close  shut  up  in  their  fortifica- 
tions. 

1 hope  that  you  have  had  the  patience  to  read  this  long  letter,  and 
that  the  suggestions  will  receive  your  consideration.  Whatever  weight 
you  may  attach  to  them  I am  so  impressed  with  them  myself  that  I 
could  not  feel  satisfied  until  I had  communicated  them. 

With  great  respect, 

D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 

[Indorsements.] 

February  27, 1863. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  President. 

These  views  strike  me  as  sensible  and  timely.  Would  it  not  be  well 
to  order  another  brigade?  Perhaps  with  General  LongstreeFs  force 
where  it  now  is  General  Colston’s  brigade  miglit  be  spared  from  Peters- 
burg. 

J.  A.  S., 
Secretary  of  War. 

The  brigade  now  being  removed  from  Goldsborough  to  a point  on  the 
railroad  from  Petersburg  to  Sufiblk  would,  with  the  least  derangement 
to  organization,  serve  the  first  purpose.  I proposed  some  time  since  the 
l)roposed  disposition  of  Hampton’s  brigade  to  General  Lee,  but  he  dis- 
sented. It  may  be  that  the  views  of  General  Hill  will  prevail  over  his 
objections.  It  is  i>roper  to  add  that  that  brigade  is  idle  because  the 


892 


NOKTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


liorses  are  unfit  for  immediate  service.  I have  entertained  the  opinion 
expressed  as  to  an  attack  on  Wilmington,  and  therefore  my  recommen- 
dation for  an  increase  of  heavy  guns,  especially  at  Fort  Fisher.  I am 
glad  to  see  that  General  HilFs  attention  is  directed  to  xxrocuring  supplies 
from  Eastern  North  Carolina  and  to  promoting  the  cultivation  of  the  next 
crop.  His  views  are  generally  approved,  and  he  should  by  all  practi- 
cable means  be  aided  and  encouraged  to  execute  them.  General  Long- 
street  can  take  care  of  the  routes  to  and  from  Suffolk  by  detachments 
from  his  command. 

J.  D. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  February  23,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  Bichmondj  Ya. : 

Sir  : The  inadequacy  of  the  armament  for  the  defense  of  this  impor- 
tant district  has  been  frequently  set  forth.  The  urgent  necessities  of 
other  positions  threatened  by  the  enemy  have  divided  many  of  the  req- 
uisitions intended  for  this  place,  and  I am  well  aware  of  the  difficulty 
of  procuring  in  the  present  state  of  our  resources  a sufficiency  of  guns 
of  heavy  caliber  5 but  in  the  mean  time  can  you  not  give  me  a battery  of 
30  or  20  pounder  Parrotts  for  the  river  defenses'?  They  would  be  of 
great  service  here,  and  their  mobility  would  add  to  their  efficiency.  I 
beg  also  that,  as  soon  as  possible,  three  10-inch  columbiads  and  three 
7-inch  rifles  may  be  sent  me.  These  guns  are  absolutely  necessary  to 
defend  the  outer  harbor,  the  point  of  all  others  we  must  endeavor  to 
keep. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


[February  24,  1863. — For  D.  H.  Hill  to  Beauregard,  and  reply  of 
March  1,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XIV,  pp.  789,  798.] 


Kent  Court-House, 

February  24,  1863. 

Capt.  J.  H.  Pearce, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain:  I deem  it  proper  to  report  that  a deserter  from  the  Yankee 
forces,  who  has  just  been  sent  in  by  Captain  Hill,  reports  that  there  are 
some  6,000  troops  at  Yorktown  and  that  fresh  troops  are  constantly 
being  landed  there.  This  deserter  seems  to  have  passed  the  cavalry 
pickets  and  fallen  in  with  some  of  Captain  Hill’s  men.  It  is  proper  for 
me  also  to  report  that  there  are  four  cases  of  small  pox  in  Captain  Hill’s 
companv,  who  have  been  idaced  in  hospital  near  Barhamsville. 

K.  T.  W.  DUKE, 

Colonel. 


[Indorsement.] 


Kespectfully  forwarded  to  Maj.  Gen.  A.  Elzey  for  his  information. 

HENBY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  893 

Asheville,  N".  0.,  February  24,  1863. 

[Hon.  Zebulon  B.  Yance:] 

Governor  : In  obedience  to  your  directions  so  to  do,  I have  made 
inquiries  and  gathered  facts  such  as  I could  in  reference  to  the  shooting 
of  certain  prisoners  in  Laurel  Creek,  in  Madison  County.  I have  to 
report  to  you  that  I learned  that  the  militia  troops  had  nothing  to  do 
with  what  was  done  in  Laurel.  Thirteen  prisoners,  at  least,  were  killed 
by  order  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Keith.  Most  of  them  were  taken  at  their 
homes,  and  none  of  them  made  resistance  when  taken ; perhaps  some 
of  them  ran.  After  they  were  taken  prisoners  the  soldiers  took  them 
off  to  a secluded  place,  made  them  kneel  down,  and  shot  them.  They 
were  buried  in  a trench  dug  for  the  purpose.  Some  two  weeks  since 
their  bodies  were  removed  to  a grave-yard.  I learned  that  probably  8 
of  the  13  killed  were  not  in  the  company  that  robbed  Marshall  and  other 
places.  I suppose  they  were  shot  on  suspicion.  1 cannot  learn  the 
names  of  the  soldiers  who  shot  them.  Some  of  them  shrank  from  the 
barbarous  and  brutal  transaction  at  first,  but  were  compelled  to  act. 
This  is  a list  of  the  names  of  those  killed:  Elison  King  (desperate  man); 
Jo  Woods  (desperate  man);  Will  Shelton,  twenty  years  old  (of  Pifus); 
Aronnata  Shelton,  fourteen  years  old  (was  not  at  Marshall);  James 
Shelton  (old  Jim),  about  fifty-six  years  old ; James  Shelton,  jr.,  seven- 
teen years  old;  JDavid  Shelton,  thirteen  years  old  (was  not  in  the  raid); 
James  Madcap,  forty  years  old ; Eod  Shelton  (Stob  Eod) ; David  Shelton 
(brother  of  Stob  Eod) ; Joseph  Cleandon,  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  old ; 
Helen  Moore,  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  old ; Wade  Moore,  twenty  or 
twenty -five  years  old.  It  is  said  that  those  whose  names  I have  so 
marked  did  not  go  to  Marshall.  The  prisoners  were  captured  on  one 
Friday  and  killed  the  next  Monday.  Several  women  were  severely 
^vhipped  and  ropes  were  tied  around  their  necks.  It  is  said  Col.  L.  M. 
Allen  was  not  in  command  and  that  Keith  commanded.  Four  pris- 
oners are  now  in  jail,  sent  here,  as  I learned,  by  order  of  General  Davis. 
These  are  Sipus  Shelton,  Isaac  Shelton,  William  Morton,  and  David 
Shelton,  son  of  Sipus.  I think  the  facte  stated  are  about  true.  One 
thiog  is  certain,  13  prisoners  were  shot  without  trial  or  any  hearing 
whatever  and  in  the  most  cruel  manner.  I have  no  means  of  comi^ell- 
ing  witnesses  to  disclose  facts  to  me,  and  I do  not  know  that  I shall  be 
able  to  make  a fuller  report  to  Your  Excellency  at  any  early  day.  I 
hope  these  facts  will  enable  you  to  take  such  steps  as  will  result  in  a 
more  satisfactory  development  of  the  true  state  of  the  matter. 

I am,  &c.,  yours,  truly, 

A.  S.  MEEEIMOK. 


Goldsborough,  K.  C.,  February  25,  1863. 

[General  Whiting:] 

General:  I have  written  to  the  Secretary  of  War  in  reference  to 
heavier  armament  at  Wilmington.  A letter  from  you  to  me  on  the  same 
subject,  to  be  forwarded  to  him,  might  be  of  service.  In  the  mean  time 
it  seems  to  me  that  your  channel  front  at  Caswell  ought  to  be  strength- 
ened by  the  columbiads  near  town.  The  exterior  works  should  first  be 
cared  for.  Eansom’s  men  ought  to  be  employed  in  thickening  the  cur- 
tains and  completing  the  circle  around  town.  Evans,  too,  should  be  at 
work  at  Sudberry  in  making  that  position  impregnable.  I do  not  feel 
satisfied  that  the  Yankees  will  not  return  to  Wilmington.  They  seem 
to  be  demoralized  at  Charleston,  and  may  try  the  smaller  job  by  way  of 


894  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

encouraging  their  men,  just  as  they  reduced  Arkansas  Post  to  get  up 
heart  for  Vicksburg.  At  any  rate,  we  ought  to  spare  no  effort  and  lose^ 
no  time  in  getting  ready.  I have  referred  the  matter  of  Cogdelfs  com- 
pany to  General  Daniel. 

With  great  respect, 

D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


Headquarters, 

Goldsborough,  A.  C.,  February  25,  1863. 

The  undersigned  has  been  placed  in  charge  of  the  troops  in  North 
Carolina.  In  assuming  command  he  would  address  a few  words  of  ex- 
hortation to  his  forces : 

Soldiers ! Your  brutal  and  malignant  enemy  is  putting  forth  efforts* 
unexampled  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Having  failed  to  subjugate- 
you,  he  is  maddened  with  the  thirst  for  vengeance,  and  is  pushing  for- 
ward his  foreign  mercenaries  to  plunder  your  property  and  lay  waste 
your  homes.  But  his  marauding  hosts  have  been  so  often  beaten  and 
baffled  that  they  are  now  discouraged  and  demoralized.  Should  you  be 
able  to  check  them  everywhere  for  the  next  sixty  days  the  300,000  whose 
time  expires  in  May  will  not  re-enlist,  and  the  war  will  end  before  July. 
Should  the  scoundrels,  however,  gain  a single  substantial  success  at  any 
one  point  the  war  will  be  prolonged  during  the  entire  administration 
of  Lincoln.  It  becomes  a solemn  duty  then  to  labor  and  fight  during 
the  next  two  months  as  we  have  never  done  before.  We  must  make 
the  war  unpopular  with  the  mercenary  vandals  of  the  North  by  harass- 
ing and  annoying  them.  We  must  cut  down  to  6 feet  by  2 the  dimen- 
sions of  the  farms  which  these  plunderers  propose  to  appropriate.  You 
will  have  to  endure  more  hardships  and  to  fight  more  desperate  battles 
than  you  would  have  done  were  your  ranks  properly  filled.  Our  cities,, 
towns,  and  villages  are  full  of  young  and  able-bodied  skulkers,  wear- 
ing the  semblance  of  men,  who  have  dodged  from  the  battle-field  under 
the  provisions  of  the  exemption  bill.  The  scorn  of  the  fair  sex  and  the- 
contempt  of  all  honorable  men  have  not  been  able  to  drive  these  cow- 
ardly miscreants  into  the  ranks,  so  long  as  they  cau  fatten  upon  the 
miseries  of  the  country  and  shelter  their  worthless  carcasses  from  Yan- 
kee bullets  5 but  they  are  insensible  to  shame.  But  a day  of  retribu- 
tion awaits  these  abortions  of  humanity.  Their  own  descendants* 
will  execrate  their  memory  when  the  finger  of  scorn  is  pointed  and  the 
taunt  is  uttered,  He  is  the  son,  or  grandson,  or  great-grandson  of  an 
exempt  and  extortioner.’^  Do  your  full  duty,  soldiers,  and  leave  these 
poltroons  and  villains  to  the  execration  of  posterity. 

All  commanding  officers  are  hereby  enjoined  to  furnish  the  names  of 
officers  and  men  who  distinguish  themselves  in  pitched  battles  and  skir- 
mishes. Those  so  distinguishing  themselves  will  be  recommended  for 
promotion  and  their  names  published  in  the  principal  papers  of  their 
respective  States. 

The  infantry  have  to  bear  the  brunt  of  every  battle  and  to  endure 
special  hardships  in  every  campaign.  The  post  of  danger  and  of  suffering 
is  the  post  of  honor.  If  our  liberty  be  ever  won  it  will  be  due  mainly 
to  the  indomitable  pluck  and  sturdy  endurance  of  our  heroic  infantry. 

The  Confederate  artillery  has  behaved  most  nobly,  and  the  wonder  is 
that  with  inferior  guns  and  ammunition  it  has  been  able  to  cope  suc- 
cessfully with  the  splendid  armament  of  the  enemy.  It  has  been  a mis- 
take, however,  to  contend  with  the  Yankee  artillery.  Eeserve  your 
fire,  as  at  Fredericksburg,  for  the  masses  of  infantry,  and  do  not  with- 


Chap.XXX.j  correspondence,  etc. CONFEDERATE.  895 

draw  your  guns  just  when  they  are  becoming  effective.  It  is  glorious 
to  lose  guns  by  fighting  them  to  the  last  5 it  is  disgraceful  to  save  them 
by  retiring  early  from  the  fight. 

The  cavalry  constitute  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  army.  The  safety  of 
the  entire  command  depends  upon  their  vigilance  and  the  faithfulness 
of  their  reports.  The  officers  and  men  who  permit  themselves  to  be 
surprised  deserve  to  die,  and  the  commanding  general  will  spare  no 
efforts  to  secure  them  their  deserts.  Almost  equally  criminal  are  the 
scouts  who  through  fright  bring  in  wild  and  sensational  reports.  They 
will  be  court-martialed  for  cowardice.  Many  opportunities  will  be 
afforded  to  the  cavalry  to  harass  the  enemy,  cut  off  his  supplies,  drive 
in  his  pickets,  &c.  Those  who  have  never  been  in  battle  will  thus  be 
enabled  to  enjoy  the  novel  sensation  of  listening  to  the  sound  of  hostile 
shot  and  shell,  and  those  who  have  listened  a great  way  off  will  be 
allowed  to  come  some  miles  nearer,  and  compare  the  sensation  caused 
by  the  distant  cannonade  with  that  produced  by  the  rattle  of  mus- 
ketry. 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major  ~ Qenerah 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh^  A.  (7.,  February  25,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I had  the  honor  some  three  weeks  or  a month  ago  to  address 
you  respectfully,  asking  the  removal  of  a lot  of  broken-down  cavalry 
horses  from  the  northwestern  counties  of  this  State,  of  General  Jenkins^ 
command,  which  were  devouring  the  substance  of  a people  threatened 
with  famine.  I have  not  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a reply  to  that 
letter.  I beg  leave  to  inform  you  that  their  depredations  are  still  con- 
tinued and  that  they  have  become  not  only  a nuisance  but  a terror  to 
the  community,  and  to  inclose  you  a letter*  from  Colonel  Forkner,  of 
Seventy-third  North  Carolina  Militia,  giving  evidence  of  their  behavior. 
With  every  possible  disposition  to  aid  in  the  support  of  the  army,  I 
have  the  strongest  reasons  conceivable — the  existence  of  my  own  peo- 
ple— for  declining  to  permit  those  horses  to  remain  in  that  section  of 
the  State.  When  the  question  of  starvation  is  narrowed  down  to  women 
and  children  on  the  one  side  and  some  worthless  cavalry  horses  on  the 
other  I can  have  no  difficulty  in  making  a choice.  Unless  they  are  re- 
moved soon  I shall  be  under  the  painful  necessity  of  calling  out  the 
militia  of  adjoining  counties  and  driving  them  from  the  State.  I hope, 
however,  to  be  spared  such  a proceeding. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  YANCE. 


Kichmond,  Ya.,  February  25, 1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Petersburg j Ya. : 

You  are,  by  special  orders,  this  day  assigned  to  the  command  of  the 
department  recently  made  vacant  by  the  resignation  of  Maj.  Gen.  G. 
W.  Smith. 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General 
*Not  found. 


896 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Headquarters,  February  26, 1863. 
General  K.  E.  Lee,  Fredericlcshurg^  Va. : 

The  following  is  just  from  General  Pryor : 

Scouts  just  in  report  arrivals  of  transiiorts  daily.  Number  now  estimated  at  50,000. 
Gradually  moving  up  the  river.  Persons  from  Norfolk  report  Hooker  at  Fort  Monroe. 

My  scout  reports  the  force  at  Newport  News  at  40,000  or  50,000,  but 
has  none  of  the  other  items. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieiitenant-  General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  February  26,  1863. 

In  obedience  to  authority  from  the  War  Department  the  undersigned 
hereby  assumes  command  of  this  department.  Department  headquar- 
ters are  for  the  present  established  at  this  point,  to  which  all  reports 
will  be  directed.  The  following-named  officers  are  announced  as  com- 
posing the  general  staff,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly: 
Maj.  G.  M.  Sorrel,  assistant  adjutant  general ; Maj.  Thomas  J.  Goree 
and  Lieut.  E.  W.  Blackwell,  aides-de  camp  ; Majs.  J.  W.  Fairfax  and  O. 
Latrobe,  inspectors-general ; Maj.  S.  P.  Mitchell,  chief  quartermaster; 
Maj.  E.  J.  Moses,  chief  commissary  of  subsistence;  Maj.  Thomas  Wal- 
ton, commissary  of  subsistence ; Lieut.  Col.  P.  T.  Manning,  chief  of 
ordnance ; Surg.  J.  S.  D.  Cullen,  medical  director ; Surg.  E.  Barksdale, 
medical  inspector;  Col.  J.  B.  Walton,  chief  of  artillery;  Capt.  J.  H. 
Manning,  signal  officer. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  V.  G.,  February  27,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldsborough,  N.  €.: 

My  Dear  General:  I have  sent  one  10-inch  columbiad  to  Fort 
Caswell.  I may  also  send  the  one  novr  mounted  at  the  city.  I wrote 
to  the  Secretary  some  days  since  with  regard  to  armament.  They  are 
no  doubt  fully  aware  of  the  necessities  of  this  place,  which  I have  earn- 
estly endeavored  to  set  forth  ever  since  I was  assigned  to  this  command. 
Please  write  to  the  Governor  and  urge  the  speedy  sending  here  of  500 
or  600  negroes.  I have  spoken  and  written  to  him  about  it.  I have 
moved  Evans’  brigade  to  camp  near  Masonborough.  Faison’s  regi- 
ment, of  Eansom’s  [brigade],  occupies  Harrison’s  lines  at  Sudberry’s, 
and  another  regiment  Stevens’  lines  on  northeast.  The  remaining  three 
regiments  are  south  of  the  city,  outside  the  Greenfield  Pond.  I send 
you  a letter*  from  my  man  Sharp,  whom  I keep  in  front  as  my  “cav- 
alry.” It  contains  some  interesting  information.  Evans  had  an  under- 
ground communication  with  New  Berne.  I presume  Daniel  may  have 
the  same.  There  was  a battery  of  four  20-pounder  Parrotts  at  Golds- 
borough, for  which,  or  a similar  one,  I applied.  It  would  make  a for- 
midable addition  to  our  means  of  defense,  especially  on  the  river,  from 
its  mobility.  I do  not  know  whether  you  have  it  now  or  not.  It  was 
General  Smith’s  intention  to  send  it  to  me. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


Not  found. 


CIIAI'.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  897 

Wilmington,  K C.,  February  27, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

^Secretary  of  War,  Eichmo7id,  Va.  : 

{Sir:  I think  it  necessary  in  the  present  aspect  of  matters  on  this 
coast  to  have  another  brigade.  It  should  be  placed  in  Brunswiclv 
County.  If  the  attack  should  be  made  definitely  on  Charleston  it  can 
he  readily  thrown  to  re-enforce  General  Beauregard.  With  it  shouhl 
he  sent  a battery  of  long-range  guns.  The  field  batteries  in  my  (com- 
mand are  very  indifferent,  being  mostly  6-i)ounders,  smooth,  and  12- 
pounder  howitzers.  A cavalry  force  in  Brunswick  would  also  be  ot 
great  service.  It  is  reported  that  the  enemy  make  boat  expeditions 
about  the  inlets  ({Shallotte  and  Little  Kiver),  to  attack  the  steamers 
running  the  blockade.  They  are  armed  witli  the  Dahlgren  boat  how- 
itzer, and  it  is  said  some  of  these  have  captured  the  Y/ave  Queen,  with 
a xevy  valuable  cargo  of  saltjieter  and  powder.  I am  not  certain  of  the 
truth  of  this  for  I do  not  see  how  row-boats  can  take  a steamer  at  sea; 
but  it  may  be  so.  Foster  has  certainly  left  New  Berne  on  his  way  from 
lYashiugton  to  Port  Eoyal.  I have  information  that  he  imiiressed  and 
carried  with  him  all  the  iiilots  he  could  get  in  Beaufort,  N.  0.,  familiar 
with  the  North  Carolina  coast.  This  is  ominous,  and  the  design  may 
be  that,  having  failed  to  surprise  Charleston,  they  may  attempt  this  as 
the  weakest  place,  as  after  their  Vicksburg  failure  they  went  to  Arkan- 
sas Post.  The  moment  any  heavy  guns  can  be  sent  me  I hope  they 
will  be  forwarded  with  dispatch.  My  armament  is  sadly  inadequate. 
Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh j N.  (7.,  February  27,  1863. 
Brigadier-General  Davis,  Knoxville^  Tenn. : 

General  : In  my  last  letter  to  you  I referred  to  a report  that  a number 
of  prisoners  taken  on  Laurel  had  been  shot  in  cold  blood,  and  expressed 
the  hope  it  might  not  prove  true.  I fear,  however,  that  it  is  even  worse 
than  was  first  reported.  I beg  leave  to  ask  your  attention  to  the  copy 
inclosed  of  a part  of  a letter*  from  A.  S.  Merrimon,  esq.,  attorney  for  the 
State  in  that  district,  and  to  respectfully  request  you  to  make  inquiry 
into  the  truth  of  the  statements  within,  with  a view  to  proceedings 
against  the  guilty  parties.  While  expressing  again  my  thanks  for  the 
prompt  aid  rendered  by  your  command  in  quieting  the  troubles  in  that 
region,  I cannot  reconcile  it  to  my  sense  of  duty  to  iiass  by  in  silence 
such  cruel  and  barbarous  conduct  as  is  alleged  to  have  characterized  a 
portion  of  them,  and  more  especially  as  the  officers  mentioned  are  citi- 
zens of  this  State. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department., 

Raleigh^  W.  (7.,  February  28,  1863. 
lion.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : Some  six  months  since  a disturbance  occurred  in  Madison  County, 
North  Carolina,  near  the  Tennessee  border,  by  some  disloyal  persons  cap- 

* See  p.  881 ; see  also  p.  893. 

57  R R — VOL  XVIII 


898 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


turing  the  little  county  town  and  seizing  a lot  of  salt  and  other  plunder. 
An  armed  force  was  promptly  sent  from  Knoxville,  under  command  of 
General  Davis,  to  suppress  the  insurrection,  which  was  accomplished 
before  the  local  militia  could  get  there,  though  ordered  out  immediately. 
But  in  doing  so  a degree  of  cruelty  and  barbarity  was  displayed,  shock- 
ing and  outrageous  in  the  extreme,  on  the  part  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Keith, 
Sixty-fourth  Kortii  Carolina  Troops,  who  seems  to  have  been  in  com- 
mand, and  to  have  acted  in  this  respect  without  orders  from  his  superiors, 
so  far  as  I can  learn.  I beg  leave  to  ask  you  to  read  the  inclosed  letter* 
(copy)  from  A.  S.  Merrimon,  State’s  attorney  for  that  judicial  district, 
which  you  will  see  discloses  a scene  of  horror  disgraceful  to  civilization. 
1 desire  you  to  have  proceedings  instituted  at  once  against  this  officer, 
who,  if  the  half  be  true,  is  a disgrace  to  the  service  and  to  Korth  Caro- 
lina. You  may  depend  upon  the  respectability  and  fairness  of  Mr.  Mer- 
rimon, who  made  an  investigation  officially  by  my  order.  I have  also 
written  General  Davis. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


Headquarters, 

Petersburg^  Vu.,  February  28,  1SG3, 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Goldsboroughy  N.  C. : 

General:  From  the  reports  that  we  have  of  the  enemy’s  strength  at 
and  near  New  Berne  it  would  seem  practicable  for  us  to  concentrate  from 
Wilmington  and  your  forces  and  cut  the  New  Berne  garrison  off  from 
the  sea-coast.  Please  have  this  in  your  mind  and  collect  such  informa- 
tion on  the  subject  as  may  be  useful,  and  at  the  same  time  make  such 
other  arrangements  for  such  an  expedition  as  may  be  necessary,  but  let 
no  one  know  that  you  have  anything  of  the  kind  in  view.  We  should 
make  every  effort  to  get  supplies  from  the  counties  near  the  enemy’s 
position.  I hope  that  you  will  collect  all  information  upon  the  subject 
of  supplies  also.  I hope  to  be  able  to  make  you  a visit  soon,  but  hope 
that  you  will  send  me  all  the  information  in  the  mean  time.  The  cavalry 
was  ordered  to  Bertie  for  the  jiurpose  of  getting  supiilies  as  much  as  for 
any  other  purpose:  If  the  cavalry  is  particularly  important  where  it  is 
it  can  remain  for  the  present.  Pickett’s  and  Hood’s  divisions,  of  my 
corps,  are  here.  The  enemy  is  reported  quite  strong  at  Newport  News, 
but  no  present  indications  of  active  operations. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Fredericksburg j Va.,  February  28, 1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding  Forth  Carolina  Department : 

General:  I have  received  your  letter  of  the  24th  t and  dispatch  of 
25th.t  I have  as  yet  heard  of  but  three  army  corps  of  General  Hooker’s 
army  descending  the  Potomac.  A scout  who  has  been  on  the  river  for 
the  last  ten  days  reports  on  the  26th  that  everything  has  been  quiet  on 


See  p.  893. 


tNot  found, 


CIIAI>,  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC, CONFEDERATE. 


899 


the  Potomac  during  the  past  week^  only  two  or  three  steamers  pass- 
ing up  and  down  during  the  day.  ^^umerous  sail  vessels  with  large 
amount  of  hay  descended.  From  the  number  and  size  of  transports  he 
estimates  that  trom  15,000  to  20,000  troops  have  descended  the  river 
since  the  9th.  The  army  in  front  of  us  is  still  very  strong,  compactly 
located  along  the  railroad  from  Falmouth  to  Aquia,  with  cavalry  on 
either  flank,  extending  from  river  to  river.  It  is  now  so  difficult  to  get 
in  OL  out  of  his  lines  that  I had  to  send  Fitz  Fee’s  cavalry  to  force  an 
entrance.  With  400  men  he  broke  through  5 miles  north  of  Falmouth 
found  them  m strong  force,  fell  upon  their  camps,  and  brought  ofl‘150 
prisoners,  including  5 commissioned  and  10  non-commissioned  officers. 

Major  Moses  took  his  departure  yesterday. 

1 will  give  directions  about  Hood’s  guns,  if  they  have  not  gone. 

Make  them  take  care  of  all  the  horses. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

IF  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  C.,  February  28,  18G3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Eichmond,  Va.  : 

Sir  : The  chief  object  I propose  to  gain  in  mv  application  for  a bat- 
tery of  30-pounder  or  20-pounder  Parrotts  and  for  a brigade  to  occupy 
Brunswick  County  is  to  strengthen  Fort  Caswell,  always  the  weakest 
point  in  the  system  of  defenses  here.  Its  inherent  weakness,  that  is  due 
to  its  construction  and  armament,  I am  endeavoring  to  overcome  bv  in- 
creasing its  defenses  and  its  armament  as  fast  as  our  means  will  permit. 
A memoir  detailing  the  design  and  progress  of  these  works  will  be 
shortly  submitted  for  your  information.  But  its  isolated  position,  cut 
oft  as  it  is  from  relief  from  the  mainland,  renders  necessary  the  establish- 
ment of  interior  positions  to  arrest,  at  any  rate  materially  to  delay,  the 
advance  of  the  enemy  beyond  gaining  an  entrance,  supposing  him  to 
succeed  m reducing  the  fort.  For  this  purpose,  in  addition  to  the  very 
few  guns  I am  able  to  command  for  permanent  location  on  the  Smith ville 
Bluff,  there  are  no  better  means  than  those  proposed— a good  battery  of 
four  or  six  Parrotts,  supported  by  a column  of  troops  able  to  make  a 
formidable  resistance  to  an  attempt  at  lodgment  on  the  main.  Such  an 
attempt  would  undoubtedly  be  the  first  object  of  the  enemy  should  they 
succeed  in  entering  the  outer  harbor.  It  would  furnish  them  with  a 
depot.  They  would  strongly  fortify  it.  It  would  give  them,  a base  for 
future  operations  exceedingly  embarrassing  to  us,  and  would  effectually 
prevent  any  possibility  of  relief  to  Caswell.  The  facility  with  which 
such  a battery  might  be  moved  to  different  points  commanding  the  an- 
chorage or  the  channels,  and  its  Avell-known  effect  upon  steamers  and 
transports  would  give  at  the  smallest  outlay  the  greatest  available  ac- 
cession to  our  strength.  I know  no  position  where  such  a battery  is 
more  needed.  Clothing  that  is  possible  to  procure  should  be  omitted  in 
endeavoring  to  preserve  the  outer  harbor  from  the  enemy.  I have  di- 
rected tlie  construction  of  lines  to  repel  landings  and  cover  these  guns 
m their  field  of  operations,  a work  which  has  heretofore  only  beenpost- 
works  of  perhaps  more  immediate  necessity  and 
paitl,^  from  the  small-pox  pestilence  which  has  raged  in  that  vicinity. 
Ihe  troops  required  are  necessary  in  addition  to  what  I already  have, 


900 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E,  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


my  force  not  been  large  enough  to  divide.  In  this  connection  I refer  to 
my  letters  to  your  predecessor  of  November  last  and  to  my  correspond- 
ence with  Major-General  Smith,  in  which  the  necessity  of  a covering  or 
movable  column  of  troops  is  fully  set  forth.  Will  you  please  to  submit 
these  considerations  to  the  President  I shall  shortly  be  able  to  for- 
ward for  his  information  maps  and  sketches  which  will  show  the  whole 
system  of  defense  for  this  important  post. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters, 

Petersburg,  Va.,  February  28,  18G3. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 


General  : I wrote  several  days  ago  asking  for  generals  of  cavalry. 
General  Kobertson,  now  commanding  the  cavalry  in  this  department, 
was  sent  here  to  organize  and  instruct  it.  He  was  not  deemed  a very 
efficient  officer  in  the  field  and  was  therefore  relieved  from  duty  with 
the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia.  The  cavalry  is  now  considered  in 
proper  condition  for  field  service,  and  could  be  used  to  great  advantage, 
in  proper  hands,  in  getting  supplies  from  North  Carolina  in  and  near 
the  enemy’s  lines.  I write  to  you  upon  the  subject  again,  in  order  that 
the  Department  may  fully  understand  the  importance  of  having  the 
cavalry  in  proper  hands,  and  to  renew  my  recommendation  of  General 
Ransom  for  promotion  to  the  cavalry.  It  may  be  important,  too,  that 
we  should  act  promptly  if  we  hope  to  collect  any  great  quantity  of  the 
supplies  in  Eastern  North  Carolina. 

I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Abstract  from  Field  lictnru  of  Trooi)s  commanded  by  Moj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  for  February 

28,  1863. 


Command. 


F orces  on  Blackwater 

Twenty-ninth  E.c'^iracnt  Virginia  Volunteers 

iloseley’.s  artillery  battalion 

Ijtadlord’s  battery 

Sturdivant’s  battery 

Confederate  Guard 

Hargrove  Blues 

Moisc’s  cavalry  company 

Signal  Corps 

Camp  paroled  i)risouers 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  incsent. 

[ Aggregate  iweseut 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

318 

4,  823 

5,  904 

8,123 

36 

604 

(542 

862 

8 

140 

160 

132 

3 

75 

86 

92 

3 

74 

86 

100 

3 

63 

68 

96 

1 3 

96 

105 

123 

! 2 

23 

28 

29 

4 

124 

1.33 

140 

! 14 

152 

173 

216 

394 

6, 174 

7,  385 

9, 963 

CHAP.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  901 


Ahairact  from  Heport  of  the  Troops  of  the  District  of  tJte  Cape  Fear,  commanded  hy  Brig. 
Gen.  TV.  H.  C.  TVhiting,  for  Fel)ruary,  18G3. 


Command. 


Brigadier-General  Evans’  brigade 

Brigadier-General  Ransom’s  brigade 

1’  orts  Caswell,  Eisber,  J ohnson,  and  Saint  Philip  (twenty-one 
companies). 

City  and  river  defenses  (one  battalion  and  three  companies).. 

Three  nnattached  companies 

Thii  d Battalion  Xorth  (Carolina  Artillery 

Four  1 igbt  batteries 

T h]  ee  (Companies  of  cavalry ^ 

Signal  Corps 

Bridge  guard **/.'.*.  T.  ^ 1 


Grand  total. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

OflScers. 

i 

Men. 

i 

138 

1.  743 

1,  8.53 

2,  078 

2,  887 

1G4 

2,  6.56 

2,  673 

2,  987 

3,  825 

52 

1, 153 

1,426 

1,  718 

1,  925 

22 

402 

446 

538 

625 

10 

130 

146 

170 

208 

n 

194 

205 

234 

267 

16 

441 

443 

479 

.538 

5 

180 

181 

206 

278 

1 

2>2 

22 

23 

23 

1 

24 

24 

27 

31 

420 

6,  945 

7,419 

8,  460 

10, 607 

Abstract  from  Field  Beiurn  of  Troops,  Maj.  Gen.  A.  Elzey  commanding,  for  March  1,  1863 
(headqnarters  Bichmond,  Fa.). 


Command. 


Brig.  Gen.  PC.  A.  Wise 

Col.  Thomas  S.  Rhett 

Col.  Jack  Brown 

Col.  T.  J.  Page 

Capt.  S.  S.  Lee,  C.  S.  Xavy, 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total  pres- 
ent. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

128 

2,  029 

2,182 

2,  519 

3,  405 

78 

1,451 

1,585 

1,868 

2,168 

31 

714 

766 

926 

1, 136 

22 

320 

384 

433 

520 

13 

3P. 

367 

405 

434 

272 

4,  825 

5,  284 

6,151 

7,  663 

Abstract  from  Field  Beiurn  of  the  Dejjartment  of  North  Carolina,  commanded  bn  Mcj.  Gen. 
1).  U.  Hill,  for  March  1,  1863. 


Command. 


luting’s  command  [not  reported]. 

Pettigrew’s  brigade 

Raniel’s  brigade 

Reserve  Artillery 

Hamilton,  X.  C.'. 

Weldon,  X.  C 

(loldsborongh,  X.  C ....  1 " 

Robertson’s  cavalry  brigade 

Grand  total. 


Present  for 
duty. 

a 

rn 

o 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

U 

o 

o 

s 

<0 

cj 

fcC 

9 

So 

fcJO 

169 

3,  008 

3,  582 

4,476 

216 

3,  513 

4,  247 

5,  680 

13 

335 

380 

447 

47 

832 

1,036 

1. 132 

32 

(i53 

879 

1,113 

40 

541 

710 

794 

105 

1,378 

1,703 

2, 177 

622 

10,  320 

12,  537 

i5,  819 

902 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Ya.^  March  1,  18G3. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina: 

Sir  : I regret  to  learn  from  your  letter  of  the  25th  ultimo  that  such  j 
serious  opposition  is  entertained  by  you  to  the  continuancje  of  the  horses 
of  a i)ortion  of  General  Jenkins’  command  in  the  western  counties  of  1 
North  Carolina.  I had  commended  your  previous  letter  to  the  attention  | 
ot  the  general  commanding  that  department  with  the  hope  that  the  evil  | 
complained  of  would  be  inquired  into,  and,  if  found  remediable,  would  ■ 
be  corrected.-  Doubtless  it  has  been  continued  only  from  the  necessity  | 
of  the  case.  The  truth  is,  that  the  large  number  of  cavalry  in  the  mount-  ' 
ainous  regions  of  East  Tennessee  and  Virginia  could  not  be  subsisted  | 
there  during  the  winter,  and  it  was  deemed  imperatively  necessary  that  | 
most  of  the  men  should  be  dismounted  and  the  horses  sent  to  more  dis-  | 
tant  regions,  less  exhausted  by  being  ravaged  or  drained  by  the  strug-  ; 
gling  armies,  for  subsistence  and  preparation  for  the  approaching  cam-  . 
paigu.  It  was  supposed,  and  indeed  strongly  represented,  that  the 
counties  on  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  mountains  in  North  Carolina  would  I 
afford  abundant  suiiplies  and  early  pasturage  for  them,  and  that  benefit  I 
would  result  from  sending  them  there,  not  only  to  the  horses,  but  to  the 
people  around,  in  affording  them  a market  for  their  surplus  grain  and  ' 
forage.  Only  a moderate  number,  however,  were  sent  there,  and  more  i 
were  scattered  about  in  the  various  more  distant  counties  of  Virginia,  ! 
along  the  valley  and  mountainous  districts.  Complaints  similar  to  those  ! 
addressed  to  you  have  come  up  from  various  counties  of  this  State,  where  i 
they  have  been  collected,  for  the  products  of  the  last  season  were  scant 
almost  everywhere,  and  some  irregularities  are  but  too  apt  to  occur  with 
the  rather  irregular  and  partially  disciplined  cavalrymen  sent  with  the 
horses.  But  our  authorities  have  been  content  with  the  effort  to  redress 
them  by  appeal  to  the  officers  or  commanding  generals,  and  no  effort  has 
been  made  or  intimated  of  a purpose  to  expel  them  by  force.  They  are, 
it  will  be  recollected,  not,  as  Your  Excellency  supposes,  broken-down 
horses,  nor  can  they  be  considered  as  Virginia  cavalry,  though  lately  en- 
gaged in  that  State.  They  are  horses  of  the  cavalry  of  the  Confederate 
States,  engaged  for  the  common  defense,  as  well  for  North  Carolina  as 
for  every  other  State,  and  placed  where  they  are  to  preserve  them  in  a 
state  of  efficiency  for  our  further  struggles  in  a common  cause.  I trust 
therefore  Your  Excellency  will  forbear  from  any  forcible  expulsion  of 
them,  should  their  still  longer  stay  be  deemed  indispensable.  Your  let- 
ter, however,  shall  be  sent  to  the  general  commanding  the  department 
where  these  horses  were  sent,  and  his  attention  especially  invoked  to 
your  remonstrances. 

With  high  esteem,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
tSecretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg  J F«.,  March  1,  1803. 


Muj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Goldsboronghj  N.  C.  : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  25th  is  this  instant  received.  Your 
views  are  almost  precisely  those  that  I wrote  you  two  or  three  days  ago. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


903 


I do  uot  know  that  I expressed  the  idea  that  a forward  movement  would 
be  a diversion  in  favor  of  Cbarlestou,  but  I had  it  in  my  mind.  I will 
send  orders  to  General  Whiting  to  i^repare  himself  to  re-enforce  you,  say 
4,000  men.  This,  with  the  cavalry  and  what  you  have,  ought  to  run 
your  force  up  to  14,000  or  15,000  men.  At  least  this  is  my  calculation. 
With  .this  force  I think  you  could  cut  the  railroad  behind  New  Berne 
and  probably  force  the  enemy  out  to  fight.  From  here,  though,  it  looks 
as  if  most  of  the  cavalry  could  operate  to  greater  advantage  on  the 
north  side  of  the  river,  so  that  we  can  forage  at  the  same  time  that  the 
forces  are  displayed  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works.  General  Whiting 
might  bring  you  5,000  men,  1 should  think,  but  I cannot  promise  so 
many  until  I am  better  posted.  If  there  is  a chance  of  doing  anything 
we  should  not  be  idle.  We  are  much  more  likely  to  succeed  by  operat- 
ing ourselves  than  by  lying  still  to  await  the  enemy’s  time  for  thorough 
preparation  before  he  moves  upon  us.  I have  been  confined  with  a 
terribly  sore  throat  since  I have  been  here,  but  hope  to  be  out  in  a few 
days  more,  when  1 shall  make  a visit  to  your  headquarters.  In  the 
mean  time  please  make  your  preparations  quietly  for  a forward  move- 
ment. Cannot  you  persuade  the  good  people  in  charge  of  the  railroads 
to  work  a little  more  and  with  more  system,  in  order  that  freight,  &c., 
can  be  brought  through  x)romi3tly?  Our  people  have  been  so  ac- 
customed to  have  all  kinds  of  labor  at  their  hands  that  they  seem  at  a 
loss  for  resources  when  emergencies  arise.  “ Where  there  is  a will 
there  is  a way”  of  overcoming  all  human  obstacles.  It  is  left  for  us  to 
find  it  out.  All  suggestions  are  thankfully  received,  and  as  I know 
that  all  of  your  ideas  are  good  you  need  not  hesitate  about  expressing 
them. 

I remain,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LOI^rGSTBEET, 

Lieutenant-  Ge7ierah 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg^  Fa.,  March  ],  18G3. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Fredericicshurg,  Va.  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  28th  is  received.  I shall  keep  you  ad- 
vised of  matters  here  that  you  may,  by  comparing  notes,  satisfy  your- 
self of  the  enemy’s  position,  &c.  I shall  be  guided  by  the  information 
that  I may  receive  from  you  of  the  enemy’s  movements  more  than  by 
wliat  I hear  here,  for  the  i)resent  at  all  events.  The  force  now  here  I 
think  quite  sufficient  to  overcome  that  of  the  euemy  at  any  time  that 
1 may  be  able  to  meet  him,  and  shall  act  accordingly  until  I find  that 
he  is  moving  additional  troops  from  your  front.  1 do  not  tliink,  how- 
ever, that  he  will  withdraw  any  force  that  he  now  holds  in  your  front, 
but  may  possibly  send  back  the  force  now  at  Yewport  News.  De- 
serters, however,  report  that  this  force  is  intended  to  operate  in  North 
Carolina. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  vour  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

lAeutcimn  t-  General. 

V.  S. — I have  ])arties  on  each  bank  of  tlie  river  to  watcli  the  force  at 
Newport  News. 


904 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  March  2,  1803. 

Hou.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  Bichniond^  Va. : 

Sir:  If  it  is  not  practicable  to  send  me  the  heavy  Parrott  guns  lately 
requested  may  I not  have  a field  battery  of  12-pounder  Parrotts  or  other 
rifled  guns,  for  the  purpose  specifled  in  my  previous  letters  on  this  mat- 
ter? I should  like  to  have  Eeilly’s,  both  frOm  the  skill  of  that  officer,  j 
his  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  country  (especially  the  locality  iu  | 
which  he  would  operate),  and  the  quality  of  his  guns.  The  matter  of  I 
the  brigade  asked  for  is  becoming  daily  more  important.  My  informa-  I 
tion  from  the  enemy’s  lines  confirms  my  opinion  heretofore  exiiressed  j 
that  the  Abolitionists,  having  utterly  failed  to  surprise  Charleston,  and  i 
[being]  very  unwilling  to  attempt  it,  believing  it  almost  impregnable,  | 
will  endeavor  to  move  against  some  weaker  point.  Unless  Hunter  ' 
should  overrule  Poster  and  try  Savannah  they  must  come  here.  I do  ' 
not  see  that  they  would  gain  much,  even  should  they  take  Savannah,  j 
since  they  already  hold  the  port  of  that  city  and  Port  Pulaski,  while 
they  might  lose  a great  deal.  At  any  rate,  should  they  come  here,  the 
attack  this  time  would  be  from  the  southward,  that  is.  Cape  Pear  and  j 
the  Prying-Pan  Shoals.  A corresponding  advance  by  land  from  New 
Berne,  as  at  first  designed,  would  be  suxiported  by  fresh  trooi)s  drawn 
from  the  North.  The  fact  of  Poster’s  taking  with  him  all  the  North 
Carolina  pilots  ho  could  find  especially  marks  this  jilace  as  the  point  . 
selected.  I urged  it  as  essential  to  our  success  that  I should  be  provided 
with  a brigade,  to  be  placed  on  the  south  side  of  the  river.  All  the  time 
they  give  me  is  devoted  to  strengthening  Port  Caswell,  the  weakest  xioint 
in  the  system.  The  xiroxiosed  disposition  would  greatly  strengthen  it. 
Very  resxiectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington.)  N.  C.,  March  2,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding ) d;c.,  Goldshorough^  A.  C. : 

My  Dear  General:  I quite  agree  with  you  that  the  Yankees,  hav- 
ing failed  to  siirxirise  Charleston  and  finding  it  very  strong,  will  make  an 
attempt  on  some  weaker  point.  That  will  be  undoubtedly  Wilmington, 
unless  Hunter  should  object  and  overrule  Poster.  The  latter’s  carrying 
off  the  North  Carolina  x^ilots  with  him  to  Port  Eoyal  is  ominous  as  to 
this.  I have  received  notice  that  a 10-inch  columbiad  is  started  from 
Eichmond  for  me  and  another  will  soon  be  sent.  Please  to  hurry  them 
through.  Time  now  is  all-important.  Cannot  you  stir  me  up  some 
labor — negro  labor?  I need  very  much  fully  500,  not  so  much  for  the 
city  as  for  Caswell,  Smithfield,  and  Pisher.  I have  applied  to  the  Sec- 
retary for  another  brigade.  In  my  opinion  now,  the  attack  coming 
as  it"  will  from  the  southward,  it  is  essential  that  a brigade  be  sta- 
tioned in  Brunswick  County,  to  maneuver  against  any  attempt  to  land, 
and  it  is  esiiecially  in  case  of  any  of  their  vessels  xiassing  Caswell  that  I 
need  both  the  troops  and  a battery  of  Parrott  guns.  My  field  batteries 
are  very  defective,  being  mostly  smooth-bores  and  howitzers.  This  is 
very  important,  and  I trust  you  will  give  the  matter  all  the  aid  in  your 
Xiower.  A brigade  might,  I think,  readily  be  sxiared  from  about  Bich- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


905 


inoiul.  The  negro  force  lately  raised  and  armed  about  N'ew  Berne  has 
been,  as  I hear,  disarmed,  in  consequence  of  disagreement  on  the  sub- 
ject between  Stanly  and  Lincoln. 

With  great  respect,  yours, 

W.  H.  O.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- Genera  1. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  2,  18G3. 

General  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

Commanding,  Charleston,  8.  C. : 

General:  Scouting  parties  just  come  in  from  around  New  Berne 
report  that  General  Foster,  on  his  way  back  to  Charleston,  took  with 
him  pilots  for  Cape  Fear  Eiver  and  North  Carolina  inlets.  The  scouts 
also  report  that  the  Yankees  think  Charleston  impregnable.  In  conse- 
(jiience  of  this  General  Whiting  anticipates  a return  of  General  Foster’s 
force  and  an  attack  at  Wilmington.  The  difficulty  between  Generals 
Hunter  and  Foster  may  have  induced  General  Foster  to  advise  against 
Hunter’s  attack,  and  possibly  may  have  induced  the  United  States  Gov- 
ernment to  change  the  point  of  attack.  This  difficulty,  I think,  insures 
your  victory  if  the  attack  is  made.  When  generals  quarrel  their  troops 
will  not  fight;  that  is,  they  will  not  fight  a severe  battle.  I hope  that 
you  vvill  keep  your  eye  upon  Foster,  and  advise  me  if  he  should  turn, 
around  and  come  back  to  his  first  love.  I hope,  though,  that  you  may 
liave  your  opportunity,  for  I am  quite  satisfied  that  you  will  be  able  to 
beat  back  any  attack  that  may  be  made  upon  you. 

I remain,  very  respectfullv  and  sincerely,  yours, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  W.  H.  .C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  N,  C. : 

General:  I desire  that  you  will  make  preparations  for  sending  the 
half  of  your  force  and  as  many  more  as  can  be  spared  from  Wilmington 
garrison  to  re-enforce  Major-General  Hill  for  foraging  service.  If  your 
services  may  be  spared  from  Wilmington  I would  like  to  have  you  on 
this  service  also,  as  some  important  service  may  grow  out  of  it.  Please 
make  your  arrangements  as  quietly  as  possible,  giving  no  one  an  indi- 
cation that  any  serious  service  is  expected.  Advise  me  as  early  as  pos- 
sible of  the  force  that  you  can  send  or  take  out. 

I remain,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lietitenant-  General. 

P.  S. — If  your  forts  in  the  harbor  are  not  ordered  to  be  held  at  all 
hazards  and  for  all  time  u})  to  starvation,  such  orders  should  be  given 
in  writing.  If  operations  should  become  extensive  in  North  Carolina 
it  may  at  some  time  be  necessary  to  abandon  Wilmington  for  a time  to 
(Jl)erate  elsewhere;  but  if  we  hold  the  harbor  we  can  at  any  time  retake 
the  city.  I do  not  know  anything  of  the  plan  of  defenses,  and  have 
taken  it  for  granted  that  the  harbor  defenses  are  independent  of  those 
of  the  city,  Ac^  Further  orders  will  be  sent  before  a movement  is  made. 


906 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  3,  1863. 

lo  reference  to  tlie  inclosed  letter*  of  General  E.  A.  Pryor,  and  which 
the  lieutenant-general  has  referred  to  me,  I have  to  remark:  General  E. 
A.  Pryor  was  sent  by  me  to  the  Blackwater,  as  desired  by  General  G.W. 
Smith.  A considerable  force  was  then  on  this  line,  under  a most  able 
officer,  who  had  twice  repulsed  the  enemy  in  force  when  he  attempted 
to  cross  the  river.  I allude  to  Col.  C.  Leventhori)e.  When  the  enemy 
began  to  assemble  a force  at  New  Berne  in  December  last  L found 
it  obligatory  to  withdraw  all  the  North  Carolina  regiments  from  the 
Blackwater,  and  on  January  5 last  left  Petersburg  to  take  command 
of  them  for  the  defense  of  Wilmington.  A few  days  previous  to  this 
General  Colston  arrived  at  this  place  with  a brigade.  I directed  him  to 
proceed  with  all  his  command  (except  one  regiment),  and  dispose  of  it 
for  the  defense  of  the  line  on  the  Blackwater,  and  to  leave  the  brigade 
there  under  the  immediate  command  of  General  Pryor,  and  that  he 
should  then  return  and  remain  in  Petersburg  during  my  absence.  He 
was  to  defend  the  James,  Blackwater,  and  Weldon  while  I was  near 
Wilmington.  After  the  sailing  of  the  enemj^  from  Beaufort,  and  when 
disposing  of  the  troops,  I ordered  General  J.  E.  Davis,  with  his  brigade, 
to  the  Blackwater,  and  on  my  arrival  here,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  inclosed 
order,*  sent  General  Colston  to  command  these  two  brigades  and  the 
line  of  the  Blackwater.  General  Pryor  was  under  General  Colston  all 
the  time  since  I left  here,  and  the  only  change  is  General  Colston  has 
moved  down  on  the  line.  General  Pryor  still  has  the  command  of  a full 
brigade,  just  as  he  had  before.  Had  General  Colston  gone  down  and 
taken  his  own  brigade  it  would  have  left  General  Pryor  without  a com- 
mand. But  he  does  not,  and  leaves  his  own  brigade  under  General 
Pryor  as  he  did  in  the  first  instance.  And  I do  not  think  General  Pryor 
has  any  cause  of  complaint.  He  came  here  without  any  troops,  and  he 
now  has  the  command  of  Colston’s  brigade  just  as  he  has  had  for  the 
last  two  months.  I cannot  say  that  General  Pryor  has  been  super- 
seded in  command.  It  was  necessary  to  send  there  a second  brigade, 
and  with  that  increased  force  General  Colston  was  sent  as  the  imme- 
diate commander  of  the  line  of  the  Blackwater  and  of  both  brigades. 
One  of  the  bridges  referred  to  was  built  by  Colonel  French,  and  a 
second  one  I directed  Colonel  Claiborne  to  build.  As  regards  supplies 
they  have  been  always  directed  to  be  drawn  from  the  enemy’s  lines. 
During  the  summer,  pork  could  not  well  be  cured,  and  it  was  not  until 
after  General  Pryor  went  down  there  that  the  farmers  commenced  kill- 
ing hogs.  Indeed,  they  were  not  then  in  condition  to  kill  and  the 
weather  was  too  warm. 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

March  3 [30],  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Y a. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  27th  has  been  received.!  I have  heard 
nothing  of  the  Sixth  Army  Corps  being  united  with  the  Ninth.  Eeports 
from  our  scouts  on  the  Lower  Potomac  as  late  as  the  28th  instant  give 
no  indication  of  a movement  of  troops  from  Aquia.  On  the  contrary  it 
is  stated  that  within  the  last  fortnight  re-enforcements  have  been  re 


Not  fonud. 


tSee  p.  944. 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


907 


ceived.  At  that  time  there  were  not  more  than  live  or  six  steamers  at 
Aquia  and  Potomac  Creeks,  and  the  number  of  vessels  and  transports 
passing  up  the  Potomac  is  reported  to  be  less  than  usual.  I fear  that 
the  enemy,  by  a systematic  propagation  of  falsehood,  has  been  able  to 
deceive  us,  and  that  the  report  of  troops  from  NTewport  News  going  to 
North  Carolina  was  purposely  spread  to  conceal  their  movement  west. 
The  weather  here  is  so  bad  as  to  preclude  any  military  movement,  and 
the  enemy’s  pickets  are  so  closely  posted  on  their  right,  being  within 
50  steps  of  each  other,  that  our  scouts  find  it  impossible  to  get  within 
their  lines,  and  we  have  to  rely  upon  citizens,  who  are  easily  gulled. 
The  ground  is  again  covered  with  snow  and  a northeast  rain  is  prevail- 
ing. The  enemy’s  positions  in  North  Carolina  have  always  appeared  to 
me  to  be  taken  for  defense,  and  if  driven  from  them  they  can  easily 
escape  to  their  gunboats.  Unless  therefore  they  will  come  out  into  the 
country  I do  not  know  how  you  can  advantageously  get  at  them.  You 
will  probably  find  Sufiblk  fortified  as  New  P>erne  is.  If  the  line  you 
l)ropose,  cutting  the  Blackwater  near  Mayfield,  is  necessary  to  enable 
you  to  draw  supj)lies  from  the  counties  east  of  the  Chowan  it  becomes 
important,  as  those  supplies  are  necessary  to  us.  But  except  to  draw 
piovisions  from  North  Carolina  at  this  distance  I do  not  see  that  you 
can  accomplish  much.  You  need  not,  however,  be  restrained  by  my 
operations,  as  at  present  I can  do  nothing.  I cannot  advance  and  the 
enemy  will  not,  though  all  reports  agree  that  he  is  ready^  to  cross  the 
Rappahannock  and  Avaits  only  for  the  weather.  I fear  you  can  expect 
no  co-operation  from  the  Navy,  nor  do  I know  that  they  can  give  any, 
as  boats  are  not  of  a character  to  contend  with  the  enemy’s  iron-clads. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 

Peter shnrg^  Va.,  March  4,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  : I have  the  lionor  to  send  herewith  a dispatch  just  received 
from  Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill.  General  Hill  thinks,  from  the  information 
that  he  has  received,  that  the  enemy  may  abandon  his  attack  upon 
Charleston  and  concentrate  for  an  attack  upon  Wilmington.  In  view 
of  this  I suggest  that  General  Beauregard  be  advised  to  send  back  the 
forces  to  Wilmington,  should  he  find  the  enemy  moving  back  to  that 
poiut.  It  is  possible  that  the  disaffection  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy 
may  force  him  to  make  some  such  effort.  I shall  not  have  the  force  to 
resist  it  without  re-enforcements  from  Charleston.  I shall  leave  for 
Goldsborough  on  the  Gth  if  the  intelligence  is  confirmed.  Burnside’s 
force  must  have  been  drawn  from  Newport  News,  but  we  have  no  infor- 
mation of  a movement  from  that  i)oint. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N.  0.,  March  4,  1863. 

bieutenant-General  Longstreet,  ‘ 

Commanding  Department^  Petershurg^  Va. : 

General  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  2d  instant.  From  your 
postscript  I perceive  you  are  not  acquainted  with  this  vicinity  and  the 


908 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


relations  wliicb  subsist  between  tlie  city,  the  outer  harbor,  the  defenses, 
and  the  interior.  1 earnestly  beg  you,  before  taking  any  such  action  as 
your  letter  indicates,  to  refer  to  my  correspondence  with  the  War  De- 
partment and  with  Major-General  Smith,  in  which  this  matter  is  fully  | 
set  forth,  and  that  you  will  refer  to  the  Secretary.  So  far  from  consid- 
ering myself  able  to  spare  troops  from  here  1 have  applied  for  and 
earnestly  urged  that  another  brigade  be  sent  here  immediately.  The  | 
works  here  are  by  no  means  completed  and  I need  the  services  of  every  i 
man  I can  raise.  This  necessity  is  so  well  understood  that  when  the  at- 
tack on  Charleston  was  imminent  the  troops  sent  from  here  to  re-enforce 
General  Beauregard  were  immediately  replaced  by  order  of  the  Secretary. 
Information  received  from  the  enemy’s  lines  leads  me  to  think  that  they  i 
have  by  no  means  abandoned  their  designs  on  this  place,  of  so  vital  im- 
portance to  the  Confederacy.  Major-General  Hill  informs  me  that  his  | 
spies  report  the  arrival  of  Burnside  and  a very  heavy  force  at  ew  Berne,  i 
?>Iine  report  that  Foster  has  returned.  I send  out  again  to-day  for 
further  information,  of  which  I will  give  you  immediate  notice. 

Witli  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-General.^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina, 

Petersburg.,  Th.,  Mar  eh  4,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Coynmanding^  &c.  : 

General  : General  Longstreet  desires  a work  constructed  on  the 
James  liiver  for  a field  battery  of  four  or  six  guns,  of  which  some  are 
l^O-pounder  Parrotts.  He  has  no  engineer  officer  at  present  serving 
with  him  aud  asks  that  you  will  send  yours  to  select  a suitable  point 
somewhere  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Powhatan.  As  soon  as  the  site  is 
chosen  if  your  officer  will  report  at  this  office  he  will  be  furnished  with 
such  working  details  as  he  will  require  for  a rapid  prosecution  of  tliC; 
work. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEBEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Petersburg,  Va.,  March  4,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding.,  d'C.,  Goldshorough,  W.  C. : 

Yours  of  2d  received.  If  the  information  contained  therein  be  con- 
firmed the  general  will  start  to  join  you  on  the  6th  instant.  He  asks 
you  to  keej)  him  promptly  advised  by  telegraph  of  any  confirmation  of 
addition al  inform ati on . 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEREL, 
As.nstant  Adjutant- General. 


[March  3,  1863. — For  correspondence  between  Longstreet  and  Bean 
regard,  see  Series  1,  Vol.  XIV,  p.  810.] 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


909 


Headquarters, 
PctersJjurg^  Va.^  March  5,  18G3. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

General:  Maj.  Gen.  D.  IT.  Hill  rei^orts  a large  force  landing  at  New 
Berne,  N.  0.  This  force  must  be  part  of  the  command  intended  for  the 
attack  upon  Charleston,  Avhich  seems  to  have  been  abandoned. 

I inclose  herewith  a letter*  from  Brigadier-General  Whiting,  com- 
manding at  Wilmington.  He  is  anxious  to  have  his  armament  in- 
creased, as  also  his  laboring  force.  I hope  that  the  Department  may 
do  all  that  is  in  its  power  to  give  him  the  aid  that  he  desires. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


IviciiMOND,  VA.,  Mar  ell  5,  1863. 

Lieut.  Geii.  James  Longstreet, 

Petersburg.,  Ya.  : 

General  : The  President  desires  that  the  troops  which  were  drawn 
from  Generals  Samuel  Jones^  and  H.  MarshalFs  commands  in  Western 
Virginia  should  be  returned  to  these  commands,  and  that  the  brigade 
of  General  Joe  [J.  E.]  Davis,  which  moved  a short  time  since  from 
Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  to  the  Blackwater  in  Virginia  should  be  returned 
to  Goldsborough.  You  will  please  issue  the  necessary  orders  in  these 
cases. 


Very,  respectfully,  &c.. 


S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

. liiehmond,  Va.,  March  5,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina,  Raleigh,  N.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  28th  ultimo,  in  reference  to 
the  conduct  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  A.  Keith,  Sixty- fourth  North  Carolina 
Regiment,  and  have  directed  General  [D.  S.]  Douelson,  commanding 
at  Knoxville,  to  investigate  the  matter  and  reiiort  the  facts  to  the 
Department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept.  Virginia  and  N.  Carolina, 

No.  39.  J Petersburg,  Va.,  March  5,  1863. 

* # * * * * # 

H.  Jenkins’  brigade  is  relieved  from  further  duty  with  Major-General 
IMckett’s  division  and  will  iiroceed  to  the.  Blackwater  and  relie^’e  the 
brigade  of  Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  Colston. 

111.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  Colston,  with  his  brigade,  is  assigned  tempora- 


* See  p.  904. 


910 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


LCriAi*.  XXX. 


rily  to  Major-General  Pickett^s  division  and  will  report  accordingly  on  i 
being  relieved  by  Genk*al  [M.]  Jenkins.  ' 

IV.  The  Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  Troops  is  relieved  from  duty  with 
Colston’s  brigade  and  is  temporarily  assigned  to  the  brigade  com-  i 
manded  by  Brig.  Gen.  J.  B.  Davis. 

*#*##**  i 

By  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet: 

G.  MOXLEY  SOBKEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters, 

l^ctersburg^  Va.,  March  [A]gril\^  0,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  W ar  : 

Sir  : I desire  to  cross  the  Blackwater  on  Saturday  for  the  i)uri)ose 
of  driving  the  enemy  into  his  intrenchments  at  Suffolk  while  we  draw 
out  the  supplies  of  subsistence  and  quartermaster’s  stores  from  the 
counties  east  of  that  river.  If  the  Navy  Department  can  co-operate 
with  us  we  may  be  able  to  capture  Suffolk  and  its  garrison.  All  that 
I desire  at  present  is  that  such  vessels  as  may  be  ready  pass  the  ob- 
structions, so  that  they  may  be  able  to  join  us  in  case  it  should  find 
a favorable  opportunity  for  them.  I believe  that  there  is  but  one  iron- 
clad of  the  enemy  in  the  James  Biver.  If  this  is  the  case  I presume  that 
wii  c.ould  with  our  vessels  and  batteries  on  the  river  bank  drive  the 
eneuQ^  off*,  cut  off*  any  re-enforcements,  and  possibly  capture  the  gar- 
rison. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  Virginia  and  North  Carolina, 

Petersburg.,  Vh.,  March  0,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  Richmond,  Va.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  note  of 
the  5th  instant,  in  reference  to  tlie  jiroposed  movement  on  Suff’qlk. 
General  Longstreet  left  last  night  for  Goldsborough,  to  be  absent  a few 
days.  Your  communication  will  be  forwarded  to  him  b}^  this  evening’s 
mail. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOBBEL, 

. Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters,  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  March  6,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding,  ific.,  Goldsborough,  N.  C. : 

Gi:neral  : The  Whitworth  guns  are  all  we  have  to  dei)en(l  on  to  Iccep 
the  blo(^kaders  at  such  a distanceas  will  enable  the  steamers  to  ran  the 
blockade.  One  is  at  [Fort]  Caswell,  one  at  Fort  Fisher,  and  one  about 
5 miles  above  [Fort]  Fisher,  on  the  beach.  We  have  now  four  British 
and  one  Confederate  steamer  in  port  daily  expecting  to  leave,  and 
several  steamers  are  expected  to  arrive.  We  have  had  an  eiigageinent 


Misplaced. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE, 


911 


with  the  euemy  over  each  one  of  these  vessels,  the  enemy’s  sloops  of  war 
fiercely  attacking  the  forts  while  their  smaller  vessels  attemi)t  to  cut 
off’  the  steamers.  This  has  happened  at  both  forts.  Without  the  dis- 
position alluded  to  at  Fort  Fisher  we  should  have  lost  the  Cornubia 
inevitably  three  days  ago.  She  had  been  thrice  cliascd  otf  tlie  coast 
and  became  short  of  coal  ; running  into  the  land  at  Masouborough  she 
communicated  with  Colonel  Lamb,  and  the  disjmsition  being  offered, 
boldly  made  for  the  bar,  a fleet  of  five  vessels  firing  into  her.  She  had 
the  most  valuable  cargo  of  ])owder  and  arms  she  has  yet  brought.  Un- 
der these  circumstances,  unless  for  a matter  of  greater  and  ])ressing  im- 
portance, I should  not  like  to  take  the  responsibility  of  detaching  the 
gun  from  the  coast  defense.  What  is  this  expedition  of  which  you 
speak?  General  Longstreet  wrote  me  something  about  it,  but  wanted 
me  to  send  off*  half  my  force  and  half  my  garrisons. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  0.  WHUTING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Arma^  of  Kortiiern  Virginia, 

March  7,  1803. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina^  cOc.  : 


General  : I have  received  your  letters  of  the  4th  and  5th  instant. 
I have  as  yet  seen  nothing  to  indicate  a change  of  ])urpose  in  the  enemy 
to  attack  Charleston.  If  Wilmington  is  their  object,  as  sux)posed  by 
General  Whiting,  it  will  be  disclosed  by  the  return  of  their  mailed  gun- 
boats and  army.  General  Beauregard  will  no  doubt  communicate  the 
withdrawal  of  the  enemy  from  his  department,  and  then,  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible, if  Wilmington  should  be  pointed  at,  our  troops  should  be  drawn 
to  that  point.  1 see  that  General  Foster  has  returned  to  jS^ew  Berne, 
but,  as  far  as  I can  learn,  without  his  troops.  I sux)posed  this  might  be 
in  consequence  of  his  disagreement  with  General  Hunter,  and  that 
leaving  his  forces  with  the  latter  officer  was  an  additional  sign  that  the 
attack  on  Charleston  or  Savannah  was  not  abandoned.  General  Burn- 
side was  reported  a few  days  since  to  be  in  Washington  City.  As  far 
as  I can  form  an  opinion  only  three  corx)S  have  been  sent  from  General 
Hooker’s  army  to  Newport  News,  and  by  the  last  rex>orts  they  were  still 
there  and  the  indications  showed  that  they  did  not  contemplate  an  im- 
mediate'departure.  I have  estimated  their  force  at  21,000.  All  of  our 
scouts  agree  (those  from  the  enemy’s  line  as  w'ell  as  those  on  the  Poto- 
mac) that  only  three  cori)s  have  left;  seven  remain.  They  also  report 
that  some  disaffected  regiments  have  been  sent  away  on  the  ])lea  of  pre- 
venting contagion.  These  latter  are  reported  to  have  gone  to  Wash- 
ington and  to  their  States  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting,  and  their  places 
to  have  been  suxii)lied  by  other  regiments,  so  that  their  strength  is  equal 
to  what  it  was  before  the  battle.  Their  cavalry  force  has  been  greatly 
augmented  recently,  and  the  report  still  is  tliat  they  intend  to  advance 
by  this  route.  It  is  also  stated  that  the  corps  sent  to  Newi)ort  News  is 
intended  for  Burnside  and  that  he  will  oi)erate  in  North  Carolina. 
General  Hooker  has  his  headquarters  on  the  Potomac  Creek  near 
Brooke’s  Station.  His  army  is  located  along  the  railroad  from  Fal- 
mouth to  Aquia,  but  the  greater  part  near  Aquia.  There  are  no  signs 
of  further  embarkation  of  troops  or  collection  of  transports.  The  only 
steamerg  dp^peiiding  the  Potomac  are  those  apparently  conveying  sup- 


912 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCiiAr.  XXX. 


plies,  towing  barges,  sail  vessels,  &c.,  on  which  troops  are  seen,  but  not 
more  than  returning  absentees,  convalescents,  &c.,  would  justify. 
Where  the  large  force  said  to  be  landing  at  Kew  Berne  comes  from  1 
cannot  conceive.  I hope  you  will  be  able  to  get  accurate  information 
and  i)ut  yourself  in  communication  with  General  Beauregard,  so  as  to 
be  prepared  for  all  emergencies.  You  had  better  keep  yourself  advised 
of  the  movements  of  the  force  at  Newport  News. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Eichmond,  Va.,  March  7,  18G3. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  G.  Whiting, 

Commanding.^  Wilmington.,  N.  C.  : 

General  : 1 have  received  your  letters  of  the  23d  and  28th  ultimo, 
stating  the  need  for  additional  guns  at  Wilmington.  Colonel  Ehett, 
insi)ector  of  ordnance,  reports,  under  date  of  the  2d  instant,  that  ‘^one 
10-inch  gun  vnll  ]>robably  leave  Eichmond  to-day  for  Wilmington.  On 
Friday  or  Saturday  a 4.G2-incii  rilled  gun  will  be  ready  for  that  point, 
and  early  next  week  another,  and  probably  a 10-inch  also  on  Monday. 
A 30-])ounder  will  be  ready,  1 hope,  on  Tuesday  next.”  Every  exertion 
shall  be  made,  as  far  as  the  resources  of  the  Ordnance  Bureau  will  allow, 
to  meet  the  calls  for  guns  necessary  for  the  defense  of  Wilmington.  I 
still  believe  the  leading  point  of  attack  designed  by  the  enemy  is  Charles- 
ton 5 but  they  may  recoil  from  that  and  make  the  attack  you  ai)preheiid. 
All  i)reparation  therefore  possible  should  certainly  be  Uiade  for  such  a 
contingency. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh.,  N.  0.,  March  7,  1SG3. 

Hon.  S.  E.  Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy  : 

Sir  : Y^ou  can  have  the  iron  requested  by  your  letter  of  the  13tli 
ultimo,  to  be  replaced,  if  you  will  permit  it  to  be  exchanged  for  the  old 
iron  on  the  different  roads  of  the  State.  They  are  rapidly  running 
down  and  are  applying  for  the  same  iron.  I suppose  their  worn-out 
rails  would  answer  the  same  purpose  for  rolling. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ ' Z.  B.  VANCE. 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

March  7,  18G3. 


Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Goldshorough,  N.  C. : 

General:  I regret  that  your  courier  should  have  missed  those  sta- 
tioned between  this  point  and  Goldsboroiigh,  thus  rendering  it  necessary 
for  him  to  come  all  the  way  through.  He  came  a different  road  ironi 
the  one  usually  traveled.  I have  directed  him  which  way  to  go  in  the 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — CONFEDERATE. 


913 


morning  and  liope  no  mistake  will  occur  in  future.  Your  dispatches 
were  received  and  your  orders  will  be  carried  out.  I have  one  of  my 
best  squadrons  (Captain  Harris’)  on  picket  between  Jacksonville  and 
White  Oak.  Considering  the  present  position  of  the  enemy’s  main  cav- 
alry force  (being  in  the  vicinity  of  Deep  Gully),  and  the  fact  that  the 
bridge  over  New  Eiver  was  burnt  b}'  Colonel  Baker,  would  it  not  be  ad- 
visable to  withdraw  Captain  Harris  ? Unless  you  object,  I shall  do  so, 
as  1 am  much  in  need  of  more  cavalry  and  desire  to  send  an  additional 
force  to  the  neighborhood  of  Kinston. 

Most  resiJectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  . • 

B.  H.  EOBEBTSON, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


JGeadquakters, 
Wilmington^  Ilarch  7,  18G3. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Richmond  : 


General  : I request  you  to  define  the  limits  and  responsibility  of 
this  command.  No  difficulty  but  some  little  confusion  now  obtains  in 
the  stall'  departments  from  misapprehension. 

When  I was  assigned  to  duty  here  I was  directed  by  the  Secretary  of 
War  to  report  to  the  War  Department,  through  the  commanding  gen- 
eral, then  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith,  now  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet. 
This  was  constituted  a separate  district — in  no  sense  considered  a part 
of  the  department  command  of  North  Carolina. 

In  many  respects,  the  nature  of  the  command  being  considered — its 
object  the  special  defense  of  a very  important  place  and  post,  and  the 
necessity  Avhich  exists  for  direct  communication  between  the  officer  in 
command  here  and  the  Department — I think  irbest  that  the  arrangement 
heretofore  existing  should  be  maintained  and  that  I should  be  directed 
TO  consider  myself  under  the  command  of  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding and  report  direct  to  him. 

1 do  not,  however,  wish  to  be  understood  as  making  any  question  or 
objection  to  any  arrangement  which  may  be  considered  best.  I simply 
desire  to  have  the  command  defined  one  way  or  another,  expressing  at 
the  same  time  my  opinion  that  it  is  best  here  to  have  communication 
as  direct  as  possible. 

Very  respectfully. 


W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Eespectfully  forwarded  through  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet,  cofii- 
manding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters,  March  12,  1863. 

Eesiiectfully  forwarded. 

If  any  change  has  been  made  I am  not  aware  of  it.  I hope  that  the 
matter  may  be  settled  as  early  as  possible. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant- General  Commanding. 


58  R R — VOL  XVIII 


914 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Hichmond,  Ya.,  March  9,  18G3. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General:  It  is  liiglily  important  to  know  the  strength,  organiptiod 
and  position  of  the  forces  under  your  command,  and  you  are  desired  tj 
give  this  information  with  the  least  delay  practicable,  extending  yonj 
report  so  as  to  embrace  the  forces  on  the  line  of  North  Carolina,  Will 
miugton  included. 

Veryrespectfallv,&c,  S.  COOPEK,  i 

* Adjutant  and  hispector  General,  i 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina, 

Petersburg,  Va.,  March  9,  1863.  • 

General  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  (&c. : 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  commanding-genera], to  direct  tha 
you  order  one  of  the  regiments  of  cavalry  now  ser\dng  on  the  Blackwatc 
down  to  Greenville,  N.  C.,  to  operate  with  a brigade  of  infantry  to  b 
sent  to  Tarborough  in  covering  and  protecting  foraging  expeditionr 
Tlie  regiment  should  start  with  at  least  three  days’  rations,  and  on  it 
reaching  Greenville  the  commander  will  notify  General  Hill,  at  Gold? 
borough,  by  telegraph,  of  the  arrival  of  his  command.  The  commaiidni 
general  desires  it  to  move  with  promptness  and  dispatch.  • 

, I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston,  N.  G.,  March  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldsborough,  K.  C. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  communications*  from  Oaptai 
Whitford.  Major  Nethercutt  desires  me  to  say  that  he  ascertaiiu 
that  the  works  at  Shepherdsville  or  Newport  can  be  turned  on  the  let 
through  a bad  road  of  swamp  land  for  4 or  5 miles  ; on  the  right,  ca 
not  be  turned  except  by  going  around  by  Carolina  City  and  crossii^ 
Newport  Eiver  at  railroad  bridge.  The  enemy  have  jiickets  there  aij 
there  is  a block-house.  Persons  traveling  the  Sound  road  c^xn  be  se(| 
from  the  Sound  in  passing  from  Swansborough  to  Carolina  City.  H 
Sound  road  comes  into  the  road  that  leads  from  Smith’s  Mill  to  Carohi 
City  immediately  above  Broad  Creek;  Fifty-first  Massachusetts  Leg 
ment  and  five  companies  of  cavalry  are  on  duty  at  Shepherdsville. 

William  F.  Bell,  called  the  3d  (now  at  Warsaw,  a refugee),  can  gi' 
you  more  reliable  information  of  that  country  than  any  one  else.  1 
latest  information  of  the  enemy  I forwarded  you  by  telegraph.  i i 
negro  alluded  to  in  one  of  the  telegrams  is  here  a prisoner.  He  is  mti 
ligent,  and  his  story  as  to  their  numbers  is  corroborated  by  tlie  ruiiio 
Majors  Nethercutt  and  McNeill  had  from  citizens.  There  is  no  enein 


Not  found. 


CnAV.  XXX.  j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


915 


1 think,  between  here  and  12  or  15  miles  of  IS'ew  Berne.  Scouts  were 
sent  out  yesterday  but  have  not  yet  been  heard  from.  My  pickets  are 
where  they  were  when  you  were  here.  They  were  ordered  there  yester- 
day at  1 o’clock.  Heard  from  Colonel  Lewis  this  morning.  He  makes  no 
report  of  the  enemy.  I am  trying  to  get  information  from  New  Berne. 
Will  certainly  keep  you  advised  of  everything  I can  hear  of  importance. 
The  telegram  sent  you  last  night  about  the  enemy  at  White  Oak  Eiver 
was  to  General  Eobertson,  from  one  of  his  captains,  on  picket  on  the 
opposite  side.  Maj.  [J.  H.j  McNeill  says  he  is  reliable.  The  informa- 
tion was  that  from  the  noise  he  thought  they  were  building  a bridge 
there.  The  country  was  such  that  they  could  not  see  the  enemy.  I 
will  open  communication  from  there  to  General  E.  and  will  telegraph 
you  anything  that  is  important.  ■ 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier -General. 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  Fickeit’s  division,  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Caro- 
lina, commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  G.  E.  Pickett,  March  d,  1863. 

NEAK  PETERSBUEG,  VA. 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Infantry. 

Artillery. 

U 

<s> 

o 

a 

CQ 

<D 

m 

o 

§ 

~ p 

Garnett’s  brigade 

117 

137 

115 

90 

1, 440 
1,  590 
1,  459 
934 

1,  851 
2, 150 
1,  886 
1,  229 
312 

3,  079 
3,  492 
3,  310 
2,  004 
434 

Ariniatoafl’a  hriradf) 

Kemper’s  brigade 

Corse’s  brigade 

'"l3  ■ 

"274 

Artillery  battalion 

Grand  total 

459 

5,423 

13 

274 

7, 428 

12,  319 

Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  Hood’s  Division,  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Caro- 
lina, commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  John  B.  Hood,  March  9,  1863. 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present.  i 

1 

Aggregate  present  and  1 
"'absent.  j 

Infantry. 

Artillery. 

s 

0 

s 

m 

0 

0 

0 

g 

Texas  brigade i 

110 

131 

123 

96 

1,404 
1,  650 
1,734 
1,413 

1,902 
2,  204 
2,  246 
1,726 
342 

3,  030 
3,  529 
3,  420 
2,408 
393 

Law’s  brigade 

Anderson’s  brigade 

Toombs’  brigade 

Artillery  battalion 

12 

292 

Grand  total 

460 

C,  201 

12 

292 

8,420 

12,  780 

1 


916  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX 


Abstract  from  Field  Beturn  of  Troopscommanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  March  10, 186[ 

PETEKSBUKG,  YA.  | 


Troops. 


Brig.  Gen.  R.  E.  Colston’s  command 
29tli  Regiment  Virginia  Volunteers  . 

Moseley’s  artillery  battalion 

Bradford’s  battery 

Sturdivant’s  battery 

Confederate  Guard 

Hargrove  Blues 

Detachment  of  cavalry 

Signal  Corps 

Camp  paroled  prisoners 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

4^ 

§ 

W 

P4 

<9 

1 

a, 

&D 

fcij 

■< 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

OiBoers.  j 

. Men. 

328 

5,  217 

6,  422 

8, 1 

40 

618 

. 694 

fc 

8 

146 

166 

1 

4 

79 

94 

1 

4 

76 

87 

i! 

4 

63 

70 

1 

4 

103 

114 

i! 

1 

23 

27 

7 

125 

137 

16 

191 

222 

. 416 

6,  641 

8,  033 

10,] 

Abstract  from  Field  Betnrn  of  Troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  D.  II.  Hill,  March  10, 18( 

GOLDSBOROTJGH,  H.  C. 


Troops. 


Whiting’s  command  [see  Department  return]. 
Garnett’s  brigade  [see  Department  return]  — 


Pettigrew’s  brigade 

Daniel’s  brigade 

Robertson’s  (cavalry)  brigade . 

Reserve  artillery 

Hamilton,  N.  C 

Weldon,  N.  C 

Post  of  Goldsborough,  N.  C . . . 


Grand  total. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Officers. 

Men. 

153 

226 

90 

13 

46 

26 

36 

2,  947 

3,  760 

1,  557 

335 

823 

814 

557 

590 

10,  793 

12,893 


& 


15,; 


Abstract  from  Beturn  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  commanded 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  C.  S.  Army,  for  March  10,  1863. 


Present  for 
duty. 

4^ 

09 

O 

1 

Officers. 

Men. 

ft 

<0 

4^ 

a 

fcO 

& 

tx 

<1 

Sr 

bC 

-<1 

277 

4, 825 

6, 156 

7, 

12.  ' 

472 

5,  697 

7,  428 

472 

6, 494 

8,420 

416 

6,  641 

8,  033 

10,  ' 

590 

10, 793 

12,  898 

15, 

434 

6,949 

8,  478 

10,  ’ 

2 

131 

141 

2,  663 

41,  530 

51,  549 
/ 

^69,  < 

Command. 


Major-General  Elzoy’s  command 

Pickett’s  division 

Hood’s  division 

Major-General  French’s  command 

Major-General  Hill’s  command 

Brigadier-General  Whiting’s  command . 
Lane’s  (North  Carolina)  battery 


Grand  total. 


uAt.XXX.]  CORI^ESPONDEI^CE,  EtC. — CONFEEERAI'E.  917 


\oop8  in  the  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina^  eommanded  hy 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  for  Mar  eh  10, 1863. 

MAJ.  GEN.  A.  ELZEY’S  COMMAND. 

(Headquarters  Richmond,  Va.) 

ol.  T.  S.  Rhett’s  command.  Col.  T.  J.  Page,  Chaffin’s  Bluff, 

ol.  Jack  Brown’s  command.  Captain  Lee,  Dre wry’s  Bluff. 

Wise’s  Brigade. 


MAJ.  GEN.  S.  G.  french’s  COMMAND. 
(Headquarters,  Petersburg,  Va.) 


rigadier-General  Colston’s  command. 
)th  Virginia  Regiment, 
etached  cavalry, 
onfederate  Guard, 
argrove  Blues. 


Moseley’s  artillery  battalion. 
Bradford’s  battery.  . 
Sturdivant’s  battery. 

Camp  of  paroled  prisoners. 
Signal  Corps. 


MAJ.  GEN.  D.  H.  HILL’S  COMMAND. 

(Headquarters  Goldsborough,  N.  C.) 

aniel’s  brigade.  I Troops  at  Goldsborough,  N.  C. 

ettigrew’s  brigade.  Troops  at  Hamilton,  N.  C. 

obertson’s  cavalry  brigade.  Troops  at  Weldon,  N.  C. 

eserve  artillery.  I 


BRIG.  GEN.  W.  H.  C.  WHITING’S  COMMAND. 

(Headquarters  Wilmington,  N.  C.) 


vans’  brigade.' 
ansom’s  brigade. 

3mpany  F,  Tenth  North  Carolina  Troops, 
unpany  B,  Sixty-first  North  Carolina 
Troops. 

xptain.'Buie’s  company.  North  Carolina 
Troops. 

iptain  Moore’s  cavalry. 

iptain  Newkirk’s  cavalry. 

iptain  Smith’s  cavalry. 

d Battalion  North  Carolina  Artillery. 

th  Battalion  North  Carolina  Artillery. 

ark  Artillery  (heavy). 

iptain  Adams’  light  battery. 


Capt.  [R.]  Boyce’s  (South  Carolina)  light 
battery. 

Capt.  [J.  R.J  Branch’s  light  battery. 
Captain  Paris’  light  battery. 

Fort  Caswell  (six  companies). 

Fort  Fisher  (nine  companies). 

Fort  French  (one  company). 

Fort  Johnson  (two  companies). 

Fort  Saint  Philip  (four  companies). 
Light-House  Battery  (one  company). 
Bridge  guard  (Weldon  and  Wilmington 
Railroad). 

Signal  Corps. 


iderson’s  brigade, 
iw’s  brigade, 
ibertson’s  brigade, 
xombs’  brigade. 


MAJ.  GEN.  J.  B.  hood’s  DIVISION. 

(In  camp  near  Richmond,  Va.) 

[W.  K.]  Bachman’s  (South  Carolina) 
battery. 

■[H.  R.]  Garden’s  battery. 

[James]  Reilly’s  battery. 

MAJ.  GEN.  G.  E.  PICKETT’S  DIVISION. 


(In  camp  near  Petersburg,  Va.) 

'mistead’s  brigade.  Jenkins’  brigade, 

use’s  brigade.  Kemper’s  brigade, 

iruett’s  brigade. 

UNATTACHED. 

Captain  Lane’s  battery. 


Note  on  original.— Since  the  date  of  this  report  Jenkins’  brigade  of  Pickett’s  di- 
Hion  has  been  ordered  on  the  Blackwater  and  Colston’s  brigade  assigned  to  Pickett’s 


918 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  B.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  NXX. 


Tarborough,  N.  0.,  March  10,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorough^  N.  C. : 

General  : I was  ordered  to  report  to  you  for  orders  by  telegraph  on 
my  arrival  at  this  place,  but  there  is  no  office  nearer  than  Eocky  Mount,  i 
I left  Petersburg  yesterday  evening  with  800  men  5 the  rest  of  my  bri- 1 
gade,  some  600  men,  were  to  follow  this  morning.  1 was  told  the  quar- 1 
termaster  of  General  Longstreet’s  corps  would  make  arrangements  for  I 
the  transportation  of  my  troops,  which  was  not  done,  so  that  I have  | 
been  able  to  bring  with  me  only  160.  I do  not  think  my  command  will ! 
get  here  till  to-morrow  night,  if  then.  I have  left  all  my  baggage  at 
Petersburg  except  cooking  utensils.  Had  I better  send  for  all  my  I 
camp  and  garrison  equipage  ? I hope  to  receive  your  instructions  very 
soon. 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Ya.,  March  12,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  — , expressing  the  views  of  the  honor- 
able Secretary  of  War  with  regard  to  a movement  against  Suffolk,  is 
received.*  Will  you  do  me  the  favor  to  explain  to  the  honorable  Sec- 1 
retary  that  I do  not  think  that  it  would  be  a prudent  move,  while  the 
enemy  holds  twenty-odd  thousand  men  at  Yewport  News,  within  a few  > 
hours’  sail  of  the  city  of  Eichmond^  To  give  the  move  the  probability  i 
of  success  a large  force  should  move,  and  to  move  a large  torce  would 
leave  Eichmond  in  the  power  of  the  enemy  should  he  be  quick  enough 
to  avail  himself  of  the  opportunity.  I am  erecting  some  works  on  the 
James  Eiver  below  this  with  a view  to  keep  back  transports.  When 
they  are  completed  I desire  to  operate  with  my  forces  5 but  in  order 
that  I may  have  reasonable  hopes  of  success  I should  have  cavalry. 
The  difficulty  that  I shall  have  to  contend  against  with  regard  to  cav- 
alry I have  already  explained  in  a previous  letter  to  the  War  Depart- 
ment. A move  against  Suffolk,  properly  aided  by  cavalry,  might  be 
very  successful  and  complete,  but  without  this  aid  would  be  but  a par- 
tial success,  which  would  hardly  pay  for  the  movement  of  the  troops. 
1 do  not  consider  it  prudent  under  any  circumstances  to  explain  fully 
my  plans,  for  the  reason  that  if  no  one  knows  them  but  myself  the  en- 
emy will  surely  not  hear  of  them.  If  they  are  made  known  to  any  one 
but  myself  that  person  might  in  his  sleep  speak  of  them  and  they  might 
reach  the  enemy. 

I am,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding > 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Ya.,  March  12,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper,  . • 

Adjutant  and  Insi)ector  General : 

General:  Your  letter  directing  that  the  troops  from  Western  ^'il■- 
ginia  be  returned  to  their  proper  commands  and  that  General  Davis 


* See  p.  871. 


IIAV.X^X.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  EfC. — CONFEDERATE. 


019 


>rigade  be  sent  to  Goldsborongb  is  received.  Please  designate  what 
roops  are  here  from  Western  Virginia,  as  I have  no  record  to  show  it. 
had  ordered  General  Garnett’s  brigade  to  North  Carolina  before  your 
etter  was  received,  and  hope  that  this  may  supersede  the  necessity  of 
he  move  of  Davis’  brigade.  General  Davis  is  on  the  Blackwater  and 
•cenpies  one  of  the  most  important  positions  in  the  department.  He  is 
Miniliar  with  the  country  where  he  is  and  if  taken  from  there  a brigade 
muld  be  sent  there  which  would  be  placing  them  and  General  Davis 
II  positions  which  are  strange  to  all  parties.  Another  reason  for  send- 
iig  Garnett’s  brigade  was  that  it  was  thought  that  it  might  have  a good 
tt'ect  to  send  some  Virginia  troops  to  that  State.  If  it  is  necessary  to 
love  General  Davis’  brigade,  however,  it  will  be  done  with  pleasure. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Navy  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Biehmond,  March  13,  1803. 

laj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  O.  S.  A.,‘ 

Headquarters,  Goldshorough,  N.  C.  : 

Dear  Sir  : Having  directed  Flag-Officer  Lynch  to  invoke  your  aid 
3 procure  iron  in  North  Carolina  for  the  completion  of  gunboats,  I beg 
?ave  to  say  that  the  water  defenses  of  Wilmington  would,  I think,  be 
egarded  with  satisfaction  if  the  two  iron-clad  sloops  under  his  charge 
here  were  completed.  Covered  with  4 inches  of  iron,  placed  at  an  angle 
f3Go,  and  mounting  each  four  heavy  guns  they  would  be  floating  forts 
f the  most  formidable  character.  We  have  obtained  from  Georgia  and 
oath  Carolina  sufficient  iron  for  one  of  these  vessels. 

The  demands  for  armor  for  vessels  under  construction  in  those  States 
reclude  us  from  obtaining  more  iron  there  at  present,  and  unless  we 
an  get  supplies  from  North  Carolina  for  the  rolling-mill  at  Atlanta, 
ra.,  we  shall  be  unable  to  complete  the  second  vessel  at  present. 

We  can  construct  boats  for  Albemarle  and  Pamlico  Sounds,  which, 
1 my  judgment,  will  expel  or  destroy  the  enemy  if  we  can  obtain  the 
‘on  to  plate  them. 

Ten  or  12  miles  of  railroad  iron  will  meet  these  immediate  wants  and 
1 taking  it  rails  unfit  for  service  on  the  roads  could  be  selected.  Iron 
lus  taken  from  the  roads  of  North  Carolina  would  be  rolled  into  plates 
t Eichmond  or  Atlanta  and  returned  for  the  defenses  of  that  State. 

May  I therefore  ask  you  to  aid  Elag-Officer  Lynch  in  this  important 
3rvice  ? 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLOEY, 
Secretary  of  the  ifavy. 


District  Headquarters, 

Richmond,  Va.,  March  14,  18G3. 
ieutenant-General  Longstreet,  Commanding  : 

General  : I explained  your  views  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  showed 
m your  letter.  He  said  you  were  perfectly  right,  and  he  approves 
>ur  course.  General  Lee  reached  here  yesterday.  No  other  news. 
With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

AENOLD  ELZEY, 

Major-General. 


920 


[CitAP.  XXX. 


norm  CAROLINA  and  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

Brigade  Headquarters, 
CJiaffm'^s  Farm.,  Ya.,  March  14,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Riclimoyid,  Ya. : 

General  : I respectfully  beg  to  submit  tbe  followiug  tabular  state- 
ment of  this  command,  in  accordance  with  the  circular  from  the  Ad- 
jutant and  Inspector  GeneraFs  Office,  March  10,  1863  : 

The  rourtli  Virginia  Heavy  Artillery,  Col.  J.  Thomas  Goode  j 
Twenty-sixth  Virginia  Infantry,  Gol.  P.  K.  Page ; Forty-sixth  Virginia 
Infantry,  Col.  E.  T.  W.  Duke;  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Infantry,  Col.  W. 
B.  Tabb;  cavalry,  Holcombe  Legion  (four  companies).  Col.  W.  P. 
Shingler ; Thirty-second  Battalion  Virginia  Cavalry,  Maj.  J.  E.  Eobert- 
son  ; Company  D,  Tenth  Virginia  Cavalry,  Capt.  L.  J.  Hawley ; Com- 
pany A,  Light  Artillery  Battalion,  Capt.  A.  D.  Armistead ; Company 
B,  Light  Artillery  Battalion,  Capt.  D.  A.  French — battallion  com- 
manded by  Maj.  A.  W.  Stark. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters,  March  15,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Commanding,  [^Y ilmington],  N.  C. : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  4th  instant  was  received  on  my  return 
to  this  place.  You  will  need  more  troops  for  the  defense  of  Wilmington  i 
when  there  is  a probability  of  attack  there,  but  I do  not  agree  with  you 
^ in  your  desire  to  mass  troops  there  in  order  to  have  them  for  the  attack. 
On  the  contrary,  I think  that  every  soldier  should  be  kept  busy.  If 
the  troops  at  Wilmington  are  not  constantly  employed  there  they  should 
be  in  the  field,  annoying  the  enemy  whenever  and  wherever  it  may  be 
done.  They  should  not,  however,  be  so  far  removed  from  Wilmington 
as  to  be  out  of  supporting  distance  should  they  be  needed  there.  I 
should  think  that  a brigade  was  quite  enough  for  sudden  emergencies, 
particularly  in  case  those  used  in  the  field  are  placed  between  you  and 
the  enemy.  If  we  hold  isolated  positions  by  detachments  the  enemy 
will  at  his  pleasure  move  upon  the  different  points  and  take  them  in 
detail. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LOEGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Peter. slnirg,  Ya.,  Afarch  15,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  GoldtiUrough,]Y.  C. : 

General  : If  your  observation  upon  your  expedition  leads  you  to 
suppose  that  any  important  results  may  obtain  by  a stronger  expedition 
against  Eew  Berne  advise  me  at  once,  and  I will  endeavor  to  assist  you 
in  making  more  complete  arrangements.  I can  spare  the  Whitworth 
tliat  I have  here  as  soon  as  I can  get  ‘^Long  Tom’’  and  “Charlie,”  as 
they  are  called,  in  my  battery  at  Fort  Powhatan.  I have  established  a 
battery  at  Fort  Powhatan  for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  transports 
should  they  attempt  to  pass  up  James  Eiver.  If  the  reduction  of  Ecw 
Berne  is  practicable  in  field  operations,  I submit  the  following  as  my 


921 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,.  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 

plan,  and  the  only  one  that  I can  see,  viz : Have  three  brigades,  with 
one  Whitworth,  down  on  the  south  side  of  theNeuse ; oue  of  Whiting’s 
brigades  and  one  Whitworth  up  to  join  you  near  New  Berne,  and  one 
brigade  down  on  the  north  side  of  the  Neuse,  with  the  Whitworth  that 
I have  here.  If  we  can  droj)  a ball  into  the  fort  every  minute  from  these 
directions  the  troops  may  become  frightened  and  surrender.  If  the 
matter  is  practicable,  I will  either  join  you  myself  or,  remaining  here, 
will  make  a strong  diversion  against  Suftblk.  I shall  start  for  the  Black- 
water  on  the  day  after  to-morrow  and  expect  to  be  absent  six  days.  If 
you  wish  to  telegraph  me,  do  so  at  Franklin  ; that  is,  if  you  wish  to 
do  so  in  the  next  four. days. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 

N.  B. — This  must  not  go  beyond  yourself. 


Hdqrs.  Forces  near  Drewry’s  Bluff,  Ya., 

March  15,  1803. 

Maj.  T.  O.  Chestney, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Richmond,  Va. : 

Major  : In  comidiance  with  orders  received  from  Major-General  El- 
zey’s  headquarters,  I respectfully  submit  to  you  the  following  tabular 
report  of  my  command,  viz : * 

Maj.  B.  H.  Gee,  commanding  Fifty-ninth  Georgia  Infantry  Kegiment; 
Capt.  W.  A.  Graham,*  commanding  Second  Squadron,  Secoml  North 
Carolina  Cavalry. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JACK  BEOWN, 
Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 


Swift  Creek,  March  15,  [1803]— 0 p.  in. 

General  D.  H.  Hill  : 

A scout  from  Street’s  Ferry,  sent  down  for  the  luirpose,  reports  that 
there  is  no  doubt  of  the  landing  of  a large  force,  and  from  the  noise  he 
thinks  they  are  fixing  a pontoon  over  theNeuse  to  bring  their  infantry 
over.  Captain  Whitford  is  convinced  that  we  shall  have  it  to-morrow. 
It  seems  so  to  me.  Send  me  a regiment  of  cavalry  immediately  and 
come  yourself.  My  danger  is  on  my  right  flank  and  rear,-  by  marching 
from  Greenville  you  can  iirotect  both.  Bring  your  provisions  and  am- 
munition. Send  them  soon,  directly  to  Kinston.  I have  no  couriers.  • 

J.  J.  PETTIGEEW, 

Brigadier-  G eneral. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

March  1C,  1803. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Ya. : 

General:  As  far  as  can  be  ascertained  from  my  own  observation, 
from  the  reports  from  our  scouts  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Eappahan- 
nock,  and  from  \^at  the  citizens  saj^,  I am  led  to  believe  that  none  of 

^Since  ordered  to  Petersburjj. 


922 


NORTH  CAROLINA  ANt)  S.  L.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiiAr.  NNX. 


tlie  army  of  General  Hooker  have  left  tlie  vicinity  of  Aquia,  except 
the  corps  of  General  Smith,  which  went  to  Newport  News.  It  is  also  ; 
reported  that  it  is  Genernl  Hooker’s  intention  to  cross  the  river  and  ad-  ! 
vance  as  soon  as  the  state  of  the  roads  will  permit,  and  that  in  fact  he 
has  issued  repeated  orders  to  that  effect.  I am  not  fully  informed  as  to 
their  apparent  intentions,  strength,  &c.,  on  the  south  side  of  the  James 
Itiver,  but  we  should  be  prepared  to  concentrate  to  meet  him  wherever  | 
he  should  advance  in  force.  From  present  indications  it  is  fair  to  pre 
sume  that*  we  shall  be  called  upon  to  engage  him  first  on  the  Kappa-  i 
hanuock,  and  I desire  you  to  be  prepared  for  this  movement,  and  make  | 
endeavors  to  keep  yourself  advised  of  the  disposition  and  preparations  | 
of  the  enemy  on  our  front  for  moving  the  troops  recently  detached  from  j 
the  First  Corps,  or  such  of  them  or  others  as  may  be  necessary  in  that  I 
direction.  As  our  numbers  will  not  admit  of  our  meeting  him  on  equality 
everywhere  we  must  endeavor,  by  judicious  dispositions,  to  be  enabled 
to  make  our  troops  available  in  any  quarter  where  they  may  be  needed, 
after  the  emergency  passes  in  one  place  to  transfer  them  to  any  other 
point  that  may  be  threatened.  Please  let  me  hear  from  you  on  this 
subject. 

E.  E.  LEE. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  A.  0.,  March  16,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Ins]gector  General^  Richmond^  Ya.  : 

General  : I send  you  to-day  a tabular  statement  of  my  command, 
as  required  by  the  letter  of  Maj.  [S.  W.]  Melton,  of  the  10th  instant.  I 
call  your  attention  to  the  following  list  of  unattached  companies  of 
heavy  artillery  : Captain  McBryde’s  company,  92  strong.  Fort  Caswell ; 
Capt.  W.  A.  Holland’s  company,  54  strong.  Fort  Johnson;  Capts.  A. 
McRae’s  company,  143  strong,  and  George  Tait’s  company,  84  stroiig, 
Fort  Fisher;  Capt.  Calvin  Barnes’  company,  61  strong.  Fort  Saint 
Philip ; Capts.  D.  M.  Beuie’s  company,  78  strong,  E.  G.  Rankin’s  com- 
pany, 116  strong,  city  garrison;  W.  B.  Lewis,  Company  A,  86  strong, 
H.  M.  Barnes,  Company  B,  90  strong,  and  C.  [M.]  T.  McCauley,  Com- 
pany C,  94  strong.  Total,  898.  The  last  three  constitute  the  Tenth 
North  Carolina  Battalion,  and  under  the  command  of  Maj.  W.«L.  Young. 
These  companies  are  in  service  for  three  years  or  the  war  ; are  well 
drilled  and  armed.  They  are  heavy  artillery,  and  have  been  raised  in 
the  district  for  the  defense  of  the  Cape  Fear  and  Wilmington.  I think 
it  will  be  better  on  all  accounts  and  that  the  efficiency  of  these  troops 
will  be  promoted  by  organizing  them  into  a regiment.  Should  a move 
from  here  become  necessary  this  will  have  to  be  done.  I propose  that 
the  ten  companies  as  they  stand  in  order  of  the  rank  of  captains  shall 
be  constituted  or  accepted  as  a regiment  of  Confederate  troops ; and  as 
they  are  already  in  service  I recommend  for  appointment  the  following 
field  officers : To  be  colonel,  Robert  Tansill,  captain,  C.  S.  Army ; to  be 
lieutenant-colonel,  John  J.  Hedrick,  major  battalion  of  artillery,  C.  S. 
Army,  and  to.be  major,  W.  L.  Young,  major  battalion  of  artillery,  C. 
S.  Army.  Capt.  [Robert]  Tansill,  C.  S.  Army  (Regular  Army),  formerly 
an  officer  of  Marines  and  late  colonel  First  [Second]  Yirgiuia  Artillery, 
is  a Yirginian,  is  now  acting  inspector-general,  and  has  been  frequently 
recommended  for  promotion.  His  knowledge  of  the  profession  is 
thorough  and  extensive.  I know  no  officer  whom  I should  prefer  to 
command  a regiment.  Alaj.  John  J.  Hedrick  is  from  this  town  and 


Chap.  CoI^RESPONDENCE,  ETC. COnEEEEEATE.  923 

state,  and  is  a most  active  and  indefatigable  officer.  He  is  now  in  com- 
mand of  Fort  Saint  Philip.  The  works  he  has  constructed  both  there 
and  at  Fort  Fisher  entitle  him  to  great  credit.  He  is  an  artillery  officer 
of  rare  promise  and  an  excellent  disciplinarian.  Major  Young  is  also 
from  this  State,  and  commands  a battalion  of  three  companies.  He  is 
a young  officer  of  great  energy,  and  has  displayed  great  zeal  in  the  de- 
fense of  this  place.  These  officers  are  all  on  duty  here  and  with  the 
troops  it  is  proposed  'they  shall  command.  If  you  approve  of  this  sug- 
gestion please  to  let  me  know  and  lay  this  matter  before  the  President 
for  his  action. 

Very  respcctfullv, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- G enera  1. 


Headquarters,  March  17,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorough,  N.  C. : 

General  : Your  telegram  of  report  of  the  scout  Harrison  is  received. 
If  it  is  confirmed  you  had  better  move  GarnetPs  brigade  near  enough 
to  you  to  be  in  easy  supporting  distance  and  keep  me  advised,  that  I 
may  send  you  other  re-enforcements.  I shall  hold  three  other  brigades 
ready  for  you.  Meantime  get  all  the  provisions  together  that  you  can 
and  have  your  supply  of  ammunition  well  looked  to.  If  you  do  not  get 
satisfactory  information  otherwise  put  your  cavalry  together  and  send 
it  with  a battery  toward  the  enemy^s  rear  and  learn  what  the  enemy  is 
going  to  do. 

I remain,  very  resiiectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTPEET, 
Lieutenant-  General.,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  March  17, 1863. 
General  M.  Jenkins,  Franldm,  N.  C. : , 

General  : General  H.  H.  Hill  telegrai)hs  the  arrival  of  re-enforce- 
ments at  New  Berne.  Those  at  Suffolk  are  probably  intended  for  New 
Berne. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  Genera  I,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  March  17,  1863. 

General  li.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding,  ffc.,  Frederichshurg,  Va. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  16th  is  just  received.  I have  Hood’s 
division  on  the  railroad  ready  for  a move  in  any  direction,  and  have 
kept  him  tln^e  with  the  view  to  some  such  emergency  as  indicated  in 
your  letter.  The  order  for  the  return  of  the  troops  from  Westm-u  Vir- 
ginia to  their  old  positions  and  some  movements  that  I thought  best  to 
make  in  order  to  draw  the  enemy  out  into  some  development  of,  his 
plans  have  made  it  necessary  to  detach  some  of  General  Pickett’s 
division.  I shall  be  ready  to  join  you  with  Hood’s  division  at  any  mo- 
pient  unless  there  is  a fine  opportunity  to  strike  a decided  blow  luwe, 
in  which  case  I think  I had  better  act  promptly  and  trust  to  your  being 


924 


NOliTH  CAHOLlNA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAP.  XXX. 


able  to  hold  the  force  in  your  front  in  check  until  I can  join  you.  The 
force  at  Newport  News  is  reported  to-day  as  moving  to  re-enforce  Suf- 
folk. I fear  that  the  real  object  is  to  join  Foster  at  New  Berne.  If  this 
is  the  intention  I shall  be  obliged  to  move  all  of  PicketVs  division  down 
to  Goldsborough.  I have  tolerably  accurate  information  of  this  force 
and  put  it  down  at  20,000  full,  but  its  condition  is  such  that  I do  not 
regard  it  as  certain  to  succeed  in  any  desperate  undertaking.  The  pris- 
oner’s taken  at  Arkansas  Post  are  expected  here  to-day.  If  they  arrive 
they  will  be  organized  and  armed  at  once,  and  will  help  us  along  wonder- 
fully. 1 am  about  to  start  out  for  the  Blackwater,  and  will  write  to  you 
more  fully  on  my  return. 

I am,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

.Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston^  N.  G.,  March  17,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldsborough.^  A.  C. : 

General  : I herewith  inclose  dispatches*  from  Generals  Garnett  and 
Pettigrew  ; they  came  directed  to  you ; I opened  them  for  the  purpose 
of  gaining  information  of  the  enemy’s  movements.  I have  not  heard 
from  General  Pettigrew  since  I saw  you.  I think,  however,  that  be  is 
not  in  any  immediate  danger,  or  I should  have  heard  from  him  or  Cap- 
tain Whitford.  I have  sent  a courier  to  Captain  Whitford  to  find  out 
the  state  of  affairs  there  and  will  let  you  know  as  soon  as  I hear.  Gen- 
eral Eobertson  I have  not  yet  heard  from.  Mr.  J.  C.  Washington  has  a 
contract  with  the  Confederate  Government  for  the  delivery  of  a large 
amount  of  iron,  and  he  has  a lot  of  corn  here  to  enable  him  to  feed  his 
operatives.'  He  has  offered  to  exchange  this  corn  for  the  same  quantity 
in  the  vicinity  of  Tarborough,  and  as  it  is  more  abundant  there  than 
here  I think  it  would  be  well  to  make  the  exchange.  Will  I be  allowed 
to  make  the  exchange  1 The  quartermaster  there  could  give  him  the 
quantity  that  he  turns  over  to  the  quartermaster  at  this  post.  I have 
received  no  report  this  morning  from  my  pickets. 

Very  respectfully, 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-  G enera  1. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg.,  Ya.,  March  18,  1803. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding,  cfc.,  Frederichsburg,  Va. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  10.30  p.  m.  yesterday  is  received.  I do  not 
think  it  would  be  well  to  draw  off  any  portion  of  Pickett’s  division  at 
l)resent.  All  of  it  cannot  well  be  taken  from  here  as  long  as  the  eiieniy 
Iiolds  this  force  of  his  so  near  Eichmond.  The’  force  at  Newport  News 
and  Suffolk  cannot  be  less  than  20,000.  We  shall  have  to*  meet  that 
with  hardly  a third,  including  Pickett’s  division ; but  there  are  three 
brigades  of  Pickett’s  division  near  here,  which  may  possibly  be  thrown 
up  by  rail ; that  is  if  the  enemy  makes  no  effort  to  advance  by  the  south 
side."  I think,  however,  that  he  will  make  a diversion  from  Suffolk,  and 
as  strong  as  is  in  him. 

Your  letter,!  in  relation  to  supplies,  .of  yesterday  is  this  moment  re- 


*Not  found. 


tNot  found;  but  see  Longstreet  to  Hill,  same  date. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  925 

ceivecl.  All  things  considered  I now  think  that  our  better  plan  would 
have  been  to  fight  the  enemy  on  the  Eappahannock  with  the  force  that 
you  have  there,  or  slightly  diminished  even,  and  to  leave  the  force  that 
was  here  to  drive  back  the  enemy  in  North  Carolina  and  draw  out  the 
supplies  there.  I cannot  divest  myself  of  the  opinion  that  an  obstinate 
resistance  on  the  Eappahannock  will  hold  that  line,  and  the  force  that  I 
had  here  would  then  do  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  North  Carolina,  where 
it  seems  we  must  get  our  supplies.  With  the  force  left  here  by  the  with- 
drawal of  Hood^s  division  nothing  can  be  done  more  than  to  hold  our 
fortified  positions  and  railroads,  and  the  latter  is  somewhat  doubtful. 
If  it  is  necessary  to  give  ground  anywhere  it  seems  to  me  that  it  would 
have  been  better  to  retire  your  force  across  the  Anna,  and  to  keep  pos- 
session of  all  that  part  of  North  Carolina  where  we  may  be  able  to  get 
supplies.  From  your  report  of  the  scarcity  of  supplies  with  you  I fear 
that  Hood’s  division  may  be  more  than  you  can  supi)ly,  and  I doubt  if 
it  can  reach  you  in  time  by  marching.  I shall  therefore  try  and  have 
it  sent  by  railroad,  unless  I get  authority  by  telegraph  to  stop  it.  I 
shall  go  to  Eichmond  this  afternoon  and  await  there  further  intelli- 
gence. 

I remain,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 

P.  S. — The  enemy  is  re-enforcing  at  New  Berne  and  at  Suffolk.  His 
intentions  it  is  presumed  are  to  make  diversions  on  both  points  when 
he  movbs  to  cross  the  Eappahannock.  Success  at  either  point  will  be 
pushed,  of  course,  unless  he  fails  again  on  the  Eappahannock. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina, 

March  18,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  cfic.,  Goldshorough,  V.  G. : 


General  : The  commanding  general  has  received  your  letter  of  last 
night.  He  leaves  this  afternoon  for  Eichmond.  He  wrote  you  fully 
this  morning,  and  the  letter  is  sent  you  with  this.  By  his  direction  I 
liave  telegraphed  you  that  you  might  go  as  you  propose  and  use  Ean- 
som’s  brigade.  I have  also  telegraphed  to  General  Whiting  to  respond 
to  your  call  for  that  brigade.  The  enemy  seems  to  bo  pressing  on  the 
Eappahannock.  It  looks  as  if  a battle  must  soon  be  fought  there. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Headquarters,  March  18,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  : 

General  : I have  just  received  a letter  from  General  Lee,  calling  for 
Hood’s  division  back  upon  the  Eappahannock.  The  enemy  is  reported 
across  with  cavalry  and  artillery  at  Kelly’s  Ford  and  attempting  with 
infantry  at  United  States  Ford.  General  Lee  calls  for  myself  also 
and  Pickett’s  division.  The  latter,  I think,  cannot  be  spared;* at  all 
events  not  till  we  ascertain  what  is  likely  to  be  the  disposition  of  the 
force  lately  held  at  Newport  News.  I shall  start  back  to  Eappahannock 


926  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  | 

to-morrow  unless  other  news  is  received.  If  the  enemy  moves  against  i 
you  you  will  have  to  try  and  hold  your  positions  by  obstinate  resistance,  j 
The  force  [lately]  at  Newport  Kews  is  supposed  to  be  at  Suffolk,  and  a j 
part  of  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  re-enforcements  reported  at  New  Berne.  ! 
Try  and  be  well  advised  of  the  troops  in  your  front,  and  if  any  re-en-  1 
forcements  come  from  Charleston  call  on  General  Beauregard  for  some 
of  his  forces,  advising  him,  of  course,  that  the  enemy  is  re-enforced  in 
your  front  from  his.  If  you  find  that  you  cannot  hold  and  protect  your 
railroad,  then  Wilmington  must  be  looked  to  and  held  at  all  hazards.  It 
cannot  be  long  before  we  will  be  able  to  help  you  from  the  Eappahan- 
nock.  I doubt  now  if  we  will  be  able  to  give  you  any  further  aid 
from  there  until  the  battle  is  fought  on  the  Eappahannock.  The  en- 
emy may  advance  by  the  Blackwater  with  his  re-enforcements  or  they  . 
may  be  moved  down  to  re-enforce  the  garrison  at  New  Berne.  What- 
ever arrangement  he  makes  it  seems  now  that  we  must  first  overcome 
his  force  at  Fredericksburg. 

I remain,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Eichmond 


General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding j Fredericksburg,  Va. : 


, Ya.,  March  11),  18G3. 


General  : I wrote  you  hastily  yesterday,  which  partially  ‘answered 
your  letter  of  the  17th  instant.  In  one  of  your  letters  you  ask  what  I 
can  do  toward  procuring  sui)plies  in  North  Carolina.  I can,  I think, 
get  all  of  the  supplies  in  that  StatS  if  I can  use  my  forces ; but  if  thi^ 
two  divisions  are  to  be  held  in  readiness  to  join  you,  or  even  one  of 
them,  I can  do  nbthing.  The  enemy  has  40,000  men,  at  the  lowest  esti- 
mate, between  York  Eiver  and  the  Cape  Fear.  I have  about  the  same, 
but  almost  every  available  man  for  active  operations  must  be  held  to 
re-enforce  you ; therefore  I cannot  use  them.  If  the  divisions  of  Pickett 
and  Hood  are  to  be  withdrawn  whenever  the  enemy  on  the  Eappahan- 
nock  advances  we  shall  leave  a force  of  twenty-odd  thousand  near 
Suffolk,  with  no  force  to  opi)Ose  it,  except  Davis’  brigade,  and  on  this 
side  of  the  James  Eiver  the  usual  garrison  of  the  city.  A tolerably 
respectable  move  from  Suffolk  would  give  the  enemy  iiossession  of  Pe- 
tersburg fortified.  He  could  take  it  without  the  loss  of  a man.  That 
point  in  his  possession  North  Carolina  would  soon  be  at  his  command 
from  the  railroad  east.  That  lino  would  cut  off  most  of  the  supplies 
that  we  depend  upon  for  our  sustenance.  I know  that  it  is  the  habit 
with  individuals  in  all  armies  to  represent  their  own  positions  as  the 
most  important  ones,  and  it  may  be  that  this  feeling  is  operating  vitli 
me;  but  I am  not  prompted  by  any  desire  to  do,  or  to  attempt  to  do, 
great  things.  I only  wish  to  do  what  I regard  as  my  duty — give  you 
the  full  benefit  of  my  views.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  a matter  of  prime 
necessity  with  us  to  keep  the  enemy  out  of  North  Carolina  in  order  that 
we  muy  draw  out  all  the  supjfiies  there,  and  if  we  give  him  ground  at 
all  it  would  be  better  to  do  so  from'the  Ea])pahaniiock.  It  is  right,  as 
you  say,  to  concentrate  and  crush  him;  but  will  it  be  better  to  concen- 
trate upon  his  grand  army  rather  than  on  his  detachments  and  then 
make  a grand  concentration  on  the  grand  army?  If  we  draw  off  from 
the  front  of  his  grand  army  Ave  ought  to  be  able  to  crush  rapidly  his 
detachments,  and  at  the  same  time  hold  the  grand  army  in  check  a^  fiir 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


927 


back  as  the  South  Anna  at  least,  particularly  while  the  roads  are  so 
very  bad,  then  concentrate  on  the  grand  army  and  try  and  dispose  of 
that.  We  have  been  rqady  to  light  for  the  last  three  months,  and  have 
only  failed  to  do  so  because  we  could  not  reach  his  force  on  the  Ka]v 
pahannock,  and  because  it  was  not  convenient  to  touch  him  elsewhere. 
If  we  delay  until  he  is  again  ready  to  give  battle  we  give  him  all  that 
he  can  desire,  besides  we  fail  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  opportunity  to 
produce  a favorable  political  impression  at  the  iTorth,  or  rather  we  fail 
to  reap  the  rewards  of  that  impression  already  produced.  If  we  cripi)ie 
him  only,  a little  at  one  place  and  then  another,  we  may  mutually  pro- 
duce grand  results.  I hope  that  I have  gone  into  details  sufficiently  to 
give  you  my  views,  but  I am  always  ready  to  do  and  to  say  all  that  I can. 

I remain,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 

General  Hood  is  ordered  back  to  his  old  cam^:). 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  War  Dept.,  G.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Ya.,  March  19,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Richmond,  Va. : 

General  : The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  say  to  you  that  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  telegram  received  from  General  Lee  you  are  directed 
to  recall  the  divisions  of  Generals  Hood  and  Pickett  and  to  retain  them 
in  their  former  iiositions  or  such  others  as  you  may  select.  In  your 
absence,  and  for  the  sake  of  expedition,  similar  orders  were  issued  di- 
rectly to  Generals  Hood  and  Pickett  yesterday. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

JOHI^  WITHERS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

March  19,  1803. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c. : ^ • 

General  : On  my  arrival  here  yesterday  I learned  that  the  cavalry 
force  of  the  enemy  which  crossed  at  Kelly’s  Ford  had  subsequently  re- 
tired, and  that  the  reported  attempt  to  force  a passage  at  the  United 
States  Ford  had  not  been  made.  I therefore  sent  a telegram  to  General 
Cooper,  requesting  that  the  divisions  ordered  uj)  here  might  be  stopped 
and  returned  to  their  former  jjositions.  I need  not  remind  you  that  it 
Avill  be  necessary  to  maintain  great  vigilance  in  your  front  as  well  as 
here,  and  to  hold  the  troops  at  both  i)oints  ready  to  co-operate  when- 
ever it  is  correctly  ascertained  where  the  attack  of  the  enemy  will  fall. 
I hope  you  will  be  able  to  act  on  the  suggestions  contained  in  my  letter 
Iroin  Richmond  relative  to  obtaining  all  the  sui.>plies  possible  of  Ibrage 
and  subsistence  from  North  Carolina  and  turn  all  the  energies  of  your 
department  in  that  direction. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General, 


928  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  i 

I 

State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  N.  (7.,  March  19,  1863.  j. 

General  B.  E.  Lee:  j 

Dis  Excellency  Governor  Vance  lias  received  information  tliat  certain  i 
soldiers  belonging  to  the  brigades  of  Generals  Bamseur  and  Hoke  are! 
now  under  arrest  and  are  being  tried  for  desertion.  His  Excellency  isj 
deeply  pained  to  learn  this,  and  directs  me  to  communicate  to  you  the  ; 
facts  and  circumstances  connected  with  the  return  of  these  men  to  thej 
army  While  Maj.  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith  was  in  command  of  this  depart-  j 
nient’he  caused  an  order  to  be  issued  extending  a full  pardon  (except 
forfeiture  of  pay  for  the  period  of  unauthorized  absence)  to  all  enlisted ! 
men  absent  without  leave  who  should  voluntarily  return  to  their  respect- 
ive commands  on  or  before  February  10.  Upon  consultation  between : 
General  Smith  and  the  Governor  it  was  thought  that  a proclamation 
by  His  Excellency,  appealing  to  the  patriotism  and  State  pride  of  ab- 
sentees, would  induce  their  speedy  return  to  duty.  A proclamation  was  i 
accordinglly  issued,  and  the  reasonable  expectation  as  to  its  effect  was: 
fully  realized  and  hundreds  were  induced  to  return  to  their  colors.  The : 
period  at  first  limited  was  so  brief  that  numbers  in  remote  parts  of  tbei 
State  were  unable  to  comply.  With  a knowledge  of  this  fact,  and  m 
conformity  with  an  order  of  General  French,  another  proclamation  was 
issued  extending  the  time  to  March  5.  It  is  true  that  General  Smith’s 
order  could  only  extend  to  his  own  department,  but  His  Excellency 
thought  it  right’to  extend  it  to  all  North  Carolina  soldiers.  Copies  of 
the  order  of  General  Smith  and  the  proclamation  of  the  Governor  are 
herewith  inclosed.=^  In  the  opinion  of  His  Excellency  the  punishment  of 
these  men  would  be  a gross  violation  of  justice  and  good  faith,  and  he 
enters  his  most  solemn  protest  against  it.  In  issuing  these  proclama- 
tions he  was  actuated  by  a sincere  and  earnest  desire  to  promote  the  in- 
terest of  the  xuiblic  service  and  he  had  reason  to  believe  that  his  course 
would  meet  the  aiixirobation  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  and  he  trusts 
and  believes  that  in  this  reasonable  hope  he  will  not  be  disappointed. 
He  will  not  allow  himself  to  doubt  that  your  sense  of  justice  and  right 
will  induce  you  to  cause  all  such  soldiers  to  be  immediately  discharged 

from  arrest.  , ^ ^ 

With  sentiments  of  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  A.  BABNES, 
Aide-de  Cam]g  to  the  Governor. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond.,  Va.,  March  19,  1863. 


Maj.  W.  T.  Alexander, 

Quartermaster  and  Inspector  of  Transportation : 

Major  : I have  the  jileasure  to  inclose  a.  tabular  statement  of  the 
distances  from  the  Capitol  to  the  batteries  around  Bichmond.  The  dis- 
tances both  by  the  road  and  by  air- line  are  given.  ^ 

General  Siriitli’a  order  and  the  Governor’a  second  proclamation  not  found. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


929 


Distances  of  the  'batteries  around  Eichmond  from  the  Capitol. 


No.  of  bat- 
tery. 

Location. 

Distance  by 

road. 

Distance  by 

air-line. 

1 

On  James  River,  opposite  Drewrv’s  Island 

Miles. 

Miles. 

93 

2 

Marion  Hill 

•>4 

QJL 

3 

Mount  Erin 

Q 

91 

4 

Blakey’s  Mill  road 

O 

1 3 

5 

Stone V Run 

•I-4 

13 

6 

Mechanicsville  turnpike 

9-1 

1 5 

7 

Mount  Comfort  Cential  Railroad , 

^4 

95 

13 

8 

Mitchell’s  track 

2-1 

1 3 

9 

Brooke  turnpike 

^4 

9-1 

•*4 

1 Z 

10 

Fair  Ground 

94 

91 

11 

Wertham  plank-road 

94 

^4 

2 

13 

Danville  Railroad 

94 

1 1 

14 

Danville  Railroad 

^4 

2 

94 

15 

Coal-Pit  turnpike 

02 

3 

93 

16 

Broad  Rock  Island 

O4 

■^4 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


J.  r.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


Abstract  from  Field  Eeturn  of  Picicetfs  division,  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Caro- 
lina, temporarily  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  J.  L.  Kemper,  March  19,  1863. 


NEAR  PETERSBURG,  VA. 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Infantry. 

Artillery. 

W 

U 

<V 

0 

0 

d 

tn 

0 

m 

0 

§ 

larnett’s  brigade 

^rniistead’s  brigade 

93 

94 

78 

1,  279 
1,227 
922 

1,  695 
1,585 
1,209 
434 

2,  712 
2,  900 
2,  012 
537 

iemper’s  brigade 

worse’s  brigade 

\rlillery  battalion 

17 

374 

Grand  total 

265 

3,  428 

17 

374 

4,  923 

8, 161 

Noth:  from  return. — Eifty-seventli  Virginia  Regiment,  aggregate  present  last  report,  528;  on  (le- 
ached duty  at  Fort  Powhatan,  First  Virginia  Regiment,  aggregate  present  last  report,  206;  on 
letached  service  at  Fort  Powhatan.  Bradford’s  battery  assigned  to  duty  with  the  division  since  last 
©port.  [Qamett’s  brigade]  on  detached  duty  in  North  Carolina. 

59  R R — VOL  XVIII 


930  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  l^rench,  March  20, 18G3. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

' Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate,  xiresent 
j ' and  absent. 

Officers. 

1 

j Men. 

1 . 

Hi'isj.  Gen.  M.  Jenltius’  command  [no  report)  ......................... 

29th  Regiment  Virginia  Volunteers 

36 

8 

3 

4 

4 

1 

9 

11 

22 

GOG 

140 

G2 

103 

23 

124 

190 

1 

732 

16G 

87 

72 

114 

24 

137 

218 

80 

915 

179 

100 

Moseley ’s  artillery  battalion  ......  ......  . 

StlirfliVcLDt  S 

98 

1251 

25 

146 

302 

80 

Ctinip  parolpd  prisoneTS  

On  duty  in  hospitals,  Petersburg 

98 

1,413  1 ],G30- 

1,  970 1 

Headquarters,  i 
Petersburg,  Va.y  March  20,  1803. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  liichmond,  Va.: 

General:  I have  the  Iionor  to  forward  herewith  a rough  statement* 
of  the  cavalrj^  force  in  this  department.  As  soon  as  I can  get  accurate 
statements  of  the  regiments  and  detached  companies  I propose  to  or- 
ganize the  force  into  two  brigades,  and  desire  General  Ransonf  s promo- 
tion as  maior-general,  to  command  the  cavalry.  Col.  E.  D.  Hall  is  higlily 
recommended  by  Mai.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  for  brigadier-gmieral  ot  cavalry. 
I hope  that  he  may  be  appointed  to  take  the  Second  Brigade.  H thr- 
force  cannot  be  formed  into  a division  of  cavalry  I desire  authority  t(| 
transfer  General  Ransom  from  his  position  in  the  infantry  to  the  charge 
of  the  cavalry  as  a brigade.  I have  already  explained  to  the  Depart 
ment  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  efficient  operations  of  the  c^mlry,  aiut 
desire  that  some  action  may  be  had  which  will  increase  its  efficiency. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  cbedmnt  se^^^^ 

JAMES  EUiNGSiKLLl, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Maj. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston.)  N.  C.,  March  20,  1803. 

Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldshorough,  N.  C.: 

General  : I send  up  names  of  those  who  acted  well  in  skirmishes  oi; 
the  7th  instant.  The  names  of  those  who  acted  well  last  week  1 wii 
send  up  as  soon  as  the  commanders  can  make  them  out.  The  cliarge 
against  Eorstler,  the  deserter,  go  up  in  the  morning.  Major  Guioii  iq 
pSrted  this  morning,  and  I directed  him  to  examine  the  country  witli  . 
^dew  of  making  a line  from  the  work  around  the  obstructions  to  \V  asH 
ingtoffis  Hill.  I will  report  as  soon  as  it  can  be  made.  I 
very  much  to  have  Coleman  or  some  good  engineer  officer.  Hie  rtgi 


Not  found. 


CnAi>.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


931 


jnent  is  ready  to  make  the  demonstration  upon  Core  Creek.  The  weather 
is  still  bad,  and  by  starting  to-morrow  it  will  make  the  attack  upon 
Sunday,  and  1 would  prefer  that  the  men  should  rest  on  that  day  if 
any  other  day  AYill  answer  as  well.  Please  telegraph  me  whether  you 
desire  the  move  to  be  made  to-morrow. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Ya.,  March  20,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding,  (be.  ; 

General  : General  Kemper’s  brigade  is  on  the  road  to  co-operate 
with  Garnett  in  an  expedition  against  Washington.  I will  seud  General 
Pickett  to  take  charge  of  the  expedition.  I desire  that  you  will  collect 
and  give  General  Pickett  such  information,  guides,  and  written  instruc- 
tions as  you  deem  proper,  and  to  telegraph  me  what  number  of  batteries 
will  be  required  for  the  expedition  and  the  kind  of  pieces.  I shall  give 
General  Pickett  general  instructions  but  subject  to  such  changes  as  you 
may  see  fit  to  make.  I will  send  you  a copy  of  them.  Meanwhile  I 
wish  you  to  continue  your  arrangements,  and  if  the  expedition  had  bet- 
ter be  made  immediately  do  not  allow  this  to  delay  it.  I send  General 
Pickett  to  take  charge  of  it,  because  I think  it  prudent  that  you  should 
be  at  Goldsborough  with  all  the  force  now  there  to  watch  the  enemy 
and  prevent  any  movement  against  the  expedition  from  New  Berne. 
If  there  is  no  probability  of  such  a move  nor  of  trouble  at  Goldsborough 
from  the  force  at  New  Berne  you  had  better  proceed  at  once  on  the 
expedition  against  Washington  if  it  is  already  prepared. 

I remain,  very  respectfull3q  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  Gen  eral,  Commandin g. 

P.  S.— In  your  letter  of  the  IGth,  giving  some  account  of  your  expe- 
dition against  New  Berne,  you  intimate  that  there  may  have  been  some 
desire  on  the  part  of  the  Department  ^^to  perpetrate  a swindle  ” upon 
you  in  putting  you  in  command  in  North  Carolina.  I presume  that 
this  was  not  intended-  as  an  official  communication  and  have  not  for- 
warded it.  I hope  that  you  will  send  up  another  account  of  you  trip. 


Richmond,  March  21,  18G3. 

General  J.  H.  Winder, 

Commanding  Department  of  Henrico,  &c. : 

General  : I am  instructed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  ask  that  you 
will  strengthen  the  night  guard  of  this  building  by  adding  another 
sentinel. 

He  will  report  for  orders  to  Mr.  Peebles,  disbursing  clerk  of  the  War 
Department. 

Yery  respectfully,  &c., 

JOHN  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  Gmemh 


932 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA, 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 

Petersburg^  Ya.^  March  21,  1863.  j 

General  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding.^  cfcc.,  Goldsborough,  N.  G. : : 

General:  Your  letters  of  the  19th  and  20th  are  received.  IfEansom’s  j 
brigade  is  brought  to  Goldsborough  you  will  not  need  Kemper’s,  and  it  i 
had  better  be  returned  at  once,  and  Eansom’s  being  at  Goldsborough  ! 
will  relieve  me  of  all  anxiety  about  that  place  and  save  the  necessity  of  ‘ 
sending  General  Pickett  down.  I have  ordered  my  Whitworth  gun  to  1 
be  sent  you  for  the  expedition,  but  I cannot  let  it  go  any  farther,  as 
General  Lee  regards  it  as  part  of  his  command,  and  will  require  it  if  he 
recalls  me  to  his  aid.  The  snow  is  10  or  12  inches  deep,  and  the  Whit-  ! 
worth  at  Fort  Powhatan.  I fear  therefore  that  I will  not  be  able  to  « 
get  It  here  in  time  to  ship  it  to-morrow  afternoon,  but  it  shall  go  as  soon 
as  it  is  possible  to  get  it  off.  Send  some  one  to  meet  it  and  conduct  it  i 
to  you.  It  will  be  ordered  to  Tarborough  from  here. 

i desire  you  to  move  from  Greenville  as  quickly  as  possible.  The  suc- 
cess of  such  expeditions  depends  altogether  upon  their  promptness  and 
action.  If  you  need  Kemper  at  any  point  in  your  rear  keep  him  for  the  ' 
time,  but  send  him  back  as  soon  as  possible.  General  Pickett  will  not 
be  sent  down,  as  General  Eansom’s  presence  at  Goldsborough  will  sat- 
isfy all  conditions.  You  must  always  have  an  eye  to  drawing  out  the 
supplies  from  the  country  in  which  you  move.  You  will  not  confine 
yourself  to  the  prices  fixed  by  the  Department  in  purchasing  supplies, 
but  give  the  market  price  and  liberal  prices  for  transportation  when- 
ever you  purchase  near  the  enemy’s  lines ; and  when  you  purchase  and 
find  that  you  can  draw  off  the  supplies,  take  every  pound  that  is  in  the 
market,  and  when  you  find  it  necessary  impress  at  the  market  prices. 
If  it  is  necessary,  you  can  leave  Garnett’s  brigade  to  protect  trains,  &c., 
while  hauling.  I suppose  that  you  will  need  General  Pettigrew’s  at 
Goldsborough.  If  not,  you  can  also  use  it  in  aiding  you  to  get  out 
supplies. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

' JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-General. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston.)  AT.  (7.,  March  21,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldsborough^  N.  C. : 

General  : Your  note  of  this  date  has  been  received.  From  its  con- 
tents I presume  you  intend  me  to  await  Kemper’s  arrival,  should  he  be 
accidentally-  detained  beyond  Monday.  I understand  Blount  Hall  to 
be  the  place  you  desire  me  to  go  to.  I think  it  a more  suitable  position 
than  Snow  Hill  for  the  reason  you  assign.  The  place  I refer  to  is,  I 
presume,  the  one  you  mean  ; it  is  on  one  of  the  roads  leading  from  this 
place  to  Greenville,  about  18  or  20  miles  from  here,  between  the  Con- 
tentnea  and  Greenville,  and  some  6 or  8 miles  from  the  Keuse.  I shall 
take  with  me  three  days’  rations.  I have  but  four  pieces  of  artillery 
now  belonging  to  my  brigade.  General  Pettigrew  not  having  returned 
the  two  rifle  guns.  I wish  to  take  one  of  the  four-gun  batteries  here; 
there  will  then  be  left  twelve  pieces  besides  those  Kemper  will  bring 
with  him.  I would  like  to  have  the  troops  I leave  behind  on  picket 
duty  relieved  as  soon  as  possible.  I think  they  can  be  relieved  on 
Wednesday,  and  wish  you  would  so  order  it.  Kethercutt’s  people  will 


Chap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  933 

be  here  and  they  know  the  country  thoroughly.  I will  not  send  the 
regiment  to  Core  Creek  on  Monday,  as  it  could  not  join  me  before 
Thursday  or  Friday,  would  leave  my  brigade  very  much  scattered,  and 
would  very  much  impair  its  efficiency.  Kemper  can  make  the  demon- 
stration if  you  still  desire  it.  Colonel  Lewis  will  remain  in  command 
of  the  outposts  until  my  men  are  relieved,  and  he  can  give  all  the  in- 
formation. The  regiment  that  I should  have  sent  knew  nothing  at  all 
of  the  country.  With  KethercutCs  people  there  will  be  no  lack  of 
guides. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUmjJS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-  Gene'i  al. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  21,  1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Commanding,  cfc.  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  19th  is  received.  I am  doing  all  that 
1 can  to  draw  the  supplies  from  the  eastern  portion  of  North  Carolina, 
but  have,  been  obliged  to  detach  portions  of  General  Pickett’s  division 
for  that  purpose.  My  o-perations  must  be  very  limited,  as  I do  not  feel 
authorized  to  use  Hood’s  division  for  any  purpose,  as  it  would  take  him 
so  [far]  from  you  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  join  you  at  Fredericks- 
burg. In  this  connection  I would  suggest  that  the  troops  should  be 
taken  up  by  rail  instead  of  the  artillery.  I think  that  you  will  need  the 
infantry  more  than  the  artillery.  When  I arrived  at  Eichmond  I found 
that  the  troops  were  moving  up  to  join  you  by  marching  and  the  bat- 
talion of  artillery  shipping  by  rail.  The  movement  of  the  latter  had 
better  be  delayed  than  that  of  the  former. 

I remain,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET. 

P.  S. — I send  you  a report  just  received.  Eeports  reach  me  from 
various  directions  leading  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  commander  on 
the  Black  water  has  reported  the  arrival  of  large  re-enforcements  at 
Suffolk.  I believe  that  an  advantageous  battle  could  be  made  at  Suf- 
folk in  the  next  fifteen  days,  but  at  least  one  division  in  addition  to 
what  we  have  would  be  necessary. 

Most  respectfully, 

el.  L. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 


March  21,  18G3. 


bicut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding  Department,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant.  I had 
hoped  that  you  would  have  been  able  with  the  troops  in  North  Carolina 
to  have  accomplished  the  object  proposed  in  my  letter  of  the  17th* 
and  did  not  suppose  that  you  would  have  required  Pickett’s  and  Hood’s 
divisions,  as  from  information  I received  the  enemy  between  the  Eoan 
oke  and  Tar  is  teeble.  I still  think  if  you  can  retain  them  in  rescrvp 


can  retain  them  in  reserve, 
„ ^ re  a blow  can  1 ' 

be^the  best  disposition  of  them.  If,  however,  you  see  an  opportu- 


to  be  thrown  on  any  point  attacked  or  where  a blow  can  be  struck,  it 
will  ^ ’ ’ 


*Not  found. 


934 


Js^oRTH  carOl^a  And  s.  e.  Virginia. 


[CiiAr.  XXX. 


nity  of  dealing  a damaging  blow,  or  of  driving  bim  from  any  important 
positions,  do  not  be  idle,  but  act  promptly.  If  circumstances  render  it 
impossible  or  disadvantageous  for  you  to  rejoin  this  army  wiien  attacked 
we  must  withdraw  toward  you,  if  we  cannot  resist  alone. 

In  operating  against  any  point  accessible  to  the  enemy’s  gunboats  be 
prepared  for  them.  I am  confident  that  at  all  times  and  in  all  places 
you  will  do  all  that  can  be  done  for  the  defense  of  the  country  and 
advancement  of  the  service,  and  are  ready  to  co-operate  or  act  singly  as 
circumstances  dictate.  I only  wish  you  therefore  to  keep  me  advised 
of  your  movements  that  I may  shape  mine  accordingly,  and  not  to  feel 
trammeled  in  your  operations  other  than  is  required  by  the  general  plan 
of  oi)erations  when  an  opportunity  offers  for  you  to  advance  the  object 
of  the  campaign. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  very  truly,  yours, 

lb  E.  LEE, 

General. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  N.  C.,  March  21,  1803. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : • 


Sir  : Yours  of  7th  instant,  inclosing  letters  from  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Cook  and  General  Jones,  in  relation  to  impressment  of  forage  by  a de- 
tachment of  General  Jenkins’  cavalry,  has  been  received.  I am  sorry 
to  see  that  the  charge  of  impressment  is  denied  upon  the  authority  of 
Sergeant  Hale.  The  concurrent  testimony  of  the  citizens  of  about 
twenty  counties  with  at  least  fifty  letters  to  that  efiect  in  my  office 
would  seem  to  be  sufficient  to  establish  a fact  of  general  notoriety. 
Those  men  were  in  several  detachments,  operating  in  as  many  different 
counties,  and  Sergeant  Hale  hardly  could  know  what  they  were  all  doing 
at  the  same  time.  Their  method  was  to  go  to  a farmer’s  house  and  tell 
him  they  wanted  corn  at  $1.50  jicr  bushel,  and  if  he  did  not  sell  it  they 
would  take  it.  In  some  instances  their  quartermaster  attended  public 
sales  and  publicly  notified  the  assemblage  (most  of  them  families  of 
absent  soldiers)  that  they  need  not  bid  for  the  corn;  that  they  were 
determined  to  have  it.  Yielding  where  resistance  would  have  heen 
useless  they  (the  cavalry)  took,  the  corn  at  such  price  as  they  saNV 
proper  to  pay,  and  this  is  not  impressment ! I beg  leave  also  to  assure 
you  that  the  imputations  indulged  in  by  General  Jones  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Cook  against  the  lo.yalty  of  the  people  of  that  region  (I  suppose 
also  upon  the  authority  of  Sergeant  Hale)  are  entirely  without  founda- 
tion in  fact,  the  refusal  to  take  Confederate  mone.y,  if  such  was  the  case, 
originating  solely  in  the  fact  that  they  did  not  have  the  corn  to  sell. 
Neither  North  Carolina  monej^  nor  gold  could  bu3^  an  article  which  was 
not  in  the  country".  That  country',  to  m.v  personal  knowledge,  may 
safely  challenge  any  similar  region  in  the  South  to  show  a better  mus- 
ter-roll in  the  army.  But  that  is  not  the  matter  at  issue.  I coui])lain 
that  a large  bod.y  of  broken-down  cavalry  horses  are  in  North  Carolina, 
eating  up  the  subsistence  of  the  people  in  a region  desolated  by  drought 
and  reduced  to  the  verge  of  starvation  ; impressing  it  at  prices  about 
one-half  the  market  rates.  The  people  or  the  horses  must  suffer.  I 
ask  for  the  removal  of  the  horses.  Is  it  denied  or  refused  ? That  is 
the  question.  I beg  leave  to  disabuse  jmur  mind  of  the  impression 
whicli  it  seems  to  entertain,  that  I objected  to  these  impressments  be- 


Chap.  XXX  j CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


935 


cause  tljey  were  for  Virginia  cavalry.  By  no  means.  I did  not  term 
them  such,  at  least  did  not  so  intend  to  term  them.  I have  no  preju- 
dice against  the  troops  from  any  State  engaged  in  defending  the  com- 
mon cause,  but  I am  unwilling  to  see  the  bread  taken  from  the  mouths 
of  women  and  children  for  the  use  of  any  troops,  when  those  troops 
might  be  easily  removed  to  regions  where  there  is  corn  to  sell,  and  1 
earnestly  request  once  more  that  they  may  be  so  removed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  VANCE. 


[ludorseiuenls.  ] 

March  25, 18G3. 

Eespectfully  referred  to  Maj.  Gen.  S.  Jones  for  information  and  re- 
port; also  for  reference  to  Brigadier-General  Jenkins’  command.  It  is 
a matter  of  much  concern  to  this  Department  that  there  is  so  much  of 
evil  spoken  of  General  Jenkins’  bands  of  cavalry. 

Bv  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

eT.  A.  CAMPBELL, 

. Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  West  Virginia, 

April  0,  18G3. 

Eespectfully  returned  to  the  War  Department  with  the  rei)ort  *of 
Col.  W.  H.  French  of  the  3d  instant.  My  own  remarks  on  this  letter 
were  given  in  my  letter*  of  the  2d  instant  to  the  Secretarv  of  War. 

SAM.  JONES, 

Major-  General. 

[Inclosiire.] 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Salem.,  Fa.,  April  3,  18C3. 

Maj.  Gen.  Samuel  Jones, 

Commanding  Department  of  Western  Virginia  : 

General:  A communication  from  His  Excellency  Governor  Vance, 
of  North  Carolina,  referred  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  you  and  by  you  to 
myself,  has  just  been  received.  In  reply  1 would  state  on  the  subject  of 
impressment  that  no  orders  have  ever  been  issued  to  any  officer  or  agent 
of  this  command  to  impress  forage  ])rior  to  your  communication*  of  the 
22d  ultimo,  authorizing  Capt.  [M.  B.J  Porteaux,  assistant  quartermaster, 
to  do  so.  If  any  impressments  have  been  made  not  included  in  that 
authority  the  party  making  them  rendered  himself  liable  to  charges, 
and  on  jmoper  notification  from  any  aggrieved  person  in  North  Carolina 
they  would  have  been  promptly  preferred  and  the  complaint  'fully 
investigated ; and  I beg  leave  to  state  that,  notwithstanding  the  fifty 
letters  received  by  Governor  Vance  and  the  notoriety  of  the  offenses  of 
Jenkins’  bands  of  cavaljy,  not  one  single  specific  charge  has  ever  been 
sent  to  these  headquarters  from  that  or  any  other  source  since  I have 
been  in  command  of  this  brigade  (nearly  a month),  nor  before  General 
Jenkins  left,  as  I am  informed  by  a member  of  his  staff. 

On  another  ])oint  touching  the  character  of  this  command  I feel  called 
upon  to  state  that  the  larger  portion  of  it  has  been  quartered  here  in 
this  county  nearly  four  months,  and  I would  invite  investigation  to  the 
fact  that  no  serious  complaints  have  been  made  by  any  citizens ; and 
while  officers  and  agents  sent  out  by  us  under  your  orders  on  detached 
service  at  remote  points  to  arrest  deserters  and  forage  horses  may  have 


Not  found. 


936  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

been  guilty  of  improper  conduct,  such  offenders  have,  on  due  notice,  ^ 
always  been  brought  to  justice.  It  seems  hardly  reasonable  that  the  ii 
reputation  of  a whole  command  should  suffer  on  account  of  the  offenses  I 
of  a few  members,  removed  from  the  eye  of  its  commander,  when  the  i 
offenses  are  not  reported  and  no  opportunity  is  afforded  him  to  render  | 
justice.  It  was  from  no  desire  to  impeach  the  lojjalty  of  the  citizens  of  i 
North  Carolina  that  it  was  stated  they  would  not  receive  Confederate 
money,  but  frequent  instances  which  have  occurred  seem  to  indicate 
that  the  dissatisfaction  arose  not  so  much  from  scarcity  of  corn  as  an 
unwillingness  to  receive  the  only  money  which  our  agents  had  to  offer. 

I will  mention  two,  reported  by  Capt.  [W.  W.]  Parsons,  of  the  Seven-  i 
teenth  Kegiment  Virginia  Cavalry:  Two  farmers  on  the  Yadkin,  in 
Davies  County,  had  each  from  500  to  1,000  bushels  of  corn,  which  they 
were  offering  for  sale,  but  refused  it  to  our  agents  because  they  could  I 
pay  neither  gold  or  silver  nor  North  Carolina  money,  and  the  same  i 
officer  stated  that  if  he  had  had  gold  and  silver  he  could  have  bought  t 
as  much  corn  as  he  wanted. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  horses  be  removed  from  North  Carolina 
to  some  portion  of  your  department.  South  of  the  railroad  there  are 
already  as  many  of  our  horses  as  can  be  barely  subsisted.  In  this 
county  the  horses  of  officers  and  those  used  for  transportation  are  at 
this  time  receiving  only  half  rations  of  corn  and  no  hay,  using  straw 
instead.  In  Botetourt  the  Government  requires  all  surplus  forage  to 
be  reserved  for  the  use  of  the  iron-works.  In  Eockbridge  we  already 
have  the  horses  of  six  companies,  and  I understand  that  General  Stuart 
has  sent  thither  three  regiments  of  his  command  to  remain  for  some 
time.  In  Craig  we  have  the  horses  of  two  companies  living  on  hay  alone 
for  the  last  three  weeks,  besides  many  of  the  transportation  horses  of 
this  command  and  a large  number  under  charge  of  Major  McMahon, 
quartermaster.  Even  hay  is  become  very  scarce  there  and  almost  im- 
possible to  procure.  The  counties  north  of  the  last  mentioned  were, 
you  are  aware,  overrun  by  the  enemy,  and  on  account  of  this  and  the 
unfavorable  season  the  corn  crop  was  very  light  and  very  little  grass 
was  cut. 

Another  fact  of  great  importance  is  that  there  is  not  enough  forage 
between  this  point  and  our  horses  in  North  Carolina  (from  100  to  300 
miles)  to  subsist  them  on  their  route  hither,  and  they  cannot  conse- 
quently be  moved  until  grass  begins  to  afford  pasturage.  This  is  the 
information  we  receive  from  our  agents.  But  even  if  they  could  be 
subsisted  on  their  way  hither  they  would  still  have  to  be  subsisted  on 
grain  here  until  grass  season  or  perish. 

The  above  report  includes,  I believe,  every  fact  of  importance  desired 
by  you,  and  I leave  the  whole  subject  for  your  determination,  awaiting 
such  orders  as  you  may  think  best  to  give,  stating  merely  that  I am 
willing  to  move  the  horses  at  the  earliest  period  when  the  grass  will 
afford  them  subsistence — probabl3"  about  May.l. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  H.  FEENCH, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Brigade. 


[Indorsement,.! 

IIdqrs.  Department  of  Western  Virginia, 

Buhlin,  Fa.,  April  G,  18G3. 

Eespectfully  forwarded  through  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General 
to  the  Secretary  of  War.  Colonel  French’s  views  in  regard  to  moving 


Chap. XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  937 

the  horses  from  North  Garoliua  coincide  with  mine,  expressed  in  my 
letter  of  the  2d  instant  to  the  Secretary  oT  War.  Colonel  French  says 
correctly  that  no  serious  complaints  have  been  made  against  the  brigade 
in  the  counties  where  the  chief  part  of  it  has  been  stationed  for  the  last 
three  months.  The  numerous  complaints  have  come  from  localities 
where  detached  companies  have  been  sent  to  collect  conscripts  and 
arrest  deserters — a delicate  duty,  well  calculated  to  cause  complaints — 
and  from  North  Carolina,  where  horses  were  sent  to  forage.  It  happens 
that  the  complaints  have  come  from  sections  of  the  country  remote  from 
the  scenes  of  military  operations,  and  where  troops  have  not  heretofore 
been,  and  the  people  in  those  localities  do  not  bear  patiently  one  of  the 
necessary  evils  of  the  war.  In  regard  to  the  comi)laints  of  the  con- 
sumption of  forage  in  North  Carolina,  Captain  Porteaux,  assistant  quar- 
termaster, whom  I sent  to  North  Carolina  some  time  since  to  i)ay  out- 
standing claims,  reports  that  he  had  an  interview  with  Governor  Vance, 
and  from  the  tenor  of  his  remarks  I (Porteaux)  judged  that  it  was  not 
the  consumption  of  grain  or  forage  that  was  complained  of,  but  that 
the  parties  were  not  paid  for  what  had  been  used ; that  was  what  the 
grumbling  was  about.”  I have  heard  no  complaints  since  an  officer  was 
sent  to  North  Carolina  to  pay  for  forage  consumed. 

SAM.  JONES, 

‘ Major-General. 


Headquarters,  March  22,  18G3. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding^  &c.^  Fredericlcshurg^  Va.  : 


Generax  : Your  letter  of  yesterday  is  received.  The  enemy’s  force, 
as  you  say,  is  feeble  between  Eoanoke  and  Tar  Rivers,  but  he  has  facil- 
ities for  throwing  other  troops  there  to  re-enforce  or  to  cut  off  our  trains, 
&c.  I think  therefore  a sufficient  force  should  be  there  to  meet  any 
such  emergency.  Two  of  Pickett’s  brigades  are  now  on  their  way,  and 
General  D.  H.  Hill  is  ordered  to  use  all  possible  ‘dispatch  in  the  execu- 
tion of  the  plans  for  drawing  out  supplies  and,  if  it  is  possible,  to  take 
the  garrison  at  Washington.  Hood’s  division  will  be  held  ready  to 
join  you  unless  I find  a most  favorable  opportunity  to  strike  an  impor- 
tant blow.  I will  advise  you  of  any  movement  of  that  division.  I will 
also  make  every  effort  to  have  Pickett’s  division  concentrated  rapidly. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant. 


JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  March  22,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill,  Goldsborough,  W.  C.  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  21st  is  received,  and  I have  made  the 
effort  to  telegraph  you  to  go,  but  the  wires  are  down.  I hope,  however, 
that  this  letter  may  reach  you  in  time  to  prevent  any  delay.  It  seems 
to  me  that  you  would  be  able  to  move  more  promptly  if  you  put  Kem- 
per at  Snow  Hill,  instead  of  relieving  Daniel  at  Kinston  in  order  to 
place  Kemper  there,  and  let  Kemper  support  either  point.  Besides 


93B 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  NXN. 


you  will  save  time  when  Kemper  is  to  return  here.  The  arrangement 
then  should  be:  Daniel  at  Kinston,  Kansom  at  Goldsborough,  Kemper 
at  Snow  Hill,  Garnett  and  Pettigrew  operating  against  Washington ; 
but  if  your  jdans  are  already  made  and  this  would  be  likely  to  delay 
your  movements  a day  do  not  wait ; the  grand  thing  is  to  get  Wash- 
ington and  its  garrison.  Yon  can  not  only  give  it  out  that  the  move  is 
against  New  Berne,  but  you  can  seriously  threaten  it  if  an  etfort  should 
be  made  to  re-enforce  Washington  from  New  Berne.  I think  that  your 
movement  would  thus  be  made  doubly  secure.  The  moment  this  is  ac- 
complished you  can  move  your  entire  force  against  New  Berne.  It  will 
not  do  to  wait  this  move  for  the  operations  against  Charleston,  because 
I believe  that  an  attack  upon  Charleston  will  not  be  made  until  the 
army  on  the  Bappahannock  is  ready  to  advance;  then  we  shall  want 
every  man  that  we  can  get  to  meet  the  grand  army.  I do  not  think 
that  there  can  be  any  doubt  but  we  can  keep  re-enforcements  from 
leaving  Suffolk  for  the  succor  of  Washington.  The  way  seems  to  me 
to  he  clear  if  we  can  only  be  prompt.  If  your  health  is  likely  to  fail 
you  advise  me  and  I will  go  down  myself.  I can  send  you  General 
Pickett  if  you  desire.  I tried  to  send  a telegram  to  General  Whitingi 
to  send  you  Ivansom’s  brigade,  but  the  wires  being  down  I could  not.i 
I inclose  one  to  be  sent  him  if  the  wires  are  operating  between  Golds  ' 
borough  and  Wilmington. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  i 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET,  j 

Lieutenant-General^  Conimanding.  \ 

\ 

P.  S. — Betain  the  Whitworth  that  I have  sent  you  if  you  can  movti 
promi)tly  against  New  Berne,  and  you  will  need  all  the  troops  for  that 
l)urpose. 


Headquarters, 

^yilmin(Jton^  N.  C.,  March  -J3,  1803.  . 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  IVar,  Richmond^  Va.  : 

Sir:  I wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the  evil  of  permitting  ])rivat( 
l)arties  to  ship  cotton  except  for  the  i)urpose  of  bringing  in  artickv 
useful  for  the  conduct  of  the  war.  It  is  a crying  evil.  It  fosters  am 
increases  speculation  in  the  wildest  manner.  The  burden  falls  exclu 
sively  upon  the  soldier  and  his  family  in  the  enormously-increased  pric(‘fl 
of  every  necessary.  He  has  a fixed  and  moderate  stipend.  The  non-coiit 
batant  engaged  m mercantile  pursuits  has  facilities  for  procuring  what 
he  needs  and  can  pay  any  price  from  the  enormous  ])i‘olits.  I believe 
the  cotton  is  in  great  i)art  exchanged  at  Nassau  with  Yankee  merchantij 
lor  Yankee  goods.  The  goods  at  least  that  come  here  are  mostly  o* 
Yankee  manufacture,  and  houses  have  been  established  in  Nassau  hv 
men  of  Northern  birth,  who  have  left  this  citj"  since  the  war  and  stil 
have  partners  here.  Lastly  and  especially,  those  engaged  in  this  trad* 
from  this  port  to  the  largest  extent  or  interest  are  partly  Yankees  out 
l ight  and  partly  of  Union  sentiments. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-General^  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COtjRESPOI^DENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


939 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  March  23,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  TFar,  Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir:  The  steam-tug  Mariner,  formerly  the  most  powerful  tug  in  this 
river,  has  come  hi  from  Nassau,  her  owners  having  put  her  to  blockade 
running.  She  is  not  suitable  for  this  purpose,  carrying  but  very  little 
cargo,  while,  her  boilers  and  engines  being  very  good,  she  is  absolutely 
necessary  here  for  the  navy  first  and  then  for  us.  She  can  readily  be 
fitted  into  a powerful  gunboat.  I consider  her  essential  for  the  defense 
here,  especially  in  connection  with  the  gunboats  building,  as  a tender, 
and  also  in  connection  with  the  valuable  cargoes  now  arriving  in  Gov- 
ernment steamers.  With  her  we  shall  be  able  to  save  much  in  case  of 
accidents  which  might  happen  to  any  of  our  vessels  from  the  enemy’s 
fire.  She  is  also  needed  for  army  transportation.  Please  to  show  this 
to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  who  will,  I hoiie,  at  once  order  her  imr- 
chase.  Flag-Officer  Lynch  concurs  with  me  in  the  necessity  of  this  and 
will  doubtless  report  at  once.  If  the  Navj^  Department  does  not  want 
the  boat  we  certainly  do.  I shall  not  permit  her  to  leave  unless  or- 
dered. Great  etforts  no  doubt  will  be  made  to  procure  a permit,  but  I 
beg  to  refer  you  to  my  letter  of  this  date  relative  to  blockade  running. 
The  boat  could  carry  but  very  few  bales.  Her  engines,  boiler,  and  hull 
are  too  valuable  to  permit  them  to  be  sacrificed  in  order  that  a i)arty  of 
speculators  should  make  money. 

Very  respectfully, 

AY.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Briga dier- Gen eral^  Comm anding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  March  23,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  TFur,  Richmoyid^  Va. : 

Sir  : I will  add  to  my  letters  of  this  date  some  considerations  on  the 
subject  of  the  blockade  running,  to  show  how  this  matter  of  private 
ex[)ortation  of  cotton  is  affecting  our  currency.  Vessels  owned  abroad 
come  in  with  cargo,  which  sells  for  nearly  $1,000,000  Confederate  cur- 
rency, and  for  $50,000  Confederate  currency  they  buy  a load  of  cotton, 
as  much  as  they  can  carry,  to  take  back.  The  balance  of  proceeds  they 
can  afford  to  expend  for  exchange  and  gold  at  enormous  prices,  and 
still  make  a handsome  profit.  E»ach  vessel  that  comes  in  instead  of  pro- 
ducing the  effect  by  increase  of  supjfiy  of  diminution  of  prices  actually 
increases  prices  and  the  current  value  of  gold.  I can  illustrate  this  by 
nn  example,  a small  one,  but  showing  the  whole  business,  which  has 
come  to  my  knowledge : A man  brought  in  six  demijohns  of  gin,  which 
cost  him  in  Nassau  $24.  He  sold  them  here  for  $900.  This  man  could 
nfford  to  give  $9  for  $1  of  specie  in  gold,  which  he  did,  and  then  make 
$76  profit,  a good  business  for  a common  sailor.  The  profits  made  by 
these  people  are  not  expended  here;  they  are  invested  in  gold  and  abroad. 
Every  single  bale  of  cotton  that  goes  abroad  on  other  than  Government 
account  to  establish  Government  credit  abroad  does  us  injury  at  home. 
1 know  there  is  a law  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  cotton.  I am  not 


940 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


aware  of  its  being  repealed  on  the  statute  book.  Until  so  informed  I I 
shall  not  permit  a bale  to  be  shipped,  except  by  special  orders,  other  [ 
than  Government  cotton. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Wilmington,  N.  €.,  March  23,  1863. 

Col.  [L.  B.]  Northrop, 

Commissary -General,  Richmond',  Va. : , 

Colonel  : I think  it  necessary  to  call  your  attention  to  the  accom-  ! 
panying  papers,*  not  for  any  purpose  of  complaint,  but  as  illustrating 
the  growing  scarcity,  and  especially  because,  in  my  opinion,  the  strong-  i 
est  and  promptest  efforts  ought  to  be  made  to  furnish  the  forts  which  I 
guard  this  harbor  with  at  least  thirty  days’  rations,  to  be  kept  on  hand  i 
as  reserve,  the  daily  consumption  to  be  supplied  as  usual.  These  forts  | 
are  liable  to  be  attacked  at  any  time  and  may  become  isolated  without  ‘ 
being  taken.  I have  endeavored  ever  since  I have  been  here  to  procure 
the  supply.  I do  not  now  think  it  can  be  done  except  you  especially  | 
direct  it  j at  any  rate,  unless  some  changes  be  made  in  the  rate  of  pro*  ! 
curing  meat. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Forces  on  Blacicwater, 

March  24,  1863. 

General  : I have  made  inquiries  concerning  young  Ford,  as  you  de- 
sired. There  is  only  one  of  that  name  in  the  Hampton  Legion — Stephen 
Ford,  from  Georgetown,  S.  C. 

Your  note  concerning  movements  on  the  Eappahannock  was  received 
yesterday.  I confess  that  I was  but  little  satisfied  with  the  affair,  even 
as  stated  by  our  papers.  I regret  much  the  loss  of  Major  Pelham.  How- 
ever, we  must  accept  with  gratitude,  notwithstanding  our  loss,  the  indi- 
cation that  our  cavalry  will  fight  and  subject  themselves  to  severe  loss, 
i.  c.,  what  would  be  termed  severe  for  them.  If  the  war  continues  much 
longer  we  will  come  to  the 'conclusion  that  it  is  better  to  use  our  cavalry 
on  occasion  even  against  infantry  on  the  battle-fields,  especially  after 
the  shock  of  infantry. 

I was  very  greatly  disappointed  at  your  not  coming  at  the  time  of 
General  French’s  visit.  I sincerely  hope  and  think  it  important  that 
you  should  pay  a visit  here.  I am  working  hard  to  make  the  line  here 
impregnable,  and  in  ten  days  it  would  give  me  pleasure  to  receive  a visit 
on  the  lower  part  of  my  line.  I have  scouts  out  all  the  time  and  of 
(tourse  get  numerous  and  conflicting  reports.  I seceived  yesterday  re- 
ports  of  the  enemy’s  forces  at  Suffolk  being  re  enforced  to  some  30,000, 
but  I cannot  believe  that  they  can  exceed  at  an  outside  limit  20,000,  ainl 
think  15,000  will  cover  their  effective  force.  I expect  to  get  more  pre- 
cise and  definite  intelligence  in  a day  or  so.  The  sharpshooters  gave 


Not  found. 


CiiAr.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  941 

Spear  aud  bis  crack  regiment  a very  rough  handling  a few  days  since, 
of  which  you  have  heard  by  General  French.  They  carried  off  four 
4-horse  ambulances  filled  with  wounded,  their  legs  hanging  out  in  front 
and  rear,  and  their  caisson-boxes  were  also  crowded  with  wounded  and 
a number  also  on  horseback.  They  acknowledged  at  the  time  a loss 
of  70.  I would  like  your  judgment  of  the  two  following  plans  which  I 
have  matured  and  concluded  to  try  in  a few  days : First,  to  move  out 
at  night  and  place  a regiment  of  infantry  in  ambush  between  Oarrsville 
and  Suffolk  and  a regiment  in  ambush  where  the  South  Quay  road  in- 
tersects the  other  road  from  Oarrsville  to  Suflblk,  and  move  out*with 
artillery  and  infantry  (some  three  or  four  regiments)  to  Councils  Cross- 
Koads,  to  support,  if  necessary,  and  try  and  annihilate  SpeaFs  regi- 
ment ; then  follow  this  with  a dash  of  Baker’s  regiment  of  cavalry 
upon  the  enemy’s  cavalry  camp  on  the  Windsor  road  (some  4 or  5 miles 
this  side  of  Suffolk),  moving  out  on  the  Windsor  road  with  all  the  forces 
I can  spare  from  the  exposed  points  on  the  line  and  taking  a strong 
position  beyond  Windsor,  give  them  battle  if  they  will  come  out  with 
their  forces.  I am  anxious  to  have  the  other  companies  of  Baker’s 
regiment  here  and  hope  you  will  not  replace  his  regiment  by  another, 
as  he  is  a fine  officer,  and  with  his  absent  companies  I think  I could, 
after  breaking  up  Spear  with  infantry,  keep  the  enemy  close  in  Suf- 
folk. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  JENKINS, 
Brigadier-General,  &c. 


Headquarters,  March  24, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  &c.,  Goldshorough,  N.  G, : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  23d*  and  General  Garnett’s  of  the  22d,* 
flirough  you,  are  received.  I believe  that  I understand  the  positions  of 
your  troops.  1 suppose  General  Kemper,  with  one  regiment  of  General 
bauiel’s  brigade  and  one  of  Eansom’s,  to  be  at  and  near  Kinston ; 
Daniel’s  brigade,  less  one  regiment,  at  Blount  Hall,  in  readiness  to 
threaten  New  Berne  or  support  you ; Garnett  and  Pettigrew  to  operate 
against  Washiugton  if  practicable;  if  not,  to  draw  off  supplies  for  our 
entire  army.  I did  telegraph  to  stop  the  movement  of  Eansom’s  brigade 
and  substitute  that  of  Kemper’s,  but  I afterward  suggested  that  it  would 
be  well  to  have  Eansom’s  at  Goldsborough,  in  addition  to  the  others, 
tliat  you  might,  if  you  had  occasion  to  do  so,  threaten  New  Berne  while 
operating  against  Washington.  Eansom  is  not  necessary  at  Wilming- 
ton and  might  greatly  aid  you  in  your  operations  by  strengthening  your 
force  at  Goldsborough  so  as  to  enable  you  to  seriously  threaten  New 
Berne  in  case  that  garrison  should  be  disposed  to  succor  the  one  at 
Washington.  General  Whiting  has  been  ordered  to  send  Eansom  to 
you  should  you  call  for  him  for  this  purpose.  He  has  acknowledged 
the  receipt  of  the  order,  and  you  can  have  Eansora’s  brigade  at  Golds- 
borough if  you  will  telegraph  for  it. 

General  Garnett’s  transportation  has  been  ordered  to  him  and  ought 
to  be  at  Tarborough  now  unless  it  has  been  detained  by  high  water, 
&c.  Great  results  depend  more  or  less  upon  the  rapidity  of  your  move- 
ments. I am  likely  to  be  called  upon  for  Garnett’s  and  KempeFs  bri- 


Not  fouucl. 


942 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


gades  on  the  Eappahanuock  at  any  moment,  biit  think  that  tlie  enemy 
will  not  be  able  to  make  a move  there  before  April  10.  I hope  that  you 
may  be  able  to  reduce  the  garrisons  at  Washington  and  New  -Berne 
before  that  time,  the  former  at  least.  If  you  deem  the  latter  not  ad- 
visable, return  the  two  brigades  of  General  Pickett’s  division  as  soon 
as  you  have  accomplished  the  former  and  gotten  out  the  meat  supplies. 
I do  not  expect  you  to  take  Washington,  of  course,  if  it  is  found  to  be 
more  difficult  than  you  anticipated.  Exercise  your  own  good  judgment 
in  the  matter.  The  important  question  is  to  "draw  in  all  of  the  meat 
ratioMS  that  can  be  had.  I have  already  written  you  not  to  confine 
yourself  strictly  to  the  prices  fixed  by  the  Subsistence  Department  if 
you  find  that  a higher  price  will  facilitate  your  operations.  Every 
vehicle  in  the  country  should  be  put  in  use  and  at  liberal  rates  of  trans- 
portation so  as  to  haul  in  supplies  for  our  armies.  I wish  you  would 
advise  me  of  the  probable  quantity  of  meat  that  you  maybe  able  to  get 
as  soon  as  you  can  get  the  proper  data.  We  may  haVe  to  make  "an 
advance  move  up  here  so  as  to  get  out  the  supplies  iroin  the  counties 
east  of  the  Chowan.  If  you  are  likely  to  get  enough  from  Hyde,  &c., 
the  latter  move  will  not  be  necessary.  I hope  that  my  Whitworth  gun 
lias  reached-you  ere  this.  The  party  is  tolerably  well  experienced  in 
the  use  of  it. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  March  24, 1S63. 
General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a report  of  Major  Moses  on 
the  subject  of  subsistence  for  our  armies.  He  has  just  returned  from 
a tour  through  Virginia  and  North  Carolina  and  from  a visit  to  the 
Commissary-General.  This  report  is  the  result  of  his  observations.  The 
])articular  counties  referred  to  by  him  as  containing  abundant  supplies 
for  our  armies  are  now  in  the  enemy’s  lines.  We  can  occupy  that  conn- 
try  and  draw  the  supplies  out  with  another  division  of  my  old  corps,  but 
I do  not  think  it  would  be  prudent  to  attempt  sucli  a move  with  a less 
force.  The  divisions  of  Generals  Pickett  and  Hood,  with  one  other  bri- 
gade (Davis’),  are  all  the  troops  that  I can  command  for  this  service. 
The  enemy  has  at  Suffolk  and  in  supiiorting  distance  27,000  men — 
21,000  that  came  down  from  General  Hooker’s  army  and  G,000  that  were 
at  Suftblk  before.  I think  that  a move  against  Suffolk  would  draw  oft' 
re-enforcements  from  General  Hooker’s  army  unless  we  can  act  promptly 
enough  to  prevent  it.  I submit  the  case  for  your  determination.  If 
we  can  supply  our  army  otherwise  the  expedition  should  not  be  made. 
If  it  is  a case  of  necessity  we  should  lose  no  time.  I fear  that  our  ne- 
cessities may  be  exposed  by  the  expeditions  thdt  are  now  out  in  Eastern 
North  Carolina  for  the  same  purpose,  and  when  it  becomes  known  to 
the  enemy  he  will  make  a great  effort  to  prevent  us  from  moving  to 
those  important  counties.  If  we  find  it  necessary  to  make  this  move  I 
desire  to  have  a consultation  with  you  before  it  sets  out. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
JAeutenant- General^  Commandinff. 


I CiiAi’.  XXX.]  COKRESrONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  943 

Headquarters, 

Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  March  25,  1803. 

Lieut.  Geii.  Longstreet, 

Commanding^  Petersburg^  Va.  : 

General  : Your  orders  to  send  off  Eaiisonds  brigade  to  report  to 
Major-General  Ilill  Lave  been  received  and  carried  out.  Let  me  hope 
that  the  removal  of  these  troops  is  only  temporary  and  that  they  may 
hereafter  be  assigned  to  me,  or  at  least  until  all  danger  of  attack  here 
is  past,  as  the  stationary  brigade  of  this  district.  There  certainly  should 
always  be  one  brigade  here;  in  my  opinion  more,  but  one  at  least.  This 
one,  about  3,000  strong,  takes  off  two-thirds  of  my  available  forc(‘,  and 
all  that  is  disciplined  and  efficient.  I place  but  little  reliance  on  Evans^ 
brigade,  which  certainly  is  in  worse  condition  than  any  1 have  ever  seen. 
It  has  but  about  1,500  men  for  duty,  a very  large  number  of  field  officers 
absent  or  under  arrest,  and  it  requires  careful  attention  and  strict  dis- 
cipline to  bring  it  to  the  efficiency  which  should  belong  to  troops  which 
have  been  so  long  in  the  service  as  they  have. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters,  March  25,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  24th  is  received.  General  GarnetLs 
transportation  started  from  here  some  ten  days  ago.  If  there  is  tele- 
gTa])hic  communication  between  this  and  Tarborough  I wish  you  would 
keep  some  oue  there  -to  take  any  dispatches  that  we  may  have  to  send 
you.  If  there  is  not,  name  some  point  nearest  you  where  we  may  tele- 
graph you.  Spare  no  pains  to  haul  off  all  meats  that  you  may  be  able 
to  secure. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAM ES  LONG  STKEET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Frederiehsburg,  Va.,  March  27,  18G3. 
Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : I received  by  the  last  mail  your  letter  of  the  21th  instant 
accompanying  the  report  of  Major  Moses  on  the  subject  of  subsistence 
to  be  obtained  in  North  Carolina.  I do  not  know  whether  the  supplies 
in  that  State  are  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  our  armies,  but  I con- 
sider it  of  the  first  importance  to  draw  from  the  invaded  districts  every 
pound  of  provision  and  forage  we  can.  It  will  lighten  the  draught  from 
other  sections  and  give  relief  to  our  citizens.  As  to  the  force  necessary 
for  this  purpose  I cannot  so  well  decide.  As  far  as  I am  informed  the 
force  of  the  enemy  south  of  James  Eiver  and  north  of  the  Cape  Fear  is 
small.  It  can  be  re-enforced  speedily  from  the  trooi)S  encamped  at 
Newport  News,  but  if  you  operate  discreetly,  concealing  your  move- 
ments and  only  occuxiying  the  country  from  which  you  are  drawing,  I 
think  much  maybe  done  before  your  i^urpose  is  discovered  and  time  be 
gained  to  develop  the  plans  of  the  enemy,  when  we  can  act  more  under- 
standingly.  You  have  about  40,000  eftective  men ; the  enemy  can  bring 
out  no  more.  I feel  assured  that  with  equal  numbers  you  can  go  where 
YOU  choose. 


944 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


If  this  army  is  further  weakened  we  must  retire  to  the  line  of  the 
Annas  and  trust  to  a battle  nearer  Richmond  for  the  defense  of  the  capi- 
tal. It  throws  open  a broad  margin  of  our  frontier  and  renders  our 
railroad  communications  more  hazardous  and  more  difficult  to  secure. 
Unless,  therefore,  a retrograde  movement  becomes  necessary  I deem  it 
advantageous  to  keep  the  enemy  at  a distance  and  trust  to  striking  him 
on  his  line  of  advance.  A sudden,  vigorous  attack  on  Suffolk  would 
doubtless  give  you  that  place.  Of  the  propriety  of  this  step  you  can 
best  judge.  To  hold  it  you  must  control  the  navigation  of  the  Nanse- 
mond  or  the  troops  from  Newport  News  could  soon  be  thrown  upon 
you.  There  is  a point  about  G miles  below  Suffolk  where  we  once  had 
a four-gun  battery  that  was  said  to  be  a good  position,  and  other  points 
lower  down.  A battery,  I should  think,  would  also  have  to  be  just  be- 
low Smithfield  and  one  at  Mannj^’s  Neck,  unless  there  is  some  better 
point  at  the  head  of  the  Chowan.  If  operations  in  that  quarter  should 
draw  re-enforcements  from  General  Hooker,  more  troops  could  be  spared 
from  this  army  j but  I hope  you  now  have  available  troops  in  North 
Carolina  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  Should  yon  find  it  advisable  to 
have  a iiersonal  conference  with  me  at  any  time  I will  be  happy  to  see 
you  here,  oitit  may  be  that  I could  meet  you  in  Richmond. 

I am,  with  great  esteem,  very  truly,  yours, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General, 


Headquarters,  March  27, 1863. 
General  R.  E.  Lee,  Frederichshurg,  Va. : 

General  : A gentleman,  professing  to  be  reliable,  informs  us  that  it 
has  been  determined  at  Washington  to  bring  the  Sixth  Army  Corps 
down  to  Suffolk  to  unite  with  the  Ninth.  I send  you  this  that  your 
scouts  may  be  on  their  guard  and  report  such  movement  at  the  earliest 
moment.  I expect  to  move  Hood’s  division  down  toward  Surry  County 
in  a few  days  and  to  run  my  line  across  from  the  Blackwater  to  the 
James,  or  to  some  of  the  streams  flowing  into  the  James.  My  line  will 
then  cut  the  Blackwater  at  some  point  near  Mayfield.  My  left  will  be 
somewhat  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  iron-clads.  If  I can  have  the  aid  of 
the  Navy  on  the  James  I think  that  such  a position  would  hold  the 
enemy  in  check  whatever  his  force  may  be.  I do  not  expect  aid  from 
the  Navy  unless  you  can  get  it  for  me.  As  my  arrangements  should 
depend  very  much  on  your  plans  it  is  proper  that  I should  advise  with 
you  and  ask  your  views.  The  new  position  will  throw  me  far  away 
from  you,  but  if  we  hope  to  draw  supplies  from  the  counties  east  of  the 
Chowan  I think  it  indispensable. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieutenant-General. 


Headquarters, 

Blount  Hall,  W.  C.,  March  27,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill, 

. Commanding  at  Greenville,  N.  C. : 

General:  Major  Guion  furnished  me  with  his  map  and  report  of  the 
Contentnea  Creek.  I ordered  Captain  Barrows,  Engineers,  as  soon  as 
he  reported  to  commence  immediately  to  lay  off  the  work  proposed,  and 
that  I would  send  an  officer  and  working  tiarty  to  execute  it.  Your  call 


OuAF.  XXX. 1 


CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


945 


for  shovels  will  leave  me  ooly  about  40  shovels.  I send  all  the  picks  the 
quartermaster  has  here — only  4.  I had  but  about  15  at  Kinston.  Have 
sent  an  order  to  Captain  Divine,  quartermaster,  lor  100  shovels  and  20 
picks.  When  they  arrive  the  working  party  of  40  shovels  will  be  in- 
creased by  that  number,  and  the  work  here  will  go  on  as  laid  off  by  Cap- 
tain Barrows  and  Major  Guion.  Colonel  Washington,  with  his  regiment 
and  two  pieces  of  artillery,  took  up  a position  on  Core  Creek  early 
Monday  morning.  He  found  it  impracticable  to  cross  the  artillery, 
and  sent  two  companies  and  a detachment  of  Kethercutt’s  over,  under 
Captain  Davis,  to  drive  in  their  pickets.  Captain  Davis  attacked  their 
pickets  in  about  8 miles  of  Kew  Berne,  killing  some  3 or  4.  He  reports 
after  this  Colonel  Washington  opened  with  artillery,  and  by  felling  trees 
and  other  noise  made  a demonstration  of  building  the  bridge  and  cross- 
ing in  force.  About  night,  after  our  troops  had  withdrawn,  they  ran 
their  monitor  car  some  1 or  2 miles  from  their  picket  post  and  shelled 
the  woods  furiously,  but  did  not  venture  nearer  than  5 or  G miles  of  the 
creek. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-General. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg^  Va.,  March  27,  1863. 

General  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Commanding^  Wilmington^  N.  C. : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  25th  is  received.  General  Kansom’s 
brigade  is  only  temporarily  at  Goldsborough.  It  will  return  to  you  as 
soon  as  General  Hill  can  draw  out  the  subsistence  stores  in  the  eastern 
counties.  During  the  absence  of  Daniel’s  and  Pettigrew’s  brigades  from 
Goldsborough  it  is  thought  the  brigade  of  General  Eansom  can  be  well 
employed  in  protecting  the  railroad  at  Goldsborough,  and  at  the  same 
time  give  quite  effectual  protection  to  Wilmington  by  threatening  New 
Berne  in  case  of  a movement  from  there  against  Wilmington.  General 
Evans  reported  his  brigade  3,500  strong  when  here  a few  days  ago.  I 
hope  that  you  are  doing  well  in  your  labors.  The  Postmaster-General 
promised  me  a few  days  ago  to  put  Port  Caswell  in  telegraphic  commu- 
nication with  your  headquarters. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  (general. 


Headquarters, 

Weldon^  A.  0.,  March  28,  18G3 — 8 p.  m. 
Lieutenant-General  Longstreet, 

Comdg.  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina  : 

General  : I am  this  moment  in  receipt  of  an  order  by  courier  from 
iMaj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  copy  of  which  order  I annex.  Three  companies 
of  my  regiment  (D,  E,  P)  are  on  detached  service,  under  Lieut.  Col. 
[John  E.]  Brown,  and  have  been  on  the  Chowan  Eiver.  On  the  23d 
and  24th  they  fought  the  enemy,  official  report  of  which  engagement  I 
sent  to  General  Hill's  headquarters  to-day.  Subsequently  Colonel 
Brown  notified  me  by  courier  that  the  enemy  were  coming  up  Eoanoke 
River  in  force  to  get  in  his  rear  and  thus  cut  off  his  command,  and  that 
he  had  fallen  back  10  miles  this  side  of  Colerain,  and  asking  for  re- 
GO  R R — VOL  XVIII 


^46 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CHA.P.  XXX 


enforcements.  I had  ordered  two  companies  to  march  at  daylight  to 
his  assistance  when  I received  orders  from  General  Hill  to  move  to 
Hamilton.  My  men  were  being  drilled  at  the  32-pounder  guns  (mounted) 
and  officers  were  being  made  acquainted  with  the  topography  of  the 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

' GEO.  O.  GIBBS, 

Colonel  Forty-second,  Forth  Carolina  Begt.,  Comdg.  Post. 


[Inclosure.  1 

Greenville,  ISi.  0.,  March  27,  1863. 
Col.  George  C.  Gibbs,  Forty-second  North  Carolina : 

Colonel  : The  reports  from  our  scouts  indicate  an  advance  upon 
Hamilton.  I wish  you  to  move  dowm  there  immediately,  and  if  neces- 
sary call  on  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown  to  aid  you.  I have  written  to 
Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  to  guard  Weldon  during  your  absence. 
Hamilton  must  be  held  at  all  hazards. 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major-General. 


Fredericksburg,  Ya.,  March  28, 1863. 
General  James  Longstreet  : 

General  W.  E.  Jones  reports  the  Ninth  Corps  (Burnside’s)  started 
West  last  Sunday  by  the  Pennsylvania  Central  and  Baltimore  and  Ohio, 
supposed  for  Kentucky.  Are  the  troops  still  at  Newport  News? 

K.  E.  LLL. 

[Indorsement.] 

Eespeotfully  referred  to  Major-General  French,  with  request  that  he 
direct  his  scouts  to  he  more  particular  and  minute  in  report^ 

JAMES  LUJNGSlliEEl, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Forces  on  Blackwater, 

March  28,  1863. 

General:  I returned  yesterday"  from  a visit  to  Broadwater  Bridge, 
&c.  I m6t  General  Corse  at  Ivor,  and  we  rode  over  the  whole  neigh- 
borhood and  line  together.  Upon  close  examination  of  the  country  he 
concluded  to  take  position  with  his  brigade  at  Tucker  Swamp  Church, 
about  li  miles  from  Ivor,  putting  one  regiment  nea,r  Broadwater  Bridge 
to  picket  that  point  and  Proctor’s  Bridge,  and  send  a guard  of  tour  men 
each  to  Wall’s  and  Birch  Island  Bridges.  Another  regiment  af  "U 
quest  he  placed  a mile  from  his  headquarters  toward  Seacock  Swamp, 
to  cover  and  picket  Joiner’s  Ford.  This  arrangement,  in  my  judgment, 
rLderTthe  line  of  Blackwater  perfectly  secure.  My  reason  for  de« 
him  to  picket  Joiner’s  Ford  was  tliat  it  was  a very  critical  PO!i't  [o  “'s 
position,  and  that  while  I picketed  it.  Seacock  Swamp 
cross  even  with  the  bridge,  might  prevent  supports  to  the 
ing  in  time;  also  if  ho  moved  either  up  or  down  he  would 
brigade  as  he  went,  and  thus  would  have  all  the  advantages  of  conce 
tration. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


947 


At  the  present  season  there  is  no  crossing  the  Blackwater  with  facility 
between  Blackwater  Bridge  (a  very  uncertain  one)  and  WalPs  Bridge, 
sone  20  miles  up.  I would  therefore  suggest  that  instead  of  increasing 
tbe  force  at  Ivor  you  place  a brigade  near  Wakefield,  when,  by  crossing 
at  Birch  Island  Bridge  and  taking  by  Cypress  Creek,  they  cover  be- 
tween the  Blackwater  and  James  Eivers  by  a short  line  and  give  us 
time  to  concentrate  and  cut  oft  any  small  force  or  to  attack  in  flank 
and  rear  any  large  one  moving  from  Suffolk.  After  passing  by  Proc- 
tor’s Bridge  an  enemy  would  not  cross  the  Blackwater  in  moving  upon 
Petersburg,  as  the  river  trends  westward  toward  Petersburg. 

I would  like  to  move  forward  the  cavalry  picket  now  along  Cypress 
Creek  and  make  a line  across  from  Broadwater  or  ProctoPs  Bridge  to 
the  head  of  Pagan  Creek,  which  runs  by  Smithfield  to  the  James  and 
is  impassaole.  I would  have  some  14  miles  of  open  country  to  picket 
and  far  enough  in  advance  to  get  information  to  a force  at  Wakefield, 
near  Birch  Island  Bridge,  and  to  get  my  command  ready  to  attack  the 
flank.  I think  it  important  to  have  a force  to  check  any  movement  in 
that  direction,  as  the  river  is  difficult  of  crossing  at  this  season.  I think 
that  the  picket  line  across  to  Pagan  Creek  would  answer  much  better 
than  the  one  at  Cypress  Creek,  as  the  latter  is  so  much  to  mvrear.  I 
hope  you  may  be  able  to  come  down,  as  I think  you  will  be  able  to  give 
me  many  points,  and  I think  you  will  like  the  line  of  defense  I have 
marked  out  and  suggested  above. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

M.  JENKINS, 
Brigadier-  General. 

P.  S. — Do  you  get  Northern  papers  regularly? 


PETERSBURd,  Ya.,  March  29,  1863. 

General  W.  fl.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  W.  C.  : 

Have  Eansom’s  brigade,  including  his  battery,  at  Goldsborough. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters,  March  29,.1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : Your  dispatches  of  the  21st  are  received.  We  have  a re- 
port that  1,000  infantry  have  passed  down  to  Edenton.  It  is  probably 
the  force  that  is  strengthening  Plymouth.  I wish  you  would  send  a 
regiment  of  cavalry  into  Bertie  if  you  have  not  already  done  so.  Gen- 
eral Eansoin  was  placed  at  your  disposal  some  time  ago,  and  I believe 
that  he  is  now  at  Goldsborough.  As  it  is  possible  that  he  may  not  be, 
1 will  telegraph  General  Whiting  to  send  him  at  once.  I shall  send 
Jajor  Sorrel  out  to  join  Colonel  Gibbs  with  special  instructions.  I 
chink  that  I can  cut  oft*  any  move  against  Weldon  by  a force  from  Frank- 
lin. I send  Colonel  Alexander  down  to  examine  into  our  ordnance 
irrangements,  ammunition  particularly. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


948 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCHAP,  XXX. 


Petersburg,  Ya.,  March  29, 1863. 
General  E.  E.  Lee,  Frederichshurg,  Va. : 

The  troops  are  reported  at  Suffolk  and  Newport  News  still. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  Genera  1. 


Petersburg,  Ya.,  March  29,  1863. 
Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  : 

General  : I have  had  many  reports  informing  me  that  all  or  a part 
of  Burnside’s  army  corps  was  in  Suffolk.  New  York  Herald  (20th  and 
21st)  says  Burnside  was  at  Fortress  Monroe.  Same  paper  of  24th  in- 
stant has  a dispatch  from  Cincinnati  (23d)  saying?  Burnside  was  expected 
there  to-morrow  (24th).  On  the  24th  instant  it  is  announced  that  he 
had  gone  West  to  relieve  General  H.  G.  Wright,  whose  nomination  was 
not  confirmed.  Nothing  is  said  about  troops.  The  troops  that  were 
sent  to  Suffolk  are  still  there,  and  had  anj^  large  number  been  embarked 
near  Newport  News  I think  I would  have  been  advised  of  it.  It  may 
be  that  General  Jones  is  mistaken  about  the  Ninth  Army  Corps.  I am 
having  chills  or  I would  come  and  see  you.  I will  write  to  the  Black- 
water  to  endeavor  to  find  out  if  anything  can  be  learned  in  regard  to 
the  matter. 

Yours,  truly, 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters,  March  30, 1863. 


General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding Frederichshurg,  Va. : 

General  : The  troops  have  left  Newport  News ; embarked  on  Friday 
and  Saturday  5 supposed  to  have  gone  to  North  Carolina.  My  inform- 
ant says  thev  sailed  for  North  Carolina. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  Ge^ieral.,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  March  30, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Greenville^  N.  C.  : 

I have  just  learned  that  the  force  at  Newport  News  has  sailed  for 
the  coast  of  North  Carolina.  They  embarked  on  Friday  and  Saturday, 
probably  12,000. 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-General.,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  March  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding.,  &c.: 

General:  I have  just  received  information  that  the  troops  at  New- 
port News  have  sailed ; it  is  supposed  to  be  for  North  Carolina.  They 
left  Friday  and  Satur^day.  I presume  that  your  move  is  discovered  and 


Chap.  XXX,] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


949 


the  enemy  has  had  time  to  discover  it.  The  force  gone  south  is  prob- 
ably 10,000;  possibly  more.  If  your  information  corroborates  this  you 
will  probably  be  obliged  to  act  on  the  defensive.  Advise  me  as  soon 
as  possible,  that  I may  be  duly  informed. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  30,  1863. 
General  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

General  ; My  scout  reports  that  the  enemy ^s  force  from  Newport 
News  embarked  on  Friday  and  Saturday  for  the  coast  of  North  Caro- 
lina. I presume  that  this  is  true,  and  that  the  re- enforcements  may 
have  gone  to  New  Berne.  I advise  you  that  you  may  caution  your 
scouts  to  be  particular  and  keep  you  advised.  This  force  of  the  enemy 
has  been  drawn  olf  by  the  operations  of  General  Hill,  I presume. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  March  30,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  Ransom,  [Jr.J,  Goldsborough,  N . C.: 

General  : General  Whiting  has  been  ordered  to  send  your  battery 
to  you,  and  if  you  find  that  your  field  officers  are  likely  to  be  wanted 
with  their  regiments  you  can  telegraph  him  to  send  them  to  you.  If 
you  find  yourself  the  senior  officer,  take  charge  of  the  defense  of  Golds- 
borough  and  the  railroad.  If  you  are  not  the  senior,  report  to  the  officer 
who  is.  The  command  at  Goldsborough  will  also  look  to  the  protection 
of  Wilmington,  the  latter  being  the  essential  point;  but  a force  at  Golds- 
borough threatening  New  Berne  ought  to  prevent  any  advance  from 
that  point  against  Wilmington.  I have  just  been  informed  that  the 
enemy  has  embarked  his  force  from  Newiiort  News  for  the  coast  of 
North  Carolina.  If  this  is  the  case — and  I have  good  reason  to  believe 
it — the  force  is  intended  to  re-enforce  New  Berne.  This  will  give  the 
enemy  an  additional  force  of  10,000  or  12,000.  He  will  not  be  able  to 
begin  any  operations,  however,  until  you  can  be  advised.  If  the  re- 
enforcements arrive  at  New  Berne  you  must  have  General  Hill  advised 
of  it  in  due  time. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 

V.  S. — The  troops  from  Newport  News  embarked  on  Friday  and  Sat- 
urday. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

March  30,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  : One  of  our  scouts  reports,  under  date  of  29th  instant, 
that  he  was  in  Washington  and  Baltimore  the  first  of  last  week,  and 


t 


950 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


that  Burnside’s  corps  left  Newport  News  at  that  time  for  the  West. 
He  does  not  state  whether  the  information  was  derived  from  his  own 
observation  or  from  others.  The  New  York  Times  of  the  25th  and  the 
Washington  Chronicle  of  the  26th  state  that  Burnside  was  in  Cincin- 
nati on  the  24th  and  is  charged  with  the  defense  of  Kentucky,  but  do 
not  mention  his  troops.  Can  you  not  ascertain  definitely  whether  these 
statements  are  correct? 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

B.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg^  Eu.,  March  30,  1863. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  25th  instant  is  received.  My  letter  for- 
warding report  of  Major  Drummond  was  very  carelessly  written.  The 
report  was  sent  merely  to  indicate  the  movement  of  the  enemy,  not  that 
I gave  any  credit  to  the  reported  strength.  I thought  that  my  desire  to 
move  in  the  direction  of  Suffolk  would  indicate  to  you  that  I put  no 
faith  in  the  report  of  numbers.  There  are  no  particular  advantages 
in  giving  battle  at  Suffolk,  except  that  we  might  do  so  by  rapid  move- 
ments, with  a greater  force  than  the  enemy  could  have.  This  to  me 
would  be  a novelty  and  something  of  a luxury.  I am  quite  satisfied 
that  the  enemy  could  be-'drawn  from  his  intrenchments  by  threatening 
his  rear.  Then,  with  a superior  force,  we  ought  to  get  the  entire  force 
this  side  of  Norfolk.  I do  not  believe  that  the  enemy  will  advance  from 
Suffolk  with  a view  to  give  battle  unless  this  force  is  very  greatly  re- 
duced. In  that  event  he  will  have  a short  and  not  very  difficult  route  to 
Eichmond.  1 cannot  well  concentrate  from  North  Carolina,  as  the  enemy 
has  a force  of  10,000  at  New  Berne,  a considerable  force  at  Washington 
and  Plymouth.  With  his  facilities  for  transportation  he  can  move  his 
troops,  and,  aided  by  his  gunboats,  move  against  any  i)ortion  of  our  rail- 
road ; besides,  I am  obliged  to  keep  all  the  spare  troops  in  the  field 
hauling  in  bacon  and  other  supplies.  I think  it  utterly  impossible  for 
the  enemy  to  move  against  your  position  until  the  roads  are  sufficiently 
dry  for  him  to  move  around  you  and  turn  your  position.  By  re-enforcing 
here  we  might  destroy  the  enemy  and  get  our  forces  together  again  in 
time  to  resist  him  at  the  Eappahannock.  But  if  we  succeed  in  destroy- 
ing him  here  and  have  to  retire  to  the  Annas  before  we  can  give  him  a 
general  battle  we  will  accomplish  a great  deal  and  really  have  the 
enemy  in  a better  position  for  our  operations  than  the  one  he  now  oc- 
cupies. We  can  cross  the  Blackwater  at  any  point,  as  we  still  hold  botli 
banks  of  the  river.  It  is  a very  strong  defensive  line,  but  can  be  turned 
as  soon  as  the  roads  become  dry  enough  for  the  enemy  to  move  up  the 
James  Eiver  with  his  fleet  and  army;  but  I think  that  a very  strong 
offensive  and  defensive  position  could  be  taken  by  letting  the  line  cut 
the  Blackwater  and  rest  its  left  flank  on  the  James,  but  this  would  re- 
quire some  aid  on  the  part  of  our  Navy  in  order  to  strengthen  our  left 
flank. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant  General. 

P.  S. — I have  just  received  intelligence  by  one  of  my  scouts  that  the 
enemy  sailed  on  Friday  and  Saturday  from  Newport  News  for  the  coast 
of  North  Carolina.  In  arranging  our  forces  to  protect  supply  trains 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


951 


into  the  eastern  counties  of  N’orth  Carolina  we  had  hoped  to  make  a di- 
version upon  New  Berne  and  surprise  the  garrison  at  Washington.  The 
high  waters  have  washed  away  the  bridges  and  detained  us  a week, 
and  it  is  i)robable  that  the  enemy  has  discovered  our  movements.  It  is 
possible,  however,  that  this  force  may  have  returned  to  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  March  30,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  G.  Whiting, 

Commanding^  Wilmington^  A.  C. : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  23d  instant  I have  the  honor 
to  say  that  it  is  not  perceived  how  j)rices  are  increased  by  the  export  of 
cotton.  As  necessaries,  to  some  extent  at  least,  are  brought  in  in  re- 
turn, the  trade  ought  to  diminish  the  prices;  but  apart  from  this  the 
existing  law  allows  the  export,  and  the  Department  is  not  authorized, 
except  under  military  exigencies,  to  obstruct  or  stop  the  trade. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War, 


' Headquarters, 

■Swift  CreeJc,  Va.j  March  31,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Cross-Roads : 

General:  Your  letter  of  this  date,  directing  me  to  march  with  all 
my  force  to  Yankee  Hall,  has  been  received.  I will  move  early  to-morrow 
with  [William  A.]  Owens’  [Fifty- third  North  Carolina]  and  [Thomas  S.J 
Kenan’s  [Forty-third  North  Carolina]  regiments  by  way  of  the  cross- 
roads. Col.  [E.  C.]  Brabble,  [Thirty-second  North  Carolina],  with  the 
other  troops,  will  march  directly  across,  and  I presume  will  be  able  to 
reach  there  to-morrow  night.  1 learn  from  Lieutenant  Barrington  that 
Yankee  Hall  is  on  the  Tar  Eiver,  7 miles  above  Washington.  I will 
write  to  Kemper  immediately. 

Yery  respectfully, 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-  General, 


Eichmond  and  Danville  E.  E.,  President’s  Office, 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 


Richmond^  Ya.^  March  31,  1863. 


Secretary  of  War : 


Sir  : I regret  to  have  to  report  to  you  that  the  condition  of  this  road 
is  such  as  to  make  it  indispensable  that  there  should  be  at  least  5 miles 
of  iron  iirocured  for  it.  There  are  between  4 and  5 miles  of  road  at 
Amelia  Court-House  that  is  unsafe  and  cannot  be  rendered  safe  with- 
out it  is  laid  with  new  rail.  With  the  exception  of  that  portion  of  the 
road  we  may  continue  to  run  it,  with  great  care  and  caution,  for  some 
time  to  come.  No  caution  or  care  can  make  safe  the  portion  of  the 
track  above  referred  to.  We  have  had  various  and  frequent  accidents, 
caused  by  the  condition  of  that  part  of  the  road,  and,  being  unable  to 


952 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


procure  irou,  I am  driven  with  great  reluctance  to  appeal  to  the  Gov- 
ernment for  help.  The  old  iron  now  on  the  track  is  the  flat  bar,  which 
we  will  exchange  with  the  Government,  yard  for  yard,  for  T or  U rail, 
we  paying  for  the  difference  in  weight  if  the  Government  can  furnish 
the  new  iron.  I know  very  well  the  difflculty  that  it  will  have  to  en- 
counter in  order  to  furnish  this  road  with  the  iron  asked  for,  but  it  has 
become  indispensable  to  the  continued  use  of  the  road,  in  my  judgment 
and  that  of  the  suiierintendeut,  and,  it  not  being  j^ossible  for  us  to  get 
the  iron,  no  alternative  is  left  but  to  appeal  to  the  Government  for  aid. 
Without  the  use  of  this  road  I do  not  see  how  the  necessary  transpor- 
tation for  the  army  can  be  done,  and  it  therefore  becomes  my  duty  to 
apprise  you  of  its  condition.  The  constant  increase  of  prices  paid  in 
the  Government  shops  for  mechanics  makes  it  impossible  for  us  to  pro- 
cure and  keep  machinists  enough  to  keep  in  repair  our  rolling-stock. 
That  and  the  deterioration  of  the  track  for  want  of  material  presents  a 
gloomy  condition  and  calls  for  some  action  on  its  part.  Every  effort 
on  the  part  of  the  management  of  the  road  has  been  made  and  will  be 
continued  to  enable  it  to  answer  the  calls  made  on  it  by  the  Govern- 
ment and  community.  I beg  that  you  will  give  this  matter  your  early 
and  serious  attention,  as  the  exigency  does  not  admit  of  delay. 

Eespectfully, 

LEWIS  E.  HAEYIE, 

President. 


[Indorsement.] 

Engineer  Bureau,  April  7, 1863. 

Eespectfully  returned  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War. 

The  condition  of  the  Eichmond  and  Danville  Eailroad,  as  represented, 
seems  to  demand  that  a portion  of  the  iron  taken  from  other  roads  (if  it 
be  decided  to  take  it)  should  be  applied  to  its  wants.  The  removal  of 
the  rail  from  the  York  Eiver  road  is  now  in  progress,  and  it  is  hoped 
some  will  soon  be  obtained  from  the  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  road.  In 
exchange  for  good  iron  the  Government  should  have  an  amount  of  worn 
iron  equivalent  in  value. 

J.  E.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  of  JEngineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


Abstract  from  Field  lieturn  of  Troops,  Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey  commanding,  for  April  1, 
1863  {headquarters  Richmond,  Va.). 


Present  for 
duty. 

TO 

ft 

c3 

O 

CO 

o 

P 

o 

« . 

ft© 

Command. 

Officers. 

Men. 

"o 

a 
o o 
> 

o 

w 

ft 

o 

a 

to 

P 

Sc 

to 

< 

fcc-c; 

® c 

tc* 

Ml 

< 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  A . Wise 

157 

2,  025 

2, 144 

2,498 

3,445 

Col.  T.  S.  Rliett 

85 

1,523 

1,639 

1,952  i 

2,191 

Col.  Jack  Brown 

32 

602 

634 

768  1 

863 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  M.  Maury 

Capt.  S.  S.  Lee 

25 

325 

398 

445  . 

526 

15 

311 

374 

427 

451 

Grand  total 

314 

4,786 

5, 189 

6,  090  j 

7,  476 

Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


953 


Eichmond,  Va.,  A^ril  1,  18G3. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet: 

The  enemy  have  abandoned  Newport  News.  Burnside,  with  his  corps 
(the  Ninth),  j)assed  throug^h  Baltimore  a few  days  since  to  re-enforce 
Kosecrans.  Other  troops  have  been  sent  from  Hooker’s  army  into  Ten- 
nessee. One  iron-clad  reported  at  the  mouth  of  the  James  Eiver.  The 
above  may  be  relied  on. 

AENOLD  ELZEY, 

Major-General. 


Hamilton,  N.  0.,  April  1,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding ^ &c. : 

General  : Colonel  Lamb  started  this  morning  five  of  his  companies 
in  the  direction  of  Plymouth  for  a reconnaissance,  and  I propose  to  join 
them  with  him  to-morrow.  It  will  probably,  however,  be  unnecessary 
to  send  this  force  any  distance  down  the  river,  as  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Towns,  with  four  companies,  is  to-night  reported  as  having  just  re- 
turned from  within  1 J miles  of  Plymouth.  The  force  there  is  said  to 
be  unchanged  and  no  evidences  of  a movement  in  the  direction  of  Wel- 
don. Colonel  Gibbs  is  now  sending  over  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown 
to  ascertain  if  his  position  is  the  same  and  if  any  movements  have  taken 
place  in  his  front.  1 have  been  to-day  expecting  to  hear  your  guns  at 
Washington  but  have  heard  nothing.  The  force  at  Plymouth  is  re- 
ported 800  men  and  two  gunboats. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


General  Orders,  » Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
No.  34.  j Richmond.^  Fa.,  April  1,  1863. 

#*##*** 


II.  The  geographical  limits  of  the  command  of  Lieutenant-General 
Longstreet,  embracing  the  defenses  of  Eichmond  and  extending  south 
to  include  the  State  of  North  Carolina — the  whole  under  the  supervision 
and  general  direction  of  General  E.  E.  Lee — will  be  divided  into  three 
military  departments,  as  follows : All  north  of  the  James  Eiver  for  the 
defense  of  Eichmond  will  constitute  the  Department  of  Eichmond,  under 
Major-General  Elzey,  headquarters  Eichmond j all  that  portion  of  Vir- 
ginia south  of  the  James  Eiver  and  east  of  the  county  of  Powhatan  will 
constitute  the  Department  of  Southern  Virginia,  under  Major-General 
French,  headquarters  at  some  central  point  near  Blackwater ; the  State 
of  North  Carolina  will  constitute  the  Department  of  North  (Carolina, 
under  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  headquarters  Goldsborough. 

* * * * * * * 


By  order : 


S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


954 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

April  2,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding  CorpSy  Petersburg^  Ya. : 

General:  Your  letters  of  29tli  and  30th  ultimo  have  been  received. 
I fear  that  the  enemy,  by  propagation  of  consistent  falsehood  and  per- 
sistent reports  of  intended  advance,  are  deceiving  us,  and  that  while 
acting  on  the  defensive  on  the  Eappahannock  and  Blackwater  they  may 
be  re-enforcing  their  armies  west,  with  a view  to  offensive  operations.  I 
do  not  think  Burnside’s  corps  is  in  North  Carolina  but  In  Kentucky; 
all  the  information  that  I get  confirms  the  truth  of  this.  General  Burn- 
side reached  Cincinnati  on  the  24th  and  has  assumed  command  of  the 
Department  of  the  Ohio.  His  corps  is  intended  to  operate  in  Kentucky, 
where  their  papers  state  that  a large  rebel  force  is  expected.  It  may  be 
intended,  however,  that  it  shall  re-enforee  Eosecrans.  You  are,  at  any 
rate,  relieved  of  half  the  force  that  has  been  opposed  to  you.  You  will 
therefore  be  strong  enough  to  make  any  movement  that’  you  may  con- 
sider advisable;  but,  as  stated  in  former  letters,  so  long  as  the  enemy 
choose  to  remain  on  the  defensive  and  covered  by  their  intrenchments 
and  floating  batteries  I fear  you  can  accomplish  but  little,  except  to 
draw  provisions  from  the  invaded  districts.  If  you  can  accomplish  this 
it  will  be  of  positive  benefit.  I leave  the  whole  matter  to  your  good 
judgment.  If  your  troops  cannot  be  advantageously  employed  in  North 
Carolina  they  will  be  very  useful  here,  for  unless  General  Hooker  soon 
takes  the  aggressive  I must  endeavor  to  operate  to  draw  him  out.  All 
the  reports  of  our  scouts  and  citizens  north  of  the  Eappahannock  show 
that  they  are  impressed  with  the  belief  that  he  will  advance  against  us 
so  soon  as  the  weather  and  roads  permit.  Several  periods  in  the  past 
month  were  appointed  by  him  to  advance,  and  in  every  case  he  was  pre- 
vented by  storms. 

1 am,  with  great  respect,  very  truly,  yours, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 

Greenville,  JY.  C.,  April  2, 1863 — 8 p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Kinston,  N.  C. : 

General:  Your  dispatch  to  General  Pettigrew  and  myself  has  been 
received.  I will  move  to  Hookerton  to-morrow  morning.  The  rifle 
4.62-inch  and  32-pounder  gun  and  ammunition,  and  a good  deal  of  other 
ammunition,  I understood,  had  been  removed  to  Tarborough  before  ray 
arrival  here.  I have  sent  an  officer  to  Tarborough  to  remove  the  rifle 
gun  to  Falkland;  the  32-pounder  I presume  you  prefer  having  at  Tar- 
borough. Colonel  Brabble  is  at  Taft’s  Cross-Eoads  with  two  pieces  of 
[ J.  B.]  Starrs’  battery.  I have  directed  him  to  move  to  this  point  at  day- 
break. He  will  be  left  here,  and  I would  prefer  his  keeping  the  two 
pieces  of  artillery  with  him  until  the  rifle  gun  is  in  position.  If  you  do 
not  object  to  it  1 think  it  would  be  well  for  him  to  keep  these  pieces 
with  him  as  long  as  he  remains.  I will  leave  them  until  I hear  from 
you.  Please  let  me  know  in  your  next  if  he  can  keep  them.  The  rifle 
gun  will  be  in  position  to-morrow  evening.  Major  Haskell  thinks.  Upon 
the  receipt  of  your  three  notes  directing  me  to  be  ready  to  move  to  the  as- 
sistance of  General  Eansom  I sent  the  different  battery  commanders  to 
examine  the  ammunition  here  and  was  informed  that  it  was  not  suited 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


955 


to  field  guus — that  most  of  it  was  ammuuition  that  had  been  missent. 
As  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  me  to  remove  the  commissary  stores 
and  this  ammunition,  and  be  in  a condition  to  go  to  the  assistance  of 
General  Eansom,  I concluded  it  would  be  best  to  send  the  ammunition 
to  Tarborough.  My  transportation  is  so  limited  that  it  is  with  much 
difficulty  that  I can  feed  my  troops  when  moving  about  unless  hard 
bread  is  the  issue.  I hope,  general,  that  this  disposition  will  meet  with 
your  approval,  as  the  ammunition  is  not,  I understand,  suited  for  field 
guns,  and  had  I removed  it  and  the  commissary  stores  1 would  not  have 
been  ready  for  two  days  or  more  to  have  gone  to  the  assistance  of  Gen- 
eral Eansom.  Colonel  Ferebee  I presume  you  wish  to  remain  here  until 
he  hears  from  you,  as  I understand  from  General  Eobertson  that  you 
informed  him  that  he  would  be  sent  to  the  Blackwater  when  he  left  here. 
I have  heard  nothing  from  him  since  the  dispatch  I forwarded  you 
stating  that  he  had  been  informed  by  citizens  that  there  were  a good 
many  wagons  in  Washington  and  some  4,000  or  5,000  troops,  and  he 
thought  they  would  march  somewhere  to-day.  I will,  unless  I receive 
further  instructions,  encamp  in  the  vicinity  of  Hookerton  to-morrow 
night. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUEIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier- Genei'al. 

There  has  been  no  movement  on  the  Washington  road  since  day  be- 
fore yesterday. 


Headquarters  Garnett’s  Command, 

Two  miles  from  Washington^  N,  C.,  Ajyril  2,  1863. 
[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : I have  directed  the  engineer  officer  (Lieutenant  Stevens) 
to  proceed  to  build  the  bridge  immediately  (he  has  charge  of  the  pon- 
toneers  sent  with  Colonel  Singeltary),  and  he  is  now  engaged  on  that 
work.  He  reported  to  me  in  person  and  I impressed  upon  him  to  use 
all  possible  dispatch.  You  state  in  one  of  your  dispatches  that  General 
Daniel  has  been  sent  to  my  assistance.  Please  let  me  know  what  dis- 
position you  wish  made  of  his  troops.  If  you  apprehend  that  re-en- 
forcements will  be  sent  from  Plymouth  he  had  better  be  ordered  in  that 
direction,  I should  think,  unless  you  design  that  he  shall,  in  concert 
with  me,  assault  Washington.  I do  not  understand  what  your  partic- 
ular plans  are.  I would  be  glad  to  act  under  your  personal  directions, 
if  that  can  be  done  consistent  with  your  judgment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 


Headquarters  Garnett’s  Command, 

Near  Washington,,  N,  0.,  April  2,  1863. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  two  dis- 
patches from  you.  I very  much  regret  that  my  communications  to  you 
should  have  been  so  irregular  as  well  as  late  in  reaching  you.  I did 
not  know  where  you  would  establish  your  headquarters  or  the  arrange- 
ment made  of  the  line  of  couriers  to  communicate  with  you.  I sent  two 


956 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


messengers  to  Swann’s  Point,  who  returned  and  reported  they  could 
find  no  means  of  crossing.  This  occasioned  considerable  delay.  My 
forces  are  in  front  of  and  below  the  town.  I deemed  these  the  best 
positions  to  threaten  the  enemy  and  prevent  his  escape.  My  battery 
(four  smooth-bores)  is  from  half  to  three-quarters  of  a mile  from  the  ene- 
my’s works.  I have  not  yet  opened,  because  the  guns  are  partially 
concealed,  and  the  Yankees  can  concentrate  on  my  artillery  from  ten  to 
twelve  guns  of  superior  metal,  some,  if  not  all,  rifled  pieces.  It  is  im- 
possible to  contend  successfully  with  smooth-bores  against  guns  in- 
trenched and  of  superior  range. 

In  accordance  with  your  instructions  to  look  well  to  my  rear  and 
strongly  guard  the  Williamston,  Jamestown,  and  Plymouth  roads,  I 
have  placed  Colonels  Washington  and  Singeltary  on  these  routes.  This 
leaves  me  an  infantry  force  but  slightly  superior  to  that  of  the  enemy,  as 
far  as  I can  learn  from  careful  inquiry.  The  Yankee  works  are  strongly 
constructed,  with  artillery  to  sweep  the  front  and  enfilade  the  ditch 
extending  along  the  whole  line,  12  feet  wide  and  from  4 to  5 feet  deep. 
The  fallen  timber  in  advance  of  the  line  of  fortification,  within  range 
of  canister  and  grape,  makes  the  construction  of  rifle-pits  almost  im- 
possible. I have  no  evidence  that  the  enemy  has  been  demoralized  by 
our  presence,  there  having  been  no  desertions  or  messages  from  them. 
I therefore  infer  they  will  make  a good  resistance  if  attacked.  I will 
look  into  the  practicability  of  using  cotton  bales  as  you  suggest.  I am 
truly  anxious  to  forward  your  views,  but  I am  satisfied  that  without 
long-range  artillery  to  silence  the  enemy’s  batteries  I cannot  assail  the 
town  without  great  sacrifice  of  men,  with  doubtful  hope  of  success. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  B.  GAENETT, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I have  made  arrangements  to  send  you  couriers  by  a shorter 
route.  Please  order  the  arrangements  to  be  completed  on  your  side  of 
the  river. 


Headquarters, 

Ivor,  Ya.,  April  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding,  &e. : 

General  : I think  that  the  force  recently  at  Newport  News  has  gone 
West,  except  the  re-enforcements  left  at  Suffolk.  From  the  accounts 
that  I get  the  force  at  Suffolk  varies  from  18,000  to  50,000.  The  former 
estimate  is  probably  about  right,  though  I cannot  satisfy  myself  that 
there  can  be  more  than  16,000.  This  is  considerably  more  than  I can 
put  into  the  field.  I must  therefore  call  for  the  brigades  of  Kemper 
and  Garnett,  of  General  Pickett’s  division,  and  I also  desire  that  you 
send  the  two  Whitworth  guns — all  to  Franklin.  It  may  be  necessary 
for  you  to  suspend  operations  in  North  Carolina  until  I can  send  you 
another  force.  I desire  particularly  to  haul  from  the  counties  east  of 
the  Chowan  the  subsistence  and  quartermasters’  supplies  there.  Wc 
may  not  have  so  favorable  an  opportunity,  and  it  is  important  that  we 
should  get  the  supplies  from  those  counties.  The  enemy’s  cavalry  force 
is  more  than  double  that  which  I can  put  into  the  field.  I am  particu- 
larly anxious  to  get  a regiment  of  cavalry  to  put  with  our  present  force. 
If  the  cavalry  has  gone  to  Bertie  I wish  you  would  order  it  up  to  Frank- 
lin, except  a regiment  for  Bertie  and  to  look  after  gunboats.  If  the 
cavalry  is  still  with  you  please  make  prompt  arrangements  with  it  to 
meet  these  views,  i hope  that  you  will  lose  no  time  in  putting  the  bn- 


Cpmp.  XXX.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  957 

gades  of  General  Pickett’s  division  at  Franklin,  and  the  two  Whit- 
worth guns,  unless  one  is  indispensable  to  you.  Let  the  cavalry  report 
at  the  same  point.  I would  like  to  be  advised  of  the  time  necessary  to 
accomplish  this,  as  this  alone  will  delay  my  operations.  I sincerely 
hope  that  you  may  have  succeeded  at  Washington. 

I remain,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General.,  Commanding. 


Brigade  Headquarters, 
Goldsborough,  N.  0.,  April  ti,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  in  the  Field : 

General  : Yesterday  I received  a note  from  General  Longstreet  stat- 
ing that  10,000  or  12,000  men  of  the  enemy  had  left  ^^lewport  News,  Va., 
for  the  coast  of  this  State.  General  L.  stated  that  he  had  good  reason 
to  think  they  were  intended  for  New  Berne.  He  has  directed  me  to 
look  after  the  enemy  in  the  direction  of  New  Berne  and  Wilmington, 
preferring  the  safety  of  the  latter  to  this  place.  I have  directed  Gen- 
eral Kemper  to  get  the  earliest'  information  from  New  Berne  and  if 
any  movement  be  commenced  to  send  you  intelligence  at  once,  as  Gen- 
eral Longstreet  directed  you  should  be  informed.  Everything  quiet 
at  last  accounts.  Kemper  made  his  demonstration  on  Monday.  I 
sent  to  him  a regiment.  It  is  still  there.  As  Evans’  cavalry  has  been 
taken  away,  there  must  be  some  cavalry  in  front,  and  I have  directed 
Robertson  to  supply  it.  I pray  by  this  time  you  have  the  enemy  as  you 
wish  them. 

Very  resiiectfully  and  truly, 

R.  RANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier- General. 


Engineer  Department,  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington.,  N.  C.,  April  2,  1863» 
His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina  : 

Dear  Sir  : The  army  commissary  here  finds  it  extremely  diflicult  to- 
keep  up  a supply  of  provisions  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  army,  and  the 
negroes  sent  by  you  at  work  on  defenses  under  my  charge  have  in  con- 
sequence been  on  short  rations  since  their  arrival  here.  I respectfully 
suggest  that  if  you  will  induce  the  owners,  or  others  interested  in  the 
negroes,  to  send  here  a suitable  supply  of  meat  and  bread  I will  pay  the 
highest  market  rates  for  it  and  see  that  the  negroes  are  properly  fed. 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  JAMES, 
Captain  and  Chief  Engineer. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  I «.,  April  2,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina.,  Raleigh,  N.  C. : 

Sir:  On  the  receipt  of  your  telegram  with  regard  to  the  condition  of 
aft’airs  in  Western  North  Carolina  I directed  General  Donelson  to  send 


958 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


Chap.  XXX. 


a force  to  Asheville*  and  vicinity  to  repress  the  disorders  existing  there. 
1 have  just  received  from  him  the  following  dispatch : 

Knoxville,  Tenn.,  April  1,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon. 

Ill  compliance  with  your  order  a regiment  of  cavalry  will  leave  tins  place  for  Ashe- 
ville, N.  C.,  to-morrow  morning,  with  orders  to  sweep  the  mountains  in  its  vicinity  of 
marauders,  conscripts,  and  deserters. 

D.  S.  DONELSON, 
Brigadier- General  Commanding. 

With  high  regard,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON. 


Eichmond,  April  2,  1863. 

W.  S.  Morris,  Esq., 

President  Telegraph  Company: 

I am  desired  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  request  that  you  will  per- 
mit nothing  relative  to  the  unfortunate  disturbance  which  occurred  in 
the  city  to  day  to  be  sent  over  the  telegraph  lines  in  any  direction  for 
any  purpose. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


To  the  Richmond  Press : 


Eichmond,  April  2,  1863. 


Gentlemen;  The  unfortunate  disturbance  which  occurred  to-day  in 
this  city  is  so  liable  to  misconstruction  and  misrepresentation  abroad 
that  I am  desired  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  make  a special  appeal  to 
the  editors  and  reporters  of  the  press  at  Eichmond,  and  earnestly  to 
request  them  to  avoid  all  reference  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  affair. 
The  reasons  for  this  are  so  obvious  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  state  them, 
and  the  Secretary  indulges  the  hope  that  his  own  views  in  this  connec- 
tion will  be  approved  of  by  the  press  generally.  Any  other  course  must 
tend  to  embarrass  our  cause,  and  to  encourage  our  enemies  in  their  in- 
human policy. 

Very  respectfully,  &c. 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Headquarters,  April  3, 1863. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  27th  is  just  received.  On  Monday  I 
started  down  for  the  Blackwater  for  the  purpose  of  making  arrange- 
ments for  crossing  a force  for  foraging  in  the  counties  east  of  the 
Chowan.  I hoi)e  to  be  able  to  concentrate  a force  and  have  good 
bridges  prepared  by  Wednesday  next.  IMy  scout  reported  on  Monday 
that  the  enemy  at  Newport  News  had  embarked — it  was  supposed  for 
North  Carolina.  There  are  some  reports  in  this  section  that  the  enemy 
lately*  at  Newport  News  has  gone  West.  According  to  the  best  informa- 
tion that  I can  get  he  has  a force  at  Suffolk  of  at  least  17,000  men,  well 
fortified.  However,  I hope  to  be  able  to  cross  with  about  the  same  force 
and  to  forage  all  the  counties  east  of  the  Chowan.  I do  not  deem  it 
practicable  to  make  movements  concealed  in  any  portion  of  thi^  country. 

* See  Seddon  to  Douelson,  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  II,  p.  7*2o. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


959 


In  the  first  place  I do  not  suppose  the  enemy  so  very  careless  as  to 
admit  of  it;  second,  there  are  many  people  in  the  eastern  counties  who 
sympathize  with  the  opposite  cause ; third,  our  transportation  is  the 
most  indifi'erent,  rendering  slow  movements  almost  impracticable;  rapid 
movements  out  of  the  question.  Your  transportation  I thought  indif- 
ferent. If  you  could  see  such  as  there  is  in  this  section  you  would  be 
delighted  at  the  contemplation  of  those  large,  fine  teams  of  your  own. 
The  vehicle  almost  universal  here  is  what  our  soldiers  call  the  ox  sulky. 
I will  send  you  a sketch  of  one  of  them  as  soon  as  I can  get  a good 
draughtsman.  I believe  with  you  that  a sudden  vigorous  attack  upon 
Suffolk  would  give  me  that  place,  but  I see  no  chance  of  getting  the 
garrison  unless  I can  get  assistance  from  the  Nav^y.  Besides,  it  would 
cost  me  5,000  men  ; but  with  another  division  I can  do  more  and  at  a 
third  the  sacrifice.  I have  thought  since  about  January  23  last  (when 
I made  the  same  suggestion  to  you)  that  one  army  corps  could  hold  the 
line  of  the  Eappahannock  while  the  other  was  operating  elsewhere.  I 
cannot  now  appreciate  the  necessity  of  your  retiring  to  the  Annas  in 
case  you  send  off’  more  troops  from  the  Eappahannock.  There  you  are 
fortified  on  the  river  and  on  the  heights;  on  the  Annas  you  would  have 
neither.  Besides,  you  would  lose  morale  and  encourage  the  enemy.  If 
I move  out  to  make  the  attack  upon  Suffolk  I shall  attack  a position 
which  ought  to  be  well  fortified,  and  I have  information  that  it  is.  That 
position  can  be  re-enforced  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  three 
days.  I might  get  re-enforcements  from  you  x)ossibly  in  two  days.  I 
doubt,  too,  the  policy  of  giving  time  to  develop  the  plans  of  the  enemy, 
but  would  prefer  to  act  before  his  plans  are  matured.  Our  plans  must 
be  made  to  suit  the  emergency,  so  they  might  be  more  effective  if  made 
and  executed  before  the  enemy’s  were  matured.  I shall  move,  as  I have 
said,  across  the  Blackwater  as  soon  as  I can  get  substantial  crossings, 
and  at  least  make  a forced  reconnaissance  while  I endeavor  to  draw  off 
subsistence  and  quartermasters’  stores.  If  more  can  be  done  without 
great  sacrifice  I shall  do  it.  My  chief  object  in  wishing  a consultation 
was  to  endeavor  to  get  your  aid  in  securing  co-operation  on  the  part  of 
the  Kavy.  With  that  I should  hope  to  capture  the  force  at  Suffolk  and 
re-enforcements  from  the  army  of  the  Eappahannock. 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  vour  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONTGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  Genera ?,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg.,  Fa.,  Ajgril  4,  1863. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding.,  FredericJcsburg,  Va. : 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  let- 
ters of  the  27th  and  31st  ultimo  and  of  the  2d  instant.  General  Hill 
has  succeeded  in  cutting  off  the  enemy’s  position  at  AVashington  from 
his  gunboats  and  has  surrounded  it,  bub  he  fears  that  time  alone  will 
reduce  the  garrison.  He  complains  of  want  of  artillerj".  It  is  thought 
that  there  are  no  iron-clads  on  the  coast  of  North  Carolina,  and  if  I am 
correctly  informed  there  is  but  one  in  the  James  Eiver.  General  Hill 
is  ordered  and  urged  to  be  prompt  in  his  operations.  If  he  finds  that 
too  much  time  will  be  consumed  in  reducing  the  garrison  at  any  i:)oint 
he  is  to  draw  off  as  soon  as  he  gets  out  the  supplies  from  the  eastern 
counties.  I hope  to  be  able  to  cross  the  Blackwater  on  Wednesday  or 


960  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  j 

Thursday  next  and  to  get  what  supplies  there  are  east  of  that  stream  i 
and,  if  I find  it  possible,  to  make  an  effort  to  get  that  garrison.  There  i 
seems  but  little  room  to  doubt  but  the  enemy  is  inclined  to  make  his  I 
great  effort  in  the  West,  but  we  may  break  him  up  in  the  East  and  then  I 
re-enforce  in  the  West  in  time  to  crush  him  there.  It  may  be  necessary  i 
in  this  view  to  suggest  to  the  commander  in  the  West  to  decline  battle  ■ 
there  until  we  can  re-enforce,  unless  he  finds  a favorable  opportunity.  I 
hope  to  be  able  to  finish  with  the  operations  in  this  section  in  time  to  j 
join  you  as  soon  as  the  roads  are  in  condition  for  you  to  begin  to  oper- 
ate. I have  not  thought  that  the  enemy  could  advance  on  either  this 
or  your  line  until  the  roads  were  better  ; on  this,  not  at  all,  unless  he  | 
sent  other  than  the  forces  that  he  has  had  here.  The  forces  that  have 
gone  West  may  have  been  sent  there  to  keep  down  trouble.  It  is  pos- 
sible, too,  that  he  has  deceived  himself  with  regard  to  the  forces  sent  by  j 
us  West.  The  three  regiments  that  were  sent  from  here  may  have  been 
magnified  into  a great  force.  Their  papers  have  frequently  mentioned 
movements  of  our  troops  toward  Kentucky. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding, 

p.  S. All  of  my  information  is  to  the  effect  that  half  at  least  of 

Burnside’s  command  is  still  at  Suffolk. 


Headquarters,  April  4, 1803. 

General  E.  E.  Lee, 

Co7nmanding,  Fredericksburg,  Va. : 

General  : I send  you  a letter  just  received  from  General  Hill.  I 
have  ordered  six  rifled  guns  instead  of  only  four.  As  he  has  under- 
taken Washington  it  is  important  that  he  should  reduce  it ; otherwise  it 
will  give  the  enemy  great  confidence.  I doubt  if  New  Berne  is  worth 
the  trouble  and  time  it  would  take  to  reduce  it.  General  H.  asks  for 
two  weeks  ; in  addition  to  these  two  weeks  it  will  require  two  to  move 
out  to  Suffolk  and  draw  the  supplies  from  there.  Can  we  afford  to  con- 
sume this  time  and  reach  you  before  the  enemy  can  move  ? It  depends 
on  your  roads  more  than  anything  else.  If  you  can  spare  me  two  more 
brigades  and  artillery  I can  operate  at  once.  I think  that  I might  do 
with  one  brigade  and  a battalion  of  artillery.  If  we  succeed  in  getting 
one  of  the  positions  of  the  enemy  the  others  may  not  be  so  difficult. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Jjieutenant- Geiieral,  Commanding. 


You  might  telegraph  in  such  away  as  to  indicate  your  wishes  without 
making  them  understood  to  operators. 


Headquarters, 

Kinston,  K.  C.,  April  4,  1SC3. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Comdg.  Department  of  Virginia  and  Forth  Carolina: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  30th  was  duly  received.  Kemper  made 
a demonstration  on  New  Berne.  The  enemy  kept  within  his  works.  Hill 


Chai'.XXX.J  correspondence,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  961 

lijis  been  around  AVasbiugton  since  Tuesday.  He  has  called  one  of  my 
regiments  to  his  vicinity.  To-morrow  Kem{)er  goes  to  Franklin.  I shall 
he  here  with  four  regiments  and  enough  artillery  for  luy  infantry.  I have 
but  one  squadron  of  cavalry.  If  an  opportunity  offers  I shall  strilte  j but 
with  only  2,500  men  I shall  have  to  be  circumspect.  Hill  has  directed  me 
not  to  go  to  Whiting  under  any  circumstances  unless  the  latter  states 
that  the  enemy’s  ffeet  is  directly  off’  the  forts  below.  In  this  official 
note  let  me  ask  a favor.  If  it  be  possible  to  prevent  it  do  not  let  me 
be  kept  only  to  watch  when  others  are  doing  better.  1 am  not  partial 
to  service  where  there  has  been  so  little  done  and  where  there  are  poor 
opportunities  to  render  real  good. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

K.  KANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters,  Aj)ril  4, 1863. 

General  K.  Hansom,  [Jr.,] 

Commanding  at  Goldshoroughj  W.  C.  : 

In  case  you  are  likely  to  give  battle,  telegraph  for  Colonel  Hansom ; 
otherwise  let  him  remain  on  the  coast.  1 do  not  know  where  General 
Robertson  is.  Please  send  an  order  to  him  to  send  three  companies  of 
cavalry  to  General  Whiting.  Explain  to  him  why  I send  the  order 
through  you. 

JAMES  LONGSTHEET, 
Lieutenant-General  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  A]gril  4,  1863. 

General  W.  H.  0.  Whiting, 

Commanding  at  Wilmington ^ N.  C. : 

Keep  Col.  [M.  W.]  Hansom  unless  his  regiment  is  going  into  battle, 
when  General  Hansom  will  telegraph  for  him.  Three  comi)anies  are 
ordered  in  the  place  of  Colonel  Barbour.  I hope  that  the  monitor  off 
the  bar  will  not  be  able  to  weather  the  storms.  If  she'attempts  to  cross 
Lave  a party  ready  to  board  her.  - 

JAMES  LONGSTHEET, 
Lieutenant- General  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Forces  on  Blackwater, 

A]gril  4,  1863. 

Lieu  ten  an  t-  General  Longstreet  , 

Commanding  Department : 

General  : I send  you  the  map  of  roads.  The  enemy  have  not  gotten 
over  the  fright  of  my  move  to  Carrsville  and  are  on  the  alert,  expecting 
an  attack  from  us.  My  scouts  report  the  cars  running  day  and  night 
from  Norfolk.  I learn  from  Mr.  Hofinan,  just  from  Suffolk,  that  when 
he  left  the  forces  consisted  only  of  some  sixteen  to  eighteen  regiments 
inclusive,  say  some  13,000  men.  Thirteen  regiments  have  been  there, 
and  either  three  or  five  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  are  there.  He  thinks 
that  fortifications  run  from  Suff'olk  to  Dismal  Swamp,  but  I think  he  is 
mistaken  and  will  have  an  examination  made.  If  this  be  so  it  may  be 
61  R R— VOL  XVIII 


962 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  R.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


dilficult  to  get  between  Suffolk  and  ISTorfolk.  He  says  the  plan  of  Suf- 
folk and  fortifications  I sent  you  is  correct.  The  troops  at  Sufiolk  are 
not  reliable.  I am  preparing  to  rebuild  the  Joiner  Bridge.  I will  hear 
to-night,  I think,  from  a gentleman  in  Suffolk  and  will  write  you  by  next 


mail. 


Very  respectfully,  your 


obedient  servant, 

M.  JENKINS, 

Brigadier-  General j Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Petersburg.,  Fa.,  April  4,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding^  &c.: 

General:  In  asking  you  to  send  me  the  cavalry,  leaving  a regiment 
in  Bertie,  I only  wished  the  cavalry  over  and  above  the  force  that  you 
need  on  your  picket  line.  T^ree  companies  should  be  kept  with  General 


VVhitino:'  at  Wilmington.  The  enemy  seems  to  be  re-enforcing  in  the| 


West  with  a view  to  operating  actively  there,  and  only  on  the  detensive' 
in  the  East.  We  should  therefore  act  promptly  here  with  the  purpose' 
of  pushing  some  of  our  forces  West  as  soon  as  we  may  be  able  to  do  so., 
If  you  find  that  you  are  likely  to  be  detained  any  time  in  reducing  Wash 
ington  it  will  probably  be  better  to  abandon  it  and  confine  yourselt  to 
drawing  out  the  supplies  from  the  eastern  counties.  This  you  can  do 
with  the  force  properly  belonging  in  North  Carolina.  The  cavalry  I will 
send  back  as  soon  as  we  can  get  the  supplies  from  the  country  east  ot 
the  Chowan.  I want  the  brigades  of  Gdnerals  Garnett  and  Kemper  at 
Franklin,  Va.,  as  soon  as  you  find  that  you  cannot  reduce  the  garrison 
at  Washington  without  consuming  too  much  time;  or,  if  you  are  suc- 
cessful, I want  them  returned  to  me  at  Franklin;  also  my  Whitworth, 
if  it  is  not  the  one  that  was  burst.  Give  me  the  earliest  information  ol 
the  time  that  these  troops  can  be  put  at  Franklin. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


I suppose  that  you  know  that  we  have  not  the  ammunition  to  fight  an 
artillery  battle  against  the  enemy’s  fortifications. 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  April  5, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  : 

Beauregard  informs  me  eight  monitors  off  Charleston  Bar.  Eneiii\ 
have  landed  four  regiments  on  Cole’s  Island.  He  desires  telegrapi 

W.  H,  C.  WHITING. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fi.,  April  5,  1803. 

General  W.  H.'  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington.,  N.  C. : 

The  morements  of  the  enemy  seem  to  threaten  an  approaching  attacl 
on  Charleston.  Hold  Bansom’s  brigade  in  remliness  for  movement 
the  event  their  forces  should  be  concentrated  tor  a 

Secretary  of  War. 


Ojiai’.  XXX.] 


963 


COKRESPONDKNCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Goldseorougii,  N.  C.,  April  5,  1803. 
Maj.  G.  Moxley  Sorrel,  lisHistant  Adjutant- General : 

1 have  110  cavalry  to  send  to  Wiliiiiiigtoii ; all  available  actively  em- 
ployed. Claiborne’s  horses  broken  down.  Will  send  the  coinpaiiies  as 
soon  as  possible. 

B.  H.  BOBEBTSON, 
Brigadier- General j Commanding^  Cavalry. 


Hdqrs.  Forces  on  ]^lackwater,  April  0,  1803. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet  : 

General  : I have  postponed  for  a few  days  my  attempts  upon  the 
enemy’s  advanced  post,  having  found  him  much  on  the  alert.  In  view 
of  your  designs  I have  taken  steps  to  have  them  think  you  are  gone  to 
the  West  with  the  greater  portion  of  your  force  to  meet  Burnside’s 
movement.  I will  send  an  intelligent  officer  or  scout  to-night  to  dis- 
cover Avhether  it  will  be  possible  to  throw  a force  by  the  south  side  be- 
tween Suffolk  and  Norfolk.  He  v/ill  have  no  idea,  of  course,  why  I wish 
to  know,  as  I will  lead  him  to  suxipose  it  is  merely  for  a cavalry  raid  to 
tear  uj)  the  milroad,  &c.  If  it  cannot  be  done  wt‘.  miglit  effect  the  same 
object  by  crossing  the  Nansemond  Biver  by  ])ontoon.  My  last  estimate 
of  the  forces  at  Suffolk  I think  correct — say  12,000  to  15,000.  If  you 
succeed  in  capturing  them  it  will  be  the  most  brilliant  affair  of  the  war 
and  would  be  attended  by  glorious  results  to  the  cause.  Part  of  Lane’s 
battery  has  arrived,  but  tlie  most  imi)ortant  gun  for  our  x)urposes  is  not 
with  it,  and  the  ammunition  is  defective.  1 hope  the  Whitworth  gnn 
will  be  here  in  time  for  the  gunboat;  at  anj^  rate  I will  make  the  at- 
temx)t  with  the  guns  I have  the  next  trip  they  make. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  JENKINS, 
Brigadier-  G eneral. 


Headquarters,  A])ril  6, 18G3. 
General  M.  Jenkins,  Commanding  at  Blacliwater  : 

General  : I desire  that  you  have  your  command  in  readiness  to  cross 
the  Blackwater  on  Friday.  The  divisions  of  Generals  Pickett  and  Hood 
will  not  be  able  to  cross  before  Saturday ; but  if  the  force  at  Suffolk  is 
no  larger  than  stated  in  your  letter  of  the  4th  you  will  be  able  to  cross 
with  the  two  brigades  on  the  day  before  them  and  take  uji  some  strong 
])osition  between  the  Blackwater  and  Suffolk.  You  will  jirobably  cross 
at  the  Franklin  Bridge.  I hope  to  join  you  on  Thursday  at  your  head- 
(piarters  and  will  then  give  detailed  instructions.  The  regiment  of 
Colonel  Baker  should  be  ready  to  move  with  you.  You  should  have 
four  days’  rations  cooked.  The  squadron  of  Gax)tain  Graham  is  ordered 
To  be  at  Blackwater  Bridge,  to  cross  at  that  x)oint,  and  move  on  the 
Hank  via  Windsor.  The  pickets  that  you  have  on  the  other  side  of  tlie 
Iffackwater  had  better  be  left  there,  provided  with  the  number  of 
rations  already  mentioned.  You  can  take  them  on  to  join  you  after 
crossing.  You  will  require  tools  for  intrenching.  The  cavalry  should 
he  provided  with  wires  to  stretch  across  the  roads  in  case  the  enemy’s 
cavalry  should  attack  it,  particularly  lor  any  cavalry  charge.  , 

Please  acknowledge  receipt  of  this  by  telegraph. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant-  Generals  Commayiding. 


964  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  ICuai  .xxx. 

Headquarters, 

Petersburg^  Fa.,  April  6,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 
Maj.  Geu.  I).  H.  Hill,  Commanding^  &c, : 

General  : From  your  letter  of  the  4th  instant  I infer  that  your  cav- , 
airy  is  picketing  continually  from  Eoanoke  to  Wilmington.  This,  it 
seems  to  me,  is  superfluous  labor.  I should  think  three  companies 
quite  enough  for  General  Whiting.  Six  ought  to  be  enough  at  and 
around  New  Berne  and  three  near  Washington.  Then  a cavalry  force — 
say  Glaiborne’s  regiment— in  Bertie  ought  to  be  more  than  enough  to 
watch  that  country  while  their  horses  are  resting.  The  balance  of  the 
force  ought  to  be  kept  at  some  suitable  point  for  other  operations  and 
for  foraging  the  animals.  If,  however,  you  cannot  make  such  arrange- 
ments 1 must  do  without  him.  I am  satisfied  that  we  have  a much 
greater  cavalry  force  than  the  enemy.  That  being  the  case  I cannot 
see  how  we  should  be  obliged  to  use  but  part  of  a regiment  on  tbe 
other  side  of  the  Blackwater  against  two  of  the  enemy.  The  enemy  is 
reported  to  be  ready  to  commence  his  attack  upon  Gharleston,  so  he 
cannot  re  enforce  from  that  quarter.  My  move  across  the  Blackwater 
will  secure  you  against  any  re-enforcement  from  that  quarter,  so  you 
will  be  free  to  operate  with  your  other  forces,  which  (not  including  Gen- 
erals Garnett  and  Kemper)  will  exceed  the  force  of  the  enemy.  The 
two  regiments  at  Hamilton  ought  to  be  enough  to  keep  up  your  invest- 
ment without  Garnett,  and  they  will  then  be  in  position  to  cut  off  any 
force  that  might  be  so  indiscreet  as  to  venture  up  to  Weldon.  You 
could  at  least  keep  the  enemy  inside  his  works  and  draw  out  the  sup- 
plies from  the  eastern  portion  of  the  State.  Your  letter  of  the  2d  in-; 
stant  expressed  confidence  in  entire  success  if  you  could  get  four  other 
rifle  guns.  I ordered  them  to  you  at  once,  but  you  now  say  that  noth- 
ing but  heavy  artillery  will  answer.  I hope,  therefore,  that  you  will  re- 
turn the  guns  under  Gapt.  [James]  Reilly  to  me  at  Franklin.  I hope 
to  cross  the  river  on  Saturday,  and  as  they  are  the  only  long-range 
guns  belonging  to  one  of  my  divisions  they  will  be  essential  to  me. 
The  enemv  will  surely  be  in  condition  to  begin  his  operations  on  the 
Rappahannock  in  a month  more,  and  we  should  at  least  be  ready  to  de- 
fend in  this  department  and  re-enforce  on  the  Rappahannock  by  that 
time.  I was  so  much  encouraged  by  your  letter  ot  the  2d  that  I sent 
you  the  artillery  that  you  called  for  and  asked  if  the  time  (two  weeks); 
could  be  given  you  with  Garnett’s  and  Kemper’s  brigades.  From  your 
letter  of  the  4th  1 conclude  that  it  is  still  a matter  of  doubt  whethei 
you  will  then  reduce  the  garrison  at  Washington.  It  must  be  better, 
therefore,  for  me  to  get  my  forces  together  at  once  and  move  across  the 
Blackwater  and  secure  such  provisions  and  forage  as  may  be  in  that 
portion  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ ^ JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

TAeu tenant-  Genera Commanding. 

It  may  be  that  after  i have  hnished  on  the  other  side  that  1 can  send 
you  some  other  force,  but  I presume  that  1 shall  be  obliged  to  return  tt, 
the  Rappahannock. 


. ■ Headquarters, 

Petersburg,  Va.,  April  6,  1863. 

General  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding : 

General:  In  writing  for  the  cavalry  I only  wanted  such  ^ 

not  be  in  use  in  your  line  as  pickets.  Three  companies  should  go 


CiiAi-.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONREDERAtE.  965 

General  Whiting.  I wish  you  would  establisli  an  infantry  and  cavalry 
force  in  Bertie  to  guard  the  .Cl^owan  and  give  notice  at  Franklin  if  any 
of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  ascend  the  river.  1 think  there  can  be  no  need 
of  troops  at  Weldon  except  such  as  may  be  necessary  to  guard  the 
bridge.  I sent  you  four  rifle  guns  and  two  Napoleons.  I shall  need 
them  as  soon  as  you  may  be  able  to  dispense  with  them.  When  they 
are  returned  send  them  to  Franklin  by  rail.  Let  me  know  by  telegraph 
when  they  will  start  back. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieuten ant-  General^  Com mandin g. 

P.  S.— I have  this  moment  received  your  letter  of  the  4th.  I wrote 
you  yesterday,  suggesting  that  you  might  keep  Garnett’s  brigade  if  it 
would  be  of  much  use  to  you.  You  now  say,  however,  that  heavy  artil- 
lery alone  can  be  useful,  so  I suppose  there  is  no  prospect  of  a success- 
ful termination  of  your  expedition.  . I sent  authority  to  you  to  keep  Gen- 
eral Garnett  and  sent  you  six  of  my  best  field  guns*.  As  they  will  be  of 
no  service  to  you  I hope  you  will  send  them  back  to  Franklin  as  soon 
as  possible.  You  can  at  least  keep  the  enemy  inside  his  works  and  haul 
ofi'  all  supplies  that  may  be  in  the  counties  east  of  you.  This  will  be  a 
great  thing,  and  we  may  yet  be  able  to  render  you  such  aid  as  you  de- 
sire. You  know,  though,  that  we  cannot  afford  to  fight  artillery  against 
them,  particularly  when  they  are  behind  their  works.  The  order  for 
the  return  of  the  troops  was  given  under  the  impression  drawn  from 
your  letters  that  there  was  no  prospect  of  reducing  the  garrison  at 
Washington.  A letter  from  you  yesterday  seems  to  give  some  hope 
of  success  and  you  were  then  authorized  to  r*etain  Garnett.  Now,  again, 
you  seem  to  have  but  little  hope  except  from  heavy  artillery.  The 
enemy  is  reported  about  to  commence  operations  at  Charleston,  so  you 
can  go  on,  at  least,  hauling  off  supplies  from  any  portion  of  the  State. 
If  1 can  get  through  in  time  or  find  that  I can  render  other  assistance 
to  you  1 will  do  so  promptly.  I regret  very  much  that  matters  have  so 
turned  out  as  to  delay  me,  but  we  must  hope  for  better  fortune  hereafter. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Richmond, 

A^pril  fi,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Lonostreet,  Commanding : 

General:  I received  your  note  this  evening  and  hasten  to  answer  it. 
The  proposed  diversion  on  the  Peninsula  can  be  made.  Owing  to  the 
continually  threatened  riots  in  Eichmond  it  would  not  do  to  move  any 
of  Ehett’s  command.  It  must  be  done  with  Wise’s  brigade.  He  has  on 
the  Pamunkey  380  men  guarding  and  suiiporting  the  engineers  in  te'ar- 
ing  up  the  railroad  iron  from  West  Point  to  White  House.  This  cannot 
he  disturbed.  He  has  then  left  1,563  infantry  and  412  cavalry  and  two 
light  batteries,  making  a force  of  1,975  and  two  batteries.  This,  deduct- 
ing camp  guards  to  be  left  at  Chaffin’s  farm,  will  constitute  the  expedi- 
tion under  General  Wise.  I shall  start  him  down  the  Peninsula  Wed- 
nesday morning  unless  I receive  contrary  instructions  from  you  by 
telegraph.  There  is  a force  at  Yorktown  of  from  3,()(){)  to  5, ()()()  meii. 
Of  course  Chaffin’s  and  Drewry’s  Bluffs  will  be  left  without  any  infantry. 
I do  not  think  it  will  be  well  to  go  far  beyond  Yorktown  unless  the  force 
np  tot  hat  point  is  met  and  whiiiped.  Fort  Magruder,  you  are  aware,  will 
have  to  be  carried  or  the  garrison  torced  to  retire  before  proceeding  to 


966 


NORTO  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGTNtA.  [Chap.  XXN. 

Yorktowii.  Wise  lias  been  cliafiDg  for  a chance  and  I am  glad  he  has 
got  it.  He  knows  the  country  thoronghl;f  and  no  doubt  will  do  well. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

ARNOLD  ELZEY, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

Apn7  G,  18G,3. 

Maj.  (feu.  Arnold  Elzea^, 

■ Commanding  at  Richmond,  Va.  : 

General:  General  Longstreet  conteinjdates  a move  across  the  Black- 
water  and  thinks  he  may_  require  more  infantry  and  artillery  than  he 
now  has.  In  that  event,  can  you  spare  him  either  Wise’s  brigade  or 
your  artillery  battalion,  armed  as  infantry,  with  a light  battery  or  two? 
As  he  will  be  in  front  of  Richmond,  and  as  there  are  now  no  Federal 
troops  on  the  James  River,  except  those  in  his  front,  I think  you  could 
re-enforce  him  with  advantage.  Please  see  the  Secretar^^  on  tlie  subject 
and  communicate  with  General  Longstreet. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

April  6,  18G3. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

General  : I have  received  your  two  letters  of  the  4th  instant,  inclos- 
ing one  from  General  D.  H.  Hill,  of  the  2d  instant.  General  Hill  seems 
to  be  operating  judiciously  and  you  have  given  him  all  that  he  requires. 
1 hope  therefore  he  may  be  successful  and  may  not  be  obliged  to  storm 
the  enemy’s  iutrenchments,  which  might  cause  the  loss  of  many  of  our 
brave  men.  I was  in  hopes  he  might  have  had  enough  troops  in  the 
Department  of  North  Carolina  for  his  military  operations,  and  regret 
that  he  has  to  use  Kemper’s  and  Garnett’s  brigades  for  such  work. 
You  know  how  much  depends  on  your  divisions,  and  I wish  to  reserve 
them  as  much  as  possible.  As  to  your  own  operations  you  must  push 
them  according  to  your  own  judgment,  and  I would  recommend  care- 
ful reconnaissances  belbre  attacking  Suffolk  or  any  other  fortifications 
of  the  enemy,  and  that  you  endeavor  to  draw  his  forces  out  bj^  threaten- 
ing his  communications.  I think  you  will  find  none  of  Burnside’s  corps 
opposed  to  you.  The  troops  in  your  front  are  those  which  have  been  at 
Norfolk  and  Old  Point.  Burnside’s  corps  has  certainly  gone  West.  At 
the‘first  intimation  of  its  departure  from  Newport  News  a scout  was 
dispatched  to  watch  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad.  He  proceeded 
as  far  as  Ellicott’s  Mill  and  learned  that  the  troops  had  been  brought  up 
the  bay  and  were  encamped  around  Baltimore.  He  saw  them  on  their 
way  over  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  and  counted  some  fifty-seven 
trains.  He  conversed  with  the  men  at  some  of  the  stations,  who  ex- 
])ressed  great  dissatistaction  at  being  transferred  West;  were  fearful  of 
the  climate,  their  health,  &c.,  and  deserted  on  every  opportunity  that 
offered.  The  troops  conveyed  over  this  road  were  altogether  infantry. 
If  any  artillery  was  taken  West  it  was  carried  on  the  Pennsylvania 
Central  road,  which,  I learn  from  other  sources,  was  also  used  in  the 
transportation  of  Burnside’s  corps. 


CIIAJ'.  COIIKI^SPONDENCE,  El'C. — CONFEDERATil. 


961 


The  roads  in  this  section  have  dried  astonishingly,  but  the  storm  of 
Saturday  has  again  surrounded  us  with  mud  and  water.  I cannot  say 
whether  General  Hooker  will  advance  or  not,  though,  as  before  stated, 
all  the  information  I receive  from  every  source  goes  to  show  that  it  is 
his  intention  to  do  so,  and  that  he  is  prepared.  It  may  be  a part  of  their 
general  plan  to  deceive  us  while  re-enforcing  their  western  armies;  but 
as  soon  as  I can  move  I will  endeavor  to  find  out.  In  the  mean  time  I 
do  not  think  it  prudent  to  weaken  the  force  here,  but  should  you  require 
more  strength  I think  it  better  that  you  call  on  General  Elzey  for  Wise^s 
brigade  and  such  artillery  as  can  be  sent  you  from  Eichmond.  I have 
written  to  General  Elzey  on  the  subject. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  EEE, 

General. 


Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet: 


Division  Headquarters, 

April  6,  18G3. 


My  Dear  General:  I sent  up  yesterday  some  Yankees  taken  by 
Bearing.  From  what  I could  gather  from  the  sergeant  a good  many 
enlistments  wouhFsoon  expire,  and  he  seemed  to  think  the  men  would 
not  re-enlist  and  thought  they  would  not  be  forced  in.  Schriver  is  here 
yet.  I would  have  sent  him  down  yesterday  to  Suffolk,  but  he  will  have 
to  go  to  Newport  News;  thence  to  Norfolk  and  Suffolk.  He  says  he 
will  have  no  difficulty  in  reaching  Suffolk  by  that  route,  but  much  by 
any  other.  In  order  to  send  him  that  way  some  little  money  will  be 
necessary.  I have  none  except  Confederate  money,  which  will  not  pass. 
I think  $40  of  State  money  would  answer  and  would  be  well  expended. 
He  could  return  (by  starting  on  Wednesday)  on  Sunday  or  Monday 
next,  and  could  bring  back  accurate  information  if  he  chooses.  I think 
it  worth  trying,  and  if  you  have  any  funds  on  hand  for  such  purposes 
and  wish  the  venture  made  please  send  down  by  first  train.  If  not  I 
will  immediately  return  Schriver  to  his  company. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant  and  friend, 

GEO.  E.  PICKETT. 


P.  S. — Mr.  Eiddick  hears  from  Chuckatuck  that  the  Yankees  have 
not  crossed  the  river  at  Eeed’s  Bridge,  but  are  repairing  the  bridge; 
will  take  probably  three  days.  When  completed  it  gives  them  a chance 
to  sweep  the  country.  Shall  I send  expedition  down  after  forage  and 
at  same  time  burn  bridge  ? 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  April  7,  18G3. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Commanding.,  <&c. : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  Gth  instant*  reached  me  this  morning. 
Gratified  to  learn  that  you  contemplate  an  important  movement  at  so 
early  a day.  I was  anxious  to  aid  in  making  it  as  effective  as  possible 
and  lost  no  time  in  conferring  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  secure 
the  co-operation  of  such  vessels  as  could  be  commanded  to  cut  off*  the 
enemy  from  retreat  and  effect  their  capture.  The  Secretary  had  every 
disposition  to  meet  your  views,  and  thought  at  first  tliat  the  iron-clad 

* Soo  p.  910.  ~ 


968 


■ NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


gunboat  Eicbmond,  with  another  light  steamer,  might  be  ventured  to 
aid  your  operations.  He  had,  however,  to  consult  his  naval  officers  and 
likewise  to  learn  whether  the  obstructions  could  be  removed  or  widened 
in  time  to  allow  the  ships  to  i)ass.  Unfortunately,  it  has  been  ascer- 
tained that  the  vessels  could  not  pass  without  such  removal  of  tbe 
heavy  obstructions  as  to  render  it  very  doubtful  whether  the  work 
could  be  accomplished  in  time.  At  the  same  time  the  replacement  of 
the  obstructions  after  the  termination  of  the  expedition,  it  is  estimated, 
would  require  much  time  and  expenditure.  I have  required  a fuller 
report  than  I ;^et  have  to  satisfy  me  of  the  inexpediency  of  attempting 
the  present  removal  j but  Colonel  Gilmer,  the  head  of  the  Engineer 
Bureau,  expresses  himself  so  strongly  against  the  feasibility  of  the 
speedy  removal  that  I fear  that  portion  of  your  plan  will  have  to  be 
relinquished.  Should  I conclude  otherwise  I will  promptly  inform  you ; 
but  you  had  better  proceed  without  counting  on  naval  co-operation.  I 
have  arranged  with  Major  General  Elzey  to  make  an  expedition  down 
the  Peninsula  with  some  2,000  men,  as  if  to  threaten  Yorktown  and 
Fort  Monroe,  and  at  the  same  time  to  have  a few  companies  of  cavalry 
threaten  the  enemy  at  Gloucester  Town,  as  if  there  was  a purpose,  by 
combined  attack,  to  carry  all  the  posts  of  the  enemy  on  the  Peninsula. 
These  movements,  it  is  hoped,  will  agitate  and  alarm  the  enemy,  so  as 
to  make  their  resistance  to  your  real  attack  less  serious  and  effectually 
preclude  their  drawing  any  re-enforcements  from  this  side. 

With  my  best  wishes  for  the  success  of  your  operations,  I remain,  with 
high  respect,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  Wa^\ 


Headquaktees,  April  7,  18G3. 
Major-General  Elzey,  Commanding : 

General:  In  giving  instructions  to  General  Wise  you  had  better 
direct  that -he  should  not  pass  Yorktowp  any  considerable  distance  with 
his  entire  force  unless  he  finds  that  he  will  by  doing  so  draw  out  the 
force  at  Yorktown,  but  that  instructions  must  not  prevent  him  taking 
advantage  of  any  favorable  opi)ortunity  that  may  occur. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 

P.  S. — It  would  probably  be  well  to  magnify  his  command  as  much  as 
he  can.  The  enemy  likes  to  be  deceived,  or  rather  to  have  good  excuses 
for  reverses.  People  who  play  tricks  are  always  the  easiest  tricked.  He 
might  give  it  out  that  you  are  behind  him  with  any  number  of  trooi)S. 
1 want  iialf  a dozen  20-pounder  Parrotts  for  my  expedition.  I have  tla^ 
men  and  horses  for  them  if  you  cannot  spare  them. 


Headquarters, 
Fetershurg,  Va.,  April  7,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding  : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  is  just  received.  Yon 
should  remember  that  my  orders  are  based  upon  information  that  I re- 
ceive. Up  to  the  2d  instant  you  gave  me  no  reason  to  hope  that  yon 


Chap.  CORKEkSPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


969 


could  accomjdisli  auytliiug  at  Washington;  on  the  contrary,  you  seemed 
to  have  but  little  hope  in  your  own  letter,  and  frequently  forwarded 
letters  from  General  Garnett  which  always  argued  the  utter  impossi- 
bility of  your  being  able  to  accomplish  anything.  Under  these  circum- 
stances I called  for  the  troops  to  be  returned  to  me  that  I might  put 
them  at  other  work,  for  we  have  already  been  idle  too  long.  Then 
came  your  letter  of  the  2d,  which  was  full  of  encouragement  and  hope. 
I sent  you,  instead  of  four  guns,  as  you  desired,  six,  and  sent  you  au- 
thority^ to  retain  General  GainetFs  brigade.  After  your  letter  of  the 
2d’ came  one  of  the  4th,  which,  I believe,  was  more  desponding  than 
your  previous  letters,  and  expressing  the  opinion  that  nothing  but  heavy 
artillery  would  answer  any  good  purpose.  I then  sent  my  order  for 
Garnett’s  brigade  to  return  and  the  six  pieces  of  artillery.  Your  letter 
of  the  5th  revives  much  hope  again,  and  I now  authorize  you  to  retain 
General  Garnett  and  the  six  field  pieces  if  they  are  important  to  you. 
1 fear  from  the  tone  of  General  Garnett’s  letters  that  he  was  so  well 
satisfied  that  Washington  could  not  be  taken  that  he  was  not  even 
willing  to  make  the  effort.  Because  things  are  not  laid  down  in  the 
hook  it  does  not  follow  that  things  cannot  be  done.  You  mention  for 
the  first  time  that  General  Foster  is  below  you  with  a succoring  force. 
If  that  be  so  'New  Berne  must  be  weak  and  General  Eansom  might  get 
a position  below  it,  which  will  leave  it  in  the  same  condition  as  Wash- 
ington. I would  have  been  glad  to  have  left  General  Kemper  at  Kins- 
ton to  aid  ill  such  a purpose  had  I been  advised.  You  have  enough 
force  for  this  and  your  own  work  without  him,  however;  that  is,  if  you 
have  not  sent  General  Garnett  back.  If  there  is  a good  point  below 
New  Berne  where  a battery  can  be  placed  which  will  cut  off  the  garrison 
from  succor  you  had  better  have  it  fortified  at  once.  You  will  readily 
see  the  advantage  of  this  without  my  going  into  details.*  The  Secretary 
of  War  telegraphed  General  Whiting  yesterday  that  he  should  hold 
General  Eansom  ready  to  go  to  South  Carolina.  General  Whiting 
telegraphed  me  to  know  what  he  should  do.  He  is  ordered  to  leave 
General  Eansom  where  he  is,  but  the  Secretary  is  advised  that  General 
Evans  may  be  spared,  but  it  is  the  only  brigade  at  Wilmington.  Com- 
iminicate  with  me  at  Franklin,  either  by  telegraph  or  otherwise.  Any- 
thing of  the  ordnance  department  send  to  Col.  P.  T.  Manning  at  this 
l)lace.  If  General  Eansom  can  get  a good  position  below  Kew  Berne 
which  he  can  fortify  I think  Colonel  Manning  can  send  him  some  heavy 
guns. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LOKGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I fully  appreciate  the  importance  of  your  success.  Besides  the 
l)acon  and  corn  that  you  speak  of  it  ought  to  give  us  the  coast  of  North 
Carolina  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Chowan  at  least. 


Headquarters, 
retershurg,  Va.,  April  7,  1803. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

Generae  : Your  letter  of  the  5th  is  received.  General  Hill  reports 
the  enemy  in  the  river  below  him  with  a considerable  succoring  force 
iiiuler  General  Foster;  tliat  his  fort,  some  distance  below,  kee])s  the 


970 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[dlTAP.  xxX. 


force  back,  and  that  the  enemy  will  have  to  come  out  and  give  him 
battle  before  he  can  reach  Washington,  unless  he  succeeds  in  reducing 
the  fort.  He  has  not  yet  been  able  to  make  any  impression  upon  our 
fort.  General  Hill  is  now  ordered  to  endeavor  to  establish  a like  fort 
below  New  Berne  to  prevent  this  succoring  force  returning  to  New 
Berne.  He  expresses  every  confidence  in  being  able  to  overcome  the 
enemy  should  he  land  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  Washington.  If  he 
reduces  Washington  and  succeeds  in  getting  a good  point  on  the  river 
below  New  Berne  I hope  that  all  of  the  State  (North  Carolina)  below 
the  Chowan  will  soon  be  relieved  of  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  I shall 
not  be  able  to  cross  the  Blackwater  before  Saturday,  i)ossibly  not  before 
Sunday.  If  I find  it  practicable  I shall  get  around  the  enemy’s  position 
at  Sulfolk  and  endeavor  to  cut  off  re-enforcements  by  batteries  on  the 
river,  &c.  I do  not  propose  to  do  anything  more  than  draw  out  the 
supplies  from  that  country  unless  something  v(^ry  favorable  should  offer. 
I have  ordered  General  Wise,  with  such  of  his  force  as  can  be  spared 
from  Kichmond,  to  make  a strong  diversion  on  the  Peninsula.  If  I find 
that  I can  do  no  more  than  haul  off*  supplies  I shall  hurry  one  of  my 
divisions  (Hood’s)  back,  so  as  to  be  within  reach  of  you,  unless  the  force 
is  much  stronger  at  Suffolk  than  you  supx)ose  it  to  be. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

' JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : 


Headquarters, 
Petershurg,  Fa.,  Aj)ril  7,  1803. 


Sir  : Major-General  Hill  is  now  operating  against  Washington,  N.  C., 
with  the  purpose  of  reducing  tliat  garrison  and  opening  thereby  tlie 
counties  east  of  that  to  our  subsistence  and  quartermasters’  depart- 
ments. The  town  of  Washington  is  comi)letely  invested,  and  a fort 
that  we  have  constructed  below  that  cuts  off  re-enforcements.  General 
Foster  is  said  to  be  in  the  mouth  of  the  river  with  re-enforcements,  but 
unable  to  get  them  to  Washington  until  he  can  reduce  our  fort.  He 
has  not  as  yet  been  able  to  make  any  impression  on  the  fort,  and  we 
hoi)e  that  he  may  be  obliged  to  land  and  give  battle  or  give  up  the 
garrison.  In  the  mean  time  General  Hill  is  ordered  to  throw  a force 
below  New  Berne  and  fortify  some  good  position  so  as  to  prevent  Gen- 
(wal  Foster  returning  to  New  Berne.  To  make  this  last  move  secure  it 
may  be  necessary  for  General  Hill  to  use  the  brigade  of  General  Evans, 
ihe  only  one  left  at  Wilmington.  I deem  it  prox^er  to  advise  you  of  the 
condition  of  aff’airs  in  North  Carolina  that  you  may  better  judge  of  tlie 
.X)roi)riety  of  ordering  General  Evans’  brigade  to  Charleston.  I have 
received  no  intimation  from  the  department  that  any  of  the  troops  of 
this  command  would  be  called  for  to  re-enforce  Charleston  and  could 
not  therefore  be  expected  to  be  ready  for  such  emergency.  If  the 
safety  of  Charleston  depends  upon  such  re-enforcements,  however,  we 
(‘.an  resume  defensive  arrangements  and  s])are  even  more  than  this 
brigade. 

1 remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAIMES  LONGSTREET, 

Jji  eu  ten  ant-  G cnera  I,  Co  m m a n di  ng. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETCe — CONFEDERATE. 


971 


April  7,.  1863 — 7.30  p.  m. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : I have  examined  the  positions  in  front  of  Washington  for 
rifled  pieces  with  Oapts.  [Samuel  E.]  Bunting  and  Starr,  of  the  artillery, 
and  am  of  the  opinion  that  those  occupied  by  the  smooth-bores  of  Cap- 
tain Starr’s  battery,  six  in  number,  are  the  most  favorable  that  can  be 
found.  They  are  on  the  east  and  front  of  the  town  and  would  command 
the  block-house  and  new  earthwork  (lately  erected  by  the  Yankees  to 
fire,  I presume,  on  Eodman’s  Point)  and  the  fort,  as  it  is  called,  about 
the  center  of  line  of  intrench ments.  I shall  strengthen  the  earth  about 
them  to-night  and  will  be  ready  for  them  whenever  they  may  be  sent. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENTETT, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Brigade, 
Contentnea  CreeJc  Bridge.,  April  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill  : 

General:  I got  here  at  12  o’clock  to-day  with  my  three  regiments 
and  battery.  General  Eobertson  has  gone  to  the  front.  1 hear  nothing 
from  Swift  Creek  to-day.  Direct  your  couriers  to  bring  dispatches  by 
the  cross-roads  some  8 or  10  miles  this  side  of  your  headquarters,  where 
the  Greenville  road  crosses  the  Birney  place  and  Boyd’s  Ferry  road, 
and  thence  direct  to  this  idace  and  not  by  Snow  Hill.  General  Eobert* 
son  has  ordered  an  officer  to  fix  this  line  of  couriers.  If  the  enemy 
attempt  to  move  on  Greenville  we  will  try  to  give  a good  account  of 
ourselves. 

Yours,  &c., 

E.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston,  Y.  (7.,  April  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  North  Carolina  : 

Dear  Sir  : Your  favor  of  yesterday  is  to  hand.  Whitford  had  sent 
me  word  of  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  I shall  be  ready  to  obey  your 
instructions.  Some  days  ago  I sent  a force  to  the  Contentnea  to  throw 
up  batteries,  yifle-ints,  &c.,  to  protect  those  passes.  I wrote  you  last 
evening.  The  couriers  seem  to  travel  too  slowly.  I will  direct  them  to 
go  8 miles  the  hour.  Order  yours  in  coming  this  way  to  do  the  same. 
1 have  just  gotten  yours  of  yesterday,  and  it  is  7 o’clock. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

E.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  Genera  1. 


General  W. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Biclimond,  April  7,  1863. 


H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  N.  G. : 

General  Evans’ brigade  must  beheld  prepared  to  move  to  Charleston. 

j.  A.  seddo:n, 

Secretary  of  War. 


972 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  ^ 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N.  (7.,  April  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen-.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Cross-Roads,  3 miles  south  of  W ashington,  N.  C. : ' 

General:  I wish  I bad  some  10-pounder  Parrotts  for  you,  but  we 
liave  never  bad  any  of  those  guns  tbougb  I have  frequently  applied 
for  tbern.  My  field  artillery  is  wretched,  being  mostly  smooth-bore  and 
howitzers.  I hope  you  will  be  successful,  but  fear  they  will  be  enabled 
to  re-enforce.  Beauregard  reports  all  the  monitors  oft  the  bar  at  Charles- 
ton. Secretary  of  War  ordered  me  to  hold  Ransom  in  readiness  to  move. 
I referred  the  dispatch  to  Longstreet. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Wilmington,  N.  0.,  April  7,  1863. 
Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  : 

Secretary  of  War  has  ordered  Evans’  brigade  to  be  ready  to  move. 
Action  commenced  at  Charleston.  I must  have  some  troops  to  replace 
them  if  they  go;  it  will  not  do  to  leave  this  place  bare. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

' B7'i gadi er-  Genera  1. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  April  8,  1863. 

General  James  Longstreet,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

I would  not  have  you  abstain  from  offensive  oj)eration.  They  may 
efiect  as  much  by  diversion  as  more  direct  aid.  Still  if  you  can  arrange 
to  si)are  one  brigade  (say  Evans’)  for  Wilmington  I should  be  much 
pleased.  The  arrangement  to  send  one  forward  in  case  of  necessity  was 
known  to  General  Beauregard  and  General  Whiting  prior  to  your  com- 
mand, and  I supposed  had  been  communicated  to  you. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters,  April  8,  1863 — 3 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding.,  &c.: 

General  : Let  me  suggest  that  you  have  your  fort  so  arranged  that 
you  will  be  able  to  i)ut  your  guns  out  of  fire  from  the  gunboats  if  it 
should  become  necessary.  By  having  your  platforms  high  you  can  put 
your  guns  on  them  when  in  action,  and  if  the  enemy’s  guns  have  a longer 
range  than  yours  you  can  run  your  guns  down  under  the  parapet  so  as 
to  get  them  out  of  fire ; or  you  might  liave  pits  alongside  your  platforms 
so  as  to  run  your  guns  out  of  fire.  We  must  not  expect  to  contend 
against  the  enemy  in  ammunition,  so  it  may  become  necessary  for  you 
to  occiqiy  the  fort  merely  to  keep  back  the  enemy’s  transports  or  only 
to  ])lay  upon  the  gunboats  when  they  are  in  close  range.  If  you  can 
cut  (leneral  Foster  off  from  New  Berne  by  using  Evans’  brigade  at  Wil- 
mington, do  not  hesitate  to  do  so.  Your  force  in  North  Carolina  must 


Chat.  XXX.] 


COKKESPONDEinCE,  etc. COXEEDERATE. 


973 


be  superior  to  that  of  eiieiuy.  If  you  can  only  get  bis  garrison  at 
one  position  you  ^Yill  be  able  to  concentrate  to  great  advantage  upon 
the  next. 

1 remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTKKET, 
Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Fetershurg^  Ere,  A])ril  8,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Contmanding,  &c.  : 

General  : I wrote  you  yesterday  to  endeavor  to  get  a point  below 
New  Berne  to  prevent  General  Foster’s  return  there  with  his  re-enforce- 
ments. If  you  cannot  make  such  arrangements  at  once  have  it  in  your 
mind,  and  should  Foster  land  .and  give  you  battle  be  ])repared  to  cut 
him  otf  from  New  Berne  by  land  and  water,  if  you  are  so  fortunate  as  to 
beat  him  back.  Please  send  couriers  and  letters  to  me  at  Franklin  until 
otherwise  advised.  The  War  Department  has  arranged  it  so  that  your 
command  is  a department  and  includes  all  the  troops  in  the  State.  The 
Secretary  has  ordered  General  Evans’  brigade  to  be  ready  to  go  to 
Charleston.  I hope  that  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  send  him  there. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant-  General.^  Conunanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg.,  Va,  April  8,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

I wrote  the  Secretary  of  WTir  yesterday.  He  knows  your  situation. 
I hope  that  there  may  be  no  occasion  for  Evans  to  move. 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
TJeutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Petersburg,  Va.,  April  8,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  G.  Whiting, 

Commanding,  (&c.,  Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

General:  Colonel  Long  has  just  made  his  inspection  report.  lam 
much  gratitied  at  the  favorable  account  that  he  gives  of  your  condition 
and  your  iirogress  in  your  difficult  labors.  I have  ordered  the  chiet  of 
subsistence  to  have  you  supplied  with  ]>rovisions  for  at  least  a month  at 
your  forts.  It  seems  to  me  that  you  have  hardly  enougii  ammunition  in 
your  forts.  I have  written  the  Secretary  of  War,  giving  him,  I think, 
very  good  reasons  wdiy  your  garrison  should  not  be  r(*duced  below  its 
])resent  force,  yet  I think  that  that  force  can  be  spared  for  a few  days 
better  than  any  other.  General  Hill  is  now  at  Washington.  He  has 
invested  the  place  and  has  thrown  u})  a fort  below  wliich  cuts  outre-en- 
forcements. General  Foster  is  below  with  re-enforcements,  but  cannot 
get  in  unless  he  can  reduce  the  fort.  General  Hill  thiid^s  that  he  will 
be  compelled  to  land  and  give  battle  or  give  up  the  garrison.  If  he 
lands  we  hope  to  destroy  liim.  General  Hill  is  ordered  to  try  and  throw 
a force  below  New  Berne  and  erect  a battery  on  the  river,  which  will  pre- 
vent Foster  from  returning  to  New  Berne.  I have  exidained  the  condi- 


974 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


tioii  of  affairs  to  the  Secretary,  suggesting  that  if  you  could  keep  Evansi 
you  could  so  co-operate  as  to  make  the  last  move  completely  successful.; 
1 wish  you  to  have  this  in  your  mind,  and  if,  iii  communicating  withi 
Geueral  Kausom,  you  find  it  favorable  opportunity  you  should  not  fail  tc 
take  advantage  of  it.  I leave  to-night  for  Franklin  to  cross  Blackwater 
and  cut  off  re-enforcements  for  Norths  Carolina,  and  at  the  same  time 
haul  off  all  provisions,  &c.,  from  the  counties  east  of  the  Blackwater. 

I remain,  very  respectfully^,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General  Commanding. 


Confidential.]  Hdqrs.  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  | 

Ajgril  9,  18G3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  W ar : 

Sir  : General  Longstreet  proposes  to  cross  the  Blackwater  with  a 
•view  to  obtaining  supplies  from  the  counties  of  Nansemond,  Isle  oli 
Wight,  &c.  He  is  at)prehensive  that  the  enemy  may  move  up  James] 
Itiver  and  get  in  his  rear,  and  asks  whether  he  cannot  obtain  some  co 
operation  from  the  Navy.  I am  not  aware  that  the  Navy  can  operate 
below  the  obstructions  at  Drewry^s  Bluff*.  If,  however,  any  of  tbeii; 
steamers  could  go  down  as  low  as  Hardy’s  Bluff*,  at  which  iioint  General! 
Longstreet  might  place  some  batteries  on  the  land,  they  could  observe! 
the  river  below,  and  I do  hot  think  the  enemy  woukl  venture  to  throwi 
a.  laud  force  ashore  above  Hay’s  Point.  They  might  also  enable  tlici 
Quartermaster’s  Department  to  use  boats  on  the  river  to  transiiort  sup- 
plies, which  would  prove  more  expeditious  than  hauling  them  by  land. 

I am,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Cross-Roads^  Ajpril  9,  1803. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding^  &c.: 

General:  General  Pettigrew  reports  that  the  enemy  are  advanciiiii! 
upon  him  (1.15  p.  m.;  reached  here  about  3 p.  m.).  I immediately  or 
dered  the  Fiftieth  to  him.  Since  then  two  dispatches  have  been 
received.  The  first  stated  that  the  part  of  the  column  seen  by  Major 
Eoss  was  half  a mile  long,  but  he  did  not  see  the  rear  of  it.  The  next 
states  that  there  were  three  brigades  of  infantry  and  two  regimcntsJ 
and  that  there  were  eighteen  pieces  of  artillery.  I have  ordered  tin 
Fiftieth  Eegiment  and  Second  Battalion  (seven  companies)  down  tc 
him.  The  last  tw^o  dispatches  were  sent  by  General  P.  They  were  from 
Leventhorpe’s  officers.  Nothing  has  been  received  from  General  IV 
since  his  first  dispatch,  asking  me  to  send  a part  of  my  troops  to  hiiu 
Since  then  I have  sent  him  the  dispatch  from  Morehead,  stating  that 
they  were  within  4 miles  of  Swift  Cieek.  Nothing  has  been  received 
from  Swift  Creek  since  the  first  dispatch  (2.30  p.  m.).  I do  not  thin! 
there  will  be  an  advance  from  Swift  Creek,  but  1 may  be  mistaken.  Tin 
last  courier  from  General  Pettigrew  said  they  were  fighting  at  Blount 
Creek  Mill. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier- General. 


C11A1>.  XXX.  J 


975 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

April  9,  18G3 — 11.45  o’clock. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : I have  sent  tbe  battery  which  came  with  Colonel  Martinis 
regiment  (it  arrived  this  morning)  back  to  its  station.  I have  more 
light  artillery  than  I can  use.  Forage  is  getting  very  scarce,  and  Col- 
onel M.  says  it  is  needed  in  the  defense  of  Eainbow  Banks.  I would 
also  suggest  in  this  connection  that  Captain  Starr’s  battery  be  also 
ordered  to  Greenville,  or  any  other  point  you  may  deem  best.  The  bat- 
teries of  Captains  Eeilly  and  Bunting  are  sufficient,  I should  think,  for 
my  command.  The  enemy  strengthen  their  works  every  night.  Their 
line  of  intrenchments  is  now  as  strong  as  it  can  well  be  made,  as  far 
as  I can  judge  with  my  glass.  My  wagon  train  started  down  to  Pungo 
yesterday  morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  B.  GAPvNETT, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Fetershurg,  Fu.,  April  9,  1803 — 9 a.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina:  i 

General:  If  you  can  operate  Avithout  the  aid  of  Evans’  brigade  the 
commanding  general  desires  you  to  order  it  to  be  in  readiness  to  move 
to  Charleston  at  a moment’s  notice.  If  you  need  it  and  cannot  get  along 
without  it  he  desires  you  to  retain  it.  General  Longstreet  left  last  night 
for  Franklin.  Your  communication  by  courier  of  the  7th  instant  is  re- 
ceived. It  will  be  forwarded  at  once  to  the  general. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEREL, 
Assistant  A djutant- General. 


Briuade  Headquarters, 
Diascund  Bridge^  Fu.,  April  9,  1803—3.30  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding^  &c.  : 

General  : I moA^ed  yesterday  morning  at  9 a.  m.  Avith  my  Avhole 
force  exce])t  the  several  guards.  Arrived  here  in  person  Avith  the  artil- 
lery about  12.30  p,  m.  My  men  marched  Avell  and  in  line  s])irits,  and 
did  Avell  in  Aveather  and  bivouac  and  roads.  The  infantry  are  delayed 
at  Forge  Bridge  by  the  high  Avater.  I ordered  the  baggage  wagons  to 
be  emptied  to  take  them  across  dry-footed.'  As  soon  as  I arrived  I 
called  the  chief  officers  of  this  post  together  lor  reports.  Here  they 
report : 


Holcombe  Le<^ion,  fit  for  actiou . 175 

3211  (Virginia)  Battalion,  Maj.  [J.  R.]  Robertson,  lit  for  action 40 


Total  cavalry  to  be  relied  on  in  a fight 215 

One  section  of  artillery 39 

One  battalion  of  infantry 239 


At  Diascund,  of  all  arms 493 


976  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. ; 

At  Diascniid,  of  nil  arms 493  i 

Re-eiiforcements  brouglit  I>y  me  : 

Artillery  (one  battery  and  two  sections) 174 

Infantry  (71  officers  and  1,040  enlisted  men) 1,  111 

Hawley’s  cavalry,  about 35 

Total  of  all  arms  brought  by  me 1, 320 

Total  of  all  arms 1, 813  ' 

Deduct  for  error  in  cavalry  report 40; 

Total : 1,773, 


SUMMAKY. 

Total  of  cavalry 

Total  of  artillery 

Total  of  infantry 

Grand  total 


210; 

213 

1,350 


1, 773 


If  uiy  men  are  not  too  much  broken  down  I will  move  upon  Williams- 
burg- near  enough  to  attack  to-morrow  evening  or  by  daylight  next 
morning.  1 send  you  a note*  from  Colonel  Tabb,  which  met  me  on  the 
way.  Infantry  or  no  infantry,  enemy  re-enforced  or  not,  I will  cer- 
tainly attack  them  Saturday  morning  as  early  as  my  men  can  take  aim. 
I hud  the  forces  here  deficient  in  ammunition,  and  beg  you  to  forward 
some,  according  to  the  accompanying  requisitions,  with  dispatch. 

Very  trulv,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier -General. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 


Navy  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  April  10,  1803. 


Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  James  River  obstructions 
be  opened  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment,  to  iiermit  the  Richmond 
to  pass  below  them. 

I deem  it  very  important  that  our  armed  vessels  in  the  river  should 
be  able  to  pass  the  barrier  at  any  time,  and  I resfiectfully  suggest  that 
this  be  provided  for.  The  large  schooner  Galego  may  perhaps  be  used 
in  connection  with  this  measure. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

[ludorsements.] 

April  11,  1803. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  Rresident  for  his  consideration. 

J.  A.  S., 
Secretary. 


It  would  be  well,  before  action,  to  have  a report  and  opinion  of  the 
Chief  Engineer. 

, ‘ J.  D. 


Not  found. 


CHAP.  XXX.)  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  977 

April  12,  18G3. 

To  the  Engineer  Bureau: 

Note  the  President’s  suggestion  of  a report.  It  is  desirable  to  know 
among  other  things  how  far  the  permanence  and  security  of  the  remain- 
ing works  would  be  endangered  by  making  the  required  opening^  how 
long  it  would  require  to  remove  5 whether  the  opening  could  be  so  ar- 
ranged as  still  to  make  the  obstructions  effective  to  arrest  and  keep 
under  fire  hostile  vessels  attempting  to  pass,  and  also  whether  a i:>as- 
sage  might  not  more  easily  or  advantageously  be  made  by  cutting  a 
canal  around  through  the  low  ground  on  one  side  of  the  river  at  the 
point  of  obstruction. 

J.  A.  S., 
Secretary. 

Engineer  Bureau,  April  20, 18G3. 

Kespectfully  returned  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War. 

A report  in  reply  to  the  above  questions  has  been  forwarded  to-day.* 

J.  E.  GILMEB, 

Colonel  of  Engineers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


War  Departjvient,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  April  10,  18G3. 

General  W.  II.  C.  Whiting, 

Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

General  Beauregard  telegrax)hs  that  clear  indications  denote  an  early 
attack  by  land  from  Bull’s  Bay  on  Charleston,  as  likewise  contempo- 
raneous assaults  on  other  parts  of  his  line,  and  urges  earnestly  the  for- 
warding of  re-enforcements.  If  you  can  venture  the  risk,  send  forward 
any  troops  (Evans’  brigade  or  less).  The  movement,  however,  is  rested 
on  your  discretion,  with  only  an  expression  of  the  desire  of  the  Dei)art- 
ment.  If  you  send,  inform  General  Longstreet,  whose  address  I do  not 
know. 

J.  A.  SEDBON, 

• Secretary  of  W ar. 


Er  AN  KLIN,  Va.,  April  10,  18G3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

It  will  probably  occupy  two  weeks  of  time  to  haul  out  the  subsistence 
and  quartermaster’s  supidies.  This  would  probably  give  abundance  ol 
time  for  the  co-operation. 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Executive  Department  of  Virginia, 

' April  10,  18G3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  The  mayor  of  this  city  has  called  upon  the  Governor  for  a mili- 
tary force  in  aid  of  the  civil  authority  in  suppression  of  an  outbreak 

*Seo  Gilmer  to  Seddon,  April  20,  p.  1008. 

G2  II  R— VOL  XVXII 


978  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  | 

wliicli  his  honor  has  been  informed  may  be  expected  during  the  coming  i 
night.  In  addition  to  the  force  Brigadier-General  Winder  has  placed 
at  His  Excellency’s  command,  Major-General  Elzey  has  been  requested 
to  bring  into  the  city  two  of  his  battalions.  To  this  request  the  major- 
general  from  Chaffin’s  Bluff  has  promptly  replied: 

The  two  battalions  asked  for  have  been  ordered  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  | 
under  arms;  but  it  would  be  well  for  His  Excellency  (the  Governor)  to  apx)ly  to  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  the  mean  time  for  the  force  under  my  command.  I am  inspect-  ; 
iug,  but  will  bo  in  the  city  by  sundown.  | 

Accordingly^,  by  direction  of  His  Excellency,  I have  the  honor  to  ask 
that  the  order  suggested  by  General  Elzey  may  be  given. 

I am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  BASSETT  EKENCH, 

Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


April  10,  1863—11  a.  m. 

[General  Hill:] 

General:  My  wagon  train  will  be  here  from  Pungo  at  7 p.  m.,  the 
quartermaster  writes  me  who  is  in  charge  of  it.  Captain  Eeilly  opened 
on  the  enemy  this  morning,  but  can  i)roduce  but  little  effect,  except  to 
make  him  keep  close.  They  returned  his  fire  with  four  32-pouuders.  I 
trust  to  God  all  is  going  well  with  you.  Let  me  know  what  I shall  do. 
My  quartermaster  at  Tranter’s  Bridge  has  forage. for  some  four  days, 
after  which  he  says  he  knows  not  where  to  procure  it.  E^o  recent  news 
from  Bath. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Abstract  from  Field  Ecturn  of  Troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  April  10, 

18(33. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

o 

OD 

a 

’ ^ w 

£ a 

tx 

<: 

Officers. 

Men. 

PorcGS  on  Blactwator ... ... ............. 

382 

5, 456 

6,  744 

32cl  Virginia  Regiment 

19 

92 

177 

251 

Moseley’s  artillery  battalion 

8 

146 

164 

179 

Sturdivant  Battoiy 

4 

86 

95 

101 

IT.n roTove  Rlnos  ........... 

3 

76 

85 

125 

Detacbment  cavalry 

1 

23 

24 

25 

Sb^tinl  CnTTia  . 

9 

143 

154 

161 

Camp  xjaroled  prisoners 

15 

832 

861 

920 

On  duty  in  hosijitals,  Petersburg 

21 

55 

76  1 

76 

rri'aud  fntii.l  ..  .... 

4G2 

6,  909 

8,380  1 

1,838 

Bur  WELL  Bay,  Ajjj'U  11, 1803. 

Maj.  William  Norris, 

Chief  of  Signal  Corps : 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  my  return  from  my  first  trip  across 
the  river.  There  are  few  Abolitionists  on  the  Peninsula.  No  addition 


Chap.  XXX.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


979 


to  the  number  at  Yorktown.  Two  (lieutenants)  only  at  Newport  News. 
Hawkins’  Zouaves  a t Oanip  Hamilton  (Segar’s  farm)  and  Third  New  York 
in  garrison  at  Fort  Monroe.  None  have  gone  to  Suffolk  since  the  15th  or 
20tli  of  March.  Their  number  there  is  estimated  at  20,000.  I will  en- 
deavor to  learn  the  exoct  force  there  to-morrow  night,  when  I shall  pro- 
cure papers,  &c.  The  usual  fleet  at  the  mouth  of  the  river. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  * 

G.  II.  CAUSEY, 
Captain j Confederate  States  Army. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 


Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding  at  Biehmond : 


April 


11,  18G3. 


General:  Your  letter  of  7th  has  been  received.  The  diversion  you 
project  in  the  direction  of  Yorktown  will  serve  to  distract  the  enemy 
and  prevent  re-enforcements  being  sent  to  Suffolk,  and  I hope  will  afford 
more  aid  to  General  Longstreet  than  the  additional  troops  you  could  give 
him.  I approve,  therefore,  of  your  course,  and  hoi)e  it  will  be  carried 
out  boldly  and  energetically. 

I am,  very  resiiectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

II.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Biehmond^  Fn.,  April  11,  18G1. 
General  James  Longstreet,  iVan/i: tin,  Va.: 

General  Beauregard  is  so  urgent  for  re-enforcements  that  I request 
you  will  send  Hansom’s  brigade,  or  some  other,  to  Wilmington  to  replace 
Evans’,  which  I shall  order  to  Charleston. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

Seven  miles  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11,  18G3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Your  telegram  is  received.  The  most  that  we  can  possibly  spare 
to  re-enforce  General  Beauregard  would  be  a brigade.  It  would  hardly 
be  worth  the  while  to  send  it.  I hope  that  General  Hill  may  in  a few 
days  be  able  to  send  more.  I have  advised  him  of  General  Beaure- 
gard’s necessities.  It  must  occupy  the  enemy  several  days  to  begin  to 
make  any  iin])ression  at  Charleston  ; meanwhile  we  may  do  much  more 
good  here  and  in  North  Carolina.  General  Hill’s  address  by  telegraph 
is  Ilocky  Mount,  N.  C. ; from  that  point  your  dispatches  will  be  for- 
warded to  him.  His  orders  and  arrangements  were  comjilete  as  far  as 
1 could  make  them  when  I left  Franklin.  Please  send  him  such  orders 
or  instructions  as  you  think  proper. 

May  I ask  that  you  i)ardo]i  this  i)encil  note'?  My  writing  materials 
have  not  yet  come  up. 

I remain,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant-General^  Commanding, 


980 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CnAr.  XXX 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  Fa.,  April  11,  1863. 

Geueiiil  W.  H.  0.  Whiting, 

Wilmington.,  N.  C.  : 

1 have  requested  General  Longstreet  to  send  Hansom’s  or  some  other 
brigade  to  Wilmington  to  replaee  Evans’  brigade. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington.,  N.  C..  April  11,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Sir  : I received  your  telegram  referring  to  General  Beauregard’s  ap- 
prehension of  an  attack  by  Bull’s  Bay.  If  well  founded  this  is  a very 
serious  demonstration,  and,  combined  with  the  fact  that  the  enemy  is 
in  force  in  the  Sounds  below  Charleston,  where  his  base  is,  it  will  make 
the  successful  defense  of  the  city  and  surrounding  country  a very  diffi- 
cult problem  with  the  force  at  General  Beauregard’s  command.  The 
object  of  a demonstration  by  Bull’s  Bay  might  either  be  the  establish- 
ment in  force  on  the  Haddrell’s  Point  side,  isolation  of  Sullivan’s  Island, 
and  bombardment  of  the  city,  or  an  attempt  to  cut  the  ISortb  Carolina 
Railroad,  or  both.  With  regard  to  my  power  to  assist  General  Beaure- 
gard, you  are  aware  that  my  force  is  already  much  reduced  by  the  ab- 
sence of  General  Ransom’s  brigade  for  the  operations  against  Foster 
about  mew  Berne  and  Washington,  in  which  also  General  Longstreet, 
by  letter  of  8th  instant,  desires  me  to  co-operate  if  possible.  The  only 
available  force  here  is  Evans’  brigade,  not  a very  strong  one.  Of  this 
I must  take  the  responsibility,  upon  your  telegram,  of  sparing  three 
regiments  to  General  Beauregard,  though  I must  earnestly  urge  that 
their  place  be  supplied  at  once,  with  the  double  view  of  giving  him,  in 
case  of  necessity,  further  and  much  needed  aid  and  of  preventing  all 
risk  here  where  I am  by  no  means  as  strong  as  1 desire  to  be  and 
where  the  presence  of  troops  is  at  all  times  necessary  as  well  for  labor 
as  for  defense.  With  regard  to  the  water  defenses,  I hope  you  will  be 
able  to  let  me  have  at  least  two  Brooke  rilles,  one  for  each  entrance, 
those  guns  appearing  to  have  been  most  effective  against  monitors. 
Very  respectfullv, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITIRG, 

Brigadier- Gena  al. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington,  N.  G.,  April  11,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  W ar,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Sir  : A letter  of  Flag-Officer  [William  F.]  Lynch  to  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  with  accomiianying  letter  of  Senator  [George]  Davis,  of  North 
Carolina,  has  been  referred  to  me  as  relating  to  the  defense  of  the  Cape 
Fear.  There  are  several  points  in  both  letters  (mistakes  as  well  as  iin- 
])roprieties)  upon  which  1 might  remark  with  some  animadversion.  I 
will  simply  refer  to  them  : In  the  first  place,  the  battery  to  which  Flag- 
Ofiicer  Lynch  refers,  March  13,  has  not  been  discontinued,  but  (although 
the  guns  will  be  needed  for  the  North  Carolina)  is  prepared  for  mount- 
ing others ; second,  the  fiver  obstructions  are  not  only  much  further 


dHAP.  COkkESPONDENCii],  ETC. COEPEEERA’I’E. 


981 


advanced  than  when  I (he)  first  came  on  the  station,”  but  nearly  all 
that  has  been  done  in  this  matter  has  been  done  since  I assumed  com- 
mand; is  rapidly  progressing  as  satisfactorily  as  the  means  at  my  com- 
mand and  the  nature  of  the  problem  will  permit.  In  this  connection 
permit  me  to  refer  you  to  my  report  on  the  defenses  of  the  Cape  Fear, 
section  headed  Obstructions,”  and  generally.  Many  projects  of  ob- 
structions, mostly  impracticable,  have  been  presented  to  me.  There  is, 
thirdly,  “no  uneasiness  felt  in  the  community”  with  which  the  Depart- 
ment lias  not  been  fully  (through  myself,  when  well  lounded)  made  ac- 
quainted, and  upon  which  I have  perhaps  equal  facilities  with  Senator 
Davis  to  enlighten  it.  Flag-Ofilcer  Lynch  says,  fourthly,  “ Under  these 
circumstances  I pray  you  to  obtain  authority  for  me  to  obstruct  the 
river,  which  in  twelve  days  I will  be  ready  to  defend  with  the  IsTortb 
Carolina  under  one  coat  of  plating.”  . I am  competent  to  give  the  au- 
thority asked  and  most  cheerfully  concede  it  in  the  same  spirit  in  which 
I have  always  assisted  and  co-operated  with  the  Kavy  and  always  shall, 
though  I most  respectfully  suggest  that  I think  the  completion  of  the 
gunboats  will  be  quite  as  much  as  the  Navy  authorities  can  attend  to, 
the  North  Carolina  not  yet  being  ready  for  the  purpose  proposed  on  the 
13th  March.  As  to  the  defense,  that  is  my  affair.  I will  not  further 
allude  to  the  manifest  impropriety  of  these  letters  than  to  notice  a re- 
mark in  that  of  Senator  Davis,  that  he  has  “ reason  to  believe  that 
General  D.  H.  Hill  has  been  painfully  disappointed  in  the  defense  of 
Wilmington.”  If  General  Hill  had  any  such  feeling  it  was  doubtless 
in  relation  to  the  deficiency  of  the  armament — a feeling  shared  by  the 
department  and  by  myself  and  due  to  the  straitness  of  our  resources 
and  the  pressing  demands  upon  us  everywhere,  and  not  to  any  measures 
I have  taken.  Senator  Davis  in  a natural,  proper  anxiety  upon  a mat- 
ter of  the  greatest  importance  to  himself  and  people,  and  not  familiar 
with  the  ‘Subject,  has  no  doubt  misunderstood  General  Hill.  I request 
that  you  will  permit  Senator  Davis,  if  not  inconsistent  with  the  public 
service,  to  read  the  report  upon  the  defenses  of  the  Cape  Fear  which  I 
had  the  honor  to  submit  for  the  information  of  the  President,  with  his 
permission,  and  that  you  will  refer  this  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  to  whom  Flag-Officer  Lynch’s  letter  was  originally  addressed. 

Very  respectfullv, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters,  in  Camp^  April  11,  [18G3]. 

(Via  Franklin  April  12.) 

Hon.  James  x\.  Seddon  : 

I hope  that  we  shnll  have  plenty  of  time  to  re-enforce  General  Beau- 
regard. It  will  take  much  time  for  the  enemy  to  accomplish  anything, 
even  after  his  attack  is  begun. 

I telegra])hed  General  Hill  to  re-enforce  as  soon  as  he  imssibly  can. 

JAMES  LONGSTRE'ET. 


Headquarters, 
Kinsfon^  A.  C.,  April  12,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  II.  IItll, 

Commanding  in  North  Carolina  : 

General:  I have  receivx'd  your  two  notes  of  yesterday  and  have 
put  on  foot  the  men  on  the  railroad.  Shall  act  vigorously  in  getting 


[Chap.  XX jC. 


982  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  8.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

the  coDScripts.  Have  also  started  a party  to  put  up  the  Core  Creek 
Bridge.  I hold  the  force  I took  with  me  to  Couteutuea  so  that  I may 
move  to  any  i)oint  from  here.  Unless  the  enemy  should  again  strip 
New  Berne  a demonstration  only  in  that  direction  could  do  little  good. 
I hardly  think  old  man  Wessells  will  try  to  march  to  AVilmington;  if 
he  does  he  will  never  get  back.  May  God  grant  you  a speedy  success 
at  Washington.  Iff  go  toward  New  Berne  I desire  to  enter  the  town. 
If  your  scouts  gain  no  more  information  than  mine  you  must  be  embar- 
rassed 5 but  tlie  short  line  between  the  rivers  makes  it  very  difficult  to 
pass. 

Inclosed  I send  a letter  from  Mr.  Washington,  perhaps  the  richest 
man  in  the  county.  The  corn  he  speaks  of  is  indispensable  to  us. 
He  has  carried  off  his  own  entire  crop,  and  this  corn  was  bought  last 
dall.  If  one  man  be  permitted  To  take  it  aw^ay  we  will  be  able  to 
get  none.  It  is  with  difficulty  that  we  get  on  now.  I have  refused 
every  one,  no  matter  how^  small  the  quantity.  Mr.  Washington  has  a 
mill,  and  claims'  that  because  he  has  sold  to  us  since  last  fall  some 
$1,500  or  $2,000  worth  of  meal  that  he  should  be  exempt,  and  also  be- 
cause he  has  the  iron  contract.  His  slaves  were  hired  up  the  country 
principally,  and  in  my  judgment  he  should  not  have  permission  to  carry 
off  one  bushel.  There  is  hardly  a man  in  the  Confederacy  w^ho  has  done 
less  for  the  Government.  As  to  the  corn  in  Warren  County  I simply 
said  to  Mr.  Washington  he  could  ffnd  it  there.  As  to  the  nature  of  his 
contract  I know  nothing  ; he  has  been  reticent  on  that  point.  I do  not 
consider  that  I am  bound  by  the  permits  of  my  predecessors,  for  I do 
not  know  how  far  they  may  have  been  taken  advantage  of.  Until  I 
get  your  positive  orders  to  let  the  corn  go  it  will  remain,  unless  neces- 
sity compels  me  to  use  it.  I shall  apply  to  Mr.  Washington  the  same 
rules  I do  to  others. 

Everything  quiet. 

Yer^T  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier- General. 


* Wilmington,  N.  C.,  April  12,  1803. 

Mnj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding : 

•My  Hear  General:  I have  your  note  this  afternoon.  Have  tele- 
griiphed  you.  By  reason  of  the  urgent  dispatches  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment, General  Beauregard,  together  with  General  Longstreet’s  instruc- 
tions, and  the  importance  of  the  case,  1 have  felt  obliged  to  let  General 
1‘lvans  and  three  regiments  go  to  Charleston.  I keep  two  here.  Suj)- 
])ose  you  let  either  Colonel  Eansom’s  or  Col.  [L.  ^I.]  IMcxAfee’s  regiment 
(Forty-ninth  North  Carolina),  from  General  Eansom’s  brigade,  come 
down  here.  I shall  not  then  feel  uneasy  as  to  any  temporary  attack  or 
feint  of  the  enemy.  Colonel  Eansom  is  here  on  a court-martial.  That 
brigade  is  so  strong,  and  [being]  composed  of  live  regiments,  would  not, 
I think,  greatly  miss  one,  while  the  presence  of  one  here  would  be  much 
for  me.  A^our  movements  as  against  Washington  and  Foster  appear  to 
me  to  be  admirably  designed,  and  I hope  you  will  bag  him.  IMy  scouts 
ro])oi  t great  alarm  in  Ne\v  Berne.  We  have  a refugee  who  has  escaped 
tluMu  to  our  lines.  He  describes  the  impression  there  that  you  will  de- 
stroy Foster.  I have  applied  for  the  First  and  Third  North  Carolina 
Eegiments,  nowin  Virginia,  to  be  sent  here  as  a garrison  of  Wilmington. 
These  regiments  are  not  brigaded  in  any  North  Carolina  brigade,  and 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


983 


miglit  perliaps  suit.  It  would  be  a very  good  tliiug  j I wish  you  would 
urge  it.  It  would  greatly  help  all  of  our  operations  to  have  a couple  of 
independent  regiments. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


War  Department,  G.  S.  A., 

Rie]mo7id,  Va.,  April  13,  1863. 
General  D.  H.  Hill,  Rochy  Mounts  N.  0.: 

General  Evans’  brigade  being  sent  from  Wilmington  to  Charleston, 
replace  it  with  a brigade.  General  Longstreet  is  informed  of  this. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Vh.,  April  13,  1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  FranMin,  Va. : 

General  Whiting  still  urges  re-enforcements.  Send  force  to  replace 
Evans’  brigade. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Vh.,  April  13,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  11th  instant  has  been  delivered  by  your 
courier.  General  Whiting  calls  still  so  urgently  for  re-enforcements  to 
replace  General  Evans’  brigade  (sent  on  to  Obarleston)  tliat  the  matter 
lias  been  laid  before  the  President,  and  his  judgment  is  that  it  would  be 
unsafe  to  leave  Wilmington  without  such  re-enforcements.  Therefore 
I telegrax^hed  you  this  morning  that  such  should  be  sent.  I will  now, 
having  learned  General  Hill’s  address  through  your  letter,  telegraph 
him  directly  to  the  same  effect.  I regret  very  much  to  interfere  in  any 
way  with  your  concerted  arrangements,  but  an  engagement  was  pre- 
viously given  to  send  forward  a brigade  wiien  required  to  Charleston, 
and  I did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  disregard  it.  As  explained  to  you  in  a 
jirevious  letter,  I had  supposed  you  acquainted  with  that  arrangement. 
I do  not  propose  that  more  than  one  brigade  be  sent  to  Charleston  to 
be  supidied  at  Wilmington.  That  will  not,  I trust,  materially  interfere 
with  the  plans  of  General  Hill  or  yourself. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 

P.  S. — The  above  letter  was  returned  by  the  same  courier. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond.,  Fa.,  April  13,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N. 

General  Hill  lias  been  ordered  to  send  a brigade  to  replace  Evans’,  to 
be  forwarded  to  Charleston. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


984 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


April  13,  18G3. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General:  I am  in  receipt  of  your  dispatch  ‘of  April  13,  7:30  a.  m- 
My  ordnance  officer  has  gone  to  Boyd’s  Landing  for  the  Parrott  ammii-i 
nition.  When  I have  completed  all  the  breastworks  for  batteries  andj 
l)laced  guns  in  them  I shall  require  more  troops  to  support  them,  other- i 
wise  my  command  will  be  too  much  scattered.  Col.  [ W.  F.]  Martin  had 
l)etter  be  sent  over,  I think.  Your  instructions  will  be  communicated 
to  Captain  Keilly.  I do  not  know  at  what  point  on  this  side  your  boat 
will  land  to  establish  the  courier  line  you  speak  of.  Three  Yankee  pris- 
oners were  brought  up  this  morning  by  the  cavalry  from  Bath.  These 
men  deserted  from  the  troops  at  Sew  Berne  and  went  over  to  Hyde 
County,  where  they  delivered  themselves  to  two  of  Captain  Swindell’s 
men.  One  is  an  orderly  sergeant,  and  seems  to  be  au  intelligent  man. 
He  reports  10,000  troops  at  Sew  Berne  under  the  command  of  Palmer; 
says  many  of  these  troops  are  disaffected  and  those  who  are  to  be  dis- 
charged in  May  will  not  serve  longer.  I have  sent  the  deserters  to 
Greenville  subject  to  your  further  orders.  They  are  very  anxious  that 
their  names  should  not  appear  in  the  papers  as  deserters  for  fear  it  may 
bring  punishment  upon  them  when  they  return  and  work  to  their  preju- 
dice at  their  homes.  I therefore  hope  you  will  give  the  necessary  in- 
structions should  you  order  them  to  Eichmond. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 
Brigadier-  General. 

P.  S. — The  deserters  are  from  the  One  hundred  and  first  Pennsyl- 
vania. 


' April  13,  1803— 5 p.  m. 

[General  H.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : 1 have  given  the  instructions  to  Captain  Eeilly  about  open- 
ing on  the  Yankee  barracks,  in  accordance  with  your  orders  in  dispatch 
of  7.30  a.  m.  to-day.  Colonel  Ferebee  has  been  ordered  to  collect  con- 
scripts and  also  to  watch  the  roads  you  speak  of.  He  says  that  General 
Eobertson,  who  was  here  yesterday,  spoke  of  relieving  Colonel  Fere- 
bee’s  men  by  Griffin’s  cavalry.  I presume  he  means  those  on  the  James- 
ville  and  Plymouth  roads.  I have  frequently  impressed  upon  Colonel 
F.  to  guard  those  roads  well,  and  he  informs  me  that  the  necessary 
steps  have  been  taken  to  do  so.  My  ordnance  officer  Avent  for  the  am- 
munition to  Boyd’s  Ferry  this  morning.  I mentioned,  in  re])ly  to  your 
note  this  morning,  that  1 thought  it  better  for  Colonel  jMartiii’s  regiment 
to  join  me  here,  and  will  send  him  the  order  to-night.  I can  learn  noth- 
ing of  the  condition  of  the  enemy  inside,  but  I fear  that  they  can  keep 
themselves  supplied  by  fishing  with  seines,  as  fish  are  very  plentilid  in 
the  river  at  this  season.  I sent  up  the  James ville  road  this  morning 
about  7 miles  and  found  Griffin’s  pickets  on  it,  so  I i) resume  it  is  all 
right  in  that  direction. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 
Brigadier-  Gen  era  I . 


April  13,  1803 — 7 p.  m. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General:  I inclose  you  a note  from  Colonel  Cantwell  nOative  to  the 
seizure  of  a vessel  bound  to  New  Berne.  1 liaAT'.  ordered  the  property 


CHAi'. COliRI:S?ONBEKCK,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


985 


of  the  Widow  to  be  removed  and  the  captain  and  crew  to  be  arrested  and 
sent  to  me;  also  the  vessel  to  be  burned  should  there  be  any  danger  of 
her  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  I wish  you  would  give  me 
instructions  as  to  what  1 shall  do  with  the  arrested  persons  and  the 
schooner.  I think  she  should  be  burned,  but  will  not  give  the  order 
until  I hear  from  you  to  that  effect.  The  ordnance  officer  I sent  for 
ammunition  reports  that  the  road  which  was  ordered  to  be  repaired 
leading  to  Boyd^s  Ferry  will  not  admit  of  artillery  or  even  many  wagons 
passing  over  it  without  cutting  it  np  very  much.  As  they  be  an  im- 
portant work,  I deem  it  proper  to  mention  this  fact  to  you. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  B.  GARNETT, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Raleigh^  N.  (7.,  April  13,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  Hill, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina.,  Goldshorongh,  N.  G.  : 

General:  If  you  have  any  command  for  me  I have  the  honor  to 
request  that  I may  be  ordered  to  it  at  once.  The  position  of  command- 
ing officer  here  is,  in  my  opinion,  a necessary  one,  but  the  duties  can 
be  performed  by  an  officer  unable  to  do  field  service.  Col.  [W.  L.]  De 
Rosset,  now  in  the  State,  could  easily  take  my  place  here.  A general 
officer  is  not  required  here,  and  the  circumstances  of  my  situation,  which 
are  known  to  you,  make  it  desirable  to  me  to  leave  the  State,  and  under 
any  contigencies  to  leave  the  city  of  Raleigh.  Should  you  have  no  com- 
mand to  offer  me,  ifiease  approve,  recommend,  and  forward  the  inclosed 
application. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MARTIN, 
Brigadier-  Genera  1. 


[April  13,  1863] — 12  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

General:  Yours  of  10.30  just  received.  I would  like  to  have  all  the 
movable  rifie  artillery  or  rather  ^^anti-gunboat,”  that  I can  get.  The 
ground  on  the  enemy^s  side  of  the  mouth  of  the  creek  does  certainly 
command  ours,  and  unless  we  can  drive  the  gunboats  away  they  can 
cross;  but  how  they  are  to  march  to  Fort  Hill  afterward  will  puzzle 
them,  i^rovided  our  forces  are  ready  to  concentrate.  They  must  con- 
centrate to  attack.  Everything  depends  upon  our  being  able  to  do  the 
same  is  my  opinion.  I think  the  guns  in  question  had  better  come 
down. 


Yours,  respectfully, 


J.  J.  PETTIGREW, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston,  N.  G.,  April  13,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding : 

General:  Your  two  notes  of  to-day  are  just  received.  Of  course  I 
will  cheerfully  do  whatever  is  for  the  good  of  our  service;  but  I hope  my 
brigade  may  be  kept  together.  Faithfully  have  I striven  to  get  it  to  a 
first-rate  state  of  efficiency,  and  it  would  be  a proud  moment  for  me  to 


986 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  R.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XNX. 


take  it  a uuit  into  a battle.  Yon  are  well  aware  how  soon  the  best 
troops  can  become  demoralized.  But  recently,  during  a very  short 
absence  from  my  brigade,  I had  reason  to  regret  that  I had  left  it.  I 
beg  you  will  do  what  you  can  not  to  split  my  command  to  pieces  and' 
cause  it  to  become  of  little  use.  If  you  could  see  it  together  I know  you 
would  award  it  a place  second  to  no  other.  Whatever  may  be  your 
orders  I will  obey  with  zeal  and  faithfulness. 

I wrote  to  Major  Anderson  to-day.  Everything  as  quiet  as  possible. 
I can  get  no  news  from  NTew  Berne  j have  tried  hard,  and  am  still  mak- 
ing efforts. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier- General, 


Headquarters, 
Kinston,  W.  (7.,  April  13,  1863. 

Maj.-  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  : 

General:  I inclose  a note*  from  General  Whiting  by  a courici, 
whom  I sent  with  your  letter  to  him.  It  has  just  come  in.  I hear  that 
the  enemy  is  landing  heavy  forces  below  Charleston.  Whiting  will 
doubless  give  you  the  news. 

Very  respectfully, 

E.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  Genera  1. 


Kinston,  K.  C.,  April  14,  1863. 

General  B.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  in  North  Carolina : 

General  : Your  note  of  yesterday  was  received  early  to  day.  I had 
sent  off  about  a dozen  conscripts.  Will  retain  the  others.  With  no 
evidence  except  against  one  of  the  14  sent  up  by  your  order  from  Beau- 
fort I can  make  but  a poor  investigation.  Major  Kennedy  sent  me 
only  one  letter  from  Ed.  Stanly,  addressed  to  a United  States  naval 
officer,  that  commits  partially  one  of  the  parties.  He  too,  I should  say, 
was  over  forty  years  old.  The  lest  had  best  be  sent  to  Eichmond  or 
directly  to  the  Eappahannock.  My  Quakers  are  obstinate.  They  have 
withstood  hunger  and  thirst  for  over  four  days.  I sent  down  Major 
Guion,  of  the  Engineers,  to  superintend  the  building  of  the  bridge  over 
Core  Creek.  To-day  I find  it  completed,  but  so  low  to  the  water  that  a 
sliglit  rise  would  wash  it  away.  My  scouts  rei)ort  a larger  force  now 
in  Kew  Berne  than  for  some  weeks  past.  They  say  re-enforcements 
liave  arrived  within  the  past  few  days.  If  so,  an  advance  will  be  at- 
tempted toward  this  place  and  an  attack  by  the  gunboats  be  made  on 
Wilmington.  They  will  thus  hope  to  prevent  your  sending  any  one  to 
Wilmington,  and  perhaps  to  pass  over  us  before  you  can  get  here,  or  it 
may  be  they  will  be  content  to  hold  us  all  here.  If  you  do  not  order 
the  demonstration  on  Kew  Berne  I shall  not  make  it.  With  half  the 
number  of  my  force  in  the  town  I cannot  take  it.  Two  demonstrations 
liave  already  been  made  upon  the  place,  and,  with  respect,  I suggest 
t hat  a repetition  of  these  feints  tend  to  weaken  us  and  give  courage  and 
importance  to  the  enemy.  If  the  enemy  go  out  again  I will  be  as  rapid 
as  man  can  be  to  take  his  place  ; and  if  in  your  better  judgment  it  be 
wise  to  make  the  demonstration  let  me  know  and  it  shall  be  promptly 


Not  found. 


irur.  ^XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


987 


(xecuted.  I have  been  told  that  you  had  heavy  firing  this  morning  and 
ast  night.  I earnestly  pra3"  j'oii  have  again  repulsed  them.  Your  note 
elative  to  the  engineers  has  just  reached  me.  I will  attend  to  its  com- 
oands.  . 

G p.  m. — Lieutenant  Connor  has  just  gone  ofi'  in  the  direction  jmu 
peak  of  and  will  be  near  you  by  the  time  you  get  this.  Lieutenant 
Niy,  whom  I sent  scouting  near  New  Berne,  has  returned  within  the 
lOur.  He  states  that  a day  or  two  ago  some  twenty  iron- clads  and  other 
gunboats  left  Beaufort — that  a strong  re- enforcement  came  up  from 
here  to  New  Berne.  The  officer  I sent  to  breakup  the  railroad  has  not 
et  reported.  He  has  hardly  had  time,  as  I wished  the  bridge  near 
>hepherdsville  destroyed,  if  possible. 

Very  respectfully  and  trulj^, 

E.  EANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  JSf.  0.,  April  14,  18G3. 

laj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  near  Washington^  N.  C. : 

General:  I have  just  received  yours  of  the  12th,*  inclosing  a tele- 
ram* from  Longstreet.  I have  received  so  many  orders  and  counter- 
rders  from  so  many  different  sources  that  really  I am  puzzled  how  to 
nsw  er.  The  War  Department  has  been  directing  me  to  re-enforce  Gen- 
ral  Beauregard.  The  lieutenant-general  commanding  orders  co-opera- 
ion  with  you,  while  from  his  headquarters  at  Petersburg!  get  directions 
0 aid  Beauregard  if  the  latter  is  urgent.  Finally,  General  Beauregard 
uspends  the  movement  of  Evans’  brigade.  My  i)osition  is  then  this : 
)iie  regiment  of  Evans’  brigade  is  in  Charleston,  having  got  off  before 
he  movement  w'as  stopped;  the  general  himself  is  there;  I have  four 
ere.  I do  not  think  the  enemj^  have  in  the  least  given  up  their  designs 
11  Charleston.  It  is  incredible  that  after  such  monstrous  preparations 

hey  should  give  up  1 of  that  performance  of  the  monitors. 

for  am  I apprehensive  immediately^  of  any  demonstration  on  Wilming- 
an,  though  such  might  be  attempted.  If,  as  you  surmise,,  any  feint 
hould  be  made  by  land,  your  cavalry  ought  to  let  Eansom  know  the 
lomeut  it  is  discovered,  that  he  need  not  wait  for  me  to  call  upon  him. 
f .your  estimate  of  Foster’s  troops,  viz,  8,000,  is  correct,  and  as  Long- 
treet  says  he  has  received  no  more  re-enforcements,  he  will  neither  dare 
1)  attack  you  nor  to  move  on  me.  I know  him  too  wxll.  Still  I must 
ecp  on  the  lookout.  I only  fear  that  my  armament  is  not  heavy  enough 
I)  keep  a monitor  out.  For  one  to  get  inside  would  be  a very^  serious 
inbarrassment ; but  it  will  hardly  be  tried,  I think,  until  the  defenses 
f Cliarleston  are  more  thoroughly  tested  ; and  surely  unless  they  aban- 
011  their  great  expedition  altogether  before  that  first  repulse  they  wTll 
ot  divert  an.y  ])ortion  of  their  land  or  naval  forces  for  an  attempt  on  a 
iihordinate  xiosition.  If  I should  hear  that  the  fleet  and  transiiorts 
ad  all  iiassed  the  Charleston  bar  going  northward  1 should  thiTik  they 
-ere  coming  here  and  call  for  all  the  aid  1 could  get.  If  they  abandon 
iieir  Cliarleston  move  Beauregard  could  aid  me.  In  the  mean’ time  I do 
ot  like  to  think  that  your  operations  should  be  in  any  manner  crippled  to 
id  me  unless  at  the  last  extremit.y.  Your  oxierations  there  are  in  fact  my 
reat  security^  here,  unless  an  additional  expedition  should  be  fitting  out 


Not  found. 


t Illegible. 


988  ^^OliTn  CAKOLtNA  AiSft)  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXi 

in  the  ISTortli  of  which  we  know  nothing.  I therefore  hope  yon  will  h 
able  to  press  Foster  hard.  He  is  not  the  man,  nor  Wessells  either,  1 
fight  you  and  me  both  at  once. 

Very  truly, 

W.  IT.  C.  WmTING,  i 
Brigadic}'- General.  ! 


Special  Orders,  » Hdqrs.  Dept.  Virginia  and  N.  Carolina, 

^^o.  — . j Near  Suffolk,  Fu.,  April  14,  1803. 

Maj.  Gren.  S.  G.  French  is  temx)orarily  assigned  to  the  command  of  ai! 
the  artillery  serving  with  the  forces  on  the  Blackwater.  It  will  be  iir 
der  his  control  and  direction,  and  commanding  officers  will  accord  dni 
observance  of  his  orders  and  dispositions. 

By  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet: 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington.)  N.  (7.,  April  15,  1803. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  Wur,  Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir:  1 beg  leave,  in  the  short  lull  afforded  by  the  enemy,  to  urge  m.| 
need  of  more  heavy  guns,  especially  the  8 or  10-inch  columbiads  aiic 
the  Brooke  rifle.  The  enemy,  I think,  now  will  either  renew  a desperati 
effort  on  Charleston,  or,  fearful  of  that  place,  try  one  they  suppose  to  hi 
weaker.  If  injury  to  us  be  an  object  they  ought  scarcely  to  attempt  thi 
place.  Y ou  are  aware  of  the  inadequacy  of  our  armament  here,  and  tha 
many  guns  intended  for  Wilmington  have  been  diverted  to  meet  wha 
have  been  required  as  more  pressing  necessities  elsewhere.  I am  mud 
in  want  now  of  at  least  two  heavy  rifles  and  four  columbiads  (8  or  10 
inch),  with  their  ammunition, 
ery^  respectfn  1 ly , 

W.  H.  C.  WHITIXG, 

Brigadier-  General. 


April  15,  1803— 9.30  a.  m. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General:  My  train  has  just  arrived  from  the  Pungo  River.  I 
brings  uj)  05  barrels  of  corn  and  about  8,000  iiounds  of  bacon.  Of  tliit 
lot  2,000  pounds  came  from  Hyde.  Captain  Swindell,  who  sent  agent? 
into  Hyde,  reports  that  most  of  the  bacon  remaining  in  that  country  i? 
in  the  liands  of  persons  who  have  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  they 
will  not  sell  it  unless  it  is  impressed.  I have  ordered  my  train  to  go  t( 
Tranter’s  Creek  Bridge.  You  do  not  say  in  your  last  dispatch  how  tlu 
surplus  meat  at  Tranter’s  Bridge  is  to  be  transported.  I suggested  tbn 
it  shoufd  be  sent  to  Greenville  or  Tarborough  by  steamboat  from  Boyd’? 
Landing.  Please  let  me  have  definite  instructions  in  this  matter,  as  i 
do  not  tliiiik  my  train  can  haul  the  meat  in  question  should  we  have  U 
move  the  wagon  train  all  at  once.  I have  no  control  over  the  steam 
boat,  and  have  therefore  reported  the  above  facts  to  you  in  order  thai 
you  might  give  the  necessary  directions  should  you  deem  this  mode  o 
trans])ortation  xireferablc.  1 judge  from  the  spirited  rejAy  the  enemy 


JnAP.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC— CONFEDERATE. 


989 


uake  to  oiir  fire  that  their  amiiuiiiitioii  has  been  repleuished.  We  have 
jad  quite  a heavy  fall  of  rain.  Whether  it  will  eiidauger  our  bridges  1 
im  uuable  to  say. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 

Brigadier- General. 


Maj.  Gen.  I).  H.  Hill  :J 


April  15,  18G3— 7.25. 


General  : Lieut.  [James  A.j  Eeid  has  just  delivered  your  note.  He 
•eports  the  water  very  high  on  the  route,  and  as  we  have  had  a very 
leavy  fall  of  rain  since  his  arrival  I fear  my  artillery  ammunition  will 
ill  be  wet  in  crossing  the  creeks.  My  infantry  ammunition  will  have 
0 be  renewed  at  TranteEs  Greek,  as  I am  sure  that  it  is  all  spoiled  by 
lie  violent  rain-storm,  the  men  having  no  tents  or  flies  to  protect  against 
be  weather.  My  command  will  be  in  a very  bad  condition  to  march 
arther  than  TranteEs  Greek  Bridge,  as  they  will  have  to  wade  almost  up 
0 their  waists  and  without  rest.  They  have  been  on  ])icket  duty  every 
(ther  night  for  a long  time.  I will  make  every  possible  eftbrt  to  jom 
ou,  but  you  must  make  allowance  for  pitch  darkness  and  deep  streams 
0 march  through.  * 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters,  April  15, 18G3. 
ilaj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : Your  letter  and  its  inclosure  are  received.  I think  that 
ou  had  better  reduce  the  charge  of  the  big  guns  and  trj^  them.  The 
ull  charge  seems  to  burst  them  all.  I think  that  Major  Henry  had 
letter  be  relieved  by  Gapt.  [E.  M.]  Stribling  to-night.  Gannot  the  jiar- 
ipet  at  the  battery  where  Major  Henry  is  be  so  arranged  as  to  protect 
be  pieces  from  the  fire  on  the  opposite  side  and  at  the  same  time  allow 
lur  pieces  to  jilay  upon  the  gunboats  ? If  it  can  be  done  I would  like 
0 have  it.  General  Hood  will  give  you  such  detail  as  you  need  to 
vork.  If  you  keep  Gaptain  Stribling’s  battery  you  should  send  him 

be  other  that took  j that  is  Bradford’s.  He  has  but  two  on  our 

ight,  and  that  seems  the  only  point  where  the  enemy  will  venture  out. 
lo  has  been  out  with  strong  lines  of  skirmishers  there  twice  to-day. 

. was  called  up  there  in  consequence  and  could  not  therefore  go  over 
0 see  you.  I ordered  Gaptain  Glarke  to  you  this  morning  to  examine 
ind  place  batteries  or  breastworks  wherever  you  thought  best.  Direct 
IS  you  think  best,  and  order  him  to  call  for  such  details  as  he  needs  in 
ny  name. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  April  15,  18G3. 
daj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding  : 

General  : Iidbrmation  reaches  me  to-day  that  the  enemy  is  landing 
>a  the  Gliowan,  in  Gates  Gounty,  from  your  part  of  the  country.  I 


990 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chai’.XXX 


wish  you  would  keep  your  Yankees  to  yourself;  or  if  you  fiud  tbeu 
])usbiug-  up  liere  from  New  Berne  you  must  send  me  some  more  troops 
I hope" that  you  will  semi  me  Garnett  and  Eeilly  as  soon  as  it  can  b( 
done;  and  if  you  find  other  troops  coming  from  New  Berne  you  luu^ 
better  try  and  make  some  arrangement  by  wbicli  you  can  re-enforce  nu, 


fnrtber 


I remain,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Com^n'andimj. 


I am  greatly  iu  need  of  cavalry.  Uave  but  seven  companies  o 
Colonel  Baker’s  regiment.  Wbat  can  it  be  doing?  General  Wbitinj:| 
complains  that  be  can  get  none  and  you  say  that  it  is  worthless.  J| 
have  been  trying  to  get  some  ever  since  I have  been  in  the  dej)artmeiri 
and  think  that  I could  make  it  very  useful  if  I could  ever  get  hold  of  it, 


April  15  (or  18),  1863 — 8.30  a.  in. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  11.  Hill: 

General  : 1 received  your  note  last  niglit  inclosing  one  from  Browi 
and  one  from  Whitford.  If  the  dispatch  mentioned  by  Brown  waf 
really  sent  to  the  commander  of  the  expedition  it  was  very  kind  of  bin! 
to  communicate  it ; but  what  becomes  of  General  Longstreet’s  effort  fij 
keep  the  enemy  in  Suffolk  if  they  thus  march  across  his  face  ? M: 
opinion  is  what  it  was  last  night— concentrate.  If  you  are  going  fi 
fight  in  the  rear  of  the  road  leading  from  Blount’s  farm  to  the  Swif 
Creek  road  1 am  opposed  to  exposing  any  one  at  the  Blount’s  Greek,  fo 
1 should  consider  ihem  sacrificed  unless  I stationed  a regiment  at  t\u 
farm,  and  that  would  increase  the  dispersion  of  our  forces,  which  alreail: 
exceeds  reasonable  limits.  1 send  you  Captain  McCrady’s  dispatch 
by  which  it  appears  that  the  same  steamer  ran  down  by  both  batterie. 
this  morning.  So  passes  away  the  blockade.  As  somebody  remarkei 
this  morning,  with  more  truth  than  agreeability,  “ The  entertainmeu 
will  now  conclude  with  the  laughable  and  amusing  farce  of  ‘ Kunmii^ 
the  Blockade.’  Parents  may  send  their  children  with  the  assuranc 
that  the  exhibition  is  perfectly  innocent.”  It  is  a mystery  to  me  tlia 
the  one  battery  should  not  have  seen  her  and  the  other  should  not  havi 
sunk  her. 

A^ery  respectfully, 

J.  J.  PETTIGEEW, 

Briaadier- Genera  1. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  15, 1863. 

Mai.  Gen.  D.  IT.  Hill, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina,  near  Washington,  N.  G.: 
General:  Your  letter  of  the  10th  to  the  commanding  general  i 
received.  I am  directed  to  write  as  follows : , . +i 

We  cannot  afford  to  keep  the  large  force  that  you  have  watching  tn 
garrison  at  Washington.  It  would  seem  that  you  could,  by  fortitym 
the  positions  that  vou  hold  around  Washington,  keep  the  garrison  sj 
curely  inside  with  3,000  men.  If  you  should  order  the  two  regimcmi 
that  were  at  Hamilton  in  the  place  of  Garnett’s  brigade,  and  let  tiiei 
fortify,  they  could  keep  the  garrison  in  on  the  north  side.  Pettigrev 


CIIAP/.XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


991 


brigade  on  the  south  side  ought  to  be  able  to  keep  the  enemy  in  on  that 
side.  Indeed,  it  seems  that  half  of  this  brigade  is  enough  on  the  south 
side.  By  such  an  arrangement  you  will  have  treble  the  force  of  the  garri- 
son. Garnett  then  could  come  here ; Daniel  go  to  Kinston,  and  Eansom 
to  Wilmington.  If  you  cannot  effect  such  an  arrangement  the  invest- 
ment had  better  be  abandoned.  If  you  prefer,  it  is  suggested  that  the 
two  regiments  at  Hamilton  be  sent  to  Wilmington;  then  Eansom^s 
brigade  can  remain  where  it  is,  and  you  will  thus  have  Daniel  and  Petti- 
grew at  Washington,  which  ought  to  be  abundant.  There  can  be  no 
great  force  to  succor  Washington,  and  it  must  come  from  Kew  Berne. 
If  it  comes  from  that  point  you  can  support  by  DaniePs  brigade  and 
replace  it  by  part  of  Eansom’s. 

Two  of  your  letters  reported  the  enemy  evacuating  New  Berne.  If 
this  be  done  you  will  require  little  or  no  force  at  Kinston.  A portion 
of  the  troops  from  North  Carolina  are  reported  landing  in  Gates  County 
for  Suffolk.  It  thus  appears  that  the  force  that  you  are  to  contend 
against  is  being  drawn  in  this  direction.  Send  Garnett’s  brigade  and 
Reilly’s  battery  here  as  soon  as  possible,  but  endeavor  to  continue  the 
siege.  When  the  enemy  had  all  his  force  in  North  Carolina  you  had  no 
trouble  in  driving  back  his  succoring  force  ; now  that  part  of  it  is  here 
yon  can  surely  keep  back  the  little  force  that  he  may  possibly  be  able 
to  bring  against  you. 

It  is  suggested  that  excessive  charges  may  account  for  the  repeated 
disasters  to  your  guns.  If  they  were  reduced  it  is  thought  that  not  so 
many  would  burst. 

The  enemy  is  re-enforcing  here  from  his  reserves  in  Baltimore  and 
other  points.  His  accessions,  however,  are  not  believed  to  be  large. 
Not  a gun  has  been  fired  here  at  the  enemy’s  works.  We  have  no  am- 
munition to  throw  away  in  this  manner. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Maj.  [L.  M.]  Shumaker, 

Chief  of  Artillery : 


April  15, 1863. 


Withdraw  the  batteries  and  go  into  camp,  and  do  not  attack  the 
gunboats  unless  they  move  up  ; in  that  case  attack  them.  I wish  you 
to  remain  here  to-night  with  the  batteries.  I go  up  to  assist  Major 
Henry.  Keep  a watch  and  let  no  boats  pass  down. 

S.  G.  EEENCH, 

Major-General. 


April  16,  1863. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  HilliJ 

General  : I have  had  my  courier  line  removed  already.  I api)lied 
lor  the  boat  to-day,  but  the  captain  said  he  was  specially  under  your 
orders,  and  if  he  went  iq)  to  Greenville  he  could  not  return  Avithout 
going  a considerable  distance  above  that  town  to  get  wood.  I therefore 
concluded  to  try  to  move  my  stores  with  my  own  wagons.  It  will  re- 
<iuire  some  two  days  to  send  the  meat,  meal,  and  corn  1 have  at  Pactolus 
io  Greenville.  I Avill  leave  Colonel  Eerebee  to  defend  Tranter’s  Greek 
bridge  when  I leave.  Tlie  steamer  is  loading  the  flats  with  large  guns. 
Iwo  are  already  on  board.  This  will  prevent  the  boat  from  taking  my 
nicii  over,  If  what  the  captain  says  is  correct  the  steamer  will  have  to 


992 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[C1IA1>.  XXX. 


run  some  distance  above  Greenville  to  get  wood,  and  will  not  be  ablcj 
to  return  until  late  to-morrow  morning  to  B(d  d’s  Ferry,  [ sbonld  judge. i 
1 am  in  great  perplexity  bow  to  manage  to  get  over  before  some  time  in 
the  day  to-morrow.  I thought  it  would  not  be  safe  to  leave  tbe  bridge: 
until  1 heard  from  you  after  Colonel  Ferebce’s  report  of  an  advance  of  , 
the  enemy.  Subsequent  reports  do  not  confirm  an  advance,  though  it 
is  likely  they  will  do  so  if  they  are  re-enforced  at  Washington.  Please 
let  me  hear  from  you  as  soon  as  x>ossible. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

li.  B.  GAENETT, 

Brigadier- General. 


April  16,  1863—9.30. 


[Maj.  Gen.  D.  PI.  PIill  :] 

General  : I have  received  your  dispatch  of  this  morning  and  will 
take  the  steps  you  desire.  My  men  are  very  much  worn  out  by  con- 
stant picketing,*  and  the  wet  and  the  somewhat  long  march  of  last  night. 
It  took  my  command  until  daylight  to  make  it.  I have  a quantity  ot 
commissary  stores  and  some  corn.  I will  send  these  up  by  boat  to  Green-i 
ville  x)rovided  your  orders  do  not  conflict  with  this  arrangement.  The 
boat  can  take  them  up  and  return  to-night  or  early  to-morrow.  Should 
there  be  any  delay  in  removing  my  stores  I will  direct  Colonel  Ferebee 
to  i)rotect  them. 

Yery  respectfully, 

E.  B.  GAENETT, 

Brigadier- General. 


Tranter’s  Greek  Bridge, 

^ April  16,  1863 — 8.30  p.  m. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : I have  received  your  dispatch  by  Lieutenant  Eeid ; also 
yours  of  5.30  p.  m.  I shall  withdraw  to-morrow  morning  at  daylight. 
*I  have  directed  Colonel  Ferebee  to  remain  here,  and  to  take  up  the 
bridges  at  this  point  and  at  Gaines.  1 shall  get  off  all  my  stores,  except 
a quantity  of  corn  that  I am  having  ground  at  Pactolus.  I think  Colonel 
P\  can  hold  the  enemy  long  enough  in  check  to  have  it  ground  and  sent 
to  Greenville.  I sent  Captain  Eeilly  off  this  morning  to  Tarboroiigh, 
according  to  your  orders.  Oaxitain  Bunting  is  still  here,  but  I do  not 
apprehend  I shall  require  his  services.  I can  get  along  better  without 
the  boat.  The  road  to  Boyd’s  Ferry  is  impassable  for  wagons,  and  even 
couriers  have  a very  hard  time  at  night. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  B.  GABNETT, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


Tranter’s  Greek  Bridge, 

April  16,  1863—12.10  p.  in. 

[Mnj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  :] 

General  : Colonel  Ferebee  has  retired  with  his  brigade  to  this  point 
He  rejiorts  that  he  left  his  position  near  Washington  between  8 mnK 
o’clock  this  morning;  also  that  their  cavalry  and  a body  of  infantry 
followed  them  some  distance.  The  information  is  indelinite,  but  tin 


CnAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


993 


enemy  may  advance  upon  me  at  this  point.  It  would  not  do,  I should 
think,  to  leave  this  position  open.  The  destruction  of  the  bridge  would 
not  detain  the  enemy  long.  1 cannot  depend  upon  the  steamboat  to  take 
up  my  stores.  She  is  loading  at  Boyd’s  Ferry  and  1 cannot  tell  what 
she  will  be  able  to  transport.  I shall  try  to  get  my  stores  up  by  wagons, 
but  it  will  take  some  days  to  do  so.  The  road  to  Boyd’s  Ferry  on  this 
side  is  said  to  be  exceedingly  bad,  impassable  to  wagons.  The  last  rain 
has  made  it  very  much  worse. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant. 

B.  B.  GABNETT, 

Brigadier-  General. 


' Headquarters  Havis’  Brigade, 

Before  Suffolk^  Fu.,  April  10,  1863. 

Maj.  Graham  Daves, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major  : I respectfully  request  to  know  if  my  brigade  belongs  to  the 
division  commanded  by  Major-General  French  j and,  if  so,  am  I to  con- 
tinue to  receive  orders  and  instructions  from  an  intermediate  commander, 
or  from  the  major-general  commanding 

I am,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  B.  DAVIS. 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  Southern  Virginia, 

April  17,  1863. 

Bespectfully  forwarded  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding. 

I apprehend  there  is  no  difficulty  in  this  question.  While  I regard  this 
brigade,  of  course,  a part  of  my  command  as  well  as  General  Jenkins’ 
brigade,  yet,  as  I must  be  absent  much  of  my  time,  the  division  must 
be  under  command  of  the  senior  officer  present. 

S.  G.  FBENOH, 

‘ Major- General^  Commanding. 


Signal  Office, 
Biehmond,  Va.^  April  16,  1863. 
Maj.  William  Korris,  Chief  Signal  Corps: 

Sir:  Pursuant  to  your  orders  1 left  Bichmond  on  the  8th  instant  and 
proceeded  to  Day’s  Neck,  on  the  James,  nearly  opposite  to  the  mouth 
of  Warwick  Bi\  er,  which  i^lace  I reached  on  the  lOth.  On  the  11th  at 
uigiit  succeeded  in  crossing  to  Mallicote’s  house  on  the  opxmsite  shore, 
about  4 miles  I’rom  Newport  News.  Obtained  but  little  information 
that  night,  but  delivered  the  letters  intrusted  to  me  to  a reliable  i)er- 
son,  who  placed  them  in  the  Federal  post-office  at  Fort  Monroe.  At- 
,teini)ted  to  cross  on  Sunday  night,  but  owing  to  the  intense  darkness, 
jand  having  no  compass  or  glasses,  got  lost,  and  after  many  hours’  hard 
jlabor  at  the  oars  found  myself  on  the  same  side  from  which  I started. 
|Made  another  attempt  the  next  night  and  ran  over  in  full  view  of  the 
iblockading  fleet,  consisting  of  the  Minnesota,  an  iron-clad  of  the  Mon- 
itor  model,  and  three  or  four  small  wooden  gunboats.  Obtained  files  of 
63  R R— VOL  XVIII 


994 


NORTH  CAROE-INA,  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  ! 

I)apers  to  the  9th  ultimo,  and  the  subjoined  note  from  a friend,  dated 
the  13th  instant : 

There  has  been  greai  excitement  here  during  the  past  few  days  owing  to  the  action  i 
of  onr  troops  at  Williamsburg  and  on  the  south  side  of  the  James  River.  On  Satur-  i 
day  night  the  loaig  bridge  across  Hampton  Creek  was  lined  with  sentinels,  and  so  i 
great  was  the  fear  that  the  rebels  would  make  a descent  that  long  piles  of  combusti- 
bles were  placed  on  the  eastern  end  to  facilitate  its  intended  destruction  if  they  came 
in  sight.  In  consequence  of  disasters  present  and  likely  soon  to  occur,  military  mtw 
exhibited  great  dcsumndency,  and  are  unanimous  in  speaking  most  disparagingly  of 
Uncle  Sam’s  prospects.  General  Dix  is  absent  in  New  York,  trying  to  persuade  Gov- ' 
ernor  Seymour  to  furnish  him  men  enough  to  hold  the  Peninsula  from  Williamsbnrg 
down,  which  he  admits  his  inability  to  do  unless  strongly  re-enforced,  and  that  right j 
speedily.  To  conciliate  the  Governor  he  is  using  x>leas  of  Democratic  fellowship,  &c. ; 
with  what  success  has  not  yet  transpired.  Poster,  in  North  Carolina,  is  in  a most  crit- 
ical condition ; nor  can  one  man  be  sont  him,  either  from  this  point  or  from  Suffolk. 

After  reaching  the  south  side  on  Tuesday  morning  a heavy  cannonade 
began,  which  continued  until  nightfall.  The  next  morning  I met  a man 
who  was  acting  as  a guide  the  day  of  the  firing,  and  he  informed  me 
that  he  had  been  almost  entirely  around  Suffolk ; that  the  Norfolk  and 
Petersburg  road  was  then  in  our  possession,  and  two  brigades  wore 
pushing  rapidly  on  to  the  Seaboard  and  Eoanoke  road ; that  our  ligbti 
batteries  were  lining  both  banks  of  the  Nansemond,  and  had  sunk  one 
gunboat  and  disabled  two  others.  Eifled  32s  were  being  brought  up 
and  a pontoon  bridge  thrown  across  to  facilitate  their  passage.  If  bis; 
information  is  entirely  reliable  (and  I see  no  reason  for  doubting  it) 
Sufiblk  is  completely  isolated. 

0.  H.  CAUSEY, 
Gaptain,  G.  S.  Army. 


Brigade  Headquarters, 

Near  WilUamshurg,  Ua.,  April  10,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  Coimnandmg,  &c.  : 

General:  This  ^s  now  Thursday  morning;  .all  is  quiet,  and  I shall 
begin  to  fall  back  at  3 o’clock  this  evening.  This  is  the  fifth  day  after 
our  attack  upon  the  enemy,  and  they  have  shown  no  disposition  to 
advance.  We  have  all  the  forage  and  pio visions  that  can  be  obtained 
in  the  neighborhood  and  sent  them  behind  us.  About  Saturday  or 
Sunday  next  I expect  to  reach  Diascund  Bridge  by  falling  back  slowly 
ainU posting  my  cavalry  close  up  to  Williamsburg.  I wish  you  would 
say  by  courier  whether  I shall  leave  the  forces  at  IMa«cuud  as  they 
were  before  my  advance  (Colonel  Tabb’s  command),  or  what  niunber  of 
forces  I shall  leave'  there,  and  also  please  say  whether  I am  to  fall  baclt 
to  Cliafiin’s  farm  with  my  force.  I must  beg  of  you  to  oriler  forward 
Captain  Doby’s  company  of  cavalry  immediately,  the  cavalry  force  here 
being  very  insufficient  and  inefficient. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly, 

llENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- Genera  1. 


Headquarters, 

^ix  Mile  Ordinary,  Va.,  April  16,  1863 — 6.30  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  xVrnold  Elzey,  Commanding,  the.  : 

General  : After  getting  all  the  forage  and-  provisions  in  Williams- 
burg and  its  immediate  neighboMliood  I left  Casey’s,  2 miles  from  IViH- 


CiiAl’.  XXX. J 


COKKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


995 


iaiii8biir<(,  at  3.30  p.  m.  to-day  aiid  reached  this  place  about  5 p.  in.  Be- 
fore 1 moved,  Surgeon  Wager,  the  enemy’s  surgeon  at  the  lunatic  asylum, 
sent  through  Major  Garrett  a letter  addressed  to  him  by  acting  Briga- 
dier-General West,  his  commander  at  Fort  Magruder,  to  withdraw  from 
that  institution  and  surrender  it  to  the  commander  of  the  Confederate 
forces  in  and  around  Williamsburg.  I ordered  Major  Garrett  to  make 
no  rejily  to  this  notice;  but  I had  anticipated  some  such  ruse,  and  yes- 
terday had  arranged  with  Talbot  Sweeny,  esq.,  the  only  State  of  Vir- 
ginia officer  left  with  the  asylum,  to  attend  to  and  provide  for  its  wants. 
I will  also  send  to  it  Dr.  Martin,  a resident  jiracticing  physician  of  this 
county,  to  superintend  its  hygeia.  It  is  pretty  certain,  too,  the  enemy 
have  drawn  in  their  lines,  and  the  report  is  that  they  have  informed  the 
inhabitants  that  they  consider  the  town  itself  surrendered.  For  two 
days  they  have  made  no  demonstration  and  have  not  disturbed  my  forces 
in  gathering  all  the  plunder  we  could  find  and  in  moving  out  the  inhab- 
itants and  their  effects.  It  is  worthy  of  attention,  too,  that  Avhile  ex- 
changing these  communications  under  the  flag  of  truce  their  officers 
were  emphatic  and  even  urgent  in  persuading  my  officers  that  Fort 
Magruder  is  impregnable  to  any  force  short  of  20‘,000  men.  In  other 
words,  they  are  very  desirous  to  get  rid  of  our  presence  in  their  front. 
Another  evidence  of  this  is  that  they  ran  gunboats  up  both  James  and 
York  Fivers  yesterday  and  to-day.  Indeed,  this  evening  after  we  began 
to  move  two  gunboats  ran  up  Y^ork  Fiver  as  high  as  Mount  Folly  and 
shelled  the  shore.  This  was  evidently  intended  to  hurry  our  departure. 
1 have  therefore  not  moved  back  my  cavalry  pickets  and  main  force  of 
cavalry  at  all,  but  have  halted  here  with  my  artillery  and  infantry  to 
get  more  forage  and  to  render  further  assistance  to  the  citizens.  I have 
placed  a strong  infantry  guard  on  my  right  at  Oentreville,  the  Fifty- 
ninth  between  this  and  Centreville,  the  Twenty-sixth  and  Fourth  here 
with  the^  artillery,  and  a strong  infantry  guard  at  Deneufville’s  Store, 
on  the  l^ork  Fiver  road,  thus  covering  every  road  with  strong  flankers 
right  and  left. 

The  day  after  to-morrow  morning  I will  fall  back  farther  and  retire 
a iiortion  of  the  command  quite  to  Diascund,  moving  my  cavalry  far- 
ther back  to  siqiporting  distance,  and  completing  my  return  to  Dias- 
ciind  by  Sabbatli  at  noon.  I am  thus  obeying  your  instructions  to  fall 
hack  slowly,  and  paiTicularl}^  in  order*  that  you  may  modify  your  in- 
structions according  to  your  better  judgment.  We  have  but  few  sick 
men.  Tliey  stand  the  service  admirably  and  behave  well  in  all  respects. 

I am,  general,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENFY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 


Special  Orders,  } Headquarters  French’s  Command, 

2.  j April  10  (or  17),  1803. 

* - * * # * * * 

HI.  The  following  artillery  companies  are  assigned  to  duty  in  General 
Pickett’s  division,  and  will  report  to  Maj.  James  Hearing,  chief  of  artil- 
ery : Macon’s  battery,  Stribling’s  battery,  Blount’s  battery,  Caskie’s 
battery.  The  artillery  companies  on  duty  with  the  division  will  draw 
cations  and  forage  from  their  divisions  respectively. 

IV.  The  following  artillery  companies  are  assigned  to  duty  with  Gen- 
eral Hood’s  division,  and  will  report  to  Major  Henry,  chief  of  artillery  : 
bane’s  battery,  Bachman’s  battery,  Garden’s  battery.  The  artillery 


99G 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX.  I 

compaines  on  duty  with  the  divisions  will  draw  forage  and  rations  from 
their  divisions  respectively. 

# * * # * * . * 

Bv  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  S.  G.  French : 

GEAHAM  DAVES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ueadquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

April  17,  1803. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Long  street, 

Commanding.)  d^c.  : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  13th  has  been  received.  1 am  glad  that 
you  are  steadily  progressing  in  your  operations.  1 wish  I could  give 
you  any  aid,  but  1 feel  every  confidence  that  you  will  do  all  that  can 
be  done. 

T Avrote  to  Bichmond  to  ask  assistance  for  you,  from  the  Navy,  if  pos- 
sible. I have  had  no  reply.  Should  you  know  of  any  assistance  which 
eould  be  given  you  had  better  write  direct  to  Eichmond  for  it,  and 
state  that  it  is  at  my  request. 

The  enemy’s  cavalry  are  again  on  our  left.  They  presented  them-i 
selves  Tuesday  evening  at  Kelly’s  Ford,  Eappahannock  Bridge,  and 
Beverly’s  Ford  in  large"  force.  Their  attempts  to  cross  the  river  have 
been  so  far  repulsed.  Stuart  thinks  the  movement  is  intended  to  cover 
a change  of  base  or  some  other  operation  of  the  grand  army.  Nothing, 
however,  has  been  ascertained. 

Yesterday  three  gunboats  appeared  in  the  Eappahannock  below  Port 
Eoyal,  and  are  reported  to  be  ascending  the  river.  Their  character, 
description,  and  intentions  are  not  yet  known. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  and  truly  yours, 

. . E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 

Mear  JSuffoR')  F«.,  ApWi  17,  1803. 

Lion.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  favor  of 
the  13th.  I regret  the  necessity  of  sending  trooi)S  from  this  department 
to  South  Carolina,  and  still  think  that  we  should  have  abundance  of 
time  for  such  re-enforcement  after  the  enemy  had  really  begun  his  attack. 
Wilmington  is  without  a garrison,  yet  I thiidA  there  is  less  need  of  one 
there  than  at  any  other  point  in  the  command.  1 think  that  it  will  not 
be  attacked  at  all  unless  we  shut  up  the  troops  there  so  that  the  enemy 
cannot  get  at  us  anywhere  else.  One  regiment  1 think  enough  for  its 
garrison,  but  have  suggested  to  General  Hill  the  propriety  of  sending 

two  there.  . i p n 

From  the  reports  in  newspapers  1 fear  that  some  anxiety  may  be  Ici 
for  us  at  Suffolk.  We  have  not  fired  again  at  the  enemy’s  stronghold 
nor  do  1 expect  to  do  so.  I am  very  well  convinced  that  we  could  re- 
duce it  in  two  or  three  days,  but  doubt  if  we  can  afford  to  expend  the 
powder  and  ball.  To  take  it  by  assault  would  cost  us  3,000  men.  This 
would  be  less  excusable  than  the  other  mode.  There  is  but  one  othei 
means — that  of  turning  it.  This  cannot  be  done  by  the  river  in  conse- 
quence of  the  gunboats  in  the  river.  On  our  right  it  could  be  done  by 


d/iAP. 


COl^Rt^St'ONlDi^NCE,  ETC. — CONEEDEiiATE. 


99? 


taking  Norfolk,  but  we  cannot  hold  Norfolk  twenty-four  hours  without 
the  aid  of  the  Navy  or  heavier  guns  than  we  now  have.  I do  not  think 
that  we  should  have  much  trouble  getting  both  places  with  the  aid  of 
the  Eichmond.  Suffolk  would  surely  fall  if  the  Eichinond  would  only 
come  down  and  anchor  in  the  mouth  of  the  Nansemond.  The  i)riucipal 
object  of  the  expedition  was  to  draw  out  supplies  for  our  army.  I shall 
coniine  myself  to  this  unless  1 find  a fair  opportunity  for  something 
more.  The  reports  of  bacon  and  corn  are  very  favorable  thus  for.  In 
some  instances  I have  heard  of  bacon  being  bought  at  12J  cents  per 
pound.  General  Hill  is  expecting  the  enemy’s  force  at  Charleston  to 
return  to  North  Carolina  and  make  their  operations  there.  It  looks  to 
me  more  sensible  for  the  enemy  than  South  Carolina. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Headquartees,  April  17,  1803 — Op.  rn. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  Ac.  : 

General:  Your  note  of  7th  is  received.  I regret  to  learn  that 
Lieutenant  Rogers  is  probably  captured.  I hope  that  we  are  more 
troublesome  to  the  gunboats  than  tiiey  are  to  us.  I think  that  you  had 
better  send  the  whole  of  Colonel  Connally’s  regiment  down  early  in  the 
morning.  The  long  guns  from  Fort  Powhatan  will  probably  be  ready 
the  day  after  to-morrow.  I have  two  cavalry  companies  below  the 
Western  Branch,  which  ought  to  keep  off*  the  Yankee  pickets.  Colonel 
Brown  is  at  Smithtield;  I will  order  him  down  to  the  Nansemond. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
TAentenant- General,  Commqnding. 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  Southern  Virginia, 

Petersburg,  Fa.,  April  17,  18G3. 

[Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French:] 

General  : I inclose  you  a note*  from  Captain  Milligan,  to  hand  this 
morning,  as  I cannot  attend  to  it  here,  and  he  is  by  this  time  nearer 
your  present  headquarters  than  these.  I telegraphed  Major  Daves  last 
night  that  Colonel  Brown’s  entire  command  had  left  Fort  Powhatan, 
probably  for  Smithfield,  as  Major  Sorrel  ordered  six  companies  through 
Captain  Eiely  to  move  at  once  with  Dabney’s  battery  to  that  place.  I 
telegraphed  to  Fort  Powhatan  yesterday  to  know  if  the  four  comi^anies 
had  moved,  and  learned  there  was  no  one  there,  when  I went  to  see 
Captain  Eiely,  who  told  me  of  Major  Sorrel’s  order  to  him.  I hope 
there  is  no  mistake  about  this  matter,  and  the  four  companies  will  reach 
Franklin  in  good  time;  but  under  the  existing  state  of  affairs  I cannot 
feel  myself  responsible  for  any  miscarriage  of  orders,  as  Colonel  Brown’s 
command  either  is  or  is  not  under  your  immediate  command.  No  news 
here  and  but  little  doing  in  the  office. 

Hoping  for  your  safe  and  speedy  return,  1 am,  yours,  sincerely, 

CilAS.  D.  MYEES. 

P.  S. — I sent  you  a New  York  Herald  of  the  13th  instant  on  yester- 
day. 


Not  found. 


998 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  8.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.XXX. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffollc^  Va.^  April  17,  1803—6*30  p*  ni* 
Maj.  Gen.  S*  G.  French,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General:  The  commanding  ji^eneral  desires  me  to  say  that  yon  may 
use  the  North  Carolina  regiment  (Fifty-fifth)  of  General  Davis’  brigade 
on  the  river  for  the  protection  of  your  batteries.  I am  just  writing  to 
Colonel  Brown,  and  tell  him,  as  1 also  did  this  morning,  to  send  his  four 
companies,  if  he  has  not  already  sent  them,  to  Franklin  by  the  nearest 
route.  The  balance  of  his  regiment;will  be  at  Smith  held  to-night.  The 
guns  are  behind;  he  will  wait  for  them  there. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOKBEL, 
x\ssistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

April  18,  1803. 

lion.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  An  officer  reported  to-day,  bringing  from  Captain  Pannill,  pro- 
vost-marshal of  Petersburg,  six  disloyal  citizens  of  North  Carolina,  cap- 
tured by  General  D.  H.  Hill.  The  three  younger  ones  will  be  assigned 
to  the  North  Carolina  regiments,  as  conscripts,  by  your  order.  I think 
it  would  be  better,  however,  to  send  them  somewhere  into  the  interior 
of  the  country.  They  will  be  worth  nothing  as  soldiers,  and  the  facili- 
ties for  desertion  to  the  enemy  are  very  great  here.  They  will  of  course 
carry  to  the  enemy  all  the  information  which  they  have  obtained  in 
North  Carolina,  Kichmoud,  and  elsewhere,  and  communicate  any  in- 
tended movement  of  this  army  of  which  they  may  chance  to  hear. 

There  have  already  been  frequent  desertions  from  the  North  Carolina 
regiments,  and  the  enemy  claim  that  many  have  come  to  them.  The 
three  men  who  are  over  the  conscript  age  I will  send  back  by  the  train 
to-morrow,  as  they  are  evidently  not  included  in  your  order.  General  Hill 
states  that  he  will  send  the  charges  against  these  men  to  Petersburg. 
1 would  suggest  that  in  order  not  to  create  any  ill-feeling  it  might  be 
better  to  try  them  within  the  limits  of  the  State  from  which  they  come. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond.,  Va.,  April  18,  1803. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding,  &c.: 

General:  I am  gratified  by  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  17th 
instant.  The  successful  repulse  of  the  enemy’s  marine  attack  at  Char- 
leston appears  to  have  so  deranged  their  plans  and  discouraged  them 
that,  in  General  Beauregard’s  opinion,  they  are  withdrawing  as  well  a 
])ortion  of  their  laud  forces  as  their  iron-dads.  He  is  in  consequence 
returning  the  troops  sent  from  Wilmington.  I have  telegraphed  him 
in  doing  so  to  exchange  Cooke’s  brigade  for  Evans’,  retaining  the  latter 
and  sending  back  the  former.  Fearing  that,  baffled  at  Charleston,  the 
enemy  might  seek  to  retrieve  his  disaster  by  a sudden  attack  on  Wil- 
mington, 1 have  not  ventured  to  stop  any  troops  moving  from  General 
Hill  to  re  enforce  General  Whiting,  until  assured  of  the  return  of  Cooke’s 


OiTAP.  SXX.] 


CORkESt’OiTl^ENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


999 


brigade.  AVlieii  tbat  is  restored,  any  troops  parted  with  by  General 
Hill  in  the  interim  might,  if  in  your  judgment  deemed  safe,  be  restored 
to  him. 

Your  proeeedings  in  regard  to  Suffolk  are  deemed  judicious  and  fully 
approved.  I concur  in  thinking  the  object  not  worth  the  sacrifice  to  be 
entailed  bj^  an  attack.  I regret  not  having  been  able  to  receive  the  co- 
operation of  the  ]!^avy,  but  the  President  has  not  deemed  it  wise  to  open 
the  obstructions  without  fuller  information  as  to  the  effect  on  the  remain- 
ing obstructions,  and  the  consequence  that  might  ensue  in  case  of  sudden 
attack.  The  subject  is  still  under  investigation  by  the  engineers,  and 
their  report  is  awaited  before  a final  decision.  If  it  be  decided  to  send 
out  the  Richmond,  you  shall  be  promptly  informed.  Meantime  it  is  not 
unlikely  the  enemy  may  pour  in  re-enforcements  to  Suffolk  and  give  you 
some  chance  of  action  with  them  in  the  open  field.  They  are  greatly 
agitated  and  alarmed  by  reports  of  the  operations  of  youself  and  General 
Hill.  The  main  object  of  your  expedition  is,  I am  happy  to  believe,  being 
fully  accomplished.  It  will,  however,  be  difficult  for  you  to  bring  out 
with  dispatch  the  subsistence  supplies  you  can  command.  The  transpor- 
tation we  can  afford  is  lamentably  deficient.  I would  r*ecommend  the  im- 
pressment of  all  wagons  on  both  sides  of  the  Blackwater,  with  their 
teams,  to  get  the  subsistence  sui^plies  to  a safe  point  on  this  side.  I 
ueed  not,  however,  make  suggestions  on  the  subject,  as  doubtless  your 
own  attention,  with  fuller  information,  has  been  engaged  in  securing  the 
utmost  dispatch  and  efBciency  in  this  business. 

With  high  esteem,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Army  of  hToRTHERN  Virginia, 

April  18,  1863. 


Lieut.  Gen.  tlAMES  Longstreet, 

Commanding^  c&c.  : 

General:  Your  provost-marshal  in  Petersburg  (Mr.  Pannill)  to-day 
forwarded  some  disloyal  North  Carolina  citizens  as  conscripts  to  this 
army,  on  a suggestion  of  General  D.  H.  Hill,  approved  by  yourself  and 
the  Secretary  of  War.  The  facilities  for  desertion  are  so  great  here  that 
these  men  cannot  be  kept  a week.  They  will  be  worth  nothing  as  sol- 
diers and  will  convey  all  the  information  they  can  to  the  enemy.  Will 
it  not  be  better  always  to  try  disloyal  citizens  in  their  own  State,  in  order 
to  avoid  jars  and  all  ill-feeling?  They  had  best  be  sent  to  the  interior 
somewhere,  as  they  will  do  us  but  little  harm,  unless  they  can  commu- 
nicate with  the  enemy.  Three  of  these  men  I send  back,  as  they  are 
uot  of  the  conscrij)t  age. 

I am,  very  respectfuffy,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters,  April  18,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General:  It  is  a question  with  me  whether  it  is  best  to  put  the  long 
guns  in  battery  below  Western  Branch  or  above  it.  Please  give  me 
your  views. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieut enant-Genorfd^  Commanding. 


1000 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[OifAP.  XNX. 


Headquarters, 

Kinston.  N.  C.  April  18,  1863 — 2.30  p.  m. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General  : Nothing  has  happened  since  last  night.  The  enemy  hold 
Core  Creek  and  appear  to  be  at  work  there.  Their  force  would  require 
all  mine  to  dislodge  them  quickly  and  with  success.  The  move  was  to 
cover  a more  general  one  this  evening  or  to-morrow,  or  it  may  be  a feint. 
As  your  courier  told  me  you  would  be  here  this  evening  I shall  delay 
any  action  until  you  arrive.  It  is  not  necessary  to  pass  the  regiment 
up.  I have  a telegram  from  Whiting  which  may  be  of  importance  to 
you,  and  has  had  weight  in  causing  me  to  defer  acting  until  you  arrive. 
Very  respectfully, 


R.  RANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington^  N.  0.,  April  18,  1863. 
Col.  T.  S.  Rhett,  Chief  of  Artillery.,  Richmond.,  Va.: 

Colonel  : Since  the  failure  of  the  reconnaissance  on  Charleston  I am 
inclined  to  think  they  may  try  this  place.  You  know  my  arniament, 
though  much  improved,  is  still  greatly  inadequate.  I beg  that  you  will 
do  all  in  your  t)ower  to  increase  my  supply  of  8 and  10  inch  columbiads 
and  heavy  rifles  as  many  as  can  possibly  be  sent  me,  for  none  will  be 
superfluous  at  such  a point  as  this.  I should  be  much  pleased  if  you 
would  come  down  here  and  assure  yourself  both  of  the  nature  of  the 
l)roblem  of  defense  here  and  the  necessities  I have.  The  heavy  calls  ou 
the  Department  for  other  places  have  diverted  many  of  the  gnus  in- 
tended for  me.  I think  we  can  now  be  supplied.  I would  not  be  so 
urgent  were  it  practicable  for  me  to  obstruct  the  harbor  entrances.  That, 
however,  may  be  regarded  as  out  of  the  question,  and  hence  we  must 
obtain  the  most  formidable  concentration  of  fire  possible.  Both  Forts 
Caswell  and  Fisher  should  have  Brooke  rifles  in  addition  to  columbiads. 
I can  make  good  use  of  ten  or  twelve  32-pounder  iron  bands,  many  of 
my  32-i30unders  being  unbanded  and  therefore  not  reliable.  Please 
when  you  send  guns  to  send  with  them  at  least  100  rounds. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  General. 


April  19, 1863. 

Maj.  [L.  M.]  Shumaker: 

1 will  have  the  matter  of  forage  attended  to.  I hope  you  may  suc- 
ceed in  sinking  those  infernal  gunboats  that  have  shown  no  considera- 
tion for  women  or  children.  If  you  cripple  one  andean  use  the  field 
batteries  against  her  do  so.  I felt  too  ill  from  the  medicine  I took  to 
come  down  this  morning.  Keep  me  advised. 

Yours,  truly, 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  April  19, 1863. 

Major  Shumaker: 

Let  me  know  what  is  the  result  of  the  heavy  cannonade  now  going  on. 
Show  this  to  Colonel  Connally  and  have  him  post  his  regiment  to  repel 


CORfttSt^ONDENCE,  EtC. — CONFEDSRaI’E. 


1001 


any  landing  of  infantry  against  tbe  batteries.  They  had  better  move 
down  near  the  battery  of  Stribling’s.  The  countersign  is  Morgan for 
to-night. 

Yours,  truly, 

S.  G.  FEENOH, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Garnett’s  Brigade, 

Near  Greenville,  N.  C.,  April  10,  18G3. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

General:  I shall  move  with  all  the  haste  i)ossible,  but  no  route  was 
indicated,  and  I have  to  make  inquiries  about  the  best  route,  arrange 
about  rations,  &c.  I am  ignorant  of  the  country  and  where  supplies 
could  be  obtained  if  I left  with  an  insufficient  quantity.  My  supply 
train  was  at  Pactolus  when  I got  your  order,  and  that  could  only  rejoin 
me  late  this  afternoon. 

With  many  kind  wishes  for  your  success, 

1 am,- general,  very  resiiectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

^ E.  B.  GAENETT, 

Brigadier- Geyieral,  Commanding. 


I 


Headquarters,  April  19, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : The  two  guns  from  Powhatan  have  not  yet  arrived.  I am 
expecting  to  hear  of  their  arrival  at  Smithtield  every  hour.  I do  not 
know  if  thej^  had  not  better  be  i)laced  near  Smithfield,  on  the  James,  to 
prevent  transports  i)assing  up,  should  the  enemy  take  a notion  to  send 
troops  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Turn  the  whole  matter  over  in 
your  mind  and  let  me  know  what  you  think  best. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LOXGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commandmg. 


Headquarters,  April  10, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : Your  note  and  inclosure  are  received.  Please  let  me 
know  the  result  of  the  furious  cannonade  now  going  on  as  soon  as  you 
learn.  Have  you  the  regiment  of  infantry  so  placed  as  to  support  the 
batteries  in  time  should  the  enemy  attempt  to  laud  an  infantry  force 
against  them  ? 1 have  ordered  more  ammunition  for  the  large  guns. 

Most  respectfully,  ^ 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 

Please  order  the  gunners  of  Capt.  [H.  L.]  Smoot’s  [Alexandria  Light 
Artillery,  Va.j  to  fire  with  great  deliberation  and  care. 


1002 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  NXX. 


Headquarters,  April  10,  1SG3. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commmiding,  (&c.: 

General:  General  Hood  has  moved  a brigade  down  to  where  the 
battery  was.  It  will  be  better  not  to  move  any  more  troops  in  the 
darkness. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET. 


Try  and  ascertain  as  soon  as  possible  the  circumstances  and  why  the 
IS^orth  Carolina  regiment  was  not  at  the  support  of  the  battery.  Your  ji 
note  is  received.  1 think  that  you  had  better  huriy  down.  Eobertson’s  f 
brigade  is  on  the  way  via  Nordeet’s  house.  General  Hood  can  advise  I 
you  of  the  route  it  took.  , ' 


Headquarters,  April  19,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c.: 


General:  General  Hood  writes  me  that  General  Law  sends  him  I 
word  that  the  enemy  landed  below  the  battery  and  charged  it.  I fear  , 
that  our  infantry  has  not  been  doing  its  duty  x^roperly.  Please  ascer-  ' 
tain  the  facts  in  the  case  and  apply  the  remedy.  If  it  is  true  that  the  ■ 
enemy  is  on  this  side  he  should  be  driven  into  the  river.  General  Hood 
has  ordered  General  Eobertson’s  brigade  down.  If  yoa  need  it  you  had  j 
better  send  Davis’  brigade  also  and  have  the  infantry  so  placed  in  ; 
future  as  to  guard  against  any  such  contingency.  I am  fearful  that 
some  such  attempt  may  be  made  at  the  other  batteries. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  19,  18G3. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : From  present  appearances  we  shall  be  occupied  some  two  weeks 
longer  in  drawing  off  the  s:ipplies  from  the  counties  east  of  the  Chowan. 
If  the  Eichmond  would  pass  the  obstructions  she  would  be  oT  great 
service  by  being  in  position  to  threaten  any  move  that  the  enemy  might 
be  inclined  to  make  toward  my  rear.  If  the  enemy  knew  that  she  was 
outside  of  the  obstructions  he  would  not  venture  within  her  reach.  I 
do  not  desire  that  she  should  move  down  the  river  at  all. 

I am  somewhat  apprehensive  that  if  we  should  prove  to  be  very 
troublesome  here  the  enemy  may  move  a considerable  force  from  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac  in  behind  me.  I have  no  great  dread  of  any  force 
that  may  come  in  my  front,  but  a move  on  my  flank  may  compel  me  to 
retire.  I believe  that  we  are  doing  very  well  in  drawing  in  supplies,  biit 
some  difficulty  exists  in  consequence  of  having  too  many  purchasers  in 
the  field.  The  citizens  at  first  agreed  that  50  cents  was  enough  for 
their  bacon,  but  some  agents  of  the  Commissary-General  have  come  over 
and  are,  I understand,  giving  $1.  So  we  are  obliged  now  to  pay  75 
cents,  and  I supi)ose  that  it  will  advance  to  81  in  a few  days. 

I remain,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAIMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — The  enemy’s  troops  from  the  counties  south  of  this  are  reported 
to  have  tied  to  Eoanoke  Iv'^land. 


CiiAi'.  XXX.  ] 


COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1003 


Petersburo,  Va.j  April  19,  1863. 
ATaj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Comdg.  Department  of  Virginia  : 

General  : I received  your  order  of  the  15th  instant  to  abandon  tiie 
line  of  signals  from  Fort  Powhatan  to  Smithfield,  at  Hog  Island,  on  the 
16th  instant  at  2.30  p.  m.,  and  started  at  once  for  Ivor,  where  I found 
Captain  Small  had  already  preceded  me.  The  work  is  very  heavy  along 
the  line  of  railroad  in  erecting  stations.  Added  to  that,  our  resources 
are  limited,  and  the  line  is  not  as  efficient  as  it  could  be  made  had  we 
glasses.  AVe  ought  to  have  two  glasses  at  each  intermediate  station. 
As  it  is  now  we  have  but  one,  and  hard  work  to  get  them  at  that.  Aly 
reconnaissance  along  the  line  of  James  Eiver  has  been  thorough  and 
complete,  and  I think  the  line  will  be  very  serviceable  wh(m  located  to 
communicate  to  Smithfield  should  we  keep  a force  there.  I return  in 
the  morning  to  Ivor,  and  if  the  line  is  completed  from  there  to  General 
LongstreeCs  headquarters  I will  at  once  proceed  to  again  locate  posts 

on  the  James  Eiver  as  far  as  Boykins^  old (Fort  Boykins),  just 

above  the  mouth  of  Pagan  Creek  and  about  3 miles  from  Smithfield, 
which  can  be  supplied  by  vedette,  the  woods  and  the  character  of  the 
country  generally  precluding  all  possibility  of  running  a line  of  signals 
direct  to  Smithfield  unless  we  had  undisputed  possession  of  the  river 
and  the  creek  (by  James  Eiver  and  Pagan  Creek). 

I find  Hog  Island  a delightful  pasturage  for  1,000  horses,  the  clover 
now  upon  it  being  ankle-deep ; also  herd-grass  and  timothy.  Would 
it  not  be  well  enough  to  jdace  a guard  upon  it  and  put  our  broken-down 
horses  there  to  recuperate  % All  through  Surry,  Isle  of  Wight,  Sussex, 
and  Prince  George  where  I have  been  is  scarce  of  forage  and  high. 

Please  send  me  written  instructions  what  you  desire  me  to  do,  and 
order  me  in  detail  what  you  desire  should  be  done.  The  work  of  cut- 
ting out  is  very  heavy,  and  I would  most  respectfully  suggest  that  some 
company  be  ordered  to  report  to  me  to  act  as  guard  to  exposed  posts 
and  i^ioneers. 

Your  obedient  servant. 


J.  F.  AIILLIGAN, 

Captain.,  Comdg.  I.  8.  C.  {Independent  Signal  Corps  f]. 


Headquarters,  April  20, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General:  Your  note  per  courier  is  received  just  after  daydawn. 
Have  a careful  examination  of  the  enemy  made  and  let  me  know  his 
dispositions  as  soon  as  possible.  I shall  be  prepared  to  re-enforce  you 
if  the  enemy  is  inclined  to  give  battle  below. 

Alost  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 


Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  April  20,  1863. 
ATaj or- General  French,  Commanding,  &e. : 

General  : From  what  Captain  Clarke  says  of  the  creek  on  your  riglit 
it  would  be  mucli  easier  to  make  a ford  there  than  a bridg('..  Please 
have  it  examined  and  attended  to  as  soon  as  possible. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

JAAIES  LONGSTItEET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


1004 


NORtH  CAROLINA  Al^n  8.  fe.  VIRCHNIA. 


ftiHAP. 


Headquarters  Pettigrew’s  Brigade, 

HoolcertoUj  0.,  April  20,  1803 — 12  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

General  : Yours  of  7 o’clock  tliis  morning  is  just  received.  A half 
liour  before  I received  a note  from  General  Daniei,  dated  yesterday,  con-  i 
taining  tbe  same  information.  As  1 hear  notbing  from  him  to-day  I sup-  ( 
pose  the  Yankees  are  not  serious.  I am  20  odd  miles  from  Greenville.  ■] 
If  I am  to  support  Greenville  and  Kinston  it  is  absolutely  necessar^^  that  I 
the  depot  commissaries  at  these  two  points  should  have  enough  to  issue  | 
to  troops  arriving,  tor  in  this  country  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  support  I 
troops  while  they  are  marching.  I have  just  received  a report  that  there  ' 
is  nothing  at  Kinston.  The  weather  is  very  hard  on  troops  on  the  ( 
march,  and  it  is  trying  them  too  hard  to  add  hunger  to  their  other  suf-  i 
feriugs.  I think  that  General  Kobertson  should  be  ordered  to  establish  ‘ 
the  necessary  courier  lines.  There  must  be  maps  of  this  country.  I 
have  some  of  the  north  of  the  Tar  and  south  of  the  Keuse  but  none  be- 
tween. Please  order  your  engineer  to  have  a coi)y  made  and  sent  to  me. 

1 received  your  letter  about  the  Seventeenth  [Korth  Carolina]  some  i 
time  after  it  was  written,  but  I was  unable  to  learn  their  whereabouts  1 
until  I received  your  note  of  this  morning.  Major  Haskell  having 
no  orders  I brought  him  and  one  battery  with  me;,  the  remainder  was  , 
left  behind  with  Generals  Daniel  and  Garnett.  1 have  just  ordered  his 
battery  back  to  General  Daniel. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  PETTIGEEW, 

Brigadier -Genera  1. 


Headquarters, 

Kinston^  A.  (7.,  April  20, 18G3 — 0 a.  m. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 


General:  Your  note  of  yesterday  is  just  received.  I shall  at  once 
set  to  work  to  fortify  Southwest  Creek,  as  I presume  you  mean  that 
stream.  Batchelder’s  Creek  is  only  10  miles  from  Kew  Berne.  The  en- 
emy was  quiet  yesterday.  Now  that  they  find  their  move  on  the  north 
side  was  fruitless  I presume  they  will  be  for  trying  the  old  route.  Mar- 
tin’s regiment  and  Moore’s  battery  arrived  late  yesterday.  Shall  I keep 
them  here?  I suppose  they  can  be  of  as  much  service  here  as  anywhere 
else. 

Yours,  truly, 

R.  RANSOM,  Jr., 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffollc,  Va.,  April  20,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding ^ &c. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  communicate  to  you  the  desire  of  the 
commanding  general  that  you  forward  with  as  little  delay  as  ])ractica- 
ble  a report  of  the  affair  yesterday,  involving  the  capture  of  Stribling’s 
battery. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SORREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1005 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N.  0.,  April  20,  1803. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

t^ecretary  of  War^  Kichmondy  Va.  : 

Sir  : The  circumstiinees  developed  in  the  late  engag’einent  between 
the  monitors  and  batteries  at  Charleston  have  confirmed  me  in  certain 
opinions  treated  in  my  report  on  the  defenses  of  this  place,  especially 
as  regards  Fort  Caswell.  If  you  will  refer  to  that  report  under  the  sec- 
tion treating  of  Fort  Caswell  and  the  lower  harbor  you  will  see  that  I 
strongly  recommend  as  auxiliary  to  Fort  Caswell  the  occu])ation  of 
Smithville  both  by  troops  and  guns  to  prevent,  as  there  urged,  the  es- 
tablishment of  the  enemy  in  the  harbor.  I would  modify  this  only  to 
press  the  point  still  further  by  recommending  a [)owerful  permanent 
l)attery  at  Smithville.  This  I am  constructing,  and  I only  write  to  the 
Department  now  to  endeavor  to  obtain  the  most  powerful  guns  for  it. 
Glancing  at  the  maps  you  will  see  the  range  of  the  proposed  battery  op- 
posite  Battery  Island,  and  that  it  would  cover  the  channel  there  besides 
jnaterially  aidiug  Fort  Caswell  should  the  monitors  endeavor  to  pass 
the  fort  and  take  position  inside  to  act  on  the  reverse  of  our  defenses. 
I should  want  guns  that  would  be  formidable  to  iron-clads  and  which 
could  render  the  anchorage  unsafe  for  them.  These  should  be  Brooke 
guns — rifled  42s  or  8 or  10  inch  columbiads.  In  addition  to  the  position 
at  Smithville  I shall  occupy  with  a battery  (see  maps)  a high  bluff'  at 
the  mouth  of  Price’s  Creek.  This  would  have  a strong  fire  on  the  Nar- 
rows, a difficult  passage  in. the  channel  shown  by  the  shoal  soundings 
on  the  map  ojiposite  Price’s  Creek,  besides  controlling  the  anchorage 
above  Smithville.  Farther  up  the  river,  at  the  point  immediately  above 
Governor’s  Creek,  I would  place  another  battery  for  action  upon  the 
eastern  anchorage.  These  works,  constructed  of  sand,  I am  sure  would 
require  laud  forces  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  reduce  them  and  would 
be  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us  in  the  event  of  a forced  entrance  into 
the  harbor.  The  only  difficulty  will  be  in  procuring  the  guns. 

Eecollect  the  problem  of  obstructions  here  is  one  very  difficult  of  so- 
lution, if  not  impracticable,  and  our  main  reliance  must  be  on  our  bat- 
teries. You  know  we  have  an  armament  here  vastly  less  powerful  than 
that  at  Charleston.  The  place  itself  is  little  less  important  tons;  is 
far  more  so  than  Savannah  or  any  unoccupied  seaport.  I hope  I may  be 
able  to  obtain  at  least  eight  or  ten  more  powerful  guns.  Heretofore  I 
have  been  driving  at  the  strengthening  of  our  outer  works  first.  Those 
are  still  deficient  in  heavy  guns,  but  are  much  stronger  than  they  were. 

The  importance  of  holding  the  outer  harbor  here  is  so  very  great  that 
I must  be  excused  for  continuing  to  press  this  matter.  It  involves  both 
Caswell  and  Fisher,  all  our  importation  of  arms  tiirough  this  place,  as 
well  perhaps  as  the  ])lace  itself,  and  nothing  should  be  left  undone  that 
can  be  done. 

• Yerv  resi)ectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  VVlIlTmG, 

Brigadier -General. 

[Indorsement.] 

It  is  not  possible  to  defend  Wilmington  with  its  present  inadequate 
armament.  I have  reason  to  believe  that  forces  are  being  withdrawn 
from  Charleston  to  support  Foster.  Wilmington  and  the  railroad  will 
be  the  next  Yankee  move. 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major-  General. 


lOOG 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAI*.  XXX. 


Brigade  Headquarters, 
Biascund  Bridge,  Ya.,  April  20,  1S63 — 2.30  p.  m. 

Miij or- General  Elzey,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : My  infantry  and  artillery  have  reached  here  within  this 
hour.  I delayed  to  get  long  forage,  which  is  very  scarce  in  this  sec- 
tion, and  have  effected  much  good  in  assisting  the  citizens  of  Williams- 
burg  in  removing  their  persons  and  effects  from  the  reach  of  the  enemy. 
The  Yankee  rascals  tried  to  throw  the  hospital  on  my  hands  to  embar- 
rass and  pump  me  as  to  my  purpose  of  permanent  occupation.  I de- 
clined to  have  anything  to  do  with  it,  and  thej^  retired  their  superin- 
tendent, nurses,  &c.  I then  gave  it  up  to  the  State  civil  authorities, 
who,  by  my  counsel,  obtained  from  them  ten  days’  provisions  without 
compromising  our  dignity  or  claiming  from  them  any  protection.  I will 
send  to  Governor  Letcher,  through  you,  copies  of  all  the  correspondence 
as  soon  as  I return  to  Chaffin’s  Bluff*.  You  may  assure  the  Governor 
that  the  patients  will  not  suffer,  as  I know  they  will  take  charge  of  the 
asylum  again  now  that  I have  retired.  I could  not  draw  them  out  of 
their  intrenchments.  They  made  no  move,  and  I left  all  quiet,  though 
they  were  in  the  last  two  or  three  days  considerably  re-enforced.  I 
have  picketed  the  cavalry  in  two  lines — an  inner  and  outer  line,  the 
latter  running  across  from  the  Ohickahominy  to  James  Biver  Church, 
below  Centreville ; thence  to  Centreville ; thence  to  the  Six  Mile  Ordi- 
nary, and  to  a fork  in  the  Telegraph  road  below  j thence  to  the  cross- 
roads at  Deneufville’s  store  5 thence  to  Austin’s  store;  thence  to  Albert 
Hankins’,  on  the  York  Eiver  ; the  inner  line  running  from  Bush’s  Mill 
to  Mrs.  Piggott’s  gate ; thence  to  Garrett’s  gate ; thence  to  Eichard- 
son’s  lane,  and  thence  to  Mount  Polly,  on  the  York  Eiver.  Established 
a depot  for  forage  and  Colonel  Shingler’s  headquarters  at  Hickory  Neck 
Academy,  extending  the  quarters  thence  to  Burnt  Ordinary  and  Olive 
Branch  Church. 

Before  I leave  for  Chaffin’s  I will  move  the  cavalry  headquarters  up 
to  Barhamsville  and  draw  in  the  pickets  across  from  Albert  Hankins’, 
on  York  Eiver,  west  bank  of  Scimmino  Creek,  to  Whitaker’s  Mill,  and 
thence  across  to  Bush’s  Mill  and  the  Chickahominy. 

Eodgers’ cavalry  have  scarcely  any  men  besides  couriers  , for  duty, 
from  desertion  to  the  enemy.  They  cannot  be  trusted  for  any  duty, 
and  Doby’s  and  Hawley’s  companies  barely  supply  their  places  in  num- 
ber, and  the  necessity  for  Hawley  here  leaves  the  Chickahominy  with- 
out pickets  on  the  Charles  City  side.  1 beg  you  to  take  the  Holcombe 
Legion  and  Eobertson’s  battalion  away  and  to  restore  to  me  my  old 
regiment  of  cavalry,  which  I raised  and  mustered  (the  Tenth  Virginia 
Cavalry),  with  one  company  (the  James  City  Cavalry,  belonging  to  the 
Fifth  Virginia  Cavalry)  added.  Thus  I could  have  good  men,  familiar 
with  the  paths  of  James  City,  York,  Charles  City,  New  Kent,  and  Hen- 
rico. The  present  strangers  to  our  roads  need  guides  to  eveiy  post. 
I have  saved  the  records  of  York,  Warwick,  and  Elizabeth  City  Coun- 
ties and  forwarded  them  to  you  to  be  handed  over  to  Governor  Letcher 
for  safe-keeping.  It  is  important  I should  know  how  long  I am  to  re- 
main here,  as,  it*  long,  my  men  must  send  for  changes  of  clothing.  I 
await  your  orders,  and  am,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier -General, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COREESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1007 


Headquarters  Brigade, 

Soolcerton,  A^pril  20,  18G3. 

Mnj.  Geu.  H.  H.  Hill: 

! General  : Not  knowing  wliat  to  do  with  Major  Haskell  I ordered 
r him  to  accompany  us.  He  bears  this  himself  to  receive  your  orders. 

! In  addition  to  my  two  batteries,  he  has  another  here  and  you  have 
ordered  Captain  Moore’s.  To  command  this  battalion,  it  would  be  very 
agreeable  to  me  if  yon  would  assign  him  to  me.  In  that  event  Captain 
I McCreery  should  be  assigned  to  other  duty,  as  his  rank  is  inferior  to 
some  of  the  officers  he  commands. 

Would  it  not  be  proper  for  General  Eobertson  to  establish  a line  of 
couriers  between  this  place  and  Kinston 
Very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  PETTIGEEW, 

I Brigadier- Gefieral. 


Charleston  S.  C.,  April  20, 18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill,  GoldshorougJij  W.  C. : 

No  troops  or  iron-clads  have  left  here  to  support  Foster  as  yet. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAEH. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  April  20, 18G3. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston : 

General  : For  the  last  four  weeks  I have  been  around  Washington 
and  New  Berne  with  three  objects  in  view : To  harass  the  Yankees,  to 
get  out  supplies  from  the  low  country,  and  to  make  a diversion  in  your 
favor.  In  the  first  two  objects  we  succeeded  admirably,  whipping  the 
enemy  in  every  skirmish  and  fight.  Washington  was  closely  besieged 
for  sixteen  days,  but  they  succeeded  in  getting  two  supply  boats  into 
town,  furnishing  about  twenty  days’  rations  to  the  garrison.  I then 
abandoned  the  siege. 

1 have  failed  to  get  information  from  New  Berne  for  some  days.  The 
usual  channel  of  communication  is  cut  off,  and  I am  very  much  in  the 
dark  as  to  what  is  going  on . My  last  information  was  that  a brigade  had 
gone  up  from  Morehead  City.  This  must  have  come  from  Charleston. 
1 send  Captain  West  specially  to  you  to  ascertain  whether  any  troops 
have  left  your  point.  1 am  inclined  to  think  that  the  rascals  have  aban- 
doned all  idea  of  attacking  Charleston  and  that  Wilmington  will  be 
their  next  move.  Should  this  be  so  I hope  that  you  will  be  able  to  give 
us  back  our  North  Carolina  troops.  We  have  now  but  four  brigades  in 
the  State.  I have  rejoiced  greatly  at  your  success,  and  trust  that  you 
may  continue  to  enjoy  the  smiles  of  a protecting  God.  Our  hope  must 
be  in  Him. 

Yours,  truly, 

H.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


Headquarters,  April  20,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Comdg.  District  of  North  Carolina^  Goldshorovgh : 

General  : I inclose  you  Major  Kennedy’s  report,  and  also  letter  from 


1008  ' NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX.  L 

Colonel  Griffin,  together  with  communication  from  Lieutenant  Harvie,  | 
whom  I sent  down  to  inspect  the  courier  line.* 

The  conduct  of  Captain  Mchols’  company  on  two  different  occasions 
has  been  disgraceful  in  the  extreme,  and  I must  either  have  authority 
to  api)oint  competent  officers  to  this  and  other  comi^anies  in  Griffin’s  as  j 
well  as  Claiborne’s  regiments,  or  the  companies  requiring  them  must  be  I 
disbanded.  It  is  not  entirely  the  fault  of  the  men,  and  I feel  sure  with  ! 
l)roper  commanders  I would  not  again  be  subjected  to  the  mortification  ; 
and  disgust  occasioned  by  the  misbehavior  and  cowardice  of  these  men,  ' 
who  have  been  taught  nothing  by  their  officers  unless  it  be  to  run  from  : 
tlie  enemy.  The  proceedings  of  boards  of  examination  forwarded  to  I 
Kiehmond  have  never  been  heard  from  and  probably  never  will  be.  In 
such  cases  (I  mean  Avhere  officers  are  found  incompetent  and  inefficient) 
])]ease  inform  me  Avhat  I must  do  when  no  action  is  taken  by  higher  i 
authority. 

jSTichols  has  tendered  his  resignation  and  his  other  officers  are  incom- 
])etent.  Can  I not  appoint  officers  to  this  company?  I should  like  to 
l)ut  Captain  Wright  in  command  of  it  at  once.  Situated  as  I am  I i 
should  be  permitted  to  act  promptly  when  occasion  requires,  and  I ; 
sliould  like  to  be  informed  if  you  will  sustain  me  in  taking  the  steps  ! 
necessary  to  place  these  two  regiments  in  a state  of  efficiency  without 
loss  of  time — without  waiting  to  hear  from  the  Department  at  Richmond. 
In  case  all  the  officers  of  a company  are  worthless  the  power  to  appoint 
is  admitted  ; but  the  action  of  the  Department  is  first  necessary  as  re- 
gards those  reported  incouipetent.  If  nothing  is  ever  heard  from  their 
decision  surely  no  charge  can  be  made  according  ffo  the  requirements 
of  the  law.  I send  the  small  courier  as  requested. 

With  the  mounted  men  of  the  three  disbanded  comjDanies  I am  form- 
ing a eompany  of  couriers  as  arranged.  If  upon  examination  they  do 
not  appear  sufficiently  intelligent  I shall  substitute  it  for  one  of  Clai- 
borne’s more  Suitable  for  such  duty.  Unless  you  object  I shall  relieve 
Captain  Pitt  and  order  Colonel  Griffin  to  take  charge  of*  that  line  as 
heretofoi  e.  It  is  very  important  that  Claiborne’s  whole  regiment  should 
be  disciplined. 

Owing  to  the  scarcity  of  forage  and  the  arrival  of  Pettigrew’s  brigade 
I shall  have  to  move  in  a few  days.  Where  shall  I go  ? As  soon  as  I 
can  straighten  the  command  I now  liaA^e  here,  finish  with  an  examining 
board  now  in  session,  &c.,  I shall  report  to  General  Longstreet,  as  I 
presume  Perebee  is  on  his  way  to  Blackwater,  although  you  did  not 
tell  me. 

Please  answer  at  your  earliest  convenience. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  II.  R0BEET80N, 
Brifjadier-  General^  Commanding  Cavalry. 


AVAR  Derartment,  Engineer  Bureau,  C.  S.  A., 

Eichmond,  Pu.,  AiJril  20,  1803. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  as  suggested  by 
nis  Excellency  the  President,  and  requested  by  you  in  a recent  indorse- 
ment on  a communication  by  the  honorable  Secretary  of  the  Navy,t  re- 


Not  found. 


tOf  April  10,  1863,  p.  976. 


CiiAi-.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.™  CONFEDERATE.  1009 

questiug  that  aa  opening  be  made  in  tbe  James  Kiver  obstriietions  at 
l)revtry’s  Bluff  for  the  passage  of  the  C.  S.  steamer  Eichmond. 

Col.  W H.  Stevens,  chief  of  construction  department  of  Northern 
Virginia,  in  a recent  letter  to  this  Bureau,  after  careful  examination  and 
consideration,  expresses  the  opinion  that  a satisfactory  opening  for  the 
passage  of  vessels  may  be  made  in  ten  days.  While  this  opinion  as  to 
time  seems  rather  too  sanguine,  I think  it  clear,  however,  that  the  un- 
dertaking is  not  one  necessarily  requiring  much  delay  for  its  realization. 

This  opening  can  be  so  arranged  as  to  be  closed  on  short  notice  by 
sinking  a vessel  at  its  lower  extremity  and  kee])ing  ready  at  points  higher 
up  rafts  for  the  same  purpose.  The  barrier,  however,  will  be  neither 
so  perfect  nor  so  safe  after  as  before  the  comi^letion  of  the  oi)ening. 

I do  not  think  it  advisable  to  cut  a canal  through  the  low  grounds  on 
account  of  the  treacherous  nature  of  the  soil.  Such  a canal,  by  the  in- 
fluence of  successive  freshets,  might  enlarge  to  dangerous  dimensions. 

In  conclusion,  considering  the  fact  that  there  are  two  bars  in  James 
Kiver  between  Brewry’s  Bluff*  and  City  Point  over  which  the  Eichmond 
can  pass  only  in  time  of  freshets,  and  further  that  her  machinery  and 
speed  are  so  defective,  I most  respectfully  but  earnestly  represent  that 
it  will  be  judicious  to  make  an  opening  in  the  James  Eiver  obstructions 
only  when  a second  iron  clad  is  on  the  eve  of  completion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  F.  GILMEE, 

Colonel  of  Engmeers  and  Chief  of  Bureau. 


[Indorsement.] 


The  view  in  relation  to  the  propriety  of  waiting  for  an  additional  iron- 
clad vessel  is  concurred  in. 


J.  D. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Viroinia, 

April  21,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond.,  Ya. : 


Sir:  I have  just  received  a letter  from  General  Longstreet,  dated  the 
20th  instant,  stating  that  the  enemy  crossed  below  Hi  IPs  Point  on  the 
evening  of  the  19th  j attacked  and  captured  Stribling’s  battery  at  that 
point  operating  against  the  gunboats.  He  again  expresses  a desire  that 
the  Eichmond  would  only  show  herself  in  the  James  Eiver,  and  thinks 
that  alone  would  strengthen  his  left  by  10,000  men.  I do  not  know  that 
anything  can  be  done  by  the  Navy  and  only  express  his  wishes. 

I am,  with  great  resi)ect,  your  obedient  servant. 


E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters,  Apn'/  21,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding : 

General  : The  commanding  general  desires  to  know  what  arrange- 
ments or  dispositions  you  have  made  for  watching  the  gunboats  or 
other  movements  of  the  enemy  on  the  river.  If  you  have  made  none  he 

64  R R— VOL  XVllI 


1010 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAI*.  XXX. 


wishes  you  to  take  steps  at  once  to  have  them  earefiilly  observed.  Tlit 
last  report  that  we  have  from  the  river  is  that  General  Hood  is  in.  pos-  j 
session  of  the  old  fort. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  i 

G.  MOXLEY  SOKEEL,  : 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  | 


Headquarters,  AxMl  21, 1863. 

Maj.  G.  Moxley  Sorrel, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

Dear  Sir:  I am  in  receipt  of  your  communication  asking  what  ar- 
rangements or  dispositions  I have  made  for  watching  the  gunboats  or 
other  movements  of  the  enemy  on  the  river.  When  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding  placed  the  artillery  under  my  orders  I found  a 
battery  in  Henry’s  work  and  another  at  Hill’s  Point,  and  I placed  the 
two  heavy  guns  in  a work  which  I caused  to  be  erected.  The  general 
is  aware  that  the  guns  at  Hill’s  Point  were  taken  by  the  enemy,  and 
that  Bradford’s  guns  were  ordered  by  General  Hood  to  be  withdrawn 
last  night,  and  that  he  ordered  the  heavy  guns  to  Providence  Church. 
The  only  infantry  force  that  belonged  to  my  command  was  the  Eifty- 
fifth  North  Carolina  Troops,  which  he  ordered  down  there  to  support 
the  batteries,  and  that  has  been  ordered  back  to  its  brigade.  I had  a 
few  shari)shooters  down  on  the  Western  Branch  of  the  Nansemond, 
but  those  I ordered  back,  thinking  it  unnecessary  to  keep  such  a small 
force  on  the  left  of  General  Hood,  whose  line  extends  to  near  by  its 
mouth.  When  the  general  ordered  the  heavy  guns  to  Providence 
Church  I took  it  for  granted  he  designed  them  for  other  service.  Inas- 
much as  the  troops  of  General  Hood  extended  to  Hill’s  Point  I did  not 
think  the  watching  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  devolved  on  me. 
I will  thank  the  general  to  state  what  should  be  the  number  and  char- 
acter of  the  forces  he  wishes  me  to  send  there,  and  if  he  wishes  it  done 
to-night,  and  I will  order  them  at  once.  As  I observed.  General  Hood’s 
forces  extend  to  the  mouth  of  the  Western  Branch  of  the  Nansemond 
Elver. 

Yours,  very  respectfullv, 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  A^gril  21,  1863—11.15  p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding.,  &c.: 

General:  Your  communication  of  this  evening  is  r-eceived  and  will 
be  fully  considered  to-morrow.  Meantime  the  commanding  general 
desires  you  to  make  some  arrangements  to-night  to  keep  at  least  a look- 
out on  tiie  river  to  discover  what  may  be  going  on.  More  extended  and 
systematic  dispositions  may  be  effected  to-morrow. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Imloiserueut.] 

Headquarters  French’s  Command, 

April  22 — 1 a.  m. 

In  accordance  with  the  directions  contained  herein  Brigadier-General 
Jenkins  will  dispatch  a force  of  25  men  to  take  post  near  Eiddick’s 


OIIAI-.XXX. 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1011 


farm,  wlio  will  observe  closely  all  movements  of  tbe  enemy  and  give 
timely  notice  of  the  same.  Two  mounted  men  are  sent  to  act  as  couriers. 
Please  acknowledge  and  return  this  paj)er. 

By  order  of  Major-General  French : 

GEAHAM  DAVES, 

V Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Charleston,  S.  O.,  April  21,  1863. 
Brigadier-General  Whiting,  Wilmington^  N.  G.  : 

Three  thousand  feet  submarine  wire  will  be  sent  you.  By  authority 
Secretary  of  War,  Cooke’s  brigade  will  be  sent  you  in  iilace  of  Evans’. 
Shall  send  Hall’s  regiment  soon.  Please  send  back  Evans’  regiments 
by  the  transportation. 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  April  21,  1863. 
His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  I^orth  Carolina : 

Dear  Sir  : I think  that  infantry  would  be  of  little  service  in  Moore 
County  without  the  co-operation  of  cavalry.  I wish  to  send  25  horse- 
men and  50  infantry.  This  is,  however,  a bad  time  to  weaken  my  force. 
I learn  that  there  are  one  hundred  vessels  now  at  Morehead  City,  and 
that  troops  are  pouring  in  from  Charleston.  The  Charleston  expedition 
is  abandoned,  and  Wilmington  and  the  railroad  are  the  next  object  of 
Yankee  cupidity. 

General  Longstreet  wrote  me  to  ask  you  to  call  out  the  militia.  I do 
not  know  that  any  good  could  result  from  it  except  the  exposure  of  the 
skulkers.  The  men  staying  at  home  now  are  consumers  and  not  pro- 
ducers. They  ought  to  be  kicked  into  the  ranks  by  some  means.  One 
of  your  stirring  appeals  would  do  good.  Your  scathing  rebuke  of  de- 
serters and  skulkers  makes  even  cowards  blush.  I fear  that  the  dis- 
content and  demoralization  of  the  troops  have  been  mainly  caused  by 
unwise  ebullition  of  temper  on  the  part  of  our  local  press.  Would  to 
God  that  our  editors  could  fight  the  common  enemy  and  let  their  pri- 
vate quarrels  lie  over.  If  conquered  by  the  Yankees  our  doom  will  be 
the  most  miserable  known  in  history.  There  is  no  insult  and  no  indig- 
nity which  these  infernal  wretches  will  not  inflict  upon  us.  I earnestly 
hope  that  you  will  call  out  every  able-bodied  man  in  the  State,  but  es- 
pecially that  you  will  issue  a proclamation  in  regard  to  deserters  and 
skulkers. 

Y^ours,  truly, 

D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General, 


Headquarteks, 

Greenville^  N,  0.,  April  21,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding^  &e, : 

General  : The  force  that  came  up  on  the  Washington  road  yester- 
day will  not  exceed  300  or  400  men  and  two  pieces.  The  force  at  the 
cross-roads  evening  before  last  was  represented  as  being  very  large;  a 
large  number  of  ambulances  and  wagons.  They  retired  last  evening. 
1 sent  the  cavalry  down  the  road  to  look  after  them.  I sent  a small 
mounted  force  on  the  roads  to  Swift  Creek.  1 have  not  ^^et  heard  from 


1012 


NORFH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


the  one  tlnit  comes  by  Black  Jaclv  Church  and  into  the  Wasliingtou 
road  at  Tab’s.  Broin  the  n])j)er  road  the  cai)taiii  reports  that  he  saw 
Whittbrd,  who  was  near  the  enemy  as  late,  as  2 o’clock  in  the  morning. 
They  were  then  in  jmssession  of  Swilt  Creek  and  were  cutting  and 
working  a good  deal.  AVhitford  lepresents  this  force  at  4,000.  Should 
they  advance  I will  make  the  main  light  3 miles  from  town,  the  best 
position  this  side  of  the  Swift  Creek  roaib  but  still  much  in  favor  of  the 
enemy.  General  Pettigrew  is  at  Adams’  Bridge.  I will  endeavor  to 
keep  you  advised. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brifiadier- General. 


Headquarters, 

Greenville.,  N.  C.,  April  21,  1863 — 5.30  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew,  Commanding,  drc.: 

General  : There  will  be  no  necessity  of  your  marching  here  to-night. 
I have  not  yet  heard  from  the  force  1 sent  in  the  direction  of  Washing- 
ton, but  they  (the  enemy)  must  still  be  near  Washington,  or  I should 
have  heard  Ifom  them.  My  information  from  Swift  Creek  is  that  they 
still  occupy  it  and  are  at  work  upon  something.  In  regard  to  attack- 
ing them  1 do  not  see  how  we  can  do  so  unless  we  attack  the  force  at 
Swift  Creek,  or  those  at  Washington  should  come  out  again. 

1 will  write  you  again  when  1 get  reports  from  below. 

Very  respectfully. 


JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier- General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Bichmond,  April  22,  1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  8.  C. : 

General  Hill  telegraphs  that  New  Berne  has  been  strongly  re  enforced 
from  Charleston;  that  heavy  force  is  marching  on  Kinston,  and  that  he 
needs  hell).  General  Whiting  contirms  the  transfer  of  troops  and  gun- 
boats to  New  Berne.  Bender  all  the  aid  you  safely  can. 

J.  A.  SEDDON. 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  April  22,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  1).  11.  Hill,  Goldshorough : 

Send  you  Cooke’s  brigade,  althougli  much  needed,  enemy  being  still 
in  force  at  Port  Boyal  and  North  Edisto;  his  six  monitors  in  latter 

G.  T.  BEAUREGABD. 

[Same  to  Brigadier-General  Whiting.] 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  22,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington,  N.  C. : 

Evans  returns  immediately  to  Wilmington.  Soon  as  eneniy’s  fleet 
shall  leave  Port  Boyal  and  North  Edisto  will  send  you  another  brigade 
besides  Cooke’s. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGABD, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


OOiim:SPOKDENOE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1013 


X Charleston,  S.  C.,  Axjril  22,  18G3. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Walker,  Pocotaligo,  8.  C.: 

Cooke’s  brigade  must  return  to  Wilmington  soon  as  possible.  Kegi- 
ment  will  be  sent  you  from  Savannah.  Use  transportation  to  send  on 
Cooke’s  troops.  Answer. 

THOMAS  JOBDAN, 

Ch  ief  of  Staff. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  Aiwll  22,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  TUur,  Riclimonef  Va. : 

Have  already  ordered  Cooke’s  brigade  to  report  to  General  AYliitiiig; 
Evans  to  remain  in  Uortli  Carolina  until  further  orders.  I will  hold 
Clingman’s  ready  to  move  so  soon  as  1 can  ascertain  what  enemy’s 
forces  intend  doing  here. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Adams’  Bridge,  Aiiril  22,  1863 — 6.30  a.  m. 

Major-General  Hill: 

General:  Your  special  courier  has  just  arrived  with  your  dispatch 
of  0.30  p.  m.,  21st  instant. 

. T have  already  sent  a dispatch  to  you  at  Kinston  announcing  that  I 
am  going  to  Hookerton,  there  to  await  orders.  But  I shall  now  iiroceed 
from  that  point  to  Kinston  by  the  direct  road,  whatever  that  may  be. 

' I have  forwarded  your  [)revious  dispatches  to  me  to  General  Daniel, 
so  I suppose  he  knows  what  to  do.  1 have  given  him  no  instructions 
from  myself. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

J.  J.  PETTIGBEW, 

Brigadier- General. 

You  know  I am  ignorant  of  the  topography  around  Kinston.  Please 
have  a guide  and  a map  for  me  if  I am  to  go  into  position. 


Gum  Swamp,  K.  C.,  Ainil  22,  1863. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill;] 

General  : Capt.  fB.j  Lane  has  just  returned  from  the  reconnaissance 
on  which  he  went  early  this  morning.  He  went  to  within  half  a mile 
of  Core  Creek  and  sent  a lieutenant  ([M.J  Lee)  and  3'  men  over  the 
creek,  who  went  half  a mile  beyond  the  creek,  to  the  late  encampment 
of  the  enemy.  It  ai)])ears  like  the  encampment  of  a brigade.  They  left 
this  morning  before  day.  An  old  family  near  that  place  say  there  was 
4,000  or  5,000.  Kothing  has  been  done  lately  to  the  railroad  bridge, 
but  it  can  easily  be  prepared  for  use,  being  only  about  25  feet  long. 
The  track  was  destroyed  by  being  overturned,  the  sills  still  adhering 
to  the  rails,  and  you  will  at  once  see  that  it  can  be  rendered  tit  for  use 
by  simply  turning  the  superstructure  back  to  its  original  position,  which 
can  be  done  rapidly  when  sufficient  force  can  be  brought  to  bear.  The 
enemy  have  righted  up  the  track  for  about  3 miles  this  side  of  the  creek. 
The  track  has  been  upturned  iu  the  manner  described  from  a point 


1014  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

about  miles  beyond  this.  Thence  upward  the  sills  or  cross-ties  have 
been  burned  and  the  iron  bent,  and  it  will  require  time  to  reconstruct 
the  track. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  J.  OLAEKE, 

Colonel  [Twenty -fourth  North  Carolina  Troops]^  Comdg. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Sufolh,  Va.j  April  22,  1803. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  W ar  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  favor  of  the 
ISth.  If  the  enemy  has  abandoned  the  intention  of  reducing  Charleston 
it  would  be  well  to  have  all  the  troops  sent  from  hTortli  Carolina  returned 
as  soon  as  practicable,  and  indeed  some  of  those  comprising  the  regular 
garrisons.  Generals  Clingman’s  and  Evans’  brigades  could  be  iilaced 
at  Wilmington  and  General  Cooke’s  at  Goldsborough. 

We  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  meet  with  a serious  disaster  on  the 
ISth  in  losing  Captain  Stribling’s  battery,  55  of  his  men,  and  70  of 
General  Law’s  brigade.  The  enemy  succeeded  in  making  a complete 
surprise  by  moving  down  the  river  with  one  of  his  gunboats  until  he 
got  nearly  under  the  fire  of  the  battery,  as  though  it  was  the  intention 
to  run  by  the  battery,  then  he  opened  fire  u^Don  our  fort  at  or  upon 
Hill’s  Point  from  gunboats  and  land  batteries  as  though  his  desire  was 
to  draw  our  attention  from  the  gunboat  which  seemed  to  be  trying  to 
get  by  our  battery.  Under  this  fire  and  the  seeming  desire  of  the  boat 
to  pass  the  enemy  landed  probably  200  or  300  men  in  the  vicinity  of 
our  fort  and  captured  it  by  complete  surprise.  I have  not  made  any 
report  of  the  facts  before  this  because  I had  hoped  to  have  General 
French’s  report  of  the  facts  officially.  It  has  been  so  long  delayed, 
however,  that  I have  thought  it  proper  to  mention  this  much  that  you 
may  be  apprised  of  the  facts  so  far  as  they  have  come  to  light.  As 
well  as  I can  judge  at  present  the  misfortune  is  due  to  the  entire  want 
of  vigilance  on  the  part  of  the  troops  in  the  fort.  The  fort  is  on  the 
Nansemond,  just  above  the  mouth  of  AVestern  Branch.  The  70  in- 
fantrymen were,  I understand,  sharpshooters  selected  for  the  service. 
A regiment  (about  700  strong)  had  been  stationed  by  General  French  in 
supiiorting  distance  of  the  battery,  but  no  call  was  made  upon  it  for  aid. 
One  of  our  scouts  just  from  Fort  Monroe  reports  the  enemy  re-enforcing 
him  to  a considerable  extent,  and  that  the  enemy’s  intention  now  is  to 
effect  a surprise  by  landing  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  on  both  sides  of 
the  James  above  us.  His  late  successful  dash  at  our  battery  and  the 
limited  time  for  which  he  holds  many  of  his  soldiers  may  induce  him  to 
attempt  some  extraordinary  movements.  Please  keep  me  advised  of 
any  important  information  that  you  may  receive. 

I remain,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- General.,  Commanding . 

Since  writing  this  letter  I have  received  dispatches  from  Generals 
Hill  and  Whiting  reporting  the  arrival  at  Beaufort,  N.  G.,  of  the  enemy’s 
forces  and  fleet  from  Charleston.  I hope  that  General  Beauregard  may 
be  ordered  to  re  enforce  General  Hill  sufficiently  to  enable  him  to  resist 


OiiAp.:5tXX.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1015 


the  advance  of  the  enemy  in  [N’orth  Carolina.  I do  not  apprehend  any 
immediate  move  against  Wilmington,  but  the  enemy  may  attempt  to 
break  up  our  line  of  railroad. 

Most  respectfully,  L. 

[Indorsements.  ] 

April  25,  1863. 

Eespectfully  submitted  to  the  President  for  information. 

General  Beauregard  is  returning  tlie  troops  sent  from  ^Nortli  Carolina. 
In  presence  of  General  HilFs  force  I do  not  ai)prehend  any  serious  move- 
ment of  the  enemy  toward  our  railroad.  Tliey  will  probably  be  content 
to  hold  their  fortified  places. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary. 

April  30, 1863. 

Eespectfully  returned  by  the  President  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of 
War. 

G.  W.  C.  LEE, 
Colonel  and  Aide-de-Gamp. 


Near  Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  22, 1863. 
(Eeceived  at  Eichmond,  Ya.,  April  23,  1863.) 

Secretary  of  War: 

Dispatches  from  Generals  Hill  and  Whiting  report  the  expedition 
against  Charleston  abandoned  by  the  enemy  and  that  the  army  and  the 
fieet  have  arrived  at  Beaufort,  N.  C.  May  I ask  that  General  Beauregard 
be  ordered  to  return  to  North  Carolina  the  troops  that  came  from  there 
last  winter?  Please  acknowledge  receipt  of  this. 

Eespectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters  Frenches  Division, 

April  22,  1863. 

Maj.  G.  Moxley  Sorrel, 

Adjutant- General,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina  and  Virginia  : 

Major  : In  accordance  with  instructions  from  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  a detachment  from  one  of  the  companies  of  the  Fifty-fifth 
North  Carolina  Troops  was  sent  last  night  to  do  picket  duty  near  Hill’s 
Point.  It  is  respectfully  suggested  that  these  men  be  relieved,  inasmuch 
as  they  went  off  hurriedly  late  at  night  and  took  mo  rations. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 

• Major- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  April  22, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General:  I have  notified  General  Hood  of  the  detachment  of  the 
Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  Troops  doing  duty  on  the  river  and  asked 
him  to  relieve  it. 

Yery  respectfully,  yours, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


1016 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AnL  S.  L.  VtRGtNtA. 


[CIIA1\  XXX. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond^  Fa.,  A]^ril  22,  1863. 
Maj.  Geih  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshofongh,  ]^.  C.-: 

I Lave  telegraphed  General  Beauregard  to  send  yon  all  the  aid  he 
can  safely  spare.  We  can  spare  none  here  or  at  Petersburg.  Yon  have 
doubtless  informed  General  Longstreet. 

J.  A.  SP]DD01^, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters, 

JSfear  Sufolk,  Va.,  April  22,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding.,  dc.: 

General:  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  21st  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  directs  me  to  say  that  he  desires  to  know  what  sharp- 
shooters you  had  on  the  Western  Branch  which  you  ordered  in,  inas- 
much as  you  state  that  you  had  no  infantry  other  than  the  Fifty- 
fifth  North  Carolina  in  your  command.  He  ordered  the  heavy  guns 
back  to  Providence  Cliurch  during  the  occupation  of  the  left  bank  of 
the  river  by  the  enemy,  and  while  the  men  of  that  battery  were  occu- 
pied in  bringing  off  the  ammunition  that  had  been  left  behind  in  their 
hasty  withdrawal  from  their  position  on  the  river.  The  battery  at  Fort 
Henry  was  withdrawn  during  the  night  of  the  20th  to  prevent  a chance 
of  a surprise.  The  enemy  retired  from  this  side  of  the  river  yesterday, 
and  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  expects  that  you  will  resume 
the  resjmusibilities  of  the  river  batteries  and  their  protection,  if  it  is 
agreeable  to  you;  otherwise  he  expects  you  to  advise  him  that  he  may 
make  otlier  arrangements. 

Tlie  commanding  general  is  somewhat  sur^irised  at  your  idea  of  the 
heavy  guns  being  intended  for  other  service  because  they  were  ordered 
to  Providence  Church,  inasmuch  as  there  was  no  ammunition  for  either 
of  the  gu ns  when  tliey  were  ordered  back.  In  assigning  to  you  the  charge 
of  the  artillery,  and  particularly  the  river  defenses,  the  commanding 
general  had  every  confidence  in  your  ability  to  select  positions  for  bat- 
teries and  to  assign  proper  infantry  supports  for  their  protection.  He 
has  not  given  himself  any  anxiety  upon  the  subject  further  than  to  in- 
sist upon  your  taking  to  the  support  of  the  batteries  the  whole  of  the 
Fifty-fifth  North  Carolina  Begiment  instead  of  only  the  three  com])anies 
pro])Osed  by  you.  In  your  note  of  the  evening  of  the  19th  you  reported 
to  the  commanding  general  that  you  had  three  companies  of  this  regi- 
ment in  the  old  fort.  This  seems  to  have  been  a mistake.  The  com- 
manding general  expects  you  to  make  such  arrangements  as  you  deem 
necessary  to  secure  the  river  from  another  surprise,  and  to  have  such 
batteries  placed  upon  it  as  may  be  required  to  prevent  the  passage  of 
gunboats.  He  will  be  glad  to  offer  suggestions  upon  any  particular 
points  on  which  you  may  have  doubts. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  vour  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOKBEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters,  Aiwil  22,  1863. 

Maj.  G.  Moxley  Sorrel, 

A ssistant  Adjiitant-General : 

Dear  Sir:  I am  lii  receipt  of  your  letter  of  this  morning.  The 
sharpshooters  referred  to  were  25  men  detailed  from  General  Jenkins’ 


CiiAi*.  :^xx.  I 


CORnESPON] )ENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


101? 


brigade.  By  tbe  general  commanding  placing  tbe  artillery  under  my 
charge  I cannot  admit  that  I was  charged  particularly  with  the  river 
defenses.  That  embraces  what  was  being  performed  by  other  troops 
than  mine.  In  answer  to  the  generaPs  kind  inquiry  if  it  will  be  agree- 
able to  me  to  resume  the  responsibilities  of  the  river  batteries  and 
their  i)rotection,  I reply  it  will  not  be.  General  J.  B.  Hood’s  command 
on  the  left  extends  far  down  the  river  to  Hill’s  Point,  and  as  the  work- 
ing parties,  tools,  and  the  main  protection  must  come  from  him,  while 
my  command  is  about  9 miles  distant,  there  will  be  a want  of  unity  of 
action.  If  the  brigades  of  Generals  Jenkins  and  Havis  were  on  the  left 
I would  take  charge  of  the  batteries  with  pleasure  and  the  defense  of 
the  river. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 

M ajor- General^  Gommandinff. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  April  22,  1803. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Fredericlcshurg^  Va. : 

General  Hill  telegraphs  that  large  re-enforcements  have  been  brought 
by  the  enemy  from  Charleston  to  New  Berne,-  that  they  are  marching 
in  force  on  Kinston,  and  that  he  needs  help.  I have  telegrai)hed  Gen- 
eral Beauregard  to  send  all  he  can  safely  spare. 

Reliable  information  is  just  received  that  on  Sunday  night  last  eleven 
large  transports  with  troops  landed  at  Yorktown,  each  believed  to  con- 
tain not  less  than  750  men.  A good  deal  of  field  artillery  also  landed 
at  Yorktown.  Seventeen  large  transports  likewise  passed  the  York 
River  on  the  way  to  Fortress  Monroe  or  Norfolk. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  23,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whitino,  Wilmington,  A.  G. : 

Cannot  now  spare  heavy  guns  from  here.  Six  monitors  are  still  in 
North  Edisto.  Savannah  also  loudly  calls  for  some  heavy  guns. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  April  23,  1863 — 9.30  p.  m. 

James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Am  informed  four  heavy  Whitworth  guns  have  arrived  at  Wilming- 
ton on  Merrimac.  Cannot  two  be  sent  here?  They  are  much  needed. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Gharleston,  S.  G..  April  23,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Gommanding,  &c.,  Goldshorougli,  A.  G. : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  20th  instant,  through  Captain  West, 
has  been  received.  I thank  you  for  your  timely  move  on  Washington, 
and  regret  much  the  circumstances  which  prevented  the  capture  of  Fos- 
ter’s forces.  I hope  you  will  still  be  able  to  do  so  before  long. 


1018 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


I am  not  yet  able  to  tell  .precisely  what  has  becpme  of  all  Hunter’s 
forces  in  my  front,  but  it  is  probable  a part  has  been  sent  to  re-enforce 
Foster.  I have  in  consequence  ordered  Cooke’s  brigade  to  report  at 
once  to  Whiting  and  General  Evans’  brigade  to  remain  in  North  Caro- 
lina until  further  orders.  Clingman’s  will  be  sent  also  as  soon  as  it  may 
be  absolutely  required  and  I can  ascertain  more  positively  that  Hunter 
has  weakened  himself  too  much  to  be  dangerous  to  this  place  or  Savan- 
nali.  You  may  rely  that  I will  afford  you  and  Whiting  all  the  assistance 
in  my  power,  for  the  enemy  must  not  be  allowed  any  success  within  the 
reach  of  our  available  forces. 

Wishing  you  ample  good  luck,  I remain,  yours,  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General^  Commanding,  . { 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  Southern  Virginia, 

' April  23,  18G3. 


General  M.  Jenkins,  Commanding^  &c.: 


General  : I shall  assume  the  immediate  command  of  the  division 
composed  of  your  brigade  and  that  of  General  Davis.  Will  you  please 
let  your  assistant  adjutant-general  give  to  Major  Daves,  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, the  names  of  the  regiments  nowon  picket  duty?  The 
details  will  hereafter  be  made  by  Major  Daves.  My  chief  commissary 
could  not  leave  Petersburg,  and  the  same  commissary  will  have  to  act 
for  the  command.  Maj.  [John  B.]  Morey,  chief  quartermaster,  will  take 
prompt  measures  to  forward  all  necessary  supplies. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

S.  G.  FEENCH, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

April  23,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Commanding^  cfrc.,  Petersburg^  Ya.  : 


General  : There  is  great  need  of  more  cavalry  in  this  army.  Our 
cavalry  has  been  reduced  bj^  hard  and  long  service,  and  the  enemy’s 
recently  has  been  very  much  increased.  They  have  drawn  from  Mary- 
land the  cavalry  which  has  been  serving  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Potomac, 
in  the  interior,  and  the  counties  on  the  Eastern  Shore,  in  addition  to  the 
re-enforcements  they  have  received  from  the  North.  They  now  have 
six  brigades,  formed  into  three  divisions,  composing  a corps,  under  Gen- 
eral Stoneman,  and  in  recent  operations  on  the  Eappahannock  General 
Stuart  reports  that  they  ride  over  him  by  sheer  force  of  numbers.  It 
therefore  has  become  necessary  to  strengthen  that  arm  of  the  service, 
and  1 desire  to  know  whether  there  is  not  more  cavalry  in  North  Caro- 
lina than  you  require.  There  are  two  North  Carolina  regiments  of  cav- 
alry in  this  armj^,  and  if  I could  get  three  more  I could  form  a North 
Carolina  brigade.  Can  you  spare  three  regiments  or  a brigade,  or  \vhat 
can  you'*'spare  ? Please  let  me  know  at  your  earliest  convenience,  or 
order  such  regiments  forward  as  you  can  spare. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1019 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh^  N.  (7.,  April  23,  18G3. 


Maj.  Geu.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  Goldshorough,  N.  C. : 

General  : Years  of  yesterday  is  just  received.  lu  view  of  the  alarm- 
ing; inforjiiatioii  it  conveys  of  this  probable  invasion  of  tlie  State,  I will 
not  press  for  tlie  troops  to  be  sent  to  Moore  County  at  present.  I will 
at  once  issue  an  appeal  to  the  people  to  send  in  the  deserters  and  ab- 
sentees and  do  everything  I can  to  bring  np  every  man  to  his  post.  I 
do  not  think,  general,  that  the  militia  ought  to  be  called  out,  for  various 
reasons:  Their  help  would  be  little,  their  consumption  of  rations  great, 
and  beyond  any  sort  of  doubt  their  removal  now  from  their  crops  would 
1)0  followed  by  the  most  disastrous  consequences.  If  you  think  it  neces- 
sary when  the  enemy^s  movement  is  fully  developed  I will  call  out  the 
militia  officers,  of  whom  there  are  some  2,000  or  3,000,  which  will  be  a 
larger  number,  I fear,  than  we  can  arm  and  make  available.  I can  bring 
them  to  Ealeigh  at  once  by  an  order.  I earnestly  hope,  however,  that 
such  a thing  will  not  be  necessary.  In  accordance  with  a previous 
request,  I have  addressed  a note  to  the  city  editors,  urging  them  to 
avoid  exciting  any  panic  among  the  people  and  to  be  cautious  not  to 
speak  of  the  movements  of  troops,  &c. 

Very  respectfully, 

Z.  B.  YANCE. 


Brigade  Headquarters, 
Chaffin’s  Farm,  Va.,  April  23,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : Yesterday  morning  I issued  all  the  necessary  orders,  as 
you  instructed  me,  and  moved  back  all  the  forces  which  I took  down 
from  this  place.  They  will  reach  here  this  morning,  or  some  time  to- 
day, as  the  weather  permits.  We  left  all  quiet,  the  enemy  making  no 
demonstration,  and  still  re-enforcing  and  fortifying  at  Fort  Magruder. 
I placed  the  headquarters  of  the  cavalry  at  Barhamsville,  as  better  for 
them  in  all  respects  than  Diascund,  having  shorter  transportation  of 
forage  and  a closer  eye  on  the  Pamunkey  and  York  Eivers.  I ordered 
Hawley’s  company  back  to  its  position  on  the  Lower  Ghickahominy, 
below  Diascund  Creek.  The  pickets  are  arranged  in  inner  and  outer 
lilies,  with  infantry  scouts  all  in  and  about  Williamsburg. 

And  now,  general,  again  I urgently  appeal  to  you  to  send  to  the  Fifty- 
ninth  and  Forty-sixth  Eegiments  their  companies,  detailed  for  iiolice  duty 
at  Richmond.  The  two  of  the  Fifty-ninth  and  five  of  the  Forty-sixth  are 
absolutely  required  on  the  Peninsula,  if  we  are  to  protect  the  iieoplein 
making  crops  this  year.  They  are  near  Richmond,  and  produce  there 
is  most  convenient  to  the  city.  We  can  maintain  no  forces  down  below 
without  making  there  something  to  eat,  and  that  object  is  more  im- 
portant than  the  police  of  Richmond.  Will  the  city  battalion  never  be 
organized  ? 

I am  confident  that  if  the  iron-clad  boat  (the  Richmond)  was  sent  down 
the  river  it  would  yet  make  General  Longstreet’s  attempt  a success. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  truly, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brj go  dier- Gen  era  I, 


1020  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [OriAr.XXX 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  99.  j liichmond^  Fa.,  April  23,  18G3.  i 

* * # # * * * ■ 
XXII.  The  defenses  at  Ilrewry’s  Bluff  and  Mancliester  will  be  in-ji 
chided  in  the  I)e])artnient  of  Richmond,  under  the  command  of  Alajor  ! 
General  Elzey. 

# * * * * # * , 
By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Tranter’s  Bridge,  X.  0., 

April  24,  18C3 — 3 p.  m.  ’ 

General:  Grey  Ligget  is  near  Washington.  I will  send  for  him 
forthwith.  Forty  men  will  be  sent  with  Captain  Graham’s  battery  as 
directed.  Colonel  Griffin’s  pickets  are  in  that  direction.  I can  rely,  how- 
ever, on  my  own  men.  Gapts.  [J.  B.]  Cherry  and  [William]  Sharp,  whom 
I sent  to  the  vicinity  of  Plymouth,  are  in.  They  report,  on  what  they 
regard  as  reliable  authority,  that  there  are  5,000  Yankees  in  Plymoutli 
and  expecting  an  attack  from  us.  They  are  fortifying  the  place.  The 
force  in  Washington  two  days  since  numbered  8,000;  they  were  the  same 
that  came  up  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  Two  thousand  of  them  re- 
turned yesterdays  for  New  Berne  with  wagons  on  the  transports.  This 
information  is  from  Mr.  J.  Randall,  just  from  W.  But  why  the  wagons 
on  transports  "I  I inclose  you  General  Potter’s  order,  which  please  for- 
ward to  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill.  A large  number  of  persons  in  consequence 
of  this  order  have  left  town  and  are  now  on  the  hill  near  Mrs.  Ellerdee 
with  their  effects,  and  suffering  greatljL  Would  it  not  be  wsell  to  send  a 
flag  of  truce,  protest  against  the  rascally  conduct,  and  ask  leave  to  remove 
t he  suffering  women  and  children?  I learn  they  are  in  great  distress.  I 
can  rebuild  the  Tranter’s  Creek  Bridge  if  you  wish  it,  and  will  furnish 
transportation  for  the  plank,  which  are  5 miles  off.  I would  be  glad  to 
learn  your  wish  on  the  subject.  I send,  as  you  requested,  the  names  of 
the  men  who  captured  the  deserter  for  you:  Corpl.  W.  A.  Allen,  Alfred 
Redfern,  Stephen  Myers,  John  Edwards,  E.  R.  Simons,  and  W.  H. 
Boggan. 

I am,  general,  most  truly,  vour  obedient  servant, 

I).  D.  FEREBEE, 

Colonel  Fifty-ninth  North  Carolina  Troops. 


. Headquarters,  April  24,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding^  &c.: 

General:  I hoi)e  that  you  will  try  and  have  the  battery  at  the  right 
fixed  to  night,  if  possible,  and  the  bridge  across  the  run  at  your  right 
Hank  fixed  to-morrow,  if  it  is  not  already  done.  It  is  important  that 
these  things  should  be  attended  to  promptly.  Have  jmur  artillery  har- 
nessed ami  hitched  by  daylight  in  the  morning.  The  battery  on  the 
railroad  should  be  arranged  at  once,  else  the  enemy  may  move  out  ami 
erect  a battery  that  would  sweep  along  the  railroad  embankment. 

Most  respectfully, 


JAMES  LOXGSTREET, 

L I eiitena nt-  G enera ?,  Com m a ndin g. 


Caution  your  front  line  to  be  particularly  on  the  alert  in  the  morning. 


Chap.  XXX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1021 


Headquarters,  Aiwil  24,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 
Miij.  Geii.  S.  G.  4'RENCri,  Commanding  Division: 

General:  The  commanding  general  directs  that  you  have  the  bat- 
teries on  your  line  hitched  ui)  at  once. 

A^eiy  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

General  Pickett  reports  that  the  enemy  have  opened  heavily  on  his 
front  with  artillery,  with  strong  infantry  support. 


Headquarters,  April  24, 1863 — 5 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding  Division:  • 

General:  The  commanding  general  directs  that  you  get  your  troops 
under  arms  as  soon  as  you  can. 

Very  respectfully, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Pickett’s  Headquarters, 

April  24,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding.,  &e. : 

General  : The  effort  of  the  enemy  this  evening  proves  to  have  been 
nothing  more  than  a strong  reconnaissance.  It  is  all  over  now  and  your 
troops  jnay  return  to  their  bivouacs.  The  commanding  general  directs 
you  to  have  everything  ready  early  in  the  morning  and  your  batteries 
hitched  up. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

G.  MOXLEY  SORREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

The  commanding  general  desires  you  to  order  Bradford’s  battery  to 
report  to  Major  Hearing  at  General  Law’s  headquarters  early  to-morrow 
morning. 


Charleston,  S.  O.,  April  25,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  \1\1A.,  Kinston,  N.  C. : 

Scouts  are  mistaken.  Five  monitors  are  in  Edisto  and  one  at  Port 
Royal.  Only  one  supposed  gone  Xorth  disabled.  Some  troops  are  still 
on  Folly  Island,  Edisto,  and  Port  Royal.  Probably  some  gone  to  North 
Carolina. 

G.  T.  BEAUREGARD. 


Headquarters,  April  25,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  the.  ; 

General  : Capt.  [Thomas  J.]  Goree  thinks  that  he  saw  distinctly 
new  works  about  600  yards  in  rear  of  the  old  line  of  works  and  near  the 


1022 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E,  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XXX 


tents.  Did  your  examination  extend  as  far  back  as  this  ? If  yon  have 
time  you  had  better  have  a minute  examination  made  to-night  and  let 
us  know. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding, 


IlEADQUARTERS  DISTRICT  OF  THE  OAPE  EeAR, 

Wilmington,  N.  C,,  April  25,  1803.  ; 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding,  &e.,  Goldsl)orough : 

General  : Yours  of  the  23d  received.  General  Cooke  and  his  troo])s 
are  arriving,  but  General  Beauregard  has  received  General  Evans  in  I 
his  stead,  so  I have  only  made  an  exchange,  but  am  a gainer  by  the  ' 
swap.  Beauregard  says  the  enemy  are  still  in  force  in  his  front,  but 
that  the  moment  I am  menaced  he  will  aid  me.  I do  not  think  a land 
attack  can  be  made  upon  me  here  with  you  in  position  at  Kinston.  I 
should  of  course  require  more  troops  than  I have  now,  but  should  ex-  j 
pect  them  from  Beauregard.  In  the  mean  time  we  are  daily  growing  , 


stronger  as  against  a sea  attack. 


The  Merrimac,  Charleston,  Margaret,  and  Jessie  all  came  in  day 
before  yesterday.  We  had  quite  a spirited  engagement  over  the  two 
former.  As  you  expected,  my  30-pounder  Parrott  burst  in  the  engage- 
ment. The  Merrimac  brings  me  three  splendid  Blakely  guns,  8-inch 
rifled  130  pounders.  Two  of  them  are  for  this  place,  one  gone  to  Mis- 
sissippi. I shall  place  one  at  Caswell  and  one  at  Fisher.  I have  three 
10-inch  columbiads  at  Caswell. 

I wrote  you  about  torpedoes.  I have  only  a few  here,  hardly  enough 
for  the  obstructions.  You  had  better  apply  to  Bains,  chief  of  Conscript 
Bureau.  I think  there  are  any  number  of  them  in  Bichmond. 

Inclosed  please  find  a letter  from  my  scout,*  which  may  give  you  some 
intelligence. 

As  to  telegraph,  use  the  cipher  for  important  words.  I have  both 
the  War  Department  cipher  and  Beauregard^s. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  n.  C.  WHITING, 

Brigadier- General. 


Kinston,  N.  C.,  Axjril  26, 18G3. 
Maj.  J.  N.  Whitford,  Swift  Greelc  Village: 

Dear  Sir  : I learn  that  my  scout  Kinsly  has  lost  the  confidence  of 
the  Yankees  and  that  George  Smith  is  suspected.  It  seems,  then,  a dif- 
ficult task  to  put  Foster  on  a wrong  scent  again.  B.  and  C.  tell  me  that 
our  deserters  are  also  suspected,  and  that  the  last  two  sent  down  are 
in  irons.  I wish,  therefore,  to  arrange  a plan  with. you  for  chasing  the 
deserters  and  firing  upon  them  until  you  run  them  into  their  lines. 
This  would  relieve  all  suspicions  and  enable  me  to  stuff  Foster  to  my 
heart’s  content.  Come  up  to-morrow  or  next  day  and  we  will  arrange 
the  plan. 

I was  at  Core  Creek,  on  the  Dover  road,  on  Friday.  The  mills  are  not 
destroyed  as  rei)orted.  I wish  you  to  have  the  scouts  arrested  who 


Not  found, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1023 


gave  the  false  report.  We  must  have  true  information,  and  the  care- 
less and  sensational  scout  deserves  punishment.  General  Eansom  is  un- 
well and  may  be  detained  here  four  or  five  days,  but  I would  prefer  you 
to  come  to-morrow.  I think  that  you  can  break  up  the  negro  nest  ou 
Goose  Greek  Island.  I will  draw  Foster  ofi  towards  Plymouth  while 
you  are  operating  there. 

The  Big  Pine  tories  must  be  cut  off,  but  I fear  a fight  with  them  lest 
you  kill  some  of  my  spies  among  them.  Could  you  not  manage  through 
Smith  to  give  them  notice  in  a quiet  way  to  get  off  somewhere.  You 
can’t  be  too  cautious  in  this  matter.  Suspicion  might  be  excited  and  the 
whole  thing  prove  a failure. 

Send  F.  Kiggs  down  to-morrow,  and  let  me  have  a full  report  from 
that  section  by  the  1st  of  May  at  furthest. 

I cannot  too  emphatically  caution  you  that  your  men  must  not  trust 
to  the  report  of  others,  but  must  see  with  their  own  eyes  everything 
they  report. 

'The  accounts  of  the  Yankee  treatment  of  Spinola  amuse  me  very 
much.  He  made  his  escape  in  good  time,  however,  and  deserves  credit 
for  his  foot-race  if  not  for  his  fight. 

If  you  cannot  come  up  to-morrow  send  up  Lieutenant  Barrington  or 
Lieutenant  Whitford,  now  I believe  a captain. 

The  note  of  mine  found  at  Hill’s  Point  was  not  important,  at  least  I 
think  not. 

Kespectfully, 


H.  H.  HILL, 


Major-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffolk^  Fa.,  Ayril  2(3,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding  Department  of  Biclmond,  Va. : 

General  : The  commanding  general  desires  you  to  cause  the  wharves 
and  landing  places  on  your  side  of  the  river  wherever  the  enemy  might 
effect  a landing  to  be  burnt  or  otherwise  destroyed.  Please  direct  their 
destruction  to  be  thorough  and  complete. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 


Kavy  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  April  27,  1803. 


Sir  : Your  letter  of  the  25th  instant,  inclosing  a letter  from  General 
Whiting,  has  been  r(^ceived,  and  in  reply  I inclose  iierewith  copy  of  my 
letter  to  General  Whiting  on  the  subject  to  which  he  refers  in  his  letter 
to  you. 

General  Whiting’s  letter  is  herewith  returned. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


S.  E.  MALLOEY, 
Seeretary  of  the  Navy. 


1024 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIA1>.  XXX. 


[luclosiires.] 

Navy  Department,  C.  8.  A., 

UiclimoiKh  April  25,  1853. 

Brig-.  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  C.  S.  A., 

Commander-in- Chief  ^ Wilmington^  N.  C. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  21st  instant  has  been  received.  Know- 
ing your  want  of  heavy  guns  I would  have  sent  you  the  BaleigKs  bat- 
tery before  had  it  been  ready.  But  two  of  the  guns  designed  for  her 
are  anywhere  near  ready.  They  will  be  sent  with  ammunition  and 
equipments  in  a few  days.  They  are  two  11,000  pound  double-banded- 
Brooke  6.4  guns,  whose  penetration,  as  shown  by  our  iron  targets,  equal 
that  of  the  7-inch.  Their  bolts  weigh  90  pounds. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  E.  MALLORY, 
Secretary  of  the  Kavy. 

Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  April  21,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond: 

Sir  : Please  to  ask  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  if  he  will  lend  me  the 
armament  of  the  Raleigh,  especially  the  Brooke  rifles,  until  she  is  ready 
to  use  them.  She  will  not  be  ready  for  at  least  three  months,  and  during 
that  time  I may  be  attacked  and  those  guns  would  be  of  incalculable 
service  in  the  defense. 

Very  resiiectfully, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Brigadier-  Ge^ieral. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

April  27,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : I received  last  night  a dispatch  from  Maj.  [William]  Nor- 
ris, chief  of  signal  corps  in  Richmond,  stating  that  a special  scout  to 
AVashington  City  had  returned  Saturday  night.  After  giving  the 
strength  of  General  Hooker’s  army,  which  he  had  put  down  very  heavy 
(between  150,000  and  160,000),  and  that  he  had  been  re-enforced  from 
Baltimore,  Washington,  Alexandria,  and  Harper’s  Ferry,  he  says  that 
10,000  or  12,000  men  had  been  sent  to  Suffolk  which  were  not  taken 
from  Hooker’s  army.  Although  I think  his  statement  very  much  ex- 
aggerated, yet  all  accounts  agree  that  Hooker  has  been  re-enforced,  and 
that  tr  oops  from  the  rear  have  been  brought  forward  to  the  Rappahan- 
nock. Tliis  looks  as  if  lie  intended  to  make  an  aggressive  movement, 
but  by  what  route  I cannot  ascertain. 

A dispatch  from  Stuart,  of  the  26th,  received  last  night,  states  that 
Stoneman  is  in  force  in  the  neighborhood  of  Whirrenton  ; that  a brigade 
of  infantry  is  guarding  the  Raxipahannock  Bridge  and  the  fords  each 
side;  that  the  trains  are  running  regularly  on  the  Orange  and  Alex- 
andria Railroad  to  Bealeton,  but  that  he  does  not  learn  thej"  bring  up 
any  troops. 

I am  glad  to  learn  by  your  letter  received  yesterday  by  special  cou- 
rier that  you  are  getting  everything  out  of  North  Carolina  as  rapidly 
as  x)ossible.  Can  you  give  me  any  idea  when  your  oiieratious  will  he 


Chap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE.  1025 

completed  and  whether  any  of  the  troops  you  have  in  North  Carolina 
can  be  spared  from  there?  As  regards  your  aggressive  movement 
upon  Suffi)lk,  you  must  act  according  to  your  good  judgment.  If  a 
damaging  blow  could  be  struck  there  or  elsewhere  of  course  it  would 
be  advantageous ; but  if  the  place  was  taken  I doubt  whether  we  could 
spare  a garrison  to  hold  it,  .and  storming  of  his  works  might  cost  us 
very  dear. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

> General. 

P.  S. — Is  not  the  Eighth  Corps,  which  you  mention  in  your  front, 
Keyes’,  from  Yorktown  ? 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffolk^  Fu.,  April  27,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : If  the  reports  of  officers  of  the  quartermaster’s  and  subsistence 
departments  are  to  be  relied  upon,  it  will  require  a mouth  to  haul  out 
the  supplies  of  this  portion  of  the  country.  If  it  is  desirable  that  we 
should  remain  for  that  purpose  the  Richmond  would  be  of  great  assist- 
ance to  us ; it  would  at  least  secure  Richmond  City  against  any  sudden 
move  of  the  enemy  and  protect  my  left.  Unless  a part  of  this  force  is 
necessary  on  the  Rappahannock  it  would  probably  be  well  for  us  to 
hold  our  line  as  it  now  is  instead  of  giving  up  the  country  back  to  the 
Blackwater  again.  I learned  yesterday  that  there  are  a number  of  guns 
in  the  old  river  forts  that  were  abandoned  by  us  when. this  country  was 
given  up.  I have  sent  Captain  Clarke  (engineers)  down  to  examine  the 
old  works  and  guns  and  report  their  condition.  I i)resume  that  many 
of  these  guns  may  be  made  useful  if  we  can  have  carriages  made  for 
them. 

I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  seryant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- Generalj  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  April  27,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 

Lieutenant-General  Longstreet,  • 

Commanding j (&c. : 

General  : I started  this  morning  at  8 a.  m.,  and,  with  Generals  Jen- 
kins and  Davis,  have  walked  the  margin  of  Spikes’  Run  from  where  the 
right  of  my  line  strikes  the  run  to  where  General  Garnett  is  defending 
the  ford,  on  the  old  Somerton  road.  The  distance  is  over  three-quar- 
ters of  a mile,  and  the  ran,  while  it  is  an  obstacle,  is  no  barrier  to  in- 
fantry. It  can  be  crossed  at  any  point  throughout  its  length  between 
those  points  by  infantry.  There  are  several  log  crossings  in  the  inter- 
val. I have  your  note,  and  will  have  an  examination  made  with  a view 
to  have  a ford  for  artillery.  I mention  the  condition  of  Spikes’  Run 
[that  it  may  be  duly  considered  as  a part  of  the  general  line, 
f Very  truly, 

I S.  G.  FRENCH, 

jp  Major-General^  Commanding, 

m 65  R R— VOL  XVIII 


1026 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  27,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : The  commanding  general  desires  you  to  cause  the  earth 
in  front  of  the  rifle-pits  on  your  line  to  be  so  increased  in  thickness  as 
to  enable  it  to  resist  the  fire  of  artillery.  He  also  wishes  you  to  cause 
the  interval  between  your  works  and  the  brush  or  abatis  in  front  to  be 
filled  up  with  the  same  kind  of  brush  or  abatis,  the  whole  when  com- 
pleted to  cover  60  or  70  yards  in  front  of  the  works. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


State  of  Xorth  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  N,  C.,  April  27, 1863. 

Hon.  jAiviES  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Sir  : I received  a message  from  vyou  by  Judge  Eufifin  in  regard  to 
supplies  for  the  army  and  desiring  to  know  if  I could  not  turn  over  to 
the  Confederacy  the  stores  on  hand  belonging  to  the  State.  It  affords 
me  great  pleasure  to  assure  you  that  the  crisis  in  regard  to  provisions 
in  this  State  has  passed  over,  and  the  conviction  is  now  firm  in  all  minds 
that  there  is  not  only  enough  but  to  spare.  The  passage  of  the  impress- 
ment act  and  the  near  approach  of  a harvest,  which  promises  to  be 
abundant,  have  brought  to  light  many  hoards  that  the  fear  of  famine 
kept  out  of  the  market.  The  call  for  aid  to  the  army  has  met  with  a 
liberal  response  from  our  generous  people,  and  I trust  all  fears  may  be 
dismissed.  The  quantity  of  iiro visions  on  hand  was  not  large  belong- 
ing to  North  Carolina.  They  were  purchased  under  authority  of  an  act 
of  our  Legislature  to  prevent  suffering  in  the  families  of  soldiers  and 
consequent  disquiet  and  desertion  in  the  army.  The  demand  has  been 
much  less  than  I expected,  and  in  a few  weeks  I shall  be  able  to  see 
what  can  be  dispensed  with.  I hope  to  be  able  to  turn  over  some 
250,000  pounds  of  bacon  and  some  corn  to  the  Confederacy,  precisely 
how  much  I cannot  now  say.  The  purchases  of  Government  agents 
can  also  be  increased  when  the  State  and  most  of  the  private  individ- 
uals cease  to  be  in  the  market. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  YANCE. 


Tuesday  Night,  April  28, 1863. 

(Eeceived  May  1,  1863.) 

[Maj.  William  Norris  :] 

The  enemy  on  the  Peninsula  have  not  been  re-enforced  by  a man 
since  I last  reported  (April  22).  There  is  only  a camp  guard  at  New- 
port News  5 three  companies  of  the  Third  New  York  on  garrison  duty 
at  the  fortress,  and  Eobertson’s  battalion  (six  companies)  at  Camp 
Hamilton  ; Keyes,  with  one  brigade  (and  that  a small  one)  and  a few 
cavalry,  is  at  York  town  and  Fort  Magruder.  I have  positive  informa- 
tion that  rations  are  regularly  drawn  for  40,000  men  at  Suffolk.  Beef- 
cattle  are  butchered  at  Newport  News  and  the  meat  sent  direct  to  Suf- 
folk. Dix  has  called  for  10,000  more  men.  This  information  was  thus 
obtained  : A friend  of  ours  was  at  the  fort  and  saw  the  post  commis- 


I Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1027 


siiry  of  subsistence  of  Newport  News,  who  informed  him  that  he  sent 
40,000  rations  of  beef.  Great  fear  is  manifested  because  of  the  rumored 
coming  of  our  gunboats.  All  Government  material  at  Newport  News 
is  ready  to  be  moved  at  a moments  warning.  The  usual  fleet  is  in  the 
river. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  H.  CAUSEY, 

Captain^  C.  S.  Army. 


Hookerton,  N.  C.,  Ajyril  28,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

General  : Yours  of  Q.15  p.  m.  is  just  received.  I will  be  ready,  but 
I am  very  doubtful  of  their  coming  to  Goldsborough  if  they  say  they 
are  coming ; though  if  this  be  a demonstration,  and  they  have  sent  their 
re-enforcements  back  from  Washington,  I know  not  where  the  real  at- 
tack can  be.  Unless  General  Longstreet  has  more  hope  of  doing  some- 
thing at  Suffolk  than  I have,  I wish  him  back  on  the  railroads.  I hope 
the  commissary  will  be  ready  for  us  at  Kinston  when  we  come,  for  the 
commissariat  question  is  my  great  bother. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

J.  J.  PETTIGREW, 

Brigadier- General. 


Executive  Department,  North  Carolina, 

Raleigh.,  April  28,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Seeretary  of  War : 

Sir  : From  the  best  information  to  be  obtained  it  seems  now  pretty 
certain  that  the  enemy  has  abandoned  further  attempts  upon  Charles- 
ton and  will  direct  his  attention  principally  to  the  invasion  of  North 
Carolina  during  this  season.  I desire  to  say  that  coast  of  North  Caro- 
lina is  very  poorly  defended  indeed.  The  Roanoke,  the  Tar,  and  the 
Neuse,  embracing  the  richest  corn-growing  region  of  the  State,  upon 
which  the  army  of  General  Lee  has  been  subsisting  for  months,  have  no 
heavy  artillery  for  their  defense.  The  attack  on  Washington  recently 
failed  through  the  defect  of  artillery  and  the  very  alarming  inferiority 
of  the  ammunition.  I very  much  fear  that  region  will  not  be  planted, 
so  disheartening  is  the  prospect  of  defense.  One-fifth  of  the  care  taken 
in  rendering  Charleston  impregnable  would  be  well  bestowed  in  strength- 
ening the  defenses  of  Wilmington,  which  are  now  confessedly  weak.  It 
is  a i)oint  equally  important  in  a military  view  in  every  respect,  and 
calls  as  loudly  for  the  protection  of  the  Government,  and  yet  nearly  all 
the  heavy  guns  of  the  Confederacy  seem  to  have  been  sent  to  Charles- 
ton, and  other  points  are  left  to  take  the  chances.  An  attack  upon  Wil- 
mington by  half  of  the  number  of  iron-clads  which  assaulted  Charleston 
would  be  equivalent  to  the  capture  of  the  citj^  Can  nothing  be  done  to 
strengthen  that  point? 

From  Roanoke  Island  to  the  late  siege  of  Washington  the  history  of 
the  war  has  been  a succession  of  calamities  in  North  Carolina  which  none 
but  the  ungenerous  and  untruthful  can  charge  to  a want  of  bravery  and 
patient  endurance  on  the  part  of  her  people.  I shall  not  pretend  to  say 
that  our  defense  is  intentionally  neglected,  but  that  it  is  very  poorly 
provided  for  is  a fact  too  patent  to  deny,  and  that  it  can  be  better  pro- 


1028 


north  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX 


vided  for  I liope  is  true,  from  the  i’act,  which  I am  assured  is  true,  that 
every  sea- port  in  our  possession  is  stronger  than  Wilmington.  It  is 
discouraging  to  know  this  when  we  consider  what  North  Carolina  has 
done  for  the  cause  in  men  and  means.  ^ We  certainly  ought  to  fare  no 
worse  than  our  sisters. 

I am  again  called  on  by  General  Hill  to  call  out  the  militia.  Consider- 
ing that  our  white  male  population  is  already  taken  to  the  age  of  forty; 
that  nearly  twenty  of  our  richest  counties  have  been  stripped  of  their 
slaves ; that  over  1,500  are  yet  at  work  on  the  fortifications,  it  seems  a 
physical  impossibility  to  prevent  a famine  should  all  the  balance  of  our 
labor  be  abstracted  from  the  farms  in  the  middle  of  the  planting  season, 
yet  I could  call  them  out  with  less  reluctance,  and  put  raw  plowmen  to 
contend  with  iron  clad  ships  of  war  with  less  regret,  if  I were  honestly 
convinced  that  everything  possible  to  do  had  been  done,  and  that  such 
a course  was  unavoidable.  What  the  resources  of  the  Ordnance  De- 
partment are  of  course  I do  not  know.  But  may  I hope  that  now  that 
the  attack  upon  Charleston  is  over,  the  defenses  of  Wilmington  and 
navigable  rivers  of  the  State  will  receive  the  earnest  attention  of  the 
War  Department,  and  the  requisitions  of  the  generals  in  command  wilt 
meet  with  every  possible  fulfillment?  Permit  me  to  assure  you  in  the 
candor  which  I usually  employ  in  addressing  you,  that  an  earnest  and 
vigorous  effort  to  defend  these  exposed  points  would  work  a most  happy 
eflect  in  the  dissatisfied  public  mind  of  the  people. 

I am,  sir,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  YANCE. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  Axwil  29,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Ya.: 

General:  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  you  send  here  all  the 
available  forces  at  your  command  in  and  around  Petersburg  with  the 
least  delay  j^racticable.  In  order  not  to  interrupt  railroad  transporta- 
tion this  force  will  move  by  marching. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Etchmond 


Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  the.,  Goldshorough,  Y.  C. : 


, Ya.,  April  29,  1863. 


General:  The  following  telegram  has  just  been  received  froiu  Gen- 
eral Lee : 


The  enemy  is  crossing  below  Deep  Run,  about  the  same  [ilace  as  before.  The  fog 
has  been  so  thick  daring  the  night  and  morning  tliat  wo  can  only  see  a few  yards. 
'J'akon  with  the  reports  receiveil  from  our  left, it  looks  like  a general  advance;  but 
wliere  his  main  elfoit  will  bo  made  cannot  say.  'J'roops  not  wanted  south  of  James 
River  had  better  be  moved  in  this  direction  and  all  other  necessary  preparations 
made. 

R.  E.  LEE. 

This  i-cnders  it  important  that  such  forces  as  you  deem  judicious 
should  be  concentrated  at  Eichmond,  to  be  in  supporting  distance. 
General  Lee  may  telegraph  you.  In  absence  of  instructions  from  him 


Chap.  XXX.]  COERESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1029 

iiiiike  such  arrangements  with  above  view  as  your  judgment  shall  dic- 
tate. A like  dispatch  has  been  sent  to  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet. 
I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


[April  20,  1863.] 

[General  Longstreet  :] 

The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received  from  General  Lee : 

• Fredericksburg,  Va.,  April  29,  1863. 

The  enemy  is  in  large  force  on  north  hank  of  Rappahannock,  opposite  the  railroad, 
at  Hamilton’s  Crossing.  Ho  is  crossing  troops  below  the  point  at  which  he  crossed  in 
December,  and  extends  lower  down  the  river.  I have  discovered  nothing  lower  than 
the  month  of  Massaponax  Creek.  He  is  certainly  crossing  in  large  force  here,  and  it 
looks  as  if  he  was  in  earnest.  I hear  of  no  other  xioint  at  which  he  is  crossing,  except 
below  Kelly’s  Ford,  where’General  Howard  has  crossed  with  his  division,  said  to  be 
14,000,  six  XJieces  of  artillery,  and  some  cavalry.  Stoneman  will  probably  cross  about 
the  Warrenton  Springs,  and  I fear  will  make  for  Gordonsville  and  may  destroy  our 
roads.  I have  nothing  to  oppose  to  all  that  force  up  there  except  the  two  brigades 
of  cavalry  under  General  Stuart.  All  available  troops  had  better  be  sent  forward  as 
rax)idly  as  possible  by  rail  and  otherwise. 

R.  E.  LEE. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  April  29,  1863. 

General  Longstreet, 

FranlcUn,  Va.,  near  BlacJcwater : 

I have  sent  dispatch  to  you  by  messenger  more  in  detail.  Be  pre- 
pared to  move  your  command  in  accordance  with  that  dispatch  with  the 
least  practicable  delay. 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  a7id  Inspector  General. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Cffice, 

Richmond,  Va.,  April  29,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  : 

The  following  telegram  just  received  since  the  one  already  communi- 
cated to  you : 

If  any  troox)s  can  be  sent  by  rail  to  Gordonsville  under  a good  officer  I recommend  it. 
Longstreet’s  division,  if  available,  had  better  come  to  me,  and  the  troops  for  Gordous- 
villo  and  the  xjrotection  of  the  railroad  from  Richmond  and  North  Caroliua  if  practi- 
cable. General  Howard,  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  making  toward  Gordonsville,  has  six 
batteries  with  him.  Please  order  the  forwarding  of  supplies. 

The  Secretary,  in  view  of  the  above,  directs  the  return  of  your  com- 
mand, or  at  least  such  portions  of  it  as  can  be  spared  without  serious 
risk  j also  any  surplus  force  that  can  be  spared  from  General  D.  H. 
Hill.  Rhett’s  command  has  been  sent  to  Gordonsville.  These  move- 
ments are  required  to  be  made  with  the  utmost  dispatch. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


1030 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CoAr.  ’XXX 


Kinston,  K.  0.,  Aiiril  29, 1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  8.  G. : 

General  : I see  it  stated  in  the  Kew  York  papers  that  Hunter  had 
but  7,600  men  who  could  be  spared  to  co-operate  with  Du  Pont.  How 
true  this  is  I do  not  know,  but  all  the  papers  concur  in  the  statement 
the  land  force  was  small.  I have  force  enough  here,  if  concentrated,  to 
light  Foster  successfully,  but  the  troops  are  necessarily  scattered  over 
near  100  miles.  With  the  Keuse,  Tar,  Eoanoke,  and  Chowan  running 
nearly  up  to  the  railroad,  it  is  an  easy  matter  for  the  Yankees  to  make 
raids  into  the  richest  agricultural  portion  of  Korth  Carolina  and  of  the 
South  and  carry  off  hundreds  of  negroes  and  destroys  an  incalculable 
amount  of  property.  It  is  impossible  to  protect  the  farmers’  interests  j 
of  this  fertile  region  without  a division  of  force  and  consequent  weak-  ! 
ness.  I learn  from  General  Whiting  that  Evans’  brigade  has  gone  back  |: 
to  Charleston,  and  the  object  of  this  is  to  ask  if  you  could  send  me  i 
Clingman’s  brigade.  If  the  attack  should  be  renewed  at  Charleston  I [| 
could  return  it  rapidly,  as  I would  encamp  it  on  the  railroad  at  Magno-  f 
lia  Depot.  General  Longstreet  has  got  all  my  cavalry  worth  a sou,  and  | 
a sudden  cavalry  raid  on  the  railroad  might  be  successful  in  destroying  | 
the  bridges  and  trestle-work  below  Magnolia. 

With  great  respect, 

D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


Kinston,  K.  C.,  Axwil  29, 1863. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston,  8.  C. : 

General  : I send  you  report  of  a trustworthy  scout.  I am  satisfied 
that  Foster  has  applied  for  and  is  getting  back  the  twenty  regiments 
furnished  to  Hunter.  This  will  give  him  a force  more  than  double  of 
mine,  and  troops,  too,  which  have  seen  more  service.  The  Yankees  have 
shown  uuusual  boldness  lately,  and  this  with  them  always  indicates  the 
l)resence  of  a large  force.  Yesterday  my  outposts  were  pushed  back  to 
within  5 miles  of  this  place  and  they  are  near  me  in  heavy  force.  I 
cannot  bring  my  three  brigades  to  this  point  lest  a sudden  movement 
be  made  from  Washington  on  Greenville  and  Tarborough.  I am  very 
desirous  to  get  Clingman’s  brigade  at  Wilmington,  that  Cooke  might 
be  on  the  railroad.  Clingman’s  troops  have  been  much  demoralized,  and 
I learn  can  only  be  trusted  behind  earthworks.  I have  no  idea  that  the 
Yankees  under  Hunter  will  make  a land  advance.  Foster,  however,  is 
bold,  but  ambitious  and  fanatical.  I have  obtained  a copy  of  a letter 
from  him  to  Dix  last  winter  (December),  in  which  he  proposes  to  destroy 
the  railroad  at  Kinston  and  march  upon  Wilmington.  The  defeat  of 
Burnside  arrested  that  pretty  little  plan.  I hope  that  you  can  send  me 
Clingman’s  brigade. 

With  great  respect, 

D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 

finclosurc.] 

•SwANSBOROUGH,  N.  C.,  Ajpril  27,  1863. 

Maj.  James  H.  Hill: 

Major:  The  highest  estimate  that  any  one  in  whom  I can  rely  has 
made  of  the  number  of  troops  sent  up  to  Kew  Berne  is  5,000.  Of  the 
number  of  vessels  I have  been  unable  to  learn  anything  further  than  has 
been  already  dispatched  you.  Through  a scout  of  General  Kansom’s  I 


CIIAI’.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1031 


learned  that  on  Saturday  at  3 p.  in.  Heckman’s  brigade  passed  down 
tbe  road  througli  Sheplierdsville,  as  the  scout  believed,  to  Beaufort,  but 
1 have  learned  from  another  source  that  their  destination  was  more  prob- 
ably Carolina  City.  The  enemy,  I am  informed,  are  fortifying  at  or  near 
that  point  on  Newport  Biver,  extending  to  the  Sound,  a distance  of  4 
miles.  For  this  pur^iose  they  have  been  pressing  the  negroes.  This 
movement  of  Heckman’s  brigade  was  sent  to  General  Ransom  last  Sat- 
urday night  at  2 a.  m.  I would  have  sent  it  immediately  to  you,  but 
knowing  that  it  would  reach  you  almost  as  soon  by  that  route  as  by  this 
I concluded  to  await  news  from  my  usual  source,  by  which  I would  get 
something  more,  or  at  least  confirmatory.  In  this  I was  in  jiart  disap- 
pointed. The  conductor  did  not  visit  the  road  himself,  but  through  him 
from  another  man,  who  saw  the  (iars  pass,  said  that  they  were  loaded 
with  troops  from  New  Berne.  With  this  dispatch  you  will  find  the  Ex- 
press of  the  14th  instant,  a very  interesting  paper. 

Please  send  me  a half  quire  of  paper  and  a pack  of  envelopes. 

Very  respectfully,  vours,  &c., 

K.  J.  SHARP. 


Headquarters,  April  20, 1803. 

' Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  North  Carolina  Department : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  26th  is  received.  I am  somewhat  re- 
lieved to  find  you  are  not  threatened  with  anything  immediate  from  the 
enemy.  They  always  move  slowly,  and  must  do  so  in  North  Carolina, 
where  they  have  no  railroad  for  their  transportation.  I hope  that  all 
the  troops  sent  to  South  Carolina  will  soon  be  returned  to  you.  I doubt, 
though,  if  the  enemy  intends  any  decided  move  in  North  Carolina  or 
here.  The  enemy  will  tiy  any  dodge  or  trick,  however,  which  gives  any 
promise  of  success.  Re-enforcements  have  been  sent  here  (to  Suffolk) 
but  1 am  not  satisfied  as  to  the  extent.  I am  of  the  opinion,  however, 
tlmt  I can  hold  my  iiosition  against  any  attack  from  the  front.  We 
shall  be  here  at  least  two  weeks  longer  hauling  out  supplies.  I expect 
you  to  keep  General  Foster’s  forces  off  of  me  and  I shall  consider  my- 
self quite  safe.  There  are  no  other  forces  to  accumulate  against  me. 
We  have  recovered  some  twenty-odd  siege-guns  that  were  left  near  hero 
when  we  gave  up  this  county  last  year,  which  I hope  that  we  may  be 
able  to  send  you  as  soon  as  we  can  get  carriages  for  them.  This  is  all 
that  I can  promise  you  in  artillery.  1 can  get  nothing  in  Richmond,  or 
little  at  best.  If  you  cannot  keep  General  Foster’s  forces  off"  of  me  you 
must  be  preiiared  to  join  us  with  part  of  your  force  in  case  General 
Foster  should  move  in  this  direction  from  North  Carolina.  Have  your 
scouts  out  and  keep  yourself  well  advised  of  the  enemy’s  movements. 
We  are  in  telegraphic  communication  with  you  now  via  Petersburg. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  April  30,  1803. 
General  G.  T.  Beauregard,  Charleston^  S.  C.  : 

Send  a full  brigade  immediately  to  North  Carolina  to  report  to  Gen- 
eral Hill, 

S.  COOPER, 

Adpiiant  and  Inspector  General 


1032 


NORTH  CxiROLINA  AND  S.  E..  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  A]^ril  30,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Kinston^  N.  C.: 

Send  a brigade  immediately  to  this  place;  Eansom’s  preferred,  if  no 
loss  of  time  is  involved. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  April  30, 1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Suffolk^  Ya. : 

Move  without  delay  with  your  command  to  this  jdace  to  effect  a junc- 
tion with  General  Lee. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Suffolk,  Ya.,  April  30, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

General:  You  can  send  General  Wise’s  brigade  to  Gordonsville  and. 
telegraph  General  D.  H.  Hill  for  a brigade  and  replace  it,  and  General 
Beauregard  for  Clingman’s  brigade  for  General  Hill. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  April  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  27th  is  received.  The  battery  on  the 
Chowan  will  hardly  be  needed,  as  the  probabilities  are  that  this  com- 
mand will  soon  be  moved  to  the  Rappahannock.  If  this  is  done  one  of 
the  brigades  in  North  Carolina  will  be  needed  here  to  hold  the  line  of 
the  Blackwater.  But  I presume  that  Generals  Evans  and  Clingman 
will  return  to  you  before  the  brigade  is  called  for.  I very  much  doubt 
the  policy  of  holding  all  the  points  of  your  line  or  of  attempting  to  do 
so.  Two  points,  with  your  forces  so  arranged  as  to  meet  an  advance 
against  either,  I should  think  your  better  arrangement.  The  greater  the 
number  of  points  that  the  enemy  holds  the  better,  inasmuch  as  he  in- 
creases his  line  and  diminishes  the  number  of  available  troops.  When 
the  enemy  does  advance  I think  that  it  would  be  well  to  let  him  get 
well  out  from  his  base  before  giving  him  battle.  Then,  if  you  can  get  a 
strong  position  behind  him,  you  will  force  him  to  attack  you  and  will  be 
almost  certain  to  destroy  him.  I regret  that  you  have  ordered  so  much 
of  the  cavalry  here.  I only  wanted  one  regiment  and  called  particu- 
larly for  Colonel  Claiborne’s,  because  I thought  it  was  in  such  a condi- 
tion as  to  be  of  little  use  to  you,  and  could  scout  the  counties  south  of 
this  and  at  the  same  time  help  to  consume  forage  that  we  might  not  be 
able  to  haul  off.  I desire  that  you  recall  all  the  cavalry  that  you  have 
ordered  except  one  regiment.  If  my  troops  are  recalled  to  the  Rappa- 
hannock I expect  to  return  with  them;  but  no  move  will  be  made  for 
several  days  yet. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — -'CONFEDERATE.  ■ 1033 

Ealeigh,  N".  C.,  April  30,  1863. 

Maj,.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina,  Goldshorough,  N.  C. : ' 
General  : I received  to-day  your  letter  of  the  28th  instant.  You  are 
riglit  in  saying  I would  not  like  the  command  of  the  defenses  of  the 
Eoanoke,  including  Hamilton  and  Weldon.  While  this  is  true,  I prefer 
it  to  my  jiresent  position  and  will  gladly  take  it  rather  than  remain  here. 
Please  give  the  order  at  once.  I lieg,  however,  that  you  will  not  con- 
sider this  as  giving  up  any  chances  I may  have  for  some  more  important 
position,  and  should  another  be  offered  you  must  not  consider  me  change- 
able if  I take  it.  I hope  you  will  give  me  the  two  regiments  now  in  the 
State  not  belonging  to  brigades — the  Seventeenth  and  Forty-second. 
The  Fiftj'-lifth  North  Carolina,  now  near  Suffolk,  has  never  been  regu- 
larly brigaded.  General  Longstreet  might  be  willing  to  send  that  back 
to  the  State.  Leventhorpe’s  regiment  has  been  recently  attached  to 
Pettigrew’s  brigade  and  Faison’s  Fifty-sixth  more  recently  to  Eansom’s. 
All  of  them  have  never  been  under  my  command.  I do  not  now  know 
a position  that  would  be  agreeable  to  me,  and  can  therefore  make  no 
suggestions.  I am,  however,  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  kind  offer 
to  do  what  you  can  to  accommodate  me. 

Ver^^  truly,  yours, 

J.  G.  MAETIN. 


Headquarters,  April  30,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General:  General  Hood  reports  that  the  enemy  is  again  attempting 
a landing  on  this  side  the  river  near  the  old  fort.  The  commanding 
general  desires  you  to  have  your  troops  in  readiness  to  move  to  the  point 
threatened. 

Very  respectfully, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


flndorsement.] 

Headquarters  French’s  Division, 

April  30,  1863. 

In  accordance  with  the  within  information.  General  Jenkins  will  hold 
his  brigade  in  readiness  to  move  at  a moment’s  warning. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  French  : 

GEAHAM  DAVES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Please  return  this. 


Headquarters, 

Near  Snffollc,  Ya.,  April  30,  1863. 

JMnj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : I am  directed  to  ask  that  you  will  relieve  to-night  the 
j)ickets  of  General  Anderson’s  brigade  by  a portion  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  E. 
Davis’  command. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SOEEEL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


[CHAr.  XXX. 


1034  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  S.  0.,  Ga.,  and  Fla., 

No.  95.  i Charleston^  8.  C.,  April  30,  1863. 

****:<«!#* 

VIII.  Brigadier-General  Clingmau  is  relieved  from  duty  in  this  de- 
partment and  will  report  with  his  brigade  to  Brigadier-General  Whiting, 
at  Wilmington,  N.  G.  The  commanding  general  parts  with  this  fine  bri- 
gade with  the  hope  that  in  losing  it  from  his  command  the  good  of  the 
service  will  be  subserved  and  an  opportunity  afibrded  for  distinction  and 
substantial  service  against  the  enemy  of  the  Confederate  States. 
******* 

By  command  of  General  Beauregard : 

JNO.  M.  OTEY, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Kichmond,  May  1, 1863. 

General  K.  E.  Lee,  Frederielcsburg^  Va.  : 

Orders  were  sent  on  Wednesday  to  General  Longstreet  to  move  for- 
ward his  command  to  re-enforce  you.  He  replied  he  would  do  so  imme- 
diately, but  expected  to  be  a little  delayed  in  gathering  up  his  transpor- 
tation train  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  then  in 
sight.  General  D.  H.  Hill,  at  Kinston,  was  also  directed  to  send  for- 
ward a brigade  (Ransom’s),  and  from  his  reply  it  may  be  expected  here 
to-night,  when  it  will  be  immediately  pushed  forward.  You  have  already 
been  informed  by  the  President  of  the  1,400  troops  sent  from  here  to 
Gordonsville.  I do  not  look  for  the  arrival  of  Longstreet’s  command 
here  before  to-morrow  evening,  on  account  of  difficulty  in  collecting  his 
train,  which  may  be  employed  in  collecting  subsistence  in  the  counties 
in  North  Carolina  (East), 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General. 


Richmond,  May  1, 1863. 

General  R.  E.  Fredericlcsburg : 

The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received  from  General  Hill: 

Kinston,  May  1,  1863. 

Two  strong  regiments  have  left  in  train  for  Petersburg;  remainder  of  Pettigrew’s 
brigade  wdll  start  when  trains  can  be  gotten.  Could  not  disabled  soldiers  take  the 
lilace  of  the  negligent  operators  on  the  line  ? Your  telegram  of  yesterday  reached  me 
a.  m.  to-day. 

D.  H.  HILL. 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  May  1, 1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet, 

Near  SuffoUc,  Va. : 

Since  my  dispatch  to  you  last  night  I have  received  your  letter  of  30th. 
Tlie  order  sent  you  was  to  secure  all  possible  dispatch  without  incurring 
loss  of  train  or  unnecessary  hazard  of  troops. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.,  1035 

May  1,  [1863.] 

General  Beaureoard,  Charleston : 

Please  send  Clingman.  Enemy  have  crossed  Bappaliamiock.  Fight- 
ing commenced. 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

^Y^lm^n(Jton^  May  1,  1863. 

Mr.  J.  H.  Planner,  Present: 

Sir:  The  affair  of  the  steamer  Lizzie  is  entirely  in  the  hands  of  tlie 
Wear  Department  and  has  been  ever  since  her  arrival  in  this  port,  at 
which  time  I stated  the  circumstances  of  the  steamer,  the  objections  to 
her  being  permitted  to  leave,  which  in  my  oi)inion  are  very  strong,  and 
the  necessity,  in  both  a military  and  naval  point  of  view,  which  I con- 
ceived to  exist  for  her  remaining  in  the  river  for  Government  service, 
concluding  with  the  statement  that  I should  not  permit  her  to  leave 
without  the  orders  of  the  Department.  To  this  letter  I have  received  no 
repl}",  nor  to  subsequent  letters,  nor  to  my  telegraph  sent  j^revious  to 
your  own  application.  To  the  latter  I fully  expected  you  would  have 
before  this  received  an  answer.  I will,  however,  telegraph  again  to-day, 
requesting  an  immediate  reply. 

I do  not  know  that  any  distinction  should  be  made  between  a native 
and  a foreign  owner  when  the  latter  may  be  either  an  enemy  or  belong- 
ing to  a nation  which  does  not  choose  to  recognize  us  and  whose  Gov- 
ernment has  prohibited  the  business  in  which  she  is  engaged  j if  any, 
perhaps  in  favor  of  the  native.  I am  sorry  if  the  owners  have  suffered 
in  common  with  many  others  from  some  of  the  inconveniences  of  a state 
of  war.  But  with  reference  to  this  trade  which  this- vessel  and  others 
are  engaged  in,  I must  say  that  I have  advised  the  Government  to  take 
possession  of  them  all.  The  telegram  I have  referred  to  is  as  follows : 

May  1,  18(53. 

Colonel  Gorgas,  Richmond: 

What  decision  has  the  Department  come  to  incase  of  steamer  Lizzie,  formerly  Mar- 
iner ? Answer  as  soon  as  possible. 

I presume  the  Government  would  remunerate  the  owners  for  any 
damages  sustained  by  them  as  engaged  in  a legitimate  trade,  on  account 
of  the  action  of  the  military  authorities. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Major-General. 


Charleston,  S.  C.,  May  1, 1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  G.  Whiting, 

Wihninyton,  JSf.  C. : 

Clingman  received  orders  yesterday  to  report  to  General  Hill.  Will 
leave  to-day  and  following.  Iron-clads  still  as  before  reported. 

G.  T.  BEAUBEGABD. 


Brigade  Headquarters, 

Chaffin’s  Farm,  Va.,  May  1,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General:  I received  your  order  respecting  the  burning  of  all  the 
wharves  and  landings  on  this  side  of  James  Biver  late  Iqst  evening.  At' 


1036 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


9 a.  lu.  this  morning  I proceeded  to  execute  the  order,  and  have  destroy' ed 
two  wharves — Cox’s  and  Aiken’s.  The  destroying  of  landings,  as  ordered 
by  General  Lougstreet,  I do  not  understand.  To-morrow  the  working 
party  will  proceed  to  Deep  Bottom,  Curtis’  Neck,  Turkey  Island,  and 
Ladd’s,  destroying  all  the  wharves  as  low  down  as  we  can  reach.  Will 
you  please  say  by  return  courier  how  low  down  I must  go?  The  order 
embraces  all  the  wharves  on  this  side  of  James  Eiver.  It  will  require 
more  force  than  I have  under  my  command  to  execute  it.  Shall  I pro- 
ceed as  far  as  I safely  may  to  the  mouth  of  the  Chickahominy  ? 

General,  permit  me  to  say  this  is  a vain  expenditure  of  labor.  The 
enemy  can  land  any  5 miles  as  well  without  as  with  the  wharves.  I say 
this  under  a sense  of  duty. 

Very  truly  and  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General.  \ 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  Troops^  Department  of  Richmond^  Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzeij 
commanding,  for  May  1,  1863. 


Hdqrs.  Dept.  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida, 

Charleston.^  S.  0.,  May  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding.^  Kinston.,  N.  C.: 

General:  Your  favor  of  the  29th  ultimo  has  been  received.  Two 
regiments  of  Clingman’s  brigade  left  here  yesterday  for  Wilmington  j the 
other  two  will  probably  leave  to-day.  You  have  also  been  telegraphed 
to  that  effect.  I will  also  be  happy  to  assist  you  to  the  extent  of  our 
means,  so  soon  as  I shall  know  positively  the  departure  of  the  balance 
of  Foster’s  troops  still  on  Folly  Island,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Stono,  and 
on  Seabrook’s  Island,  North  Edisto.  The  enemy’s  iron-clads  are  still 
as  already  reported — one  in  Port  Eoyal  and  five  in  North  Edisto.  What 
he  proposes  doing  with  them  is  more  than  can  now  be  determiuedj  prob- 
ably he  has  not  done  so  himself. 

Wishing  you  ample  success  in  your  future  operations,  I remain,  yours, 
very  truly, 

G.  T.  BEAUEEGAED, 

General,  Commanding. 


[May  2-7, 1863. — For  correspondence  and  orders,  in  reference  to  raid 
from  Army  of  the  Potomac,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XXV.  | 


Chap.  XXX.1  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1037 

Richmond,  Va.,  May  2,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Lonostreet: 

General:  It  will  not  be  possible  to  furnish  transportation  from 
Franklin  for  any  of  your  command.  March  to  Ivor  Depot,  where  the 
railroad,  with  such  limited  transportation  as  can  be  commanded,  will  be 
placed  at  your  disposal.  Gapt.  R.  B.  Branch,  assistant  quartermaster 
at  Petersburg,  has  been  telegraphed  to  inform  you  at  Franklin  of  this 
arrangement.  Please  inform  Captain  Branch,  assistant  quartermaster 
at  Petersburg,  at  the  earliest  moment  you  may  want  the  cars. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Suffolk,  Va.,  May  2,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

I cannot  move  unless  the  entire  force  is  moved,  and  it  would  then 
take  several  days  to  reach  Fredericksburg.  I will  endeavor  to  move  as 
soon  as  possible. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET,  ' 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 

[Copy  telegraphed  to  General  Lee  same  date.] 


Headquarters,  May  2,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c. : 

General:  Your  note  is  received.  As  many  as  six  or  eight  couriers 
have  been  sent  Major  Mitchell  and  Colonel  Baker  to  use  the  utmost  ex- 
ertions to  [move]  everything  across  the  Blackwater  to-[night],  and  I 
hope  that  everything  may  be  before  night  to  morrow.  But  we  [must] 
be  prepared  to  wait  in  case  everything  should  not  get  over.  I have  no 
particular  objections  to  a fight  should  the  enemy  pursue  us.  General 
Hood  will  take  care  of  everything  in  his  vicinity  until  all  is  over  the 
river. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lienitenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  May  2,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General:  Your  note  is  received.  I am  glad  to  hear  that  the  Fifty- 
fourth  New  York  was  well  punished.  We  will  move  back  to-morrow 
night.  You  ought  to  advise  your  signal  line  on  the  James  River  to 
wliat  point  it  should  retire  to-morrow.  You  need  not  tell  that  we  are 
going  to  move  back,  but  only  order  them  back  to  some  point  that  will 
be  safe  for  them. 

With  respect, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


1038  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chm:-.  XXX. 

Special  Orders,  ^ Headquarters, 

No.  — . ) Suffolk^  Fa.,  Alay  2,  1803. 

This  command  will  move  back  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Blackwater 
immediately  after  dark  to-morrow  night:  Major-General  French’s  com- 
mand by  the  South  Quay  road,  Major-General  Pickett’s  by  the  Somer- 
ton  road,  and  Major-General  Hood’s  by  the  Blackwater  road,  the  last 
crossing  the  Blackwater  at  Franklin.  These  commanders  will  make  all 
arrangements  that  may  be  necessary  to  facilitate  the  movement  and 
will  be  careful  to  give  instructions  to  every  portion  of  their  commands. 
The  rear  guards  will  be  composed  of  at  least  two  good  regiments’ and  a 
battery  of  artillery.  General  Armistead’s  brigade  will  be  withdrawn 
from  the  White  Marsh  road  at  sunset,  leaving  his  line  of  pickets,  which 
will  be  withdrawn  at  dark  and  then  move  on  to  rejoin  the  brigade.  The 
picket  lines  in  front  of  General  Pickett’s  main  position,  General  French’s, 
and  General  Hood’s  will  be  withdrawn  at  II  o’clock  at  night  as  quietly 
as  possible,  and  will  march  rapidly  until  they  rejoin  their  commands. 
All  batteries  will  be  moved  back  at  sunset  to  some  point  where  their 
movements  cannot  be  heard  after  dark,  and  will  there  await  the  orders 
of  their  division  commanders.  General  French  will  halt  his  command 
at  the  intersection  of  the  Somerton  and  South  Quay  roads,  and  Gen- 
eral Pickett  will  leave  a brigade  and  battery  near  Holy  Neck  Church  to 
guard  any  of  our  trains  that  may  not  be  able  to  cross  the  river  before 
the  troops  reach  there.  Major-General  Hood  will  move  on  and  cross 
the  river  with  his  entire  command,  when  he  will  have  the  i)ontoon 
bridge  removed  and  the  other  bridges  so  nearly  destroyed  as  only  to 
allow  persons  on  foot  to  pass.  A party  of  select  axmen  will  be  left  with 
each  rear  guard  with  orders  to  fell  such  large  trees  in  the  streams  and 
swamps  as  may  assist  in  delaying  pursuit  on  the  part  of  the  enemy. 
Should  the  enemy’s  cavalry  attempt  to  annoy  our  rear,  every  effort  will 
be  made  to  destroy  it  by  ambuscade  or  otherwise,  but  too  much  time 
must  not  be  lost  in  endeavoring  to  do  so.  Discreet  officers  will  be 
selected  to  relieve  and  conduct  the  picket  lines.  Captain  Barham’s 
cavalry  will  report  to  General  French  at  sunset  to-morrow.  General 
Pickett  will  give  orders  to  the  cavalry  now  temporarily  serving  with 
him,  and  General  Hood  to  Captain  Graham’s  cavalr3^  All  vehicles  not 
absolutely  necessary  with  the  troops  will  be  sent  back  as  early  to- 
morrow as  possible. 

By  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet : 

G.  MOXLEY  SORREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- GeneraJ. 


General  Orders,  ) Division  Headquarters, 

No.  4.  1 Near  Suffolk,  Va.,  A£ay  2,  1803. 

I.  This  division  will  be  in  readiness  to  move  toward  Franklin  to-mor- 
row night,  immediately  after  dark,  on  the  South  Quay  road. 

II.  All  teams  and  vehicles  not  absolutelj"  necessary  will  be  sent  for- 
ward to-morrow  and  will  cross  the  Blackwater  and  go  into  camp  about 
3 miles  from  Franklin,  all  stopping  near  Colonel  Baker’s  cavalry  cam]). 

III.  General  J.  R.  Davis’  brigade  will  move  in  advance  (left  in  front), 
to  be  followed  by  General  M.  Jenkins’  brigade. 

IF.  General  Jenkins  will  detail  two  regiments  of  his  brigade  as  a 
rear  guard,  and  with  these  regiments  Capt.  George  Ward’s  battery  of 
artillery  will  march,  forming  a portion  of  the  guard.  A suitabh‘  num- 
ber of  ambulances  will  go  with  the  rear  guard.  Should  the  enemy 
pursue,  especially  with  his  cavalry,  strenuous  efforts  will  be  made  to 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1039 


destroy  it,  by  ambuscade  particularly,  unless  such  auibuscadcs  should 
cause  too  much  delay.  With  the  rear  guard  will  be  left  a select  num- 
ber of  axmen,  who  will  in  the  swami^s,  at  the  crossings  of  streams,  and 
other  places  fell  large  trees  across  the  road  to  retard  the  i)ursuit  of  the 
enemy.  A part  of  these  men  might  move  in  advance  to  partlj^  fell  the 
trees  before  the  rear  guard  passes.  Captain  Barham’s  cavalry  will  also 
form  part  of  the  rear  guard. 

Y.  The  field  batteries  will  be  harnessed  up'and  move  to  the  rear  about 
a mile  from  these  headquarters  at  sunset  to-morrow,  and  their  i)osition 
in  line  of  march  will  be  in  advance  of  the  infantry,  and  General  Davis 
will,  with  his  infantrj^,  aid  them  in  crossing  any  bad  places  in  the  road, 
so  that  no  delay  will  be  caused. 

VI.  The  pickets  in  front  will  be  withdrawn  at  11  o’clock  to-morrow 
night  in  the  most  quiet  and  secret  manner  possible,  and  will  then  march 
rapidly  to  join  their  respective  regiments.  The  withdrawal  of  these 
pickets  will  be  entrusted  to  careful  and  prudent  officers,  selected  for  the 
purpose,  and  the  general  commanding  wishes  General  Jenkins  to  give 
them  careful  instructions  in  this  respect.  Teamsters  are  forbidden  to 
crack  their  whips  or  shout  at  their  animals. 

VII.  This  command  will  halt  at  the  junction  of  the  South  Quay  and 
Somerton  roads  until  any  wagons  that  may  be  out  foraging  shall  have 
returned. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French : 

GBAHAM  DAVES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General.  • 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Eiehmo7id,  Fa.,  May  3,  1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Ivor  Depots  Va.: 

We  have  information  that  two  detachments  certainly,  i^erhaps  three, 
of  enemy’s  cavalry,  with  some  light  artillery,  are  converging  on  Eich- 
mond.  Their  distance  at  present  is  not  more  than  12  or  14  miles  from 
the  city.  Hurry  as  fast  as  possible  re-enforcements. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Seeretary  of  War. 


Headquarters,  May  3,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.,French,  Commanding : 

General:  I shall  start  in  about  noon  to  try  and  look  at  the  ground 
on  this  side  before  night.  Major  Mitchell  hopes  to  get  the  wagons  over 
to-night.  If  he  succeeds  in  this.  General  Pickett  is  ordered  to  move  on 
over  with  his  command  and  send  Colonel  Baker  to  report  to  you.  You 
will  remain  on  this  side  until  we  see  if  the  enemy  means  any  x)nrsuit. 
Generals  Pickett  and  Hood  are  oidered  to  act  with  j ou  in  case  of  emer- 
gency in  my  absence.  This  was  not  necessary  really,  but  1 tlioiiglit  best 
to  give  the  order  that  there  should  be  no  misunderstanding.  1 shall 
leave  three  fresh  couriers  at  Holland’s  Shop.  Anything  important  send 
there  and  it  will  be  taken  over  by  a fresh  man — that  is,  up  to  sunset; 
after  that  they  will  go  on  and  join  me.  My  headquarters  after  niglit 
will  be  at  the  house  where  General  Jenkins  was  before  we  crossed  over. 
I am  sorry  to  find  this  side  of  the  sheet  so  badly  soiled. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 


Lieutenan  t-  General^  Comma^idmg. 


1040 


NORTPI  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters,  May  3,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  French,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : General  Hood  reports  a regiment  of  the  enemy  landed  at 
the  old  fort.  He  may  give  us  battle  to  day ; but  unless  his  movements 
are  decided  we  must  not  be  detained  in  ours. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  May  3,  1803. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding.,  &c. : 

General  : General  Hood  reports  the  enemy  displaying  force  in  front 
of  General  Law.  Have  your  two  brigades  and  your  artillery  ready  to 
support  on  the  left,  or  to  re-enforce  either  your  own  pickets  or  those  of 
General  Hood.  Let  General  Hood’s  picket  line  know  that  you  are  to 
support  them  in  case  an  attack  is  made,  so  that  they  may  know  where  to 
send  for  support. 

Very  respectfully, 


JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  May  3, 18G3— 3 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : Your  note  is  received  and  General  Pickett  is  ordered  to 
draw  his  troops  to  the  left,  leaving  a regiment  and  battery  only  on  the 
White  Marsh  road.  As  General  Pickett  moves  on  toward  the  position 
you  have,  you  can  move  on  to  the  left;  only  a little,  however,  so  as  to 
be  able  to  support  Hood  should  the  battle  become  hot. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 

Davis’  brigade  can  be  moved  a mile  or  so  to  the  left  at  once. 


Headquarters,  May  3,  18G3. 
Major-General  French,  Commanding,  <&c. : 


General  : Your  note  is  received.  The  force  at  Chuckatnck  cannot 
be  more  than  a few  hundred  men  from  vessels.  It  is  impossible  that 
more  could  be  put  over  in  transports  as  yet.  Possibly  the  enemy  may 
])ut  cavalry  over  to  annoy  us  to-night.  If  the  left  is  seriously  threat- 
ened move  in  that  direction,  but  not  until  it  is  certain  that  General 
Hood  is  severely  pressed.  I think  his  force  fully  able  to  sustain  itself. 
Advise  General  Pickett  if  the  matter  becomes  serious  and  he  will  move 
two  brigades  to  where  you  are. 

Most  respectfully, 

JAIMES  LONGSTREET, 
lAeutenant- General,  Commanding. 


I shall  not  start  back  until  things  become  more  settled. 


Chap.  XXX.J 


1041 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONPEDERATE. 

Headquarters  Pettigrew^s  Brigade, 

April  [May]  3,  1803. 
Maj.  T.  O.  Ghestney,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  From  wliat  General  Elzey  tells  me  it  is  very  x)robable  that 
the  Eleventh  Eegiment  North  Carolina  troops,  now  here,  and  the  Fitty- 
second  and  Forty-fourth,  expected,  will  be  sent  uj)  to  me  at  Hanover 
Junction  to-night.  Please  order  wagons  to  carry  their  ammunition  to 
them  (railroad  depot),  and  let  your  quartermaster  iioint  out  to  them 
where  their  baggage  can  be  stored,  for  they  have  no  wagons. 

Yours, 

J.  J.  PETTIGREW, 

Brigadier- General. 

Headquarters, 

Near  SuffoUc,  Va.,  May  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commandmg  Division  : 

General  : The  commanding  general  desires  you  to  be  extremely 
careful  in  the  selection  of  officers  to  relieve  and  conduct  your  jncket 
lines  to-night.  Let  only  those  be  chosen  who  are  thoroughlj^  acquainted 
with  the  roads  they  are  to  take.  Generals  Hood  and  Pickett  are  in- 
structed to  communicate  freely  with  each  other  and  to  you  such  matters 
of  note  as  may  occur.  Will  you  also  keep  them  advised  of  anything 
that  may  come  under  your  observation  I 
I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

G.  MOXLEY  SORREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Headquarters, 
Wilmington,  N.  C.,  May  3,  1863. 

Major-.General  Hill,  Commanding,  &c.,  Kmston,  N.  C. : 

I send  you  a letter*  from  Shays,  containing  some  interesting  reports, 
which,  though  he  does  not  vouch  for  them,  may  have  something  in  them. 
Ho  writes  from  Swansborough,  which  you  know  is  at  the  mouth  of  White 
Oak.  No  doubt  the  enemy  is  fortifying  at  Carolina  City  to  protect  the 
terminus  of  the  railroad  in  case  of  retreat  and  against  raids.  He  may 
have  a design  also  of  putting  some  works  on  White  Oak,  being  perhaps 
alarmed  by  the  activity  of  our  troops  lately  and  fearing  a descent  upon 
their  communications.  Any  advance  toward  Swansborough  would  be 
doubtless  r/ith  that  view  or  to  harry  the  country.  In  that  case  cavalry 
would  move  toward  Smitffis  Mill  to  prevent  the  force  from  being  cut  off. 

I am  sorry  you  insist  upon  Cooke’s  brigade  going  to  Magnolia.  The 
importance  of  this  place  and  the  very  limited'  number  of  troops  at  my 
command  indicate  that  those  few  should  be  the  best  possible,  not  the 
worst.  It  must  be  said  in  addition  that  when  threatened,  no  matter  from 
what  quarter,  I am  expected  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  until  assistance 
can  be  sent  me.  To  do  this  I must  not  sit  down  behind  breastworks, 
but  must  maneuver.  It  was  to  get  reliable  troops  that  I consented  to 
exchange  Evans  for  Cooke.  However,  I will  go  to  work  on  Clingman’s 
brigade  and  get  it  into  shape.  If  it  were  not  for  some  of  the  officers  1 
dare  say  there  would  be  but  little  difference.  Two  Brooke  rifles  belong- 
ing to  the  Raleigh  are  on  their  way  for  me.  Please  give  orders  to  hurry 


66  R R — VOL  XVIII 


Not  found. 


1042 


NORTtt  CAROLINA  ANt)  8.  E.  VlROlNlA. 


[duAt.  XXN. 


them  along  as  fast  as  possible  with  their  ammunition.  Clingman’s  regi- 
ments are  beginning  to  arrive.  Some  of  Cooke’s  will,  1 dare  saj',  be  able 
to  go  this  evening. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  O.  WHIT^G, 

Major-General. 


Division  Headquarters,  May  3, 1863. 
[Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French:] 

General  : All  I desire  yon  to  do  is  to  supj)ort  two  regiments,  which 
1 have  on  picket,  until  to-night. 

Kespectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  B.  HOOD, 
Major-General. 

P.  S. — They  have  formed  in  a heavy  line  in  Law’s  front,  and  have  set 
the  woods  on  fire  to  try  and  smoke  out  his  skirmishers.  They  have  also 
formed  in  front  of  my  two  regiments  near  you.  Please  be  ready  to  sup- 
port them. 


Franklin,  May  4, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I am  left  here  with  two  brigades,  or  4,000  men,  to  defend  a line  of  40 
miles  in  length,  from  Fort  Powhatan  to  South  Quay,  with  25,000  of  the 
enemy  in  front. 

I protest  against  being  left  with  an  inadequate  force.  I must  have 
at  least  three  brigades. 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 

Major-General. 


Franklin,  May  4,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I can  send  troops  from  here  now  if  cars  can  be  sent  for  them. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General.,  Commanding. 


Ivor,  Va.,  May  4,  1863. 

lion.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

We  had  a sharj)  skirmish  yesterday.  If  the  enemy  does  not  molest 
us  again.  General  Hood’s  division  will  be  at  Ivor  early  to-inorrow. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Jjieutenant- General. 


Franklin,  May  4, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Hood’s  division  will  be  at  Ivor  at  8 o’clock  to-morrow  morning. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieutenant-General. 


CiiAi-.  XXX.]  COMt:Sl>ONt)ENCE,  ETC.— COKEEEEEATE. 


1043 


FeankliNj  May  4,  1863. 
Lieuteiiaut-General  Longstkeet,  Eichmond : 

I must  insist  on  Laving  three  brigades  left  bere,  ou  a line  40  miles 
in  length,  from  Fort  Powhatan  to  South  Quay.  I have  telegraphed  the 
Secretary  of  War. 

S.  G.  FEENCH. 


General  Jenkins: 


Headquarters, 

South  Quay,  N.  C.,  May  4,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 


General  Jenkins  will  take  charge  of  crossing  the  division  to  the  right 
bank  of  the  Blackwater  and  the  removal  of  the  pontoon  train. 

S.  G.  FEEKCH, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

South  Quay.,  N.  C.,  May  4,  [1863] — 2 p.  m. 
Lieutenant-General  Longstreet  : 

General  : My  whole  force  is  on  the  other  side.  I cannot  well  with- 
draw it  and  leave  down  the  pontoon  bridge,  and  there  are  none  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Poofs  pontoneers  here.  Please  send  them  at  once.  I 
can  make  a good  delense  on  the  other  side.  Will  the  pontoneers  be 
here  soon  ? 1 will  call  and  see  you  as  soon  as  I cross. 

Yours,  truly, 

S.  G.  FEEKGH, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

Where  are  the  teams  for  the  pontoon  wagons'?  I can  take  the  bridge 
up  with  my  men  to-night. 


He A D QUARTER 
South  Quay.,  N.  C.,  May  4,  1863. 

Maj.  G.  Moxley  Sorrel, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Sir  : In  regard  to  your  note  of  this  morning,  I reply  that  I did  comply 
with  the  generaPs  orders,  and  I think  did  even  more  than  comply.  Oli 
the  3d  instant  the  general  wrote  me,  ^‘Yoii  will  remain  on  this  side 
until  we  see  if  the  enemy  means  any  pursuit.”  And  it  was  arranged  that 
instead  of  stoi)ping  in  i)osition  at  the  intersection  of  the  roads  1 was  to 
form  line  of  battle  nearer  the  river  than  at  the  intersection  of  the  roads, 
on  better  ground.  When  I found  General  Pickett  not  at  the  intersec- 
tion I guarded  the  road  on  wliich  1 fell  back  with  two  regiments  and  a 
battej'y  until  he  i)assed.  JMy  orders  were  to  defend  the  passage  until 
we  found  if  the  enemy  pursued,  and  in  compliance  with  this  order  I kept 
all  my  command  on  the  other  side.  Besides,  the  contingency  of  my  re- 
maining at  the  intersection  was  to  do  so  if  Mitchell’s  wagons  had  not 
passed.  General  Longstreet  gave  his  assent  to  me  and  General  Jen- 
kins that  we  should  take  a position  nearer  the  river  than  that  mentioned 


1044 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


fCHAP.  XXX. 


in  the  order  of  retreat.  The  intersection  of  the  roads  is  marked  but  1 
mile  from  the  river  on  the  sign-board.  I presume  the  general  will  -re- 
member agreeing  with  us  that  we  should  hold  the  position  which  Gen- 
eral Jenkins  named  just  before  he  was  ready  to  leave  on  the  3d  instant. 

Yours j respectfull3% 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 

Major-  General. 

I might  add  that  when  I reached  the  intersection  of  the  roads  General 
Pickett’s  wagons  had  passed  and  his  artillery  was  passing,  and  before 
the  head  of  his  columns  made  their  appearance  my  command  moved 
to  i)osition  and  there  remained  until  they  were  ordered  to  cross  on  this 
side— in  fact  are  crossing  now. 


Headquarters, 

Near  FranMin,  Ya.j  May  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  Commanding  Division  : 

General  : Colonel  Ferebee’s  regiment  of  cavalry  has  been  ordered  to 
Ivor  to  await  orders  there  from  you.  The  commanding  general  desires 
you  to  relieve  the  four  companies  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Georgia  Regiment 
in  time  for  them  to  rejoin  their  regiment  as  it  passes,  which  will  be  to- 
morrow. He  also  wishes  you  to  relieve  General  Benning’s  brigade  at 
once,  and  to  establish  your  guards  on  the  Black  water  by  to-night. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOXLEY  SORREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


May  4,  1863— 5 p.  m. 

Major-General  Elzey: 

General:  Amid  the  thousand  contradictor}"  statements  of  respect- 
able citizens,  cavalry,  scouts,  &c.,  the  following  seems  to  be  the  condition 
of  things:  On  my  arrival  here  yesterday  at  sunset  I learned  that  the 
enemy  were  at  Ashland  and  had  captured  a train.  I think  this  was  only 
one  regiment  (Twelfth  Illinois),  from  which  we  have  captured  several 
stragglers.  It  thence  proceeded  to  Hanover  Court-House,  burnt  prop- 
erty, &c. ; thence,  a portion  went  off  iuquiriug  the  road  to  the  White 
House;  the  rest  came  back  by  the  South  Anna  Bridge  at  night  and 
passed  up  the  country.  The  best  intelligence  (which  1 believe)  is  that 
there  are  none  now  at  Fredericksburg,  but  they  have  gone  in  large  force 
south.  Some  are  still  on  the  Fredericksburg  Railroad  below  Ashland. 
The  ])risoners  say  they  started  with  eight  days’  rations,  now  nearly  ex- 
hausted. Cannot  the  force  in  Richmond,  here  at  Gordonsville,  and 
under  Hampton  co-operate  to  catch  them  ? 

The  news  from  General  Lee’s  army  continues  very  favorable.  Pas- 
sengers say  that  the  bridges  behind  the  enemy  at  Chancellorsville  are 
sunk,  and  we  hope  to  capture  that  portion;  that  they  have  IMarye’s 
Hill,  but  we  will  retake  it  to-day.  Firing  suddenly  ceased  at  12  m. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  PETTIGREW, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE^  ETC.^ — CONFEDERATE. 


1045 


WAli  JJepaktment,  C.  S.  a., 

liicJmiondj  Va.,  May  4,  1803. 

Governor  Yance,  Raleigh^  A.  C.: 

General  Hill  and  yourself  can  either  better  appreciate  the  position  of 
things  in  North  Carolina  and  the  propriety  of  calling  out  the  militia. 
In  my  judgment  it  would  require  strict  necessity  to  induce  the  call  of 
the  militia  at  this  season.  I do  not  advise  it. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 

Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N.  €.,  May  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Kinston,  N.  C.: 

Y^ours  of  3d  received.  I wrote  you  yesterday,  I think.  Cooke  and 
most  of  his  force  vill  be  at  Magnolia  this  evening;  balance  follow  in 
next  thirty-six  hours.  I ])resume  your  aide  in  speaking  of  my  scouts 
alluded  to  my  cavalry.  I place  no  reliance  upon  them  whatever.  Have 
but  two  scouts  (Fairly  and  Shays),  and  they  by  no  means  depend  on 
rumors  or  talk.  As  for  cavalry  I saw  too  much  of  them  in  Virginia  and 
here  too.  I have  just  received  dispatch  from  Fredericksburg.  Eneiny 
badly  whipped  with  heavy  loss;  retreating  over  the  Rappahannock. 
Jackson  severely  wounded;  Heth  and  A.  P.  Hill  slightly;  Paxton  killed. 
Very  respectfully, 

W.  11.  C.  WHITING, 

Major-  General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  — . f Near  FranMin,  Pa.,  May  4,  1803. 

I.  Major-General  French  will  jiroceed  at  once  to  arrange  his  troops 
for  the  (lefense  of  the  line  of  the  Black  water. 

IL  The  divisions  of  Major-Generals  Pickett  and  Hood  will  proceed 
as  rapidly  as  possible  via  Ivor  to  the  city  of  Richmond,  where  further 
instructions  will  meet  them. 

III.  The  battalions  of  artillery  under  Majors  Hearing  and  Henry  will 
march  by  dirt  road  to  Petersburg,  where  orders  Avill  meet  them. 

By  command  of  Lieutenant-General  Longstreet : 

G.  MOXLEY  SORREL, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Petersburg,  May  5,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  telegram  of  to-day  is  received.  I leave  at  7 o’clock  this  even- 
ing for  Richmond. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 

Lieutenant-  Genera  1. 


Gordonsville,  May  5,  1803. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

A courier  arrived  from  Baltimore,  sent  by  Mr.  Edmund  Law  Rogers, 
relative  of  mine,  brings  information  that  on  Wednesday  evening  Fos- 


1046 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ter^s  aud  Hunter’s  troops  were  on  board  transports  bound  for  Chesa- 
peake Bay.  They  are  either  to  co-operate  with  General  Hooker  on ‘the 
Rappahannock  or  land  at  White  House  in  case  our  army  is  forced  back 
from  Fredericksburg.  But  small  force  left  in  North  Oaroliua.  Please 
do  not  i^ublish  the  name  of  Mr.  Rogers.  Please  acknowledge  receipt 
by  telegraph. 

W.  H.  F.  LEE, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Petersburg,  Ya.,  May  5,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  FranUin  : 

The  enemy’s  cavalry  is  reported  to  be  in  large  force  north  and  west 
of  Richmond.  Endeavor  to  have  all  roads  blockaded  by  felled  timber 
to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  to  any  other  force  of  his 
south  of  James  River.  Trees  felled  across  the  roads  in  .[all  crossings  of] 
streams  would  be  most  likely  to  effect  this.  Is  General  Pickett’s  divis- 
ion on  the  march  for  this  place?  He  should  march  by  the  Jerusalem 
pike  and  keep  with  him  Hearing’s  and  Henry’s  battalions  of  artillery 
and  get  here  as  soon  as  it  is  i^ossible.  Send  him  this  advice  if  he  has 
not  already  received  it. ' Have  roads  by  which  the  enemy  may  approach 
you  blocked,  except  such  as  you  must  use  yourself,  and  have  those  well 
guarded. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Coinmanding, 


Petersburg,  Ya.,  May  5,  18G3. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill,  Goldsborough  : 

The  enemy’s  cavalry  is  reported  north  and  west  of  Richmond.  It  is 
supposed  to  be  a very  large  force.  Try  and  have  notice  given  to  the 
citizens  in  all  directions  of  this,  and  get  them  to  go  to  work  and  block 
every  road  by  which  the  enemy  may  try  to  effect  a junction  with  his 
other  forces  in  North  Oarolina.  Fell  trees  in  all  crossings  of  streams, 
particularly. 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Maj.  Geu.  H.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldsborough : 


Headquarters, 
Kinston,  N.  C.,  May  5,  18G3. 


General  : ' I will  move  to-morrow  to  carry  out  the  verbal  instructions 
you  gave  me  before  leaving.  I propose’ to  leave  the  Second  Battalion 
on  this  side,  near  the  obstructions;  to  leaA^e  Colonel  Martin  on  the  Wil- 
mington road  to  carry  on  the  work  there,  as  I think  it  should  be  com- 
])leted,  and  to  leave  a regiment  at  Y’ise’s  Fork,  and  to  send  one  regiment 
on  the  Neuse  road  to  jMoseley  Creek,  and  with  the  remainder  of  my  own 
and  Ransom’s  brigade  to  move  to  Core  Creek.  The  distance  is  too  great 
for  a day’s  march;  I. will  therefore  encamp  to-Jiiorrow  night  some  12  or 
15  miles  from  here. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


1047 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


I inclose  dispatches*  received  relating  to  the  movement  of  the  enemy 
about  Pollocksville  and  on  the  road  to  Shepherdsville.  1 am  afraid 
Captain  Wharton  has  been  captured. 

Your  dispatch  from  the  Secretary  of  War  has  been  received. 

I have  no  information  from  ^ew  Berne  since  you  left. 

Very  respectfully, 


JUNIUS  DANIIilL, 

Brigadier:  General. 


Headquarters, 
Bichmondj  Va.,  May  0,  BiGJ. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  : 

General  : Y^our  letter  of  the  5th  was  received  but  a few  moments 
ago. 

We  have  reports  from  scouts  and  persons  from  Maryland  that  Hun- 
ter’s and  Foster’s  armies  are  to  come  to  Virginia. 

The  repulse  of  Hooker’s  force  does  not  yet  appear  to  be  entirely  de- 
cided. He  has  been  driven  back  at  all  points,  but  holds  still  a position 
on  this  side  the  Rappahannock,  near  the  United  States  Ford. 

Your  views  regarding  our  policy  I think  sound,  particularly  as  I urged 
the  same  course  as  yourself,  and  it  must  have  been  at  the  same  time. 
Burnside’s  failure  on  account  of  mud  was  quite  evidence  enough  to  me 
that  we  had  abundance  of  time  to  operate  wherever  we  chose. 

I shall  endeavor  to  have  forces  sent  you  from  South  Carolina,  and 
shall  in  all  probability  call  for  your  forces  as  the  enemy  moves  north. 
Watch  his  movements  carefully  and  keep  us  advised. 

The  enemy’s  cavalry  is  still  at  Columbia,  Va.,  and  may  try  to  elfect 
his  escai)e  by  uniting  with  Foster.  Have  all  routes  that  be  would  most 
likely  take  blocked  well  (for  as  great  a distance  as  time  will  admit  of) 
with  lelled  trees.  This  the  citizens  must  do,  as  their  only  means  of  sav- 
ing their  horses  and  slaves.  They  can  delay  the  enemy  until  we  may 
have  time  to  overtake  him  and  destroy  him.  T am  trying  to,  get  a 
mount  for  Hood’s  division  to  send  in  pursuit.  I wish  that  you  would 
impress  every  horse  that  you  may  be  able  to  hnd  not  in  necessary  use 
on  farms.  This  is  no  time  to  have  horses  for  pleasure  ; all  such  must 
be  put  into  service.  If  you  do  not  need  them  send  them  here. 

I remain,  general,  yours,  most  respectfully, 

JAMES  LONGSTBEET, 
Lieutenant-General^  Commandmg. 


War  Hepartjment,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  May  0,  1803. 

General  H.  H.  HiLL,'Uo/ds&oroi^^/i,  N.  C.  : 

General  Lee  urges  you  should  send  him  Ransom’s  division.  Do  so 
if  you  can  with  any  safety.  Hooker  remains  on  the  south  side  of  the 
Rappahannock  in  a strong  position  at  the  Mine  Ford.  General  Long- 
street  arrived  here  last  night.  His  forces  are  yet  in  Retersburg. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Beereiary  of  War. 


Not  found, 


1048 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  May  6,  1863. 

Hou.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  C.  S,  A.  : 


The  troops  reported  on  the  transports  could  scarcely  have  come  from 
North  Carolina.  If  my  scouts  and  spits  can  be  relied  upon,  Foster  has 
a large  force  in  this  State,  some  forty-five  regiments.  One  or  two  of 
these  were  expected  to  leave  about  the  1st  May,  term  of  service  having 
expired.  These  may  be  the  troops  seen  on  the  transports. 

I have  written  several  times  in  regard  to  the  utter  worthlessness  of 
the  cavalry — Partisan  Eangers — in  this  State.  Yesterday  a company 
was  surprised  and  captured.  They  will  neither  fight  nor  watch. 

I earnestl^M’epeat  my  request  to  have  authority  to  dismount  and  con- 
script all  who  are  surprised  and  who  run.  Unless  you  clothe  me  with 
this  authority  I can  do  nothing  Avith  them,  and  would  prefer  to  have 
them  sent  out  of  the  State. 

In  the  whole  brigade  of  cavalry  there  has  been  but  1 man  killed  in 
the  war.  I propose  to  have  a magnificent  monument  erected  to  his 
memory. 

With  great  respect. 


D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  N.  0.,  May  6,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  [D.  II.]  Hill, 

Commanding^  Goldsborough,  W.  C. : 

General  : I am  sorry  to  hear  of  the  loss  of  a cavalry  company  at 
White  Oak.  I think  our  cavalry  is  the  poorest  in  the  world.  I only 
depend  on  Major  [George]  Jackson,  Fairly,  and  Shays,  who  are  worth  a 
whole  regiment.  I have  not  yet  received  a report  of- this  afiair ; will 
probably  hear  to-night.  One  regiment  of  Clingman’s  is  at  the  advanced 
lines;  .one  of  Cooke’s  ought  to  bo  near  Bannerman’s,  Avhere  are  works. 
Yon  will  see  it  on  the  map.  The  remainder  of  Clingman’s  are  on  the 
road,  on  hand  for  need.  I do  not  think  Foster  is  in  a hurry  to  advance. 
He  has  certainly  got  some  troops  from  South  Caroliua,  but  not  yet,  I 
think,  all;  Jackson  is  of  opinion  about  5,000.  If  he  tries  the  Sound 
road  he  ought  to  be  a lost  Foster;  but  I should  have  another  brigade 
to  insure  holding  him  at  bay  long  enough  to  destroy  him.  The  news 
is  A'ery  good  from  Lee;  he  has  certainly  given  Hooker  a terrible  thrash- 
ing. That  last  battle,  driving  Sedgwick  over  the  Kappahannock  and 
reoccupying  Fredericksburg,  is  masterly.  But  what  is  Stuart  doing, 
allowiug  that  band  of  scamps  to  harry  the  country'?  Not  one  should 
escape.  I am  much  concerned  about  Jackson. 

I send  you  a return  of  field  and  siege  guns.  Y^our  chief  of  ordnance 
ordered  field  and  hea\"y  armament  of  this  pom^iand  Avhich  he  is  not 
entitled  to.  I wrote  you  about  it. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Major-General. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1049 


[luclosure.] 

Ordnajvce  Office,  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  May  6,  1863. 


Consolidated  Eeport  of  siege  guns  and  field  artillery  in  the  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 


Ordnance. 

Carriages. 

Caissons. 

Forges, 

&c. 

m 

§ 

(M 

6-pounders,  brass. 

3-inch  rifles. 

12-pounder  howit- 

zer, iron. 

12-pounder  howit- 

zer brass. 

24-pounder  siege. 

6-pounder. 

3-inch  rifle. 

12-pound  howitzer. 

OJ 

n 

a 

o 

Ph 

o 

1 3-inch  rifle. 

0 

1 ^ 

p 

o 

ft 

lA 

p 

e 

M 

C5 

w 

Forges. 

ATn]  W.  T,.  Vnnng 

3 

3 

Captain  Adams 

o 

2 

2 

o 

2 

2 

1 

1 

(Captain  Paris 

3 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

i 

2 

1 

Captain  Ellis,  3d  Nortli  Carolina  Battal- 
ion. 

Company  B [Moore's  Battalion],  3d 
Nortli  Carolina  Battalion. 

Capt.  J.  Gr.  Moore,  3d  North  Carolina 
Battalion. 

3 

1 

3 

1 

3 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

o 

2 

2 

1 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

Total 

3 

12 

2 

4 

4 

3 

12 

2 

8 

12 

2 

8 

3 

2 

1 

Note. — Tho  siege  carriages  are  without  limbers. 


Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  M.  PAYNE, 
Lieutenant,  Ordnance. 

I Indorsement.] 

Headquarters, 
^yilmmgton,,  May  6,  1863. 

llespect fully  forwarded. 

1 wish  the  caliber  of  the  field  batteries,  the  small  number  and  the 
great  Avant  of  rifled  and  entire  want  of  Napoleon  guns,  to  be  noted. 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  7,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  James  Longstreet,  Commanding,,  &c. : 

General  : I have  just  received  yours  of  2d  instant  upon  my  return 
to  my  former  camp. 

My  letter  of  the  1st  instant,  to  which  you  refer,  was  intended  to  ap- 
prise you  of  my  intended  movement  and  to  express  the  wish  rather  than 
the  expectation  that  one  of  your  divisions  could  co-operate  in  it. 

1 did  not  intend  to  express  the  opinion  that  you  could  reach  me  in 
time,  as  I did  not  think  it  firacticable.  The  emergency  that  made  your 
presence  so  desirable  has  jiassed  for  the  present,  so  far  as  I can  see,  and 
I desire  that  you  will  not  distress  your  troops  by  a forced  movement  to 
join  me,  or  sacrifice  for  that  purpose  any  public  interest  that  your  sud- 
den departure  might  make  it  necessary  to  abandon.  The  only  imme- 
diate service  that  your  troojis  could  render  would  be  to  protect  our 
communications  from  the  enemy’s  cavalry  and  assist  in  punishing  them 
for  the  damage  they  have  done. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


1050 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond^  May  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  d;e.,  Goldsborough  : 

General  : We  have  reports  from  different  sources  that  the  plans  of 
tlie  enemy  are  to  concentrate  Hunter’s  and  Foster’s  armies  for  a general 
attack  upon  Eichmond.  Make  all  needful  arrangements  to  prevent 
sueli  a contingency. 

Your  force  will,  of  course,  he  obliged  to  come  ui)  here ; so  with  the 
chief  force  at  Charleston.  If  you  find  such  movements  in  i)rogress  you 
will  so  shape  your  own  to  meet  them  without  awaiting  further  orders 
from  these  headquarters. 

I rernaiu,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  Genera  1. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond^)  Fa.,  May  7,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  W ar  : 

Sir  : His  Excellency  the  President  expressed  the  desire  last  night 
that  1 should  join  General  Lee  at  Fredericksburg  at  once. 

I regard  the  opening  and  securing  the  communication  of  General 
Lee’s  army  with  this  city  of  the  first  importance,  and  fear  that  this  may 
not  be  accomplished  if  I leave  it  unfinished.  There  are  some  indications, 
too,  that  the  enemy  may  bring  one  or  two  other  columns  against  this 
city,  with  the  hope  of  getting  possession  by  a sudden  dash.  I think  it 
more  important  that  these  things  should  be  considered  and  that  we 
should  have  our  forces  so  in  hand  as  to  meet  any  such  contingency.  I 
propose,  therefore,  to  remain  here  until  I can  so  arrange  and  disi)ose  of 
my  forces  as  to  free  General  Lee’s  army  of  the  force  which  now  threatens 
his  communications. 

I remain,  sir,  v/ith  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LOEGSTEEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Goldsborough,  K C.,  May  7,  [1863] — 10  a.  m. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  C.  S.  A.: 

Inclosed  are  the  last  reports*  from  scouts.  Foster  has  sent  out  of  N^ew 
Berne  and  Washington  the  citizens  who  have  hitherto  furnished  infor- 
mation. I think  that  these  papers  clearly  establish  that  the  Charleston 
expedition  is  abandoned,  and  that  the  few  troops  leaving  New  Berne 
are  more  than  replaced  by  others.  I have.believed  ever  since  the  fail- 
ure at  Charleston  that  Foster  would  demand  and  get  back  the  twenty 
regiments  furnished  to  Hunter. 

General  Daniel  has  gone  down  with  two  brigades  (his  own  and  Ean- 
som’s)  to  feel  the  enemy  about  Core  Creek.  If  they  fall  back  without 
sliow  of  fight  it  is  clear  that  Foster  is  not  strong  there  and  that  he  is 
massed  upon  the  railroad  between  New  Berne  and  Morehead,  fearing 
that  tlie  Confederates  will  cut  it.  Unfortunately  this  is  a diflicult  task. 
Tliere  are  but  three  approaches  to  it  through  the  swamps  and  these  are 
fortified.  I have  but  three  brigades  outside  of  Wilmington  (Daniel, 


Not  found. 


CiiAr.  XXX.] 


1051 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


Ransom,  and  Cooke) ; two  are  at  Kinston,  and  the  third  has  one  regi- 
ment at  Weldon  and  three  below,  at  Magnolia  Depot,  50  miles  above 
Wilmington.  If  you  think  that  one  more  should  be  sent,  I will  send 
Cooke. 

I feel  confident  that  Ransom  and  Daniel  can  whip  Foster.  But  with 
Foster’s  superiority  of  numbers  and  great  water  facilities  he  can  cut  the 
railroad  and  make  most  destructive  raids  on  the  Roanoke,  Chowan,  and 
Tar,  and  it  will  be  impossible  to  prevent  them. 

There  is  nominally  a large  force  in  the  State,  but  there  is  a heavy  gar- 
rison in  Wilmington,  and  the  four  regiments  of  cavalry  are  not  worth 
four  companies  of  inferior  infantry.  In  fact,  did  we  not  need  a large 
number  of  couriers  over  this  300  miles  of  coast,  I would  prefer  them  to 
be  ordered  off. 

I have  laid  the  facts  before  you  in  regard  to  the  Confederate  strength 
and  that  of  the  Yankees  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  and  must  leave  it 
to  your  discretion  whether  to  order  off  more  forces  or  not. 

Most  respectfully. 


D.  H.  HILL, 


Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Tarhorough,  N.  (7.,  May  7,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Gomdg.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina^  Goldshorough^  N.  C.: 

General  • Upon  my  arrival  here  last  night  I found  that  Colonel 
Evans  had  gone  toward  Greenville  instead  of  Rocky  Mount,  as  we  sui)- 
posed.  I immediately  recalled  him. 

Claiborne’s  regiment  has,  strange  to  say,  not  yet  arrived.  As  soon 
as  possible  I shall  relieve  the  companies  of  the  Sixty- third  (Evans) 
below  Kinston,  and  also  the  couriers  between  Goldsborough  and  Green- 
ville and  between  Snow  Hill  and  Kinston,  as  all  the  men  belong  to  Fere- 
bee’s  command. 

Please  inform  me  by  Captain  Worthington  (who  will  deliver  this) 
how  many  men  those  lines  will  require  under  existing  circumstances. 
There  are  a great  many  more  at  present  than  are  needed  on  that  duty 
since  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  from  Hookerton  and  Greenville. 

AVhile  on  the  railroad  I should  very  much  like  to  send  the  dismounted 
men  of  Claiborne’s  regiment  to  procure  horses,  and  if  this  request  meets 
your  approbation  instruct  Captain  Worthington  to  telegraph  me  at 
once  before  the  men  leave  here.  You  can  readily  perceive,  general,  the 
necessity  for  the  step  proposed,  which  I hope  you  will  approve.  Colonel 
Claiborne  is  absent  from  his  regiment,  I understand.  W as  the  authority 
granted  from  your  headquarters  "I 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  H.  ROBERTSOK, 

* Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Where  had  Claiborne’s  regiment  better  encamp?  About  Greenville 
forage  is  scarce  and  Griffin  is  there. 


Headquarters,  May  8, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Sceretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  return  herewith  a letter  and  dispatch  from 
General  Lee.  All  of  our  rei)orts  rei)resent  the  enemy’s  main  cavalry 


1052 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  XXX. 


force  retarning  to  the  Eappahanuock  by  the  same  or  uearJy  the  same  » 
route  as  that  he  came.  I tear  that  no  effort  has  been  made  by  our  forces  :: 
or  citizens  to  obstruct  his  routes. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-General^  Commanding. 

I received  a dispatch  from  General  E.  E.  Lee  asking  the  arrange-  f 
ments  that  I have  ordered  in  reference  to  his  communication  with  this  i 
city. 


Headquartees  Department  of  Eichmond, 

May  8,  1863. 

General  J.  J.  Pettigrew: 

General  Hood^s  division  is  en  route  for  Hanover  Junction.  General 
Lee  desires  the  wagon  road  from  there  to  Fredericksburg  repaired.  If 
you  move  ahead  of  Hood,  see  to  it;  if  not,  he  will  attend  to  it.  I send 
by  first  train  to  the  Junction  100  shovels,  50  picks,  and  25  axes  to  care 
of  your  quartermaster. 

Eespectfully, 

AENOLD  ELZEY, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Pear, 

Wilmmgton,  May  8,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding,  &G.,  Goldshorough  : 

General  : Yours  of  2 p.  m.  yesterday  received.  I am  sorry  Cooke 
has  to  go.  Beauregard  is  sending  off'  two  strong  brigades  to  Pember- 
ton, and  the  coast  will  be  very  greatly  weakened.  We  are  all,  from 
Savannah  to  Weldon,  mutually  dependent  on  each  other.  I do  not 
think  Eansom  should  be  removed,  unless  at  the  last  emergency.  But 
1 do  not  know  the  exact  position  of  affairs  in  Virginia.  The  enemy 
seems  to  have  received  a terrible  thrashing.  But  his  numbers,  accord- 
ing to  their  own  account  158,000,  may  give  us  great  trouble  yet,  unless 
they  are  too  demoralized  to  fight  well.  I suppose  Lee  has  6(>,000  at 
least.  It  will  be  a difficult  matter  to  defend  Wilmington  and  the  rail- 
road with  three  brigades.  Longstreet  will  have  to  help.  I will  send 
you  a statement  of  heavy  ordnance.  The  enemy  would  not  cross  at 
Snead’s  Perry ; the  river  is  too  wide,  over  1,000  yards,  and  with  any 

wind  or flats  are  not  practicable.  We  have  a picket  there,  as 

also  at  Swansborough,  in  advance. 

I cannot  very  well  spare  Major  Cameron.  Should  he  be  absolutely 
necessary  to  you  I should  have  to  supply  his  place. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Major-General. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  May  9,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  C.  8.  A. : 

Your  letter  and  order  in  regard  to  deserters  has  been  received.*  De- 
sertion is  alarmingly  on  the  increase  in  my  own  command. 


Not  found. 


1053 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


There  is  a powerful  faction  in  the  State  poisoning  public  sentiment 
and  looking  to  a reconstruction.  The  soldiers  are  induced  by  these 
traitors  to  believe  that  this  is  an  unjust  war  on  the  part  of  the  South 
and  that  their  State  soldiers  and  citizens  have  been  slighted  and  wronged 
by  the  Confederate  States  Government. 

Unless  the  Government  will  boldly  take  this  matter  in  hand  and 
arrest  the  editors  and  speakers  who  are  daily  uttering  treason,  the  crime 
of  desertion  will  go  on,  and  I fear  that  there  will  be  thousands  in  armed 
resistance  to  the  Government.  The  teaching  of  one  paper  in  this  State 
is  treasonable  in  the  highest  degree,  and  the  editor  certainly  is  a tory 
at  heart  and  almost  openly. 

Eespectfully, 


D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


[Indorsement.] 

May  10, 18C3. 

Secretary  of  War: 

It  might  be  well  to  correspond  with  the  Governor  of  Xorth  Carolina 
in  relation  to  the  subject  matter  of  the  within. 

J.  D. 


Goldsborough,  NT.  C.,  May  10,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Seeretary  of  War,  C.  S.  A. : 

Inclosed  you  will  find  a letter  from  Major  Whitford,  commanding  bat- 
talion guerrillas.  His  spelling  is  rather  original,  but  he  is  a good,  brave, 
and  truthful  man.  The  other  letter  is  from  Mr.  Marshall,  until  recently 
our  only  reliable  source  of  information  in  New  Berne.  Foster  has  expelled 
him,  however,  and  mj^  information  is  very  vague.  We  have  an  employe 
in  Foster’s  military  family  who  is  as  true  to  the  South  as  President 
Davis.  But  unfortunately  all  the  communications  from  this  person 
came  through  Mr.  Marshall,  and  I have  now  no  agent  working  in  town. 
With  Foster’s  control  of  the  waters  and  railroad  from  Morehead  City 
to  New  Berne,  he  has  been  able  to  deceive  my  scouts  by  movements  of 
troops  backward  and  forward.  Our  troops  have  been  incessantly  harass- 
ing them  day  and  night  for  two  months,  and  the  soldiers  whose  enlist- 
ment will  expire  soon  are  in  a very  pleasant  state  of  mind  to  stay.  The 
Yankees  hold  the  whole  county  of  Carteret,  but  except  to  make  raids 
confine  themselves  to  Plymouth,  Washington,  and  New  Berne.  They 
do  not  venture  out  more  than  a mile  from  the  first,  3 miles  from  the  sec- 
ond, and  8 from  the  third,  except  in  the  direction  of  Morehead  City. 

There  are  but  three  approaches  to  the  railroad  from  New  Berne  to 
Carolina  City,  and  these  are  strongly  fortified.  The  Yankees  have  been 
engaged  for  three  weeks  in  fortifying  line  from  Newport  River  to  Bogue 
Sound.  This  looks  like  an  evacuation  of  New  Berne  in  case  of  a strong 
pressure.  Ought  not  that  squeeze  to  be  given 

I would  not  ask  for  more  infantry,  but  would  like  to  have  good  rifle 
guns,  not  of  Richmond  make. 

Since  Foster’s  disgraceful  whipping  at  Blount  Creek  by  General  Pet- 
tigrew he  has  sliown  no  disposition  to  give  a field  fight,  though  the  most 
insinuating  methods  were  used  by  General  Daniel  to  coax  him  on. 

Witli  great  respect. 


D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


1054 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


[Inclosures.] 


Swift  Ckeek,  May  9, 1863. 

Gen’l  : To-day  when  your  courrier  came  with  your  dispatch  to  me 
I was  off  trying  to  get  information  from  the  enemy.  My  scouts  on  Tar 
Eiver  report  seven  or  eight  steamers  went  down  Tar  Eiver  on  the  nights 
of  the  7th  and  8th  instant.  Those  steamers  are  not  at  Islew  Berne,  or 
was  not  yestiday  evening  j they  had  not  passed  up  Nuse  Eiver.  The 
Yankees  at  Mrs.  Grice’s  place,  tiiis  side  Washington,  told  the  citerzens 
at  Cross-Eoads  yestiday  that  Yankee  General  Palmer’s  brigade  and 
Yankee  General  Naglee’s  brigade  has  gone  to  re-enforce  Hoolcer. 
They  said  Spinola  was  yet  in  Washington  with  his  brigade.  The 
movements  about  New  Berne  is  now  on  the  railrode.  1 can’t  get  any 
person  in  their  lines  under  no  pretence  j they  turn  all  back  from  this  side 
Nuse  Eiver.  My  two  men  that  was  crossing  Nuse  to  and  from  is 
both  sick.  I understand  persons  from  south  side  Nuse  Eiver  can  go 
in  town  and  return.  I don’t  know  whether  they  can  or  not.  If  some 
citerzens  that  could  be  reliad  upon,  that  lives  below  Pollocksville,  in 
Jones  County,  [would  go,]  that  is  the  best  way  now,  as  they  will  not 
allow  any  person  from  the  north  side  to  go  in  town.  If  they  would  I 
would  soon  know  what  Foster  is  up  to.  I don’t  know  the  people  on  the 
other  side  Nuse,  or  I would  go  in  Jones  County  and  get  up  a line  of  com- 
municatiou  soon.  I think  Major  Kethercutt  could  get  some  person  to 
go  in,  as  he  knows  every  man  in  Jones  County.  I have  scouts  in  every 
direction  below  here  to  find  out  there  movements  all  I can.  I think  a 
demmonstration  in  front  of  New  Berne  would  stop  Foster  from  sending 
off*  his  troops  to  Hooker.  I am  glad  to  hear  of  Hooker’s  defeat.  I will 
get  that  to  the  Yankees  soon.  They  know  in  Washington  and  New 
Berne  that  Hooker  is  whiped. 

Yours,  very  respecufully,  and  obediant  servant, 

JOHN  N.  WHITFOED, 

Major j Comdg.  Outpost.,  Sicift  Creelc. 

Swift  Creek,  Maij  8,  1863. 

[Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill:] 

Hear  General:  Eumor  informs  us  at  this  place  that  thirty  families 
have  been  sent  up  on  the  railroad  from  New  Berne  in  the  direction  of 
Kinston  three  days  ago;  other  rumors  say  that  the  Yankees  have  not 
decided  whether  to  send  them  to  Street’s  Ferry  or  to  Core  Creek.  I am 
now  waiting  to  hear  from  my  letter  to  Foster;  and  should  they  send 
them  out,  and  I down  here,  do  me  the  favor  to  have  my  wife  informed 
that  I have  engaged  quarters  for  her  and  our  effects  with  Mrs.  Virginia 
Dudley,  in  Kinston.  I should  also  take  it  as  a great  favor  to  be  in- 
formed by  the  first  courier  if  my  family  should  be  sent  in  that  direction. 

Several  persons  have  tried  to  get  to  New  Berne  from  this  place,  and 
all  have  failed  except  one  lady  that  crossed  the  river  and  went  down  on 
the  railroad.  She  came  up  Wednesday,  and  says  they  were  all  packed 
up  to  start,  but  were  afraid  (the  Yankees)  that  the  train  or  boat  would 
be  captured  by  our  forces,  as  there  was  no  flag  of  truce,  &c. 

I know  of  no  better  way  than  to  stay  here  until  they  move  in  the 
matter,  as  there  is  no  telling  what  they  will  do.  They  have  jiaroled  a 
prisoner  and  sent  him  out,  who  states  that  they  are  sending  great  quan- 
tities of  negroes  away  on  transports.  Others  that  have  left  New  Berne 
and  gone  to  Bay  Eiver  tell  the  same  tale,  and  all  agree,  too,  as  to  their 
fortifying  Morehead  City.  They  let  no  person  go  to  town  from  the  north 


CttAP.  XX1&.]  COUiJKSt^ONDENCE,  ETC. — CONEEDEEATE. 


1055 


side  of  Ibe  river;  1 think  it  indicates  some  mysterious  move  on  their 
part.  They  have  been  practicing,  too,  with  very  heavy  guns,  something 
that  has  not  been  done  by  them  for  six  months  before.  From  their 
great  secrecy  about  everything,  and  pretending  to  be  on  the  eve  of  send- 
ing out  the  citizens  and  failing  each  day  to  do  it,  looks  to  me  like  an 
evacuation  of  the  place.  I think  it  is  all  done  to  keep  up  appearances, 
and  could  I be  eertain  as  to  the  fortifying  of  Morehead  City  I should 
feel  confident. 

There  has  been  an  order  issued  by  Foster  to  the  effect  that  no  more 
goods  be  brought  to  New  Berne  by  their  merchants;  that  is  so.  I am 
certain  that  the  taking  and  holding  it  has  not  done  much  in  the  way  of 
restoring  the  Union,  and  has  been  rather  a failure  than  anything  else; 
and  as  they  have  stolen  all  that  is  in  their  reach  I think  they  have  con- 
cluded to  leave  New  Berne  and  make  arrangements  to  hold  ihrt  Macon 
and  Hatteras  and  perhaps  Eoanoke  Island. 

I think  I shall  be  able  soon  to  open  a direct  communication  to  New 
Berne  should  they  leave  any  of  the  citizens  there.  They  have  got  the 
news  of  their  defeat  at  Fredericksburg  and  acknowledge  that  llooker 
is  whipped.  Several  ladies  were  down  to  Barrington  yesterday  and  say 
that  the  colonel  told  them  that  Hooker  was  whipped  and  asked  them 
if  we  had  heard  it.  They  knew  nothing  about  General  Jackson  being 
wounded.  > I hope  that  General  Jackson  may  recover  from  his  wounds, 
as  the  country  wmuld  lose  one  of  her  noblest  sons,  besides  his  great 
services  as  one  among  the  greatest  generals  of  the  age.  I pray  God  he 
may  recover  from  his  wounds. 

. Very  truly,  yours, 

W.  H.  MAESHALL. 

I 


Eichmond,  liui/  10,  ISGg. 
Maj.  William  Norris,  Chief  of  Signal  Corps: 

Sir  : I returned  from  the  enemy’s  lines,  in  the  vicinity  of  Newiiort 
News,  yesterday  morning  before  daylight,  bringing  the  following  intel- 
ligence : 

Troops  from  every  quarter  are  hurrying  toward  the  discomfited  army 
of  Hooker.  Many  have  been  wdthdrawn  from  Suffolk,  and  only  400  or 
500  are  left  at  Fortress  Monroe.  General  Dix,  Avith  5,000  men,  500 
wheelbarrows  and  intrenching  tools,  left  the  fortress  on  Wednesday,  it 
is  reported,  for  the  W^hite  House.  Five  hundred  cavalry  left  Yorktown 
the  same  day.  It  is  my  belief  that  Dix  will  not  noAv  proceed  so  far,  as  1 
think  he  was  only  to  occupy  that  position  provided  Hoolvcr  was  victo- 
rious, and  then  this  much-coveted  city  was  to  have  been  assailed  on  all 
sides.  Depredations  are  daily  committed  on  the  defenseless  citizens 
near  Suffolk  by  Dodge’s  cavalry.  I bring  a paper  of  the  date  of  the 
7th,  which  I have  sent  to  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War. 

Very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  CAUSEY, 

Captain^  C.  S.  Army. 


^Chap. 


1056  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


Abstract  from,  Field  Return  of  troops  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  for  May  10, 

1803.  {No  station  given.) 

! 


Command. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

U 

m 

o 

§ 

General  staff. ...... 

9 

247 

171 

21 

3 

4 

9 

2,  846 
2, 893 
388 
136 
96 

13 
4,036 
3, 470 
484 
143 
100 

Jenkins’  brigade ....... 

2,  267 
2,  335 
304 
115 
76 

Davis’  brigade 

Eoggs’  battalion  artillery 

Coit’s  battery 

Bradford’s  battery 

Baker’s  cavalry  regiment  [no  report] 

Grand  total 

455 

5,  097 

6,368 

8,  246 

Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  11,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew, 

Commanding.,  dc.,  Hanomr  Junction : 

General  : General  Pickett  informs  me,  on  wliat  he  deems  reliable 
authority,  that  a regiment  of  infantry,  one  battery  of  artillery,  and  200 
cavalry  of  the  enemy  are  at  West  Point,  the  confluence  of  the  Pamuu- 
key  and  Mattapony  Elvers.  He  thinks  it  possible  that  they  may  ascend 
the  north  bank  of  the  Pamunkey  and  attempt  to  reach  Hanover  Junc- 
tion. I give  you  this  notice  that  you  may  be  on  your  guard. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington.,  May  11,  1863. 

H.  P.  Walker, 

11.  M.  Actg.  Consul  for  the  States  ofN.  C.  and  S.  C.  at  Charleston : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  letter  of  this  date  relating  to  the  schooner 
Harkaway,  alleged  to  belong  to  a British  subject  engaged  in  running 
the  blockade,  and  seized  in  this  port  bj^  the  military  authorities  of  the 
Confederate  States  of  America. 

I am  not  aware  that  my  Government  has  recognized  you  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  Her  Britannic  Majesty.  Her  Britannic  Majesty’s  Govern 
merit  has  certainly  not  recognized  the  Government  of  the  Confederate 
States.  I decline,  therefore,  to  discuss  the  subject  with  you  or  to  re- 
lease the  vessel,  but  will  forward  your  communication  to  the  Secretary 
of  State  and  await  orders. 

In  the  mean  time,  as  Her  Britannic  Majesty’s  Government  does  not 
recognize  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Confederate  States  here,  and  the  United 
States  Government  claims  it,  perhaps  it  would  be  as  well  to  apply  to 
the  latter. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Major-General. 


CiiAi*.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1057 


Maj.  Gen.  I).  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  at  Goldsborough : 


Headquarters, 
Kinston^  N.  (7.,  May  12,  1863. 


General  : Yours  of  this  date  has  heeu  received.  Colonel  Martin 
moved  to-day  for  Greenville.  Brabble  takes  his  place  on  picket. 

As  soon  as  Captain  Coleman  returns,  or  I am  well  enough  to  make  the 
examination,  I will  have  the  work  extended  as  you  desire. 

I am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  kind  offer  to  relieve  me  by  Gen- 
eral Cooke,  and  if  everything  is  q.uiet  here  I would  like  very  much  to 
go  home  for  a week  or  ten  days,  as  my  health  is  poor  and  I have  some 
business,  giving  in  my  taxes,  &c.,  which  can  only  be  done  by  myself,  as 
I am  the  only  male  member  of  my  family  in  the  State;  and  as  I have 
paid  no  attention  to  my  affairs  in  more  than  two  years  I would  not  be 
able  to  do  so  without  an  examination.  I will  be  in  a mile  or  two  of  the 
telegraph  office  in  Weldon  and  could  return  any  day  should  anything 
occur. 

I expected  to  have  had  some  information  from  Lieutenant  Foy  to-day, 
but  have  not  heard  from  him. 

Our  scouts  report  the  enemy^s  picket  posts  some  6 or  7 miles  below 
Core  Creek.  They  had  not  to-day  relaid  the  track  torn  up  4 miles  below 
Core  Creek. 

I was  very  much  grieved  to  hear  of  the  death  of  General  Jackson,  and 
think  that  our  victory  was  a dearly-bought  one. 

Very  respectfully, 


JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters, 

Near  FredericTcshurg,  May  12,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

General:  Your  letters  of  the  8th  and  10th,  with  inclosures,  are  re- 
ceived.* I think  that  there  is  every  probability  that  the  enemy  intends 
fortifying  somewhere  near  the  coast  below  New  Berne,  and  leaving 
small  garrisons  in  North  Carolina  to  occupy  the  forts,  with  the  purpose 
of  sending  all  the  rest  of  his  force  here.  I have  already  heard  that  Suf- 
folk is  only  occupied  now  by  a small  force,  some  18,000  having  come  to 
re-enforce  Hooker’s  army.  The  same  thing  will  be  done  with  the  forces 
in  North  Carolina.  In  view  of  this,  I have  suggested  that  Clingman’s 
aud  Evans’  brigades  be  brought  to  North  Carolina  and  that  Eansom’s 
and  Cooke’s  be  brought  here ; also  the  troops  from  the  Blackwater,  and 
that  you  have  command  of  Petersburg  and  everything  south  of  that  and 
north  of  South  Carolina.  This  I presume  will  be  the  arrangement  for 
the  summer.  By  threatening  the  enemy’s  capital  we  will  be  able  to 
draw  all  of  his  available  force  here,  and  as  our  strength  here  increases 
his  must  do  the  same.  • 

I remain,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTEEET, 
Lieutenant-  General.,  Commanding. 


* Not  found. 


67  R R — VOL  XVTII 


1058 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Eichmond,  May  12,  1863. 

General  W.  H.  C.  Whiting,  Wilmington^  N.  C.: 


Let  me  know  what  force  you  have  and  what  aid  you  can,  in  case  of 


necessity,  lend  to  Charleston. 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 
^Secretary  of  War, 


Wilmington,  N.  C.,  May  12,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  W ar,  Richmond : 

I have  Clingman’s.  On  a i)inch,  can  send  three  regiments  of  that,  but 
General  Hill  should  be  notified.  Arrangements  should  be  made  to 
transfer  them  back  should  point  of  attack  be  changed. 

W.  H.  C.  AVHITING, 

Major- General. 


May  12,  1863. 

General  Beauregard,  Charleston : 

Anything  threatening  in  your  front  ? Secretary  wants  to  know  what 
I can  spare  you.  Let  me  hear  direct.  Will  do  all  in  my  power. 

W.  H.  0.  WHITING, 

Major-General. 


May  12,  1863. 

Major-General  Hill,  Goldsborough : 

Secretary  wants  to  know  what  I can  do  for  Charleston  in  need.  Can 
let  three  regiments  go  on  a pinch,  but  told  him  you  must  be  notified. 
Have  you  heard  anything  ^ 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING. 


Burwell’s  Bay,  May  13, 1863. 
Maj.  William  Norris,  Chief  Signal  Corps: 

. Sir  : Major-General  Keyes,  with  one  division  of  infantry  and  a bri- 
gade of  cavalry,  is  at  or  near  the  White  House,  unless  he  has  fallen  or 
been  driven  back  since  Monday.  The  cavalry  are  from  Stoneman^s 
division.  There  are  few  troops  at  Suffolk,  none  at  Newport  News,  and 
a very  small  garrison  at  Fortress  Monroe.  Blockading  squadron  con- 
sists of  two  iron-clads  of  the  Monitor  model — the  Galena  and  Minnesota. 
Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  CAUSEY, 

• Captain^  C.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Bichmond, 

May  13,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Secretary  of  W^r?  I b?tve, 


CiiAi'.XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1059 

the  honor  to  inalve  the  following  report  of  the  forces  in  iind  about  liieb- 
mond  for  his  iiiforinution  : 

DEPARTMENT  OF  RICHMOND. 


lirigadier-Geiieral  Wise^s  brigade,  now  occupying  the  Peninsula. 
Colonel  Ebett^s  command  (artillery,  for  defenses)  lias  been  ordered 
back,  and  supposed  to  be  on  its  way. 

Garrisons  at  01laf^in^s  and  Dre wry’s  Blubs. 

City  of  Eichmond. — Brigadier-General  Winder’s  command — City  Bat- 
talion, seven  companies  5 Wren’s  battalion  of  cavalry,  two  comiianies; 
Col.  H.  H.  Walker’s  guard  forces,  seven  companies. 

Major-General  Pickett’s  division — South  side,  near  Manchester. 

One  regiment  and  one  battery  of  Brigadier-General  Pettigrew’s  bri- 
gade, near  Eichmond. 

One  regiment  of  Brigadier-General  Eobertson’s  cavalry,  near  Eich- 
mond. 

RECAPITULATION. 

Dcx)artmeut  of  Richmond,  including  Colonel  RhetPs  command:  Effective 

total 4,2H8 

Brigadier-General  WindePs  command 1, 1500 

Major-General  Pickett,  say 8, 000 

Regiment  and  battalion  of  Pettigrew 750 

Regiment  of  Robertson  (cavalry) 500 


Aggregate _ 14, 838 

\ 

1 have  the  honor  to  request  that  this  communication  be  laid  before 
the  Secretary  of  War  at  your  earliest  convenience. 

Very  resfiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

AEEOLD  ELZEY, 

Major-  General^  Commanding, 


War  Department,  O.  S.  A., 

Eichmond,  May  13,  1863. 

General  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorough,  N.  C. : 

Necessity  comiiels  me  to  reduce  the  force  at  Charleston  very  low. 
General  Whiting,  on  inquiry,  informs  me  that  on  a pinch  he  can  send 
to  the  aid  of  Charleston  in  case  of  attack  three  regiments.  I inform 
you  of  this,  and  in  addition  suggest  if,  as  I believe,  the  enemy  have 
nearly  withdrawn,  let  your  arrangements  be  made  to  allow  in  case  of 
necessity  the  transfer  of  a larger  force. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Cavalry  Gamp, 

Near  Williamston,  May  13,  1863. 

Maj.  Archer  Anderson, 

Assistant  AdjiUant- General,  Goldsboroiigh : 

Major  : I have  just  returned  from  Jamesville,  the  lowest  point  occu- 
l)ied  by  our  cavalry  jiickets  on  the  Eoanoke. 

1 met  Lieutenant-Colonel  Towns,  of  the  Sixty-second  Georgia  Eegi- 
nient,  on  the  road,  who  had  been  absent  two  days  visiting  his  ])icket 
stations.  He  saw  to-day  a man  from  Plymouth  day  before  yesterday. 


1060 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  iS.  E,  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XXX. 


From  bim  be  learus  that  General  Wessells  is  certainly  in  command  tbere 
with  two  FTew  York  regiments,  not  exceeding  500  men  cacb,  and  one 
battery;  no  cavalry.  Tbe  cavalry  and  some  other  troops  bad  left  tbe  i 
town — supposed  toward  Sufitblk.  ^ 

Tbe  enemy  is  throwing  up  some  intrench ments  on  a high  point  near  ! 
Plymouth,  either  for  the  purpose  of  changing  his  camp,  which  is  repre-  5 
sen  ted  to  be  very  lilthy,  or  protecting  some  fisheries  at  the  point. 
Colonel  Towns  considers  this  information  entirely  trustworthy. 

I examined  Fort  Branch  yesterday  and  feel  satisfied,  if  properly  gar-  ^ 
risoned  and  provisioned,  it  can  repel  any  attack  of  the  eneinj-  by  land  ! 
or  water  less  than  a regular  siege.  The  supply  of  ammunition  is  good,  , 
and  provisions  for  1,000  men  for  thirty  days  are  being  placed  in  as  rap- 
idly as  present  circumstances  permit.  Coniho  Creek,  of  which  the  gen- 
eral spoke  to  me,  will  be  a very  serious  obstacle  to  a land  attack  on  Fort 
Branch.  The  three  roads  crossing  it  near  and  below  the  fort  are  being  ' 
effectually  impeded.  One  of  them  has  been  closed  entirely  and  the  bridge 
destroyed.  At  one  of  the  others  intrenchments  have  been  prepared  and 
at  the  third  are  being  prejiared.  This  creek,  however,  is  no  impediment 
to  an  advance  on  Tarborough. 

If  the  troops  of  my  brigade  are  to  be  used  exclusively  to  close  Ply- 
mouth and  Washington  between  the  Tar  and  Eoanoke,  my  impression 
is  they  should  be  moved  nearer  and  occupy  a line  beginning  from  James- 
ville  or  Gardner’s  Creek,  near  that  town,  and  running  toward  Tranter’s 
Creek,  thence  to  tlie  Tar  Kiver  at  or  near  Pactolus.  On  this  subject  I 
feel  some  hesitation  in  yet  ex])ressing  a positive  opinion. 

If  my  brigade  is  to  be  held  with  a view  to  protect  Weldon  or  some 
other  point,  it  should  not  be  removed  beyond  Hamilton  or  Greenville, 
except  for  picket  guard. 

Will  you  please  inform  me  if  any  troops  are  to  be  stationed  at  Wel- 
don and  if  they  are  to  be  under  my  command  ^ 

I shall  go  to-morrow  to  Greenville  and  thence  to  Tarborough,  where 
I shall  spend  a day  or  two  examining  the  quartermaster’s  and  commis- 
sary departments. 

The  order  substituting  Colonel  Griffin’s  cavalry  regiment  for  Colonel 
Evans’  has  been  received. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MAETIN, 
Brigadier- General. 

P.  S. — Since  writing  the  above  the  pickets  have  brought  in  2 Yankee 
])risoners,  who  say  that  both  General  Wessells  and  General  Hunt  are 
in  Plymouth  with  five  regiments — the  Eighty-fifth,  Ninety-second,  and 
Ninety-sixth  New  York,  and  One  hundred  and  first  and  One  hundred 
and  third  Pennsylvania ; that  the  troops  which  left  there  recently  went 
to  New  Berne,  and  they  think  General  Wessells’  brigade  is  going  to 
Suffolk  soon. 


Hanover  Junction,  May  14, 1863 — 1 p.  in. 
Major-General  Elzey,  Commanding.,  Richmond : 

General:  Tuesday  night  I sent  a company  of  cavalry  out,  with  in- 
structions to  go  as  near  West  Point  as  they  could  and  find  out  what 
was  going  on  there.  I received  a report  dated  12  m.  yesterday,  “King 
William  County,  4 miles  outside  of  the  enemy’s  pickets.”  From  what 
they  heard,  the  enemy  had  landed  on  Thursday  last  some  3,000  infantry, 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1061 


a regiment  of  cavalry,  and  some  light  artillery.  They  were  fortifying 
across  the  Peninsula,  a mile  or  so  from  the  Point.  It  ^vas  thought  that 
the  post  was  intended  as  a refuge  for  stealing  i^arties,  runaway  slaves, 
&c.,  but  I fear  they  will  give  us  more  trouble  than  that,  for  they  can 
march  up  in  force,  threaten  the  railroad  north  of  North  Anna,  perhaps 
attack  it,  or  cross  suddenly  at  Hanover  Oonrt-Honse,  do  the  same  on 
the  south  side,  and  return  by  the  White  House.  As  for  finding  out  tln^ 
strength  of  any  such  party,  my  experience  of  the  cavalry  and  citizens 
(luring  the  last  raid  has  convinced  me  it  is  imjiossible.  As  Pichmond 
is  so  much  nearer  the  White  House  and  West*  Point  yon  have  much 
better  means  of  obtaining  intelligence  than  1 have,  and  1 think  ought 
to  be  able  to  give  me  such  information  as  may  be  ncKicssary.  It  seems 
to  me  that  this  triangle  between  the  railroad  and  the  North  and  South 
Anna  Eivers  should  be  fortified.  Had  I the  tools  I could  do  it  myself, 
but  1 might  be  ordered  aw^ay  in  the  midst,  and  it  would  be  a great  deal 
better  to  send  an  engineer  from  Pichmond,  who  could  continue  until 
the  work  was  done.  AVorks  would  be  required  on  the  North  Anna  at 
the  crossing  of  the  Telegraph  road,  tlie  Fredericksburg  Pailroad,  Mor- 
ris’ Bridge,  and  Bear  Island  Ford;  on  the  South  Anna,  at  the  crossing 
of  the  Qentral  Pailroad,  of  the  Fredericksl)urg  Pailroad,  and  the  Tel- 
egraph road;  at  the  two  crossings  on  Little  Piver,  and  x)erhaps  at  the 
Junction. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servaot, 

J.  J.  PETTIGPEW, 

B'H(ja(llcr- Genera  I, 


Headquarters,  May  14,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  North  Carolina : 

General:  Your  letter  of  the  8th  is  Just  received.  The  impressment 
of  horses  was  ordered  at  the  time  that  the  Yankee  cavalry  was  in  posi- 
tion to  threaten  a raid  through  North  Carolina.  It  is  not  necessary 
therefore  to  impress  further,  but  all  horses  that  you  may  have  im])resse(l, 
and  that  are  not  necessary  to  the  supx)ort  of  himilies  or  used  in  tilling 
the  soil,  had  better  be  retained  for  our  pnrx)oses  if  you  are  in  need  of 
them. 

I think  that  the  enemy  will  x)robably  abandon  North  Carolina  and 
Southern  Virginia,  exce])t  some  posts  occu])ied  by  small  garrisons,  and 
concentrate  his  great  force  in  front  of  onr  army  here.  If  he  does  I 
think  that  a brigade  at  Goldsborough  and  one  at  or  near  Petersburg 
will  be  all  of  the  infantry  force  that  you  will  need.  As  I know  of  no 
other  reliable  officer  whom  we  can  place  in  that  command  I have  sug- 
gested your  name,  knowing  that  you  would  prefer  it  to  a x)osition  here. 

I remain,  very  resx^ectfully,  your  most  obedient  serv  ant, 

JAMES  LONGSTTIEET, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Pichmond,  May  15,  1803. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorongh^  N.  C. : 

General:  I have  received  your  letter  of  yesterday’s  date,  and  in  an- 
swer to  the  several  suggestions  then'in  I am  autliorized  to  stjiDu 

1st — in  reference  to  the  bridge  and  x>iovost  guards  within  your  com- 
mainl.  If  these  guards  have  been  mustered  in  lor  locnl  delense  it  will  be 


1062 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  YIRGINTA. 


[OlTAP.  XXX. 


necessary  to  refer  to  the  terms  entered  into  with  them  at  the  time  of  their 
muster,  and  if  they  have  not  secured  service  at  a particular  spot  they  j 
would  have  to  be  discharged,  if  found  useless,  wheu  their  places  may  be  ' 
sui)plied  by  the  militia  or  by  disabled  soldiers,  as  suggested  by  you.  In 
the  event  of  their  discharge  such  of  them  as  are  liable  to  conscription 
should  be  immediately  enrolled  for  general  service. 

2d.  You  will  consider  the  guard  to  the  prisoners  at  Salisbury  as  sub- 
ject to  your  orders,  to  be  disposed  of  in  such  manner  as  in  your  judgment 
the  interests  of  your  command  shall  require,  first  sending  the  prisoners 
by  proper  escort  to  this  city  to  report  to  General  Winder. 

3d.  In  the  cases  of  such  of  the  cavalry  of  your  command  as  may  per- 
mit themselves  to  be  surprised  or  may  behave  badly  in  the  presence  of 
the  enemy,  you  will  make  si)ecial  reports  of  the  facts  to  this  office.  In 
order  that  authority  may  be  given  you  to  dismount,  and  where  such  be- 
ll avior  is  repeated,  disband  the  men  whose  conduct  maybe  so  reported; 
those  ordered  to  be  disbanded  and  wdio  may  be  subject  to  conscription 
to  be  enrolled  to  serve  as  infantry. 

4th.  You  will  cause  an  ins]>ection  to  be  made  of  Colonel  Wheeler’s 
regiment,  and  if  the  organization  is  found  unwarranted  by  the  number 
of  troops  you  will  report  the  fact  to  this  office  for  orders  in  the  case. 

5th.  In  respect  to  the  exchange  of  full  brigades  of  your  command  with 
skeleton  brigades  in  General  Lee’s  army,  I have  to  state  that  as  General 
Lee  is  now  in  this  city  a conference  will  be  had  with  him  on  the  subject 
of  such  exchanges,  wlien  you  will  be  informed  of  the  result. 

I am,  general,  &c.. 


S.  COOPER, 
Acting  Inspector -General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Ad.it.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  110.  ] Richmond.,  May  15,  1803. 

' * # 

VIII.  Maj.  Gen.  G.  E.  Pickett  will  move  forward  immediately  with 
his  command  and  take  position  at  Hanover  Junction. 

# * * * # # * 

X.  The  artillery  battalion  attached  to  Drewry’s  P>luft*  and  the  officers 
and  crew  of  the  gunboat  Richmond  recently  ordered  to  this  city  will’ 
return  immediately  to  their  former  commands. 

* * ’ * # * * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Kinston.,  N.  C.,  May  10,  1803. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill,  Goldshorough : 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  this  date  directing  me  to  proceed  with 
my  brigade  to  Richmond  has  been  received.  Two  of  the  regiments  will 
be  ready  to  leave  by  10  o’clock  a.  m.  The  others  will  bo  ready  so  soon 
as  transportation  can  be  furnished.  The  two  regiments  would  have 
been  ready  sooner,  but  all  except  one  were  on  picket  duty  at  the  time 
the  order  was  received. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JUNIUS  DANIEL, 

7 Wigadicr-  General. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


10G3 


Richmond,  Va., 

Mmj  16,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

General  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  14tli  instant,  I will  state  that 
the  extent  of  the  re-enforceinents  you  can  send  to  the  Army  of  Northern 
Virginia  must  necessarily  depend  upon  the  strength  of  the  enemy  in 
your  front. 

The  plan  you  propose  of  exchanging  your  full  for  its  reduced  bri- 
gades 1 fear  will  add  but  little  to  its  real  strength.  It  would  increar>('  it 
numerically  but  weaken  it  intrinsically  by  taking  away  tried  troops 
lyider  experienced  officers  and  replacing  them  with  fresh  moo  and  un- 
instructed commanders.  I should  therefore  have  more  to  leed  but  less 
to  depend  on. 

I can  exchange  Daniel’s  brigade  with  one  of  those  you  propose,  but 
cannot  designate  which  until  I return  to  camj),  as  I am  not  sufficiently 
acquainted  with  their  condition  to  make  the  selection.  You  can  there- 
fore put  Daniel  in  motion  at  once.  Ransom  and  Cooke  I consider  as 
belonging  to  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  and  have  relied  upon  their 
return. 

As  far  as  I am  able  to  judge,  the  plan  of  the  enemy  is  to  concentrate 
as  large  a force  as  possible  to  operate  in  Virginia.  Whether  he  will 
unite  the  whole  under  General  Hooker  on  the  Rappahannock  or  oper- 
ate with  different  columns  I cannot  say,  but  from  the  information  I re- 
ceive he  is  withdrawing  troops  froTu  South  Carolina  and  the  country 
south  of  James  River. 

It  is  of  course  our  best  policy  to  do  the  same  and  to  endeavor  to  repel 
his  advance  into  Virginia.  If  he  weakens  his  force  in  North  Carolina 
I think  you  will  be  able,  by  using  all  your  local  troops,  such  portion  of 
your  regular  cavalry  and  regular  brigades  as  may  be  necessary,  to 
repulse  and  restrain  his  marauding  expeditions  and  protect  the  rail- 
roads and  the  farming  interests  of  the  country  you  now  hold.  Every 
man  not  required  for  this  purpose  I desire  you  to  send  to  me  and 
rely  upon  your  good  judgment  to  proportion  the  means  to  the  object  in 
view. 

I think  it  now  too  late  for  any  important  expedition  to  be  undertaken 
by  the  enemy  in  the  Carolinas.  They  will,  I think,  place  themselves 
on  the  defensive  in  those  States,  endeavor  to  deceive  us  by  threatening 
our  communications,  &c.,  and  send  their  available  troops  where  they 
can  operate  to  more  advantage.  I have  no  fear  that  they  will  be  able 
to  mislead  you. 

I hope  you  will  be  able  to  collect  and  secure  for  the  use  of  the 
army  all  the  provisions  and  forage  in  the  districts  in  which  you  are 
operating. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  yeur  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


1064 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  E.  YlRaiNIA. 


tCiTAP.  XXX. 


Headquarters  Margin’s  Brigade, 

Tarhorough,  Mciy  16,  1863. 

Maj.  Archer  Anderson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Goldsborough^  JSf.  C. : 

Major  : I returned  here  last  night  from  Greenville.  I found  Captain 
Coleman  had  laid  out  a line  of  defenses  around  the  town.  They  do  not 
fulfill  all  the  conditions  necessary  to  a good  defense,  but  I thought  it 
the  best  the  ground  would  permit.  I understood  the  captain  to  say 
General  Hill  had  decided  to  put  the  line  of  defense  at  Greenville,  and 
I did  not  examine  any  other  })oiut. 

Colonel  Griffin  was  absent  from  his  headquarters  visiting  his  pickets, 
and  1 did  not  see  him.  The  adjutant  showed  me  the  picket  stations  on 
the  map,  and  they  seemed  to  be  well  selected. 

The  telegrai)h  operator  at  Kocky  Mount  is  said  not  to  understand  the 
English  language.  It  seems  to  me  very  desirable  that  this  line  should 
be  extended  to  Tarborough  at  once.  I also  think  it  would  be  less  ex- 
pensive than  to  keep  a line  of  couriers  on  the  road. 

I shall  leave  here  to-day  for  Hamilton,  where  my  headquarters  will 
be  established  till  I can  become  well  acquainted  with  the  roads  or  Gen- 
eral Wessells  shall  move  from  Plymouth.  The  presence  of  this  general 
in  Plymouth  with  his  brigade  made  it  advisable,  in  my  judgment,  to 
move  Colonel  Martin’s  regiment  to  Hamilton.  I found  also  that  on  ac- 
count of  the  scarcity  of  tools  the  working  detail  from  the  Eorty-seventh 
Kegiment  would  not  be  heavy. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MAPTIN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Martin’s  Brigade, 

Hamilton^  May  17,  1863. 

Maj.  Archer  Anderson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  General  HiWs  Hdqrs.,  Goldsborough : 

Major  : I returned  here  last  night.  Another  prisoner  from  the 
Ninety-sixth  New  York  Regiment  was  brought  in  yesterday.  I exam- 
ined him  carefully  to-day.  He  confirms  in  all  essential  imints  the  in-* 
formation  derived  from  the  two  whom  I examined  at  the  cavalry  camp 
near  Williamston.  He  says  the  Ninety-second  New  York,  one  of  Wes- 
sells’ brigade,  was  left  in  the  fort  opposite  New  Berne,  but  a Massachu- 
setts regiment  took  its  place  in  the  brigade  at  Plymouth.  The  regi- 
ments are  small;  only  nine  companies  in  the  Ninety-sixth  New  York; 
all  the  officers  of  Company  G in  that  regiment  having  resigned — the  men 
were  transferred  to  other  companies.  The  prisoner’s  comi)any  had  not 
more  than  25  for  duty  and  the  regiment  did  not  exceed  300.  He  thought 
all  the  others  were  rather  larger,  but  could  not  say  positively.  General 
Hunt  had  been  in  Plymouth  and  in  command  of  Wessells’  brigade  dur- 
ing the  absence  of  the  latter  on  account  of  the  death  of  his  wife,  but  had 
returned  to  New  Berne. 

I think  1 have  made  such  arrangements  as  will  give  me  information 
from  Plymouth  through  our  own  jieople  in  a few  days. 

The  Seventeenth  reached  Hamilton  yesterday.  Colonel  Griflin  re- 
ports that  there  are  500  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  at  Hill’s  Point  and  the 
same  number  at  Rodman’s  farm;  ten  regiments  of  infantry,  several 
pieces  of  light  artillery,  and  about  10  cavalry  (Jocknick’s),  besides  a 
conii>any  of  40  cavalry,  now  in  Washington.  It  is  thought  tliero  is  no 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.' — CONFEDERATE.  1065 

other  cavalry  on  the  south  side  of  Tar  River.  The  eueui}^  lias  infantry 
and  cavalry  pickets  miles  from  Washington  on  the  Plymouth,  James- 
ville,  and  Williamston  road,  and  fences  across  the  two  hrst  named.  He 
has  strengthened  his  earthworks  near  the  town,  the  work  having  been 
done  by  negroes.  Also  that  there  is  no  direct  communication  with 
Washington  on  either  side  of  the  river.  Enemy  not  active  and  the  cit- 
izens have  not  been  much  troubled  on  the  north  side.  Bacon  is  still 
brought  over  the  liiiQS.  This  I believe  is  extensively  done,  and  I think 
it  advisable  to  permit  its  continuance  and  allow  the  persons  doing  so  to 
return  without  difficulty. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

, J.  G.  MARTIN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  lb,  1<S63. 


Brigadier-General  Pettigrew, 

Commanding  Forces  at  Hanover  Junction  : 


General  : Your  letter  of  the  14th  instant  is  received. 

The  commanding  general  desires  me  to  inform  you  that  he  thinks  it 
best  that  you  should  dispose  of  all  your  cavalry  to  the  east  and  south 
of  the  railroad  and  depend  upon  the  cavalry  of  this  army  to  cover  you 
in  the  direction  of  the  Raiipahannock  and  Gordonsville,  your  cavalry 
being  disposed  so  as  to  watch  the  enemy  in  tbe  direction  of  West  Point 
and  the  Peninsula.  The  general  further  desires  that  you  will  always 
keep  your  command  well  in  hand,  so  as  to  be  able  to  operate  in  auy 
direction  with  the  greatest  promptness. 

You  will  find  inclosed  the  order  regulating  the  transportation  of  bag- 
gage of  the  army.  You  are  desired  to  regulate  the  transportation  of 
your  command  according  to  this  order. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  L.  LONG, 

Colonel  and  Military  Secretary. 


Hamilton,  N.  C.,  May  18, 1863. 
General  Hill,  Commanding^  (fie.,  Goldsborough  : 

General  : I regret  I should  not  have  understood  your  wishes  about 
the  Seventeenth  North  Oarohna  Regiment,  as  I would  not  then  have 
moved  it  to  this  point.  As  it  is  here,  and  the  officers  and  men  are  well 
acquainted  \vifb  the  roads  and  swami)s  of  this  vicinity,  due  from  a tour 
of  iield  service,  I shall  order  Colonel  Gibbs  to  Greenville. 

I shall  leave  for  Greenville  to-morrow  to  make  it  my  headquarters. 

Your  letter  of  the  17th  was  received  at  1 o^clock.  This  will  be  sent 
by  return  courier. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MARTIN, 
Brigadier-General. 

None  of  the  unattached  companies  have  arrived  here,  and  nothing 
has  been  lieard  of  any  of  tlumi  in  answer  to  the  Governor’s  ordc^r. 


1066 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Hou.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  IVar,  Richmond^  Ya. : 


Headquarters, 
Fredericicshurg,  May  20,  1863. 


Sir:  The  services  of  General  Longstreet  will  be  required  with  this 
army.  Upon  his  leaving  the  department  south  of  James  Kiver  I had 
supposed  its  command  would  have  devolved  upon  General  D.  H.  Hill 
as  the  senior  major-general.  He  informed  me  this  morning  that  he 
directed  the  three  major-generals  in  command  of  the  several  districts  to 
report  directly  to  the  War  Department.  I would  recommend,  therefore, 
that  General  D.  H.  Hill  be  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  department 
between  James  Kiver  and  the  Cape  Fear.  The  battery  at  Dre wry’s 
Blutf,  if  considered  more  convenient,  could  be  embraced  within  the  com- 
mand of  General  Elzey.  I wish  General  Hill  to  make  such  disposition 
of  his  troops  as  to  give  me  all  the  force  that  can  be  spared  from  North 
Carolina.  Jenkins’  brigade,  belonging  to  Pickett’s  division,  is  still  on  the 
Blackwater,  and  I do  not  like  to  order  it  up  until  I hear  whether  proper 
dispositions  are  made  to  relieve  it.  It  is  much  wanted  with  its  division. 
Our  scouts  report  that  General  Heintzelman,  with  his  corps  from  Wash- 
ington, has  joined  General  Hooker,  Governor  Curtin  having  promised 
to  defend  Washington  City  with  20,000  State  troops.  I have  not  heard 
yet  of  any  fleet  of  transports  ascending  the  Potomac.  Single  transports 
are  frequently  seen  coming  up  the  river.  Yesterday  forty  transports 
were  counted  at  Aquia  Creek.  Eegiments  of  the  two  years’  men  are 
being  discharged,  I learn,  as  their  time  expires,  and  it  is  thought  are 
sent  oft*  at  night. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  20,  1863. 

Maj.'  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

Commanding  Department  of  Richmond.,  Ya. : 


General:  A party  of  deserters  from  the  North  Carolina  regiments 
of  this  army  left  camp  last  night,  taking  their  arms  and  equipments  with 
tliem.  Some  of  them  are  supposed  to  be  making  for  Ashe  County,  North 
Carolina,  and.  many,  it  is  said,  cross  the  James  River  at  Lumberioii, 
about  45  miles  above  Richmond,  and  Roanoke  at  Horse  Ford  Mill. 
General  Lee  directs  me  to  request  that  your  guards  be  instructed  to  l)e 
on  the  alert  for  them,  and  if  practicable  th(‘.j)oints  indicated  be  watclied 
and  guarded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  s(u  vant,  « 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
As,^i.^tanf  Adjutant- General. 


Crap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


10G7 


Ahstract  from  Field  Return  of  troops  commanded  hy  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  May  20, 

18C;}.  (Ivor,  Va'.) 


1 Present  for 
j duty. 

Aggregate  present,  j 

Aggregate  present 

j "and  absent. 

Troop.s. 

Officers. 

a 

<u 

Jeiilviris’  hi'igade 

2r)0 

2,  394 

2,  905 

4,  120 

Davis’  l)i'igadc 

2,414 

2,  971 

3,  4.55 

.T2d  Kegiincut  Virginia  Voluiitccra* 

21 

89 

101 

200 

41st  Noi  tli  Carolina  Cavalryt 

7 

194 

224 

2.32 

Doga.s’  artillery  battalion..’ 

27 

510 

598 

708 

MoscIcv’.h  artillery 

4 

50 

05 

71 

Ihadford’s  battery 

4 

70 

88 

92 

Fort  Powb.atan  | 

300 

012 

Camp  Paroled  Prisoners  ^ 

13 

137 

193 

280 

Pattnlion  pontoiiiera II  . . 

Orand  total 

489 

5,  870 

7,  025 

1 9, 830 

j 

* Ono  company  detached.  t A portion  only.  I Xot  cla.s.sificd. 

§ Does  not  include  exclianged  prisoners.  y No  report. 


Burwell’s  Bay,  May  21, 18G3. 
Maj.  William  Norris,  Chief  of  Signal  Corps: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  safe  return,  with  dates  of  the  20th 
instant.  The  Yankees  at  West  Point  have  been  re-eniorced,  but  from 
the  best  information  I can  obtain  they  do  not,  1 tliiuk*  number ’more 
than  10,000.  Five  or  six  light  batteries  and  all  tlie  spare  liorses  and 
mules  at  Fortress  Monroe  were  sent  to  Yorktown  on  Monday.  The  force 
at  Suffolk  still  numbers  about  15,000. 

liespecttiilly,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  U.  CAUSEY, 

Captain.,  C.  S.  Army. 


PiCHMOND,  May  21,  18G3. 

General  D.  H.  Hill,  Ooldshorougk : 

You  had  better  wait  for  recei]>t  of  General  Lee’s  letter  to  you.  I have 
telegrajihed  him  to  send  a c#py.  The  President  says  the  letter  refers 
the  matter  to  your  discretion  according  as  you  may  find  the*  strength 
of  the  enemy  to  be. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjntant  and,  Inspector  General. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh,  May  21,  18G3. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

Dear  Sir:  Captain  Elliott,  commanding  a company  of  State  troops, 
captured  last  Saturday  two  steamers  in  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake 
Canals,  one  of  th.em  carrying  a large  mail.  Upon  overlooking  the  mail, 
in  addition  to  various  items  of  intelligence,  w(^  found  a letter  from  a 
man  by  the  name  of  MontgonHuy,  in  VAashington  City,  to  Geueral  Fos- 
ter, at  New  Bei'iie,  ])roposing  a geiKual  n(‘gro  insurrection  and  destine- 


1068 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CriAP.  XXX. 


tion  of  all  railroad  bridges,  &c.,  in  the  South.  I inclose  you  a copy  of 
the  letter,  giving  all  the  minutia  of  the  dainuable  scheme.  You  can  of 
course  make  such  use  of  it  as  you  may  think  best.  The  necessity  for 
increased  diligence  in  guarding  our  bridges,  &c.,  is  ai)parent.  * 

The  letter  has  not  yet  been  made  public. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

Z.  B.  VANOE. 


[InoloBure.l 

Washington,  D.  O.,  May  12, 1863. 

Major-General  Foster, 

Gomdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina^  Beaufort^  N.  G.: 

General  : A plan  has  been  formed  for  a simultaneous  movement  to 
sever ‘the  rebel  communications  throughout  the  whole  South,  which  has 
been  sent  to  some  general  in  each  military  department  in  the  seceded 
States,  in  order  that  they  may  act  in  concert  and  thus  secure  success. 
The  plan  is  to  induce  the  blacks  to  make  a concerted  and  simultaneous 
movement  or  rising,  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  August  next,  over  the 
entire  States  in  rebellion j to  arm  themselves  with  any  and  every  kind 
of  weapon  that  may  come  to  hand  and  commence  operations  by  burn- 
ing all  railroad  and  country  bridges  and  tearing  up  railroad  tracks  and 
destroying  telegraph  lines,  &c.,  and  then  take  to  the  woods,  the  swamps, 
or  the  mountains,  whence  they  may  emerge,  as  occasion  may  offer,  for 
lirovisions  and  for  further  depredations.  No  blood  is  to  be  shed  exeept 
in  self-defense.  The  corn  will  be  in  roas ting-ears  about  the  1st  of  Au- 
gust, and  with  this  and  hogs  running  in  the  woods,  and  by  foraging 
upon  the  plantations  by  night,  they  can  subsist.  This  is  the  plan,  in 
substance,  and  if  we  can  obtain  a concerted  movement  at  the  time 
named  it  will  doubtless  be  successful.  The  main  object  of  this  letter  is 
to  state  the  time  for  the  rising,  that  it  may  be  simultaneous  over  the 
whole  South.  To  earry  the  plan  into  effect  in  the  department  in  which 
you  have  a command,  you  are  requested  to  select  one  or  more  intelligent 
contrabands,  and  after  telling  them  the  plan  and  the  time  (night  of  the 
1st  of  August)  you  will  send  them  into  the  interior  of  the  country, 
within  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  where  slaves  are  numerous,  with  instruc- 
tions to  communicate  the  plan  and  the  time  to  as‘  many  intelligent 
slaves  as  possible,  and  requesting  of  each  to  circulate  it  far  and  wide 
over  the  country,  so  that  we  may  be  able  to  make  the  rising  understood 
by  several  hundred  thousand  slaves  by  the  time  named. 

When  you  have  made  these  arrangements  please  inclose  this  letter 
to  some  other  general  commanding  in  the  same  department  with  your- 
self— some  one  whom  you  know  or  believe  to  be  favorable  to  such  move- 
ment— and  he  in  turn  is  requested  to  send  it  to  another,  and  so  on  until 
it  has  traveled  the  entire  rounds  of  the  department,  and  each  command 
and  post  will  in  this  way  be  acting  together  in  the  employment  of  negro 
slaves  to  carry  the  plan  into  effect. 

In  this  way  the  plan  will  be  adopted  at  the  same  time  and  in  concert 
over  the  whole  South,  and  yet  no  one  of  all  engaged  in  it  will  learn  tlie 
names  of  his  associates  and  will  only  know  the  number  of  generals  act- 
ing together  in  the  movement.  To  give  this  last  information,  and  be- 
fore inclosing  this  letter  to  some  other  general,  put  the  numeral  I after 
the  word  ‘‘Approved”  at  the  bottom  of  this  sheet,  and  when  it  has  gone 
the  rounds  of  the  department  the  i)erson  last  receiving  it  will  please 
reinclose  it  to  my  address,  that  1 may  thus  know  and  communicate  the 
fact  thatThe  plan  is  being  carried  out  at  the  same  time. 


CiiAv.  XXX.]  CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1069 

lie  assured,  sir,  that  I will  iuform  every  deijartmeut  in  the  seceded 
Slates  of  the  [)laii  and  the  time,  that  the  movement  may  thus  be  gen- 
eral and  simultaneous. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

AUGUSTUS  S.  MONTGOMEEY. 

Note. — This  letter  may  be  sent  to  other  departments  farther  south 
after  having  gone  the  rounds  of  yours,  which  will  show  to  all  that  the 
plan  is  beiug  generally  adoi^ted. 


Approved. 


Department  of  North  Carolina. 

C.  MAKSHALL, 
Major  and  Aide-de-Camp, 


Headquarters  Department  Southern  Virginia, 

Ivor^  May  22,  isfe. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  Bichmond,  Va.: 

General  : I have  received  your  telegrams  respecting  Smoot’s  bat- 
tery. Ever  since  I ba%^e  been  here  (after  leaving  Eichmond)  we  have 
been  occupied  with  the  enemy.  They  ai)peared  at  Oarrsville  with 
12,000  men,  thirty  pieces  of  artillery,  and  cavalry,  and  commenced  tak- 
ing uj)  the  railroad.  They  were  driven  back  2 miles  to  where  they  were 
strongly  intrenched.  Last  night  information  came  that  there  were 
three  gunboats  coming  up  the  Chowan  and  that  they  were  not  far 
below  the  Meherrin,  and  to-day  they  are  in  strong  force  within  8 miles 
of  this  place;  nevertheless  I ordered  back  the  guns,  though  much 
wanted  to  protect  the  steamers  we  have  at  Franklin  and  for  the  de- 
fenses of  the  river. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  22,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  District  of  North  Carolina : 


General  : I am  informed  by  telegram  from  General  Cooper  that  you 
have  received  my  telegram  but  not  my  letter  from  Richmond  of  the  16th.* 
I herewith  inclose  you  a copy  of  the  letter.  I have  nothing  in  addition 
to  say,  furtlier  than  our  scouts  have  not  reported  the  passage  of  any 
large  lleets  of  vessels  (transi)orts)  from  Suffolk  up  the  Potomac,  but 
have  reported  a number  of  individual  vessels  bearing  troops.  Re-en- 
forcements of  30,000  men  have  also  reached  Hooker^from  the  direction 
of  Washington  since  the  late  battles.  Four  gunboats  are  reported  as- 
cending the  Rappahannock  below  Urbana,  and  a scout'  who  has  just 
returned  from  the  enemy’s  lines  reports  that  every  indication  leads  to 
the  belief  that  ho  is  i>reparing  for  an  early  move. 

Your  particular  attention  is  called  to  the  inclosed  letter,  and  you  are 
desired  to  i)ush  forward  re-enforcements  from  North  Carolina  as  rapidly 


See  Leo  to  Hill,  of  that  date. 


1070 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CIIAI*.  XXX. 


as  circumstances  will  permit.  I wish  to  be  able  to  oppose  tbe  lull 
strength  of  this  army  to  the  enemy  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  meet 
him  again. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Camp  Fredericksburg,  May  22, 1863. 
General  Arnold  Elzey,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General:  Captain  Capps,  Fifteenth  Virginia  Cavalry,  on  duty  in 
King  William  County,  reports  that  Mr.  Davis,  whose  home  is  at  West 
Point,  and  who  at  this  time  is  employed  in  the  Confederate  Kavy,  has 
been  noticing  the  movements  of  tbe  enemy,  and  states  that  they  have 
left  in  part.  Three  transports  left  on  the  15th  loaded  with  trooi)s. 
There  appears  now  to  be  there  two  squadrons  of  cavalry,  one  company 
artillery,  and  a small  portion  .of  infantry.  About  1,000  negroes  are  at 
work  on  theintrenchments.  All  the  gunboats  and  transports  have  left 
except  two.  They  appear  to  be  ferry-boats.  Have  you  received  intelli- 
gence corroborating  this,  or  can  you  ascertain  what  is  the  condition  of 
things  It  was  reported  yesterday  that  four  gunboats  were  ascend- 
ing the  Eappahannock  and  had  come  within  12  miles  of  Tappahannock. 
Milroy  has  recrossed  the  mountains  and  returned  to  the  valley.  Our 
scouts  north  of  the  Eappahannock  report  indications  of  another  move 
on  the  part  of  General  Hooker.  Seven  xheces  of  artillery  and  some  in- 
fantry have  reached  Stafford  Court-House  from  Dumfries.  Heintzelman 
is  said  to  have  joined  him.  Eeports  from  Alexandria  state  that  30,000 
new  troops  are  to  be  sent  to  him.  May  I ask  you  to  report  these  cir- 
cumstances to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  his  information"? 

Very  resi^ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

Gerieral. 


Special  Order's,  \ Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Ofeice, 

No.  122.  1 liichmond,  31ay  22,  1863. 

******* 

X.  Major  Wren  will  proceed  with  his  battalion  in  the  direction  of 
Lynchburg,  Va.,  to  guard  the  passes  on  the  James  EiVer.  Quarter- 
master’s and  commissary  departments  will  provide  forage  and  rations. 
* * * * * * * 

XX.  Brig.  Gen.  George  H.  Steuart,  Provisional  Army  of  the  Con- 
federate States,  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Fredericksburg,  Va.,aud 
report  to  General  E.  E.  Lee  for  assignment  to  duty. 

* * * * * ' * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

JXO.  WITHEES, 

• Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  May  23, 1863. 

Major-General  Hill,  Commanding^  (be.,  Goldshorough : 

General  : I send  you  a note  from  Shays.*  They  seem  over  the 
lines  to  be  busy  fortifying  themselves.  I do  not  think  they  will  shortly 

*Not  found. 


Chap.  XXX.]  COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE,  1071 

adviince,  tliougli  the  manner  in  which  we  are  stripped  of  trooi)s  from 
Savannah  up  must  be  a great  bait  for  them. 

I am  in  hoi^es  we  may  hear  something  more  favorable  about  the 
Southwest.  Pemberton  is  said  to  have  had  over  60,000.  What  can  he 
be  about  <?  * * * 

Very  truly,  yours, 

W.  H.  0.  WHITIKG,  . 

Major-General. 

Headquarters, 
Fredericksburg y May  25,  1863. 

General  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  Department  South  of  James  Fiver  : 

General  : I have  received  by  courier  your  letter  of  the  21st.  I am 
much  gratihed  to  learn  that  the  enemy  has  been  so  harassed  and  pun- 
ished during  the  past  months,  and  wish  that  your  force  was  sufficient 
to  drive  them  from  the  State.  If  your  information  is  correct  that  their 
troops  are  moving  from  the  State  I hope  you  will  be  able  to  spare  the 
brigades  belonging  to  this  army.  They  are  very  essential  to  aid  in  the 
etfort  to  turn  back  the  tide  of  war  that  is  now  pressing  south. 

Since  the  battle  of  Ohancellorsville  the  enemy  has  made  a lodgment 
at  West  Point,  the  confluence  of  the  Pamunkey  and  Mattapony  Pivers, 
and  are  fortifying  that  neck.  Whether  it  is  a feint  or  preparation  for 
a new  base  of  operations  I do  not  know.  I have  thought  it  probable 
that  the  troops  from  your  department  may  be  in  process  of  transference 
to  that  point.  I therefore  desire  that  you  direct  Brigadier- General 
Jenkins  to  join  his  division  (Pickett’s)  at  Hanover  Junction,  and  Brig- 
adier-General Eansoin  to  repair  to  Eichmond.  Should  it  be  necessaiy 
to  move  him  farther  he  will  receive  orders  from  General  Elzey,  to 
whom  he  Avill  report.  You  can  retain  Brigadier-General  Cooke  for  the 
present,  or  until  you  can  more  fully  ascertain  the  intentions  of  the  en- 
emy, and  see  what  dispositions  you  can  best  make  for  the  protection 
of  your  department.  I think,  if  necessary,  troops  may  be  drawn  from 
South  Carolina  and  Georgia  to  re  enforce  you,  as  I can  hardly  suppose 
that  the  enemy  contemiilates  any  serious  invasion  of  that  department 
this  summer.  I think,  too,  the  season  has  passed  for  making  any  move- 
ment in  North  Carolina  more  than  raids  of  devastation  or  attempts  to 
retain  there  our  troops  in  idleness.  I hope  you  will  be  able  to  frustrate 
iujd  punish  all  such  eftbiits. 

1 am  very  much  in  need  of  cavalry,  and  if  you  can  spare  another  reg- 
iment, as  you  suggest,  I will  be  much  obliged  to  you  to  order  it  to  repair 
to  Orange  Court-House  and  report  to  General  Stuart.  I am  told  there 
is  a regiment  on  the  Blackwater,  whose  horses  are  in  good  condition, 
which,  if  you  could  replace  by  another,  it  might  be  well  to  send. 

If  you  require  General  Eobertson  to  command  or  organize  the  cavalry 
in  your  department  I will  return  him  to  you. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Naval  Commandant’s  Office, 

Wilmingtoiiy  N.  C.,  May  25,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Longstreet, 

Commanding  Military  Departmeuty  Fetershurgy  Va. : 

General  : I have  serious  misgivings  as  to  the  safety  of  the  gunboat 
and  floating  battery  building  near  Scotland  Neck,  upon  the  Eoanoke. 


1072 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XXX. 


Unless  there  be  a cavalry  force  on  the  left  bank  to  give  notice  of  the 
enemy’s  approach,  by  a sudden  raid  across  from  Winston,  our  work  can 
be  destroyed  by  a night’s  raid,  thus  crushing  all  our  hopes  of  repossess- 
ing Albemarle  Sound. 

It  is  not  for  me  to  suggest  any  course  to  you,  who  are  so  much  better 
(pialified  to  determine  what  should  be  done,  and  I simply  express  my 
anxiety  for  the  vessels,  upon  which  we  are  working  with  all  possible 
rapidity,  and  ask  you  to  protect  them,  for  I have*uot  men  sufficient  to 
compose  the  crew  of  the  iron-clad  almost  comideted  here. 

Very  resiiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  F.  LYNCH, 

Flag-Officer^  Commanding  Naval  Defenses^  North  Carolina, 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters,  June  7, 1863. 
KespectfuUy  referred  to  Major-General  Hill. 

JAMES  LONGSTKEET, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  26,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina,,  Raleigh  : 

Governor  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  the  21st  instant,  with  its  inclosures,  for  which  I return  you  my 
thanks. 

I think  the  course  pursued  by  you  with  reference  to  the  letter  of  Mont- 
gomery, in  withholding  it  from  publication,  judicious  and  proper.  I would 
suggest  that  measures  be  taken  to  advise  all  the  State  authorities  and 
military  commanders  privately  of  the  proposed  insurrection,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  upon  their  guard  and  take  the  necessary  precautions 
to  prevent  the  movement  and  i)rotect  public  and  other  j)roperty. 

1 thank  you  for  the  coi)y  of  the  order  showing  the  regiments  of  nine 
months’  men  that  go  out  of  service,  and  hope  your  adjutant-general 
may  succeed  in  ascertaining  the  number  of  regiments  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina.  The  information  would  be  useful,  and  I should 
like  to  have  it.  ^ 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

11.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  26,  1863. 

The  Hon.  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  to  you  a copy  of  a letter  forwarded 
to  me  on  the  21st  instant  by  His  Excellency  Governor  Vance,  of  North 
Carolina.*  Governor  Vance  states  that  it  is  a copy  of  an  original  letter 
addressed  to  General  Foster,  and  recently  taken  in  a Federal  mail,  cap- 
tured by  some  of  our  troops  in  the  State  service.  The  Governor  also 
says  that  he  has  not  given  publicity  to  the  letter,  a course  which  I have 
advised  him  that  I consider  prudent  and  judicious.  I have  suggested 


Seoiuclosuro  to  Vaucc'e  letter,  p.  10(>b, 


CIIAI*.  XXX.]  CORKESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1073 

to  Governor  Vance  to  cause  the  State  and  military  authorities  to  be 
conhdentially  advised  of  the  proposed  movement,  that  pro])er  i)rccau- 
tionary  measures  may  be  adopted.  Without  knowing-  anything  of  the 
letter  or  the  writer,  further  than  may  be  inferred  from  the  apparent  in- 
dications of  the  connection  of  tlie  latter  either  with  those  in  authority 
or  with  others  who  have  united  to  carry  out  this  diabolical  project,  I 
deem  it  my  duty  to  lay  the  matter  before  you  for  such  action  as  you 
may  see  fit  to  take  in  the  premises. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  20.  1 Goldshoroughj  May  20,  1863. 

The  department  commander  announces  the  well-known  fact  of  the 
death  of  the  great  and  good  Jackson,  not  merely  in  order  to  pay  a trib- 
ute to  the  illustrious  dead,  but  also  to  incite  the  troops  to  imitate  his 
example.  His  name  has  been  identified  with  almost  all  the  great  battles 
of  the  war,  and  his  genius  and  courage  have  been  the  chief  elements  in 
Southern  success  and  Yankee  discomfiture.  The  eagle  glance  and  iron 
will  of  the  great  commander  were  happily  united  in  him  with  the  i)atient, 
uncomplaining  endurance  of  the  common  soldier. 

His  wonderful  battles  have  contributed  largely  to  our  indei)endence, 
and  his  great  fame  has  shed  a halo  of  glory  over  his  beloved  South. 
But  his  virtues  as  a man  will  be  as  fondly  remembered  by  his  country- 
men as  the  brilliant  deeds  of  his  military  career.  He  has  taught  us 
that  he  who  most  fears  Grod  the  least  fears  man;  that  the  most  exalted 
courage  may  be  associated  with  the  modesty  of  the  shrinking  girl;  that 
the  lips  which  were  never  defiled  with  ribaldry  and  profanity  could 
cheer  on  most  loudly  amidst  the  roar  of  cannon  and  the  clash  of  arms. 
His  whole  life  was  a rebuke  to  the  intriguing,  the  selfish,  the  cowardly, 
the  vulgar,  and  the  profane. 

The  pure  man  will  be  loved  as  much  as  the  heroic  soldier  will  be  ad- 
mired in  the  future  ages  of  the  republic. 

Let  us  drop  our  laurel  upon  his  bier,  but  remember  that  we  may  best 
honor  him  by  striving  day  and  night,  and  with  his  unwavering  trust  in 
God,  to  secure  the  independence  for  which  he  gave  his  life. 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major- General. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  May  27,  1863. 

Major-General  Whiting  : 

General:  Itansom  has  been  ordered  to  Virginia.  His  first  regiment 
leaves  to-day.  This  makes  us  very  weak.  The  mail  captured  by  tlie 
guerrillas  showed  the  astonishing  fact  that  tbere  arc  thirty-one  regi- 
ments at  New  Berne,  and  that  instead  of  sending  off  they  have  been 
receiving  troops.  Nine  regiments  are  there  mentioned  which  were  not 
in  my  original  list  and  of  which  I have  never  seen  any  mention  in  their 
papers.  Take  care  that  we  are  not  all  bagged  some  of  these  days. 

Jones,  the  great  brigand,  was  really  killed  in  my  chase  of  him  the 
other  day.  He  was  a bold,  dangerous,  bad  man.  His  work  has  been 
that  of  the  Gomanche. 

l am  afraid  that  our  scouts  knew  nothing  of  the  strength  of  the  Yaii- 
68  R R — VOL  xvin 


1074 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


kees  5 they  liave  been  relying  entirely  upon  what  the  citizens  tell  them, 
and  now  that  the  blockade  is  strict  they  know  nothing.  I hoiie  that 
yonr  works  are  strong  on  Sound  and  Holly  Stretch  road. 

Direct  to  Petersburg. 

Very  respectfully, 

D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


[General  A.  H.  Colquitt:] 


Headquarters, 
Goldsboroughj  N.  €.,  May  27,  1863. 


General  : This  will  be  handed  you  by  Major  Nethercutt,  who  has  a 
battalion  of  Partisan  Kangers  on  the  Upper  Trent  road. 

General  Ransom  is  leaving  at  a very  unfortunate  time,  as  the  Yankees 
are  certainly  in  large  force  at  New  Berne,  and  neither  you  nor  Cooke 
know  the  country. 

You  will  find  Major  Nethercutt  a very  trustful,  reliable,  and  worthy 
man.  He  is  thoroughly  jiosted  in  regard  to  the  country.  Major  Nether- 
cutt  has  about  500  men.  Gapt.  0.  G.  Wright  is  there  with  a battalion  of 
300  men.  Maj.  J.  N.  Whitford  is  at  Coward’s  Bridge  with  some  400  men. 
He  should  be  ordered  up  in  case  of  an  advance  upon  Kinston.  You 
can  thus  bring  into  battle  upward  of  5,000  men.  General  Martin  is  at 
Greenville  with  two  regiments  and  could  be  sent  for  in  case  anything 
serious  should  occur.  He  is  your  senior,  and  after  General  Ransom  has 
left  he  will  be  in  charge  of  this  State.  Telegrajih  to  me  promiitly  at 
Petersburg  should  there  be  a serious  movement. 

Do  not  attempt  to  fight  farther  out  than  the  Southwest.  You  can ' 
whip  any  force  upon  the  Neuse  and  Lower  Trent  road;  but  should  the 
Yankees  swing  round  on  the  upper  road — the  Upper  Trent  and  Wil- 
mington road — you  may  cross  over  to  attack  their  rear  or  fall  back  across 
the  river.  It  will  never  do  to  fight  in  the  earthworks  just  over  the 
bridge. 

Have  the  new  bridge  finished  rapidly ; clear  away  all  the  trees  on  the 
other  side  for  at  least  500  yards  and  have  strong  batteries  and  ritie-i)its 
to  protect  the  bridge.  After  you  have  finished  the  bridge  the  old 
bridge  could  be  destroyed  in  case  of  an  advance.  Those  silly  works 
near  the  bridge  on  the  other  side  could  then  be  destroyed,  as  the  Yankees 
would  use  them  as  batteries  against  the  town. 

I hope  that  you  may  have  great  success  in  your  new  field.  Study  the 
roads  and  country  rapidly. 

With  great  respect, 


D.  H.  HILL, 
Major-General. 


Goldsborougii,  N.  C.,  May  27,  1803. 
G(‘-imral  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding  Army: 

General:  I wrote  to  you  two  days  ago  that  the  information  through 
the  captured  mail  showed  that  there  were  thirty-one  regiments  in  New 
Berne  and  possibly  six  more,  as  six  others,  not  mentioned  in  the  letters, 
were  known  to  be  there  before  the  battle  of  Chancellors  ville.  I received 
your  order  last  night  to  remove  Ransom.  My  transportation  is  very 
limited,  and  it  will  take  three  days  to  get  him  ofi‘.  1 hope  that  you  will 
rei)lace  Ransom  by  oue  of  the  shattered  brigades,  else  the  railroad  can 


Chap.  XXX.] 


1075 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

be  cut  and  possibly  Wiliiiingtou  be  taken.  The  removal  of  Ransom  I 
regard  as  hazardous  at  this  time  unless  you  move  soon.  I go  on  to-day 
to  Petersburg  to  be  provost-marshal  there. 

As  soon  as  I know  where  Brigadier-General  Jenkins  is  I will  order 
him  to  join  General  Pickett. 

With  great  respect, 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — I have  sent  you  about  9,500  on  paper,  possibly  8,000  effectives, 
if  the  partisan  cavalry  can  be  called  effectives.  I have  received  in 
return  about  1,500  effective  men,  really  good  and  true. 

I am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  offer  of  Brigadier-General  Robertson, 
but  he  has  been  once  in  this  department. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  28,  1863. 

MaJ.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  (be.,  Kinston^  N.  G.  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  25th  instant  is  received.  I regret  to 
hear  of  the  occurrence  reported  by  you,  and  fear  that  the  regiment 
allowed  itself  to  be  surprised.  I am  gratified,  however,  that  you  drove 
the  enemy  back  so  promptly  to  his  intrenchments  and  did  all  in  your 
power  to  retrieve  the  disaster. 

With  referenoe  to  the  Federal  force  in  North  Carolina,  I have  ob- 
served that  the  department  has  been  divided  into  three  districts,  a list 
of  which,  with  the  names  of  the  commanders,  I inclose.  The  name  of 
General  Foster  is  not  mentioned.  He  may  still  command  the  depart- 
ment or  he  may  have  been  withdrawn.  I am  at  a loss  to  account  for 
the  troops  that  have  appeared  at  West  Point,  unless  they  came  from 
North  Carolina  j I do  not  think  they  were  taken  from  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac.  All  the  information  received  indicates  that  none  have  gone 
down  the  Potomac.  On  the  contrary,  troops  have  been  reported  com- 
ing up  the  river,  and  Hooker  has  received  re-enforcements  since  the 
late  battles.  I supposed  that  the  troops  at  West  Point  might  have 
come  from  North  Carolina  and  that  General  Foster  maybe  in  command 
or  that  he  will  be.  The  division  of  the  department  into  districts  would 
indicate  that  active  operations  on  an  extensive  scale  were  not  contem- 
plated, but  rather  the  occupancy  of  the  country. 

I think  your  view  with  regard  to  the  letters  correct,  and  that  the 
writers  addressed  them  to  their  correspondents  in  ignorance  of  their 
having  left  North  Carolina,  a fact  that  would  of  course  be  withheld  as 
long  as  possible  from  the  knowledge  of  the  public. 

My  letter  of  the  25th  instant  will  have  already  apprised  you  that  I 
desire  Jenkins  to  be  ordered  to  rejoin  his  division  at  once  at  Hanover 
«Tunction,  and  Ransom  to  proceed  to  Richmond,  where  he  will  receive 
further  orders  through  General  Elzey,  if  it  be  necessary.  The  same  let- 
ter will  have  advised  you  that  you  can  retain  General  Cooke  for  the 
present,  until  you  have  better  ascertained  the  enemy’s  intentions  and 
made  the  best  provision  for  the  defense  of  your  department. 

When  General  Longstreet  left  the  south  side  of  the  James  a consid- 
erable amount  of  transportation  remained,  from  which  Colonel  Corley 
has  directed  Colquitt’s  brigade  to  be  supplied.  I thought  tiiis  better 
than  to  send  the  transportation  he  left  here,  as  the  distance  is  great. 


1076 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


I inclose  you  a statcuieiit  of  tlic  artillery  on  the  Blaekwater  and  near 
Petersburg.*  The  heavy  batteries  of  Dabney  and  Smoot  are  intended 
to  operate  on  the  rivers  and  are  best  for  that  purpose.  I wish  you  to 
sen(l  me  a report  of  the  held  batteries  in  North  Carolina,  and  would  be 
glad  to  know  whether  you  have  any  suriilus  of  good  ones. 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Eichmond,  Va.,  May  28, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding^  &c. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  to-day  has  been  just  sent  me  by  the  Adju- 
tant-General, and  I learn  with  some  surprise  that  both  Eansom’s  brigade 
and  that  of  General  Jenkins  have  been  ordered  from  your  department 
to  join  General  Lee.  I received  on  yesterday  a telegram  from  General 
. Lee,  recommending  that  Cooke’s  brigade  should  be  ordered  to  this  city, 
and  suggesting  that  in  case  of  need  General  Beauregard  should  re-en- 
force you.  On  conference  with  the  President,  to  whom  this  telegram 
was  exhibited,  it  was  resolved  before  giving  a positive  order  for  sucli 
movement  to  consult  you  as  to  its  effect  on  the  safety  of  your  command. 
General  Lee  must  have  concluded  this  recommendation  had  not  been 
complied  with  when  he  ordered  up  Eansom’s  and  Jenkins’.  From  your 
exhibition  of  the  forces  of  the  enemy  in  North  Carolina  I am  of  the  same 
opinion  with  yourself,  that  with  a knowledge  of  the  facts  both  brigades 
would  not  have  been  ordered  from  you.  The  best  plan  will  be,  as  you 
have  started  Eausom’s  brigade,  to  send  that  on  and  retain  both  Jen- 
kins’ and  Cooke’s,  at  least  until  further  communication  can  be  had  with 
General  Lee  and  his  counsel  taken  on  the  new  aspect  presented  by 
your  statement  of  the  enemy’s  forces  in  North  Carolina. 

General  Lee  evidently  supposes  that  the  forces  of  the  enemy  have 
been  largely  withdrawn  from  both  North  Carolina  and  Suffolk  and 
have  been  concentrated  on  the  Eappahannock  and  at  West  Point.  He 
states'  in  liis  telegram  that  Foster  has  been  withdrawn,  and  he  presumes 
with  his  force  has  been  sent  to  one  or  other  of  the  last-named  points. 
It  will  certainly  be  better  that  he  should  have  fuller  information  before 
you  carry  out  his  instructions  fully. 

With  high  esteem,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  District  oe  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington^  May  28,  1863. 


Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding^  the.,  Petersburg : 


General  : I have  your  letter,  and  don’t  like  the  news  either  of  Ean- 
som’s departure  or  the  force  of  *the  enemy.  What  can  we  do  Cooke 
cannot  defend  Kinston  by  himself  and  I cannot  aid  him.  I should  find 
hard  work  to  hold  Wilmington  by  my  force,  and  he  cannot  aid  me.  1 
don’t  think  Beauregard  can  help  me  now.  Do  try  and  get  some  troops 
down  here.  Tliey  will  surely  make  a raid  on  the  railroad  as  soon  as 
they  learn  you  are  gone,  and  the  scoundrels  hear  almost  everything. 


*Not  found. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1077 


Tbe  Governor  is  calling  back  liis  negroes,  which  troubles  me  greatly. 
You  know  I am  not  yet  ready  aud  have  not  yet  guus  eDOUgli.  The  labor 
of  the  past  two  mouths  has  been  immeuse. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  G.  WHITING, 

M ajar- General, 


Special  Orders,  > Adjt.  and  Inspector  General^s  Office, 

No.  127.  } Richmond^  Vx.,  May  28,  18G3. 

#***«=** 

II.  The  Department  of  North  Carolina  will  hereafter  include  the  De- 
partment of  Southern  Virginia  as  far  north  as  to  end)raee  the  city  of 
Petersburg  and  its  environs,  and  including  the  Ai^i^omattox  Iviver.  All 
the  troops  within  this  department,  thus  extended,  will  be  under  the 
command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill.  The  arrangements  for  the  parole 
and  exchange  of  prisoners  by  the  Ai)pomattox  Kiver  will,  as  heretofore, 
be  under  the  control  of  the  agent  for  exchange  (Colonel  Ould),  and  the 
disposal  of  the  prisoners,  after  paroled  or  exchanged,  will  be  directed 
by  the  orders  of  Brig.  Gen.  [J.  H.]  Winder,  commanding  the  Depart- 
ment of  Henrico. 

HI.  Maj.  Gen.  S.  G.  French  is  relieved  from  the  Department  of 
Southern  Virginia,  and  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Mississippi,  where 
he  will  report  for  duty  to  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston. 

# # * * * * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHEKS, 

A ssistant  A djutant  General, 


Bichmond,  May  29,  1803. 

General  K.  E.  Lee,  Fredericlcshurg,  Va. : 

General:  Hill  says  he  has  reported  to  you  as  to  condition  in  North 
Carolina. 

To  withdraw  Ransom’s,  Cooke’s,  and  Jenkins’  brigades  is  to  abandon 
the  country  to  the  enemy,  if  last  information  be  correct. 

Jenkins’  brigade  was  exchanged  for  the  one  which  had  previously 
guarded  the  approach  across  the  Blackwater,  and  which  is  understood 
to  have  gone  up  with  General  Pickett. 

Ransom  has  been  promoted,  to  relieve  General  French,  ordered  to 
Mississippi 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  May  30, 1803. 

His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  21st  instant,  conveying  a copy  of  a letter  captured  from  the  enemy, 
in  which  a plan  is  proi)osed  to  General  Foster  for  a general  insurrec- 
tion of  the  slaves  on  the  night  of  August  1,  to  destroy  railroad  bridges, 
&c.  Please  accept  my  thanks  for  tlie  information  conveyed.  Tlio  mat- 
ter has  been  referred  to  the  s])(‘.cial  attention  of  the  Secndary  of  War, 
who  will  communicate  a warning  to  generals  comimnnling  armies  in  tlie 
field. 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS, 


1078 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAV.  VXX. 


Confidential.]  Headquarters, 

Fredericicshurg,  May  30,  1863. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis  : 

Mr.  President  : I hope  you  received  my  reply  to  your  dispatch  of 
yesterday. 

When  in  Eichmond  I gave  General  D.  H.  Hill  discretionary  instruc- 
tions, stating  my  belief  that  the  contest  of  the  summer  would  take  place 
in  Virginia,  to  apportion  his  force  to  the  strength  of  the  enemy,  and  send 
me  every  man  he  could  spare.  He  declined  to  act  under  those  instruc- 
tions and  requested  positive  instructions.  He  now  offers  objections 
which  if  previously  presented  I should  not  have  issued  the  latter.  You 
will  see  that  I am  unable  to  operate  under  these  circumstances,  and  re- 
quest to  be  relieved  from  any  control  of  the  dei)artment  from  the  James 
to  the  Cape  Fear  Eiver.  I have  for  nearly  a month  been  endeavoring 
to  get  this  army  in  a condition  to  move  to  anticipate  an  expected  blow 
from  the  enemy.  I fear  I shall  have  to  receive  it  here  at  a disadvantage 
or  to  retreat.  The  enemy  will  either  make  a combined  movement  to 
force  me  back  or  transfer  his  army  to  the  Janies  Eiver.  If  I was  stronger 
I tliink  I could  prevent  either  and  force  him  back. 

You  will  perceive  by  the  return  of  the  20th,  forwarded  to  the  Adfutant 
and  Inspector  General,  the  effective  strength  of  the  army.  If  I could  use 
it  altogether  or  had  only  to  oi)pose  General  Hooker’s  army  I should  be 
content.  But  my  wish  has  been  to  organize  a force  to  defend  Eichmond 
against  the  army  apparently  collecting  on  the  York  Eiver.  I can  get 
no  positive  information  as  to  its  strength.  I have  no  knowledge  of  the 
scouts  sent  in  that  direction.  General  Loiigstreet  when  on  the  Black- 
water  sent  a person  to  Washington.  He  could  get  no  farther  than 
Baltimore.  No  one  but  the  military  was  allowed  on  the  cars  from 
Baltimore  to  Washington.  He  said  while  in  Baltimore  troops  were  con- 
stantly passing  to  Washington,  said  to  be  MitchePs,  from  the  West, 
going  to  General  Hooker.  At  Old  Point,  on  his  return,  he  saw  some  of 
Foster’s  troops,  and  was  informed  that  Generals  Dix,  Keyes,  and  Foster 
were  at  West  Point.  There  were  only  three  companies  at  Fort  Monroe. 

I receive  this  information  with  some  allowance,  but  it  may  be  taken 
as  evidence  that  troops  are  being  thrown  into  Virginia. 

I only  directed  Eansom’s  brigade  to  be  sent  to  Eichmond;  Jenkins’ 
to  Hanover  Junction ; Cooke’s  to  wait  till  movements  of  the  enemy  could 
be  further  ascertained. 

General  Loiigstreet  says  Pickett  has  no  brigade  in  the  place  of  Jen- 
kins’. He  had  temporarily  a brigade  formed  of  two  regiments  from 
General  Sam.  Jones  and  two  from  General  Marshall.  It  was  first  under 
Pryor  and  afterward  under  Colston.  Three  of  the  regiments  were  sent 
back  to  the  West;  one  is  still  in  Petersburg,  or  rather  one  that  was  ex- 
changed for  it. 

This  army  has  been  diminished  since  last  fall  by  the  brigades  of  Jen- 
Ivins,  Eansom,  Cooke,  and  Evans.  It  lias  been  increased  by  Pettigrew’s. 
I consider  Colquitt’s  exchanged  for  Daniel’s.  General  Hill  has  retained 
in  North  Carolina  a regiment  from  Pettigrew  and  Daniel.  General 
Hooker’s  army,  as  far  as  I can  form  an  opinion,  has  been  increased. 

I have  given  Your  Excellency  all  the  facts  in  my  possession  to  enable 
you  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  wliat  is  best  to  be  done.  I fear  the  time 
has  passed  when  I could  have  taken  the  offensive  with  advantage.  From 
the  indications  that  reach  me,  the  enemy  is  contem])lating  another  move- 
ment. I have  not  discovered  what  it  is.  There  may  be  nothing  left  for 
me  to  do  but  fall  back.  General  Hill  has  in  North  Carolina  Jenkins’, 


Ofiap.  XXK.] 


1079 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

Davis’,  Cooke’s,  Ivaiisoni’s,  Cliiigmau’s,  and  Martin’s  brigades,  a large 
amount  of  field  artillery,  and  three  regiments  of  cavalry;  one  of  the 
latter,  in  addition  to  the  two  sent,  lie  lias  oftered  to  send  me.  I have 
directed  him  to  suspend  the  execution  of  the  orders  from  me  and  await 
orders  from  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  (leneral. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

May  30,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

Commanding  Depart^nent  South  of  James : 

General  : Your  letter  of  May  27  has  been  received.  I telegraphed 
to  you  this  morning  to  suspend  the  execution  of  my  order  of  the  25th 
instant.  The  President  will  give  you  such  orders  as  he  may  see  fit.  I 
know  nothing  of  the  force  in  your  front,  but  I attach  no  imiiortance  to 
the  estimate  of  the  enemy’s  forces  in  New  Berne  based  on  the  captured 
mail.  These  letters  only  go  to  show  that  the  writers  thought  these  reg- 
iments were  in  New  Berne  at  the  time  they  wrote. 

One  of  Longstreet’s  scouts,  in  whom  he  places  some  confidence,  has 
just  returned  from  Fortress  Monroe.  He  reports  some  of  Foster’s  forces 
at  that  point,  and  that  Foster,  Dix,  and  Keyes  are  at  Yorktown  and 
West  Point. 

From  the  returns  of  Pettigrew’s  and  Daniel’s  brigades  the  effective 
force  of  the  two  is  5,844.  Two  cavalry  regiments  give  1,0G8  eflectives. 
Estimating  the  third  regiment  of  cavalry  at  500,  this  will  give  a total 
effective  of  7,500  sent  from  your  department.  Each  of  the  two  brigades 
is  reported  to  have  left  one  regiment  in  North  Carolina. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Richmond,  May  30,  1863. 

General  D.  H.  Hill,  Petersburg,  Va. : 

What  force  can  you  spaiic  to  General  Lee  on  the  basis  of  his  proposi- 
tion to  you?  Was  a regiment  of  Pettigrew’s  and  another  of  Daniel’s 
brigade  left  in  your  department?  What  became  of  the  force  on  the 
Blackwater  which  was  substituted  by  Jenkins’ brigade  ? Did  it  join 
Pickett’s  division  and  was  it  a brigade? 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspeetor  General. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Pichmondj  May  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding,  ; 

General:  I inclose  you  a copy  of  a confidential  letter  just  received 
from  General  Lee.*  You  will  perceive  he  anticipates  a serious  effort 
on  the  part  of  the  enemy  by  a sudden  inroad  to  ])ossess  themselves  of 
Richmond,  and  urges  timely  preparation.  Tin's  imiiression  on  General 
Lee’s  part  accounts  in  a measure  for  his  onhws  for  the  removal  of  troops 

See  Loc  to  Davis,  j).  1078. 


1080 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  R.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXK. 


from  Korth  Carolina,  for  he  had  recommended  a brigade,  at  least,  to 
be  held  here. 

My  latest  intelligence  from  the  Peninsula  is  that  the  force  tlx  re  is  not 
very  large  and  is  thought  either  to  be  removing  or  to  be  concentrating 
at  Yorktown.  If  the  design  of  sudden  attack  on  Eichmond  be  really 
contemplated  I think  it  not  unlikely  that  instead  of  resorting  to  the 
Peninsula  route,  on  which  they  have  hitherto  failed,  a sudden  advance 
from  Suffolk  by  way  of  Petersburg  may  be  preferred.  It  would  bo  well, 
therefore,  that  you  should  keep  yourself  as  well  advised  as  possible  of 
the  movements  of  their  troops  in  that  direction,  and  it  might  be  advis- 
able, quietly  but  effectively,  to  accomplish  such  organization  of  the 
arm-bearing  population  remaining  in  that  city  as  General  Lee  recom- 
mends here.  I shall  endeavor  to  carry  out  his  suggestions  in  this  city ; 
but  of  course  such  force  can  be  little  relied  on ; and  in  view  of  the  im- 
portance, in  every  point  of  view,  of  defending  this  city,  I shall  be  com- 
pelled to  have  the  aid  of  one  of  your  brigades.  That  of  Eansom’s,  a part 
of  which  has  already  reached  and  been  detained  here,  had  better  for 
the  present  be  placed  here  or  so  near  as  to  be  in  supporting  distance 
in  case  of  emergency.  I must  rely  on  you  to  make  such  dispositions  as 
you  deem  judicious  to  render  any  other  assistance  in  your  power  should 
it  be  needed,  or  at  least  to  give  timely  notice  of  any  hostile  movements 
from  the  south  side.  I incline  myself  to  think  the  enemy  have  work 
enough  before  them  on  the  Eappahannock  to  demand  all  their  forces,  and 
that  such  intimations  as  have  reached  General  Lee  are  intended  to  mis- 
lead. Still,  he  is  very  cautious  and  judicious  in  forming  his  conclusions, 
and  his  advice  renders  every  precaution  possible  incumbent  on  us. 

With  high  esteem,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War, 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington^  May  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding,  &c.,  Petersburg  : 

General  : I will  try  to  put  a small  force  at  Magnolia,  though  it 
pinches  me.  It  cannot  be  possible  that  Cooke  is  to  leave  too.  Ean- 
som’s  going  is  hard,  but  to  strip  the  whole  line  in  the  face  of  the  large 
force  in  front  of  us  is  giving  up  the  railroad.  I hope  you  have  repre- 
sented the  condition  of  affairs,  especially  your  discovery  of  the  increase 
of  force  at  New  Berne.  The  Northern  papers  are  full  of  accounts  of  the 
sending  on  all  the  North  Carolina  troops  to  General  Lee,  and  urging 
Foster  to  attempt  Wilmington,  representing  that  now  is  the  time.  No 
doubt  the  rascally  blockade  runners  carry  information  also.  Eecollect 
that  if  they  drive  Colquitt  from  Kinston  they  will  also  take  Goldsbor- 
ough,  destroy  the  bridge  once  more,  as  they  did  before,  and  no  aid  can 
reach  me.  I can’t  look  for  any  from  Beauregard,  who  has  been  depleted 
to  all  he  can  bear.  Please  to  urge  this.  It  seems  to  me  that  one  of  the 
small  brigades  of  the  Virginia  army  might  be  spared.  The  risk  of  strip- 
ping this  whole  line  is  very  great.  I don’t  understand  Pemberton’s  ar- 
rangement; never  did;  but  still  have  great  faith  and  much  hope  in 
Old  Joe.  It  will  be  a dreadful  disaster  to  us  if  Vicksburg  is  lost. 

Very  truly, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — The  troops  at  Kinston,  it  seems  to  me,  ought  to,  if  beaten  back, 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.~CONEEDERATE.  1081 

retreat  this  side  the  Neiise  to  make  a junction  with  me.  If  the  bridge 
is  burned  and  they  separated  from  me,  I could  not,  should  Foster  turn 
his  whole  force  upon  me,  hope  to  save  the  place,  except  by  a miracle. 
However,  you  will  judge  of  that.  I have  written  to  the  Secretary. 


Headquarters, 
Wilmington^  May  30,  1863. 

Hon,  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  Richmond : 

Sir  : Though  the  Department  must  be  aware  of  the  general  danger 
to  which  this  line  is  now  exposed  there  are  some  considerations  which 
I beg  leave  to  urge  without,  I hope,  impropriety. 

Major-General  Hill  informs  me  that  he  captured  a mail  from  the  en- 
emy by  which  it  appears  that  he  has  in  Berne  thirty-one  regiments, 
an  increase  of  nine  over  any  previous  estimates  in  our  possession.  A 
very  moderate  count  will  give  between  12,000  and  15,000  men.  Against 
this  we  have  but  two  small  brigades;  that  is,  if  General  Cooke  is  under 
orders,  and  I understand  he  is.  The  danger  which  I anticipate  is  the 
destruction  of  the  railroad  at  Goldsborough,  as  was  done  before.  But 
on  the  previous  occasion  I was  assisted  by  General  Beauregard  to  such 
an  extent  that  Wilmington  was  comparatively  secure.  Should  this 
recur  I cannot  expect  anything  from  General  Beauregard,  who  has 
probably  detached  all  he  can  to  the  West.  With  the  bridges  down  be- 
tween here  and  Petersburg  I could  not  receive  troops  from  above,  and 
Foster  would  bo  at  liberty  to  concentrate  his  whole  force  upon  me  by 
land.  He  would  not  need  iron-clads,  for  I would  not  have  force  enough 
to  man  my  works.  The  whole  subject  of  the  maneuvering  and  of  the 
line  of  attack  has  been  pointed  out  and  discussed  in  many  previous 
communications.  I am  now  only  pointing  out  the  dangers  that  now 
threaten,  in  the  hope  that  you  may  be  able  to  provide  some  re-enforce- 
ment. 

All  the  Northern  dates  during  this  month  contain  advices  of  the 
stripping  of  this  line  to  re-enforce  General  Lee,  and  urge  Foster  to 
make  the  attempt  on  Wilmington  while  in  its  present  condition  and 
before  the  sickly  season  sets  in.  My  scouts  in  the  front  give  me  the 
same  information. 

In  view  of  the  great  responsibility  which  rests  upon  me  I have  felt  it 
my  duty  to  advise  you  of  this  state  of  things  and  what  may  possibly 
occur  here. 

I have  no  doubt  that  in  spite  of  all  my  precautions — much  more  strin- 
gent, as  I am  told,  than  anywhere  else  in  the  country — this  miserable 
blockade  running  by  private  parties  furnishes  the  enemy  with  all  the 
information  they  require. 

I respectfully  urge  the  consideration  of  the  above  and  it-s  reference 
to  the  President. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  C.  WHITING, 

Major- General. 

[Indorsements.] 


Eespectfully  referred  to  the  President. 

It  is  feared  serious  haznrd  is  run,  but  I see  no  mode  to  avoid  it. 
Local  organizations,  which  I will  press,  are  tlie  only  resources  at  com- 
mand. 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


1082 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Secretary  of  War  : 

Is  this  not  the  same  information  which  was  before  you  when  discuss- 
ing the  distribution  of  troops  with  General  Hill  when  he  was  last  in  this 
city  If  the  evidence  of  force  at  New  Berne,  &c.,  has  not  been  sent  to 
General  Lee,  it  would  be  well  to  forward  copies  of  these  letters. 

J.  D. 

June  3,  1863. 

Assistant  Secretary: 

Let  copies  of  these  letters  be  made  out  and  sent  with  a letter  to  Gen- 
eral Lee,  stating  that  at  the  suggestion  of  the  President  they  are  sent 
for  his  information  and  that  his  attention  is  respectfully  invited  to  them. 

‘ J.  A.  S., 

Secretary. 


Petersburg,  May  30, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

All  five  of  Pettigrew’s  regiments  and  battery  have  gone  to  him.  Pour 
regiments,  a battalion,  and  battery  of  Daniel’s  have  been  sent,  leaving 
one  regiment  behind.  I do  not  know  what  troops  General  Jenkins  re- 
lieved. I could  exchange  Cooke’s  for  Ransom’s  brigade. 

D.  11.  HILL, 

Major- General. 


Richmond,  May  30, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Feterslmrg.,  Va. : 

Let  one  of  the  regiments  come  here  and  retain  the  other  two  at  Pe- 
tersburg. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and,  Inspeetor  General. 


Bureau  of  Conscription,  C.  S.  A., 

Eichmondy  Va.,  May  30,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Commamling,  &c. : 

Dear  General  : You  must  have  received  my  letter  in  answer  to 
yours  for  subterra  shells  before  this.  I have  instructed  Major  Cross  in 
the  use  of  both  subterra  shells  and  submarine  mortar  shells.  The  lat- 
ter, I think,  you  can  get  here  already  cast,  and  from  sad  experience  at 
Charleston  in  accidentally  sinking  one  of  our  own  vessels,  which  negli- 
gently was  suftered  to  drift  upon  one  of  the  latter  (she  sunk  in  twenty 
seconds),  no  doubt  can  exist  of  their  efficacy  5 and  I learn  this  morning 
it  was  one  of  the  same  which  sunk  the  enemy  in  Yazoo  River. 

I wrote  a book  with  drawings,  &c.,  and  gave  it  to  the  President.  It 
caused  him  to  enter  with  zest  into  the  schemes,  and  behold  I lind  my- 
self ousted  from  my  position  as  sui)erin  ten  dent  of  Bureau  of  Conscrip- 
tion and  ordered  to  Vicksburg.  1 protested,  knowing  General  John- 
ston’s opinion,  but  it  was  no  go,  and  he  ordered  the  Secretary  of  War 
to  write  the  following  : 

War  Departmknt,  C.  S.  A., 

Jiichmovd,  Va.,  Mai/  27,  1803. 

Gi'iier.al  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Commanding : 

Generat.  : Gcii.  G.  .1.  Rains  having?  boen  dotailoJ  for  duty  in  connection  with 

toipedoes  and  snljtcrra  shells,  has  been  ordered  to  report  to  you.  The  President  has 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


108:5 


coiififlenco  in  his  inventions,  and  is  desirous  that  they  slioold  be  employed  both  on 
land  and  river,  if  opportunity  offers,  at  Vicksburg  and  its  vicinity.  Should  commu- 
nication allow,  you  are  desired  to  send  him  there  ; but  if  otherwise,  to  employ  him  in 
his  devices  against  the  enemy  where  most  assailable  in  that  way  elsewhere.  All 
possible  facilities  and  aid  in  the  supply  of  men  and  material  for  the  fair  trial  of  his 
torpedoes  and  shells  are  requested  on  your  part.  Such  means  of  offense  against  the 
enemy  are  approved  and  recognized  by  the  Department  as  legitimate  weapons  of 
warfare. 

With  high  esteem,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 

Adieu,  my  dear  general. 

G.  J.  KAINS. 

P.  S. — A requisition  upon  Lieut.  Col.  George  W.  Rains,  at  Augusta, 
Ga.,  will  get  whatever  sensitive  i)riming- tubes  you  want.  I went  there 
and  instructed  in  their  make,  and  they  have  been  furnished  Mobile, 
Savannah,  Charleston,  &c.,  by  the  thousand. 


RicnMOND,  May  31,  18(13. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding^  &c.^  near  Fredericlcshurg^  Ya.  : 

General  : Yours  of  the  30th  was  delivered  to  me  last  night.  Before 
it  was  received  General  Cooper  had  sent  a dispatch  to  General  D.  H. 
Hill,  which  opened  the  correspondence  of  which  you  will  find  copies* 
inclosed. 

I had  never  fairly  comprehended  your  views  and  purposes  until  the 
receipt  of  your  letter  of  yesterday,  and  now  have  to  regret  that  I did  not 
earlier  know  all  that  you  had  communicated  to  others.  I could  hcrdly 
have  misunderstood  you,  and  need  not  say  would  have  been  glad  to 
second  your  wishes,  confiding,  as  I always  do,  as  well  in  your  judgment 
as  in  your  information. 

The  reports  in  relation  to  the  enemy  at  West  Point  are  not,  I fear, 
quite  reliable ; but  in  the  uncertainty  of  the  case  it  had  appeared  to  me 
that  it  might  be  well  to  bring  up  a brigade  of  General  HilFs  force  and 
place  it  on  the  south  side  of  J ames  River  sufficiently  near  to  the  pontoon 
bridge  to  be  used  in  any  operations  which  a movement  of  the  enemy  on 
the  north  side  might  require.  The  recommendation  of  General  Hill  in 
relation  to  Ransom’s  brigade,  though  not  quite  the  same,  may  answer 
the  purpose,  and  1 have  confidence  in  the  cordiality  and  alncrity  with 
which  Ransom  would  meet  such  requirement.  General  Hill  having 
mentioned  Cooke’s  brigade  as  one  which  he  is  disposed  to  exchange,  it 
seemed  best  to  order  it  uf)  and  rely  upon  his  supplying  its  place,  at 
least  partially,  by  the  organization  of  the  various  guards  and  the  bat- 
talion at  Salisbury,  which  he  had  asked  for  authority  to  embody  in  his 
army.  To  complete  Heth’s  division  without  creating  complaint  on  the 
part  of  North  (Jarolinians  it  seemed  to  me  desirable  that  there  should 
be  but  one  North  Carolina  brigade  in  it.  To  observe  that  condition  we 
had  to  choose  between  Jenkins’  South  Carolina  brigade  and  Davis’,  of 
Mississippi;  as  Jenkins  had  been  commanding  on  the  Black  water  and 
was  supposed  to  be  acquainted  with  the  country,  and  Davis  was  tem- 
porarily absent,  it  was  thought  for  that  and  minor  reasons  better  to 
detach  Davis’  brigade.  If  General  Hill’s  force  should  prove  inade- 
quate as  the  season  advances  we  should  be  able  to  draw  further  from 
the  troops  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  Mr.  Seddon,  however, 
thinks  nothing  more  is  to  be  obtained  there.  You  will  perceive  that 
no  destination  is  given  by  the  Adjutant-General  to  the  brigades  drawn 


Not  fonnd. 


1084 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Cn\P.  XXX. 


from  General  Hill.  Please  send  your  orders  to  this  place,  so  that  the 
troops  may  be  moved  in  conformity  to  yonr  wishes. 

By  the  proposed  arrangement  you  will  have  lost,  without  receiving 
anything  in  exchange,  the  brigade  of  Evans’,  as,  being  able  to  get  no 
trace  of  the  troops  for  which  Jenkins’  brigade  was  reported  to  have 
been  exchanged,  I can  only  wonder  as  to  what  constituted  the  command 
on  the  Blackwater  before  the  troops  from  Western  Virginia  went  there. 
From  the  account  which  General  Hill  gave  of  a part  of  his  cavalry,  1 do 
not  think  you  would  be  benefited  by  receiving  that  which  he  proposes 
to  send  you.  He  asked  for  and  received  conditional  authority  to  dis- 
mount a portion  of  that  force. 

I note  your  request  to  be  relieved  of  the  command  of  the  troops  be- 
tween the  James  Eiver  and  the  Cape  Fear.  This  is  one  of  the  few  in- 
stances in  which  I have  found  my  thoughts  running  in  the  opposite 
direction  from  your  own.  It  has  several  times  occurred  to  me  that  it 
would  be  better  for  you  to  control  all  the  operations  of  the  Atlantic 
slope,  and  1 must  ask  you  to  reconsider  the  matter.  I wish  I knew  how 
to  relieve  you  from  all  anxiety  concerning  movements  on  the  York  or 
James  Eiver  against  Eichmond  while  you  are  moving  toward  the  north 
and  west;  but  even  if  you  could  spare  troops  for  the  purpose,  on  whom 
could  you  devolve  the  command  with  that  feeling  of  security  which 
would  be  necessary  for  the  full  execution  of  your  designs  ? I readily 
perceive  the  disadvantage  of  standing  still,  and  sorely  regret  that  I can- 
not give  you  the  means  which  would  make  it  quite  safe  to  attempt  all 
that  we  desire.  That  any  advantage  should  have  been  lost  by  delay  is 
sad  enough  where  the  contest  at  best  was  so  very  unequal  as  to  give  little 
room  for  the  exercise  of  what  General  Charles  Lee  called  ^‘that  rascally 
virtue,”  prudence.  I do  not  know  what  success  we  shall  have  in  organi- 
zations for  local  defense,  but  should  it  be  all  that  I can  hope  you  know 
how  far  our  army  will  still  fall  short  of  the  numerical  strength  of  the 
enemy.  Missouri,  Kentucky,  the  most  populous  portions  of  Tennessee 
and  Louisiana,  are  contributing  nothing  to  recruit  our  army.  If  General 
Kirby  Smith  should  have  success  on  the  west  side  of  the  river  he  will 
soon  have  a large  force  by  volunteers  from  Missouri  and  Southern  Louis- 
iana. General  Johnston  did  not,  as  you  thought  advisable,  attack  Grant 
promptly,  and  I fear  the  result  is  that  which  you  anticipated  if  time  was 
given.  The  last  intelligence  indicates  that  Grant’s  army  is  concen- 
trating on  the  Yazoo,  where  he  connects  with  his  gunboats  and  river 
transportation  and  threatens  the  line  of  communication  between  Jack- 
son  and  Vicksburg.  The  position,  naturally  strong,  may  soon  be  in- 
trenched, and,  with  the  heavy  guns  which  he  can  bring  by  water,  will 
require  to  be  reduced  by  some  other  means  than  a direct  attack.  It  is 
useless  to  look  back,  and  it  would  be  unkind  to  annoy  you  in  the  midst 
of  your  many  cares  with  the  refiections  which  I have  not  been  able  to 
avoid.  All  the  accounts  we  have  of  Pemberton’s  conduct  fully  sustain 
the  good  opinion  heretofore  entertained  of  him,  and  I hope  has  secured 
for  him  that  confidence  of  his  troops  which  is  so  essential  to  success. 

Very  respectfully,  and  truly,  your  friend, 

JEFFEESOK  DAVIS. 


. Eichmond,  May  31, 1863. 

General  D.  H.  Hill, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina , Pefershurg,  Va.  : 
General:  I have  received  your  dis])atch  and  letter  both,  dated  30th 
instant.  It  has  been  determined  that  Major-General  Eansom  be  put  in 
command  of  the  district  of  your  department  which  includes  the  Appo- 


Ohai’.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1085 


mattox  and  Blackwater,  and  that  liis  force  consists  of  his  former  bri- 
gade and  Jenkins’  brigade;  Davis’  and  Cooke’s  brigades  to  be  detached 
from  your  department  and  directed  to  report  to  General  Lee.  This 
arrangement  will  take  place  with  least  practicable  delay,  and  you  will 
give  the  necessary  orders.  The  two  regiments  of  Eansom’s  old  brigade 
now  here  will  be  directed  to  report  to  you  at  Petersburg  for  your  in- 
structions. It  is  believed  and  hoped  that,  as  this  arrangement  will 
leave  you  live  brigades  and  three  regiments  of  cavalry  and  such  addi- 
tional force  as  you  will  be  able  to  get  from  the  bridge  and  provost- 
marshal  guards  and*  the  guard  of  prisoners  at  Salisbury,  your  force 
will  be  equal  to  the  wants  of  the  service  in  your  department.  Should 
the  enemy  move  up  from  South  Carolina  you  can  in  that  event  be  re- 
enforced from  that  quarter. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Kinston,  May  31,  1303. 

General  D.  H.  Hill,  Commanding: 

General  : There  is  nothing  of  si)ecial  interest  to  communicate.  My 
time  since  my  arrival  has  been  spent  upon  the  roads,  and  I hope  to  be 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  country  soon. 

The  line  of  defense  along  the  Southwest  is  too  long  as  a lighting  line 
for  this  small  force.  Regiments  scattered  at  the  different  crossings 
could  not  be  readily  concentrated.  On  the  ISeuse  and  Dover  roads  we 
could  resist  successfully  the  enemy’s  advance,  but  men  could  not  be 
spared  for  the  other  roads.  If  the  enemy  should  advance  upon  either 
of  the  other  roads — that  is,  the  Upper  Trent  and  Wilmington — do  you 
not  think  it  would  be  hazarding  too  much  if  we  should  cross  over  to 
assail  him  in  rear  without  having  a force  sufficient  to  check  him  in 
front  I If  we  should  whip  him  it  would  of  course  cure  any  imperfections 
in  the  plan ; but  if  in  the  chances  of  war  it  should  be  otherwise  the 
result  might  be  disastrous.  Whatever  your  skill  and  experience  may 
suggest  as  the  best  course  I Shall  endeavor  to  execute  with  all  my 
power,  and  I trust  you  will  give  me  your  views  in  full  and  specifically. 

The  new  bridge  will  be  completed  in  a day  or  two.  Details  are  at 
work  on  the  batteries  and  rifle-pits.  Other  details  will  be  made  to  cut 
the  roads  and  fell  the  timber  as  soon  as  the  engineer  is  ready  for  them. 
When  the  work  is  done  I think  the  town  can  be  held  against  a much 
superior  force.  From  the  most  reliable  information  that  I have  received 
I think  that  the  force  in  New  Berne  does  not  exceed  7,000  or  8,000 
effective  men.  None  of  the  regiments  there  have  yet  gone  out  of  serv- 
ice. Major  Whitford  has  sent  in  10  Yankees  captured  and  3 deserters. 
As  he  desired  to  see  you  on  business  I have  consented  that  he  conduct 
them  to  you. 

If  nothing  more  important  demands  my  attention  I shall  keep  enter- 
juises  on  foot  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge  or  damage  the  road  between 
New  Berne  and  Morehead  City,  and  other  things  that  may  be  harass- 
ing and  troublesome. 

For  the  sake  of  the  country  and  for  my  own  character  I trust  that 
no  disaster  or  unpleasant  circumstance  will  occur  in  this  hitherto  unfor- 
tunate section  while  the  responsibility  rests  upon  my  shoulders.  You 
may  rest  assured  that  I will  exert  myself  to  x)revent  it. 

Very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  U.  COLQUITT, 

Brigadier- General. 


1086  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

Abstract  from  Monthly  Return  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill 
commanding,for  'May‘dl,lHQ^{h6ad(xuarter8  Petersburg,  Va.).  ’ 


Command. 


General  staff 

District  of  the  Capo  Fear; 

Permanent  force 

Clinginan’s  brigade 

Colquitt’s  brigade 

Cooke’s  brigade*  

Martin’s  brigadot 

Jenkins’  brigade 

Ransom’s  brigade]: 

Davis’  brigade  § 

Unattached  infantry  || 

Field  artillery  outside  of  the  District  of  the 

Cairo  Fear  IT 

Cavalry 

Grand  total 


Present  f o r 
duty. 

Effective  total  pres- 

ent. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Pieces  of  field  ar-  [ 

tillery . i 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent  last  re- 

turn. 

Officers. 

Men. 

15 

2 

2 

17 

17 

14 

15.3 

2, 504 

2,  537 

3,450  1 

3,  984 

1 

3,  740 

1 120 

2,  085 

2, 105 

-2,551  ! 

3,  328 

] 148 

1,706 

1,711 

'2,077  1 

2,  998 

j 3, 019 

! 153 

2, 179 

2, 198 

2,638  1 

3,  505 

4 

' 3, 402 

118 

1,  995 

2,025 

2,388  j 

2,  874 

2,  893 

250 

2,  394 

2, 401 

2:965  ! 

4, 120 

182 

2,  885 

2,  897 

3,274  i 

4,019 

"o 

4, 104 

163 

2,  414 

2, 418 

2,971  1 

3,455 

109 

1,  452 

1,452 

1,646 

2,  643 

68 

1,  451 

1,  463 

1,  678 

1,  951 

55 

70 

920 

940 

1,183 

1,575 

5 

1,  549 

21,  987 

22,149 

20,  838 

34,  409  1 

1 

70 

* Juno  12.  Cooke’s  brigade  has  joined  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  since  May  31.  Includes 
battery  attached. 

t Includes  infantry  of  Martin’s  brigade  and  not  Sixty-second  Georgia  Cavalry, 
t Includes  battery  attached ; 149  captured. 

§ June  12.  Davis’  brigarle  has  joined  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  since  date  of  return. 

II  Consists  of  two  partisan  battalions,  provost  and  prison  guards,  and  garrison  at  Fort  Powhatan. 

^ June  12.  One  of  these  batteries  moved  to  Richmond  since  date  of  report. 


Abstract  from  Field  Return  of  troops,  Department  of  Richmond,  Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzcy 
commanding,  for  May  31,  1863. 


Headquarters  Forces  on  Blackwater, 

June  1,  18()3. 

Maj.  Graham  Daves,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  I have  tbe  honor  to  report  everything  quiet.  There  are  in- 
dications that  the  enemy  contemplate  withdrawing  from  Suffolk.  It  is 
reported  that  they  are  fortifying  a line  with  the  left  on  Deep  Creek, 
some  0 or  7 miles  this  side  of  Portsmouth,  and  have  been  removing  tlieir 


V 


CUAP.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONEEDERATE. 


1087 


lieavy  gnus,  &\i.,  from  SiifLblk  to  that  point.  Also  that  they  are  sending 
away  valuables,  &c. 

The  scouts  report  that  a brigade  was  sent  away  in  transports  some 
live  days  ago.  The  Yankee  soldiers  thought  they  were  going  to  join 
Hooker. 

I hope  to  obtain  more  definite  information  in  a few  days. 

I am,  major,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  JENKIN8, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Martinis  Hriuade, 

Greenville,  June  1,  1863. 

Maj.  Archer  Anderson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fetershurg,  Va. : 

Major  : Colonel  Martin  writes  to  me  that  he  has  received  informa- 
tion from  a gentleman  just  arrived  from  Edenton,  N.  C.,  that  a cavalry 
expedition  is  being  fitted  out  at  that  place,  destination  unknown,  and 
that  all  communication  from  there  to  Plymouth  has  been  cut  off.  His 
informant  is  a trustworthy  man. 

Colonel  Martin  further  reports  the  enemy  still  fortifying  at  Plymouth. 
General  Wessells’  full  brigade  there,  sui)posed  to  be  2,500  men. 

I am,  very  resijectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MAETIN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Greenville,  N.  C.,  June  1, 1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  Petersburg,  Va.  : 

General  : Since  writing  to  you  this  morning  I have  heard  through 
a person  employed  to  collect  information  from  the  people  on  this  river 
the  following : 

On  Friday  last  one  steamer  loaded  with  troops  came  up  the  river  to 
Washington ; on  Saturday  two,  also  with  troops ; one  of  these  was 
FostePs  boat.  During  the  nights  of  Friday  and  Saturday  several  boats 
went  down  the  river;  no  troops  seen.  The  general  iinjiression  made  on 
the  peoi)le  on  the  river  was  that  they  were  changing  troo]>s.  Some  of 
them,  however,  thought  the  enemy  was  re-enforcing  preparatory  to  a 
raid.  He  has  been  very  strict  for  several  days  in  not  allowing  any 
communication  with  Washington. 

I am  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  he  is  organizing  a formidable  force 
at  Edenton  with  a view  to  Weldon,  from  Colerain  or  Winton,  on  the 
Chowan.  The  Colerain  route  to  Weldon  has  always  been  considered 
by  our  people  the  most  dangerous  one  to  us  the  enemy  could  take  to 
approach  Weldon. 

I have  yet  heard  nothing  of  the  movement  of  Moore’s  battery  or  Neth- 
ercutt’s  battalion.  Have  they  been  ordered  to  Bertie  ? 

1 think  the  best  disposition  to  make  of  Colonel  Grillin  would  be  to 
place  him  in  command  of  all  the  troops  beyond  tJie  Koanoke.  Could 
the  company  of  his  regiment  now  at  Franklin  be  sent  to  him  in  Bertie 
or  Hertford  ? 

Please  let  me  know  if  you  intended  that  I should  act  on  the  applica- 
tions for  leave  of  ofiicers.  I suiiposed  so,  from  several  being  returned 
to  me  without  indorsement. 

I understand  General  Kansom  has  lelt  the  State. 

Did  you  intend  by  your  letters  to  me  that  I should  assume  command 


1088 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[CI1A1>.  XXX. 


of  all  outside  the  District  of  Cape  Fear,,  or  will  you  give  au  order  to 
that  effect  ? lu  either  case  please  designate  the  place  you  prefer  tor 
headquarters. 

I have  heard  nothing  from  General  Eansom  since  you  left. 

Communicate  with  me  by  mail  at  Tarborough,  where  a line  of  couriers 
meets  the  mail.  By  telegraph  I should  hear  sooner  from  Goldsborough, 
unless  it  is  just  in  time  at  Kocky  Mount  for  the  Tarborough  train,  at  7 
o’clock  in  the  evening. 

1 am,  general,  yours,  with  respect, 

J.  G.  MABTIN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Army  ot'  Northern  Virginia, 

June  2,  18(13. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States,  Biehmond,  Va. : 

Mr.  President  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  yesterday  your 
letter  of  the  31st  ultimo. 

I am  well  aware  of  the  difficulties  pressing  upon  all  parts  of  the  coun- 
try and  of  your  great  anxiety  to  relieve  them.  The  question  which 
seems  always  to  be  presented  is  a wise  choice  of  difficulties. 

I think  Cooke’s  brigade  had  better  be  halted  on  the  Chickahominy 
for  the  present,  and  Davis’  brigade  sent  forward  to  this  place  to  com- 
plete Heth’s  division.  I regret  to  lose  Eansom  and  Jenkins,  both  good 
and  tried  officers,  with  veteran  troops.  As  well  as  I now  recollect,  Pet- 
tigrew’s brigade  was  on  the  line  of  the  Blackwater  when  the  regiments 
from  the  West  were  brigaded  there  under  Pryor. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  General  Longstreet  he  made  some  changes,  de- 
taching Jenkins,  in  whom  he  had  conlidence,  from  Pickett’s  division,  in 
order  to  place  him  in  command.  The  Western  brigade  was  placed  sub- 
sequently under  General  Colston,  and  afterward  the  brigade  was  broken 
up  and  the  regiments  sent  back  to  Generals  Jones  and  Marshall. 

I do  not  know  the  condition  of  the  cavalry  proposed  by  General 
Hill  to  be  sent  to  this  army.  He  offered  a regiment  and  I accepted  it, 
but  if  it  is  of  the  character  described  by  you  it  had  better  be  retained. 
I understand  there  is  a good  regiment  on  the  Blackwater  as  regards 
men  and  horses,  but  it  is  at  present  in  an  unfortunate  condition  on  ac- 
count of  a difficulty  between  the  colonel  and  officers.  If  that  could  be 
reconciled  they  would  be  very  serviceable. 

I think  it  would  be  better  if  General  Eobertson  were  in  command  of 
the  cavalry  within  the  State,  as  he  is  a good  organizer  and  instructor, 
but  General  Hill  does  not  appear  to  require  him.  I would  then  brigade 
the  North  Carolina  regiments  in  this  army,  under  Colonel  Baker,  from 
that  State,  who  is  said  to  be  a good  officer. 

1 requested  to  be  relieved  from  command  of  the  troops  between  the 
James  and  the  Cape  Fear  Eivers  because  I did  not  see  that  I could 
advantageously  exercise  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  continue  in  it  might 
be  productive  of  harm.  I could  only  exercise  it  beneficially  by  relying 
upon  the  judgment  of  General  D.  H.  Hill,  who  declined  to  act  upon  dis- 
cretionary orders,  and  I thought  it  best  for  the  service  to  leave  him  to 
his  own  discretion.  The  only  object  of  command,  in  my  opinion,  is  the 
benefit  of  the  service. 

I ho])e  the  forces  we  can  place  near  Eichmond  will  be  able  to  S(‘cure 
it  against  attack  from  the  York  or  James  Eiver.  The  local  troops  of  the 
city  shouhl  be  organized  promptly  and  be  kept  in  readiness  for  service 
at  any  moment.  With  Cooke  and  Wise  advanced,  the  one  to  the  north 


Chap.  XXX.] 


COERESPONDENCEj  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


1089 


and  the  other  to  the  east,  under  Elzey,  we  will  have  a sufficient  out- 
guard,  and  for  the  present  I will  leave  Pickett  and  Pettigrew  at  the 
Junction.  If  I am  able  to  move  I propose  to  do  so  cautiously,  watching 
the  result,  and  not  to  get  beyond  recall  until  I find  it  safe. 

If  a brigade  of  cavalry  under  a good  officer  could  be  placed  north  and 
east  of  the  city  to  repress  the  marauding  expeditions  of  the  enemy  and 
prevent  reconnaissances,  I should  feel  it  was  safe.  In  case  of  emer- 
gency I think  General  Hill’s  troops  could  be  brought  up  from  NTorth 
Carolina  and  be  replaced  there  by  some  from  General  Beauregard. 

I still  hope  that  General  Johnston  will  be  able  to  demolish  Grant,  and 
that  our  command  of  the  Mississippi  may  be  preserved.  The  enemy  may 
be  drawing  to  the  Yazoo  for  the  jiurpose  of  reaching  their  transports  and 
retiring  from  the  contest,  which  I hope  is  the  case.  General  Kirby 
Smith  ought,  if  possible,  to  collect  a sufficient  force  and  occupy  Helena 
or  some  better  point  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river. 

As  far  as  I can  ascertain  the  enemy  seems  to  be  quiet  in  Western  Vir- 
ginia and  the  troops  of  General  Sam.  J ones  are  idle.  They  could  also  be 
brought  to  Eichmond  or  to  Eastern  Virginia  if  occasion  require  it. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

GeneraL 


Greenville,  K.  C.,  Ttiesday,  June  2,  1863— a.  m. 
Major-General  Hill,  Petersburg : 

General  : I received  this  morning  yours  of  the  31st.  Colonel  Griffin 
is  now  in  Bertie  looking  after  his  picket  posts.  I will  send  for  him  at 
once  and  hope  to  have  him  ready  to  march  promptly.  Please  recollect 
that  this  will  leave  me  entirely  without  cavalry. 

Ko  negro  laborers  have  yet  reported.  A company  of  the  Seventeenth 
is  still  out  for  deserters.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  return  Captain 
MacRae  to  the  camp  of  instruction,  to  be  used  for  this  purpose,  and  the 
company  of  the  Seventeenth  take  his  place  at  Weldon? 

There  have  been  a good  many  desertions  from  the  Forty-second. 
The  deserters  of  that  regiment  to  be  shot  are  here.  Shall  I send  to 
Richmond  to  the  penitentiary  the  men  so  sentenced  or  to  Fort  Caswell? 
I think  I could  manage  the  Conscript  Bureau,  but  I did  not  report  my- 
self incapable  of  field  service.  I can  and  am  willing  to  stand  the  in- 
creased suffering  if  it  is  necessary  and  whenever  necessary. 

Very  truly,  yours. 


J.  G.  MARTIN, 
Brigadier- General. 


Greenville,  June  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  H.  Hill, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Virginia  and  N.  Carolina^  Petersburg^  Va. : 
General  : Your  letter  of  the  29th  of  May  came  here  to-day  by  the 
mail  about  2 o’clock.  I have  persons  employed  trying  to  get  informa- 
tion of  the  enemy’s  force  and  movements  in  and  about  Washington  and 
Plymouth.  As  yet  no  decided  success  has  resulted. 

The  horses  taken  by  Griffin  and  Claiborne  were  ordered  to  be  returned 
some  days  since.  I have  not  heard  how  many,  if  any,  they  now  have. 
I think,  however,  I can  make  the  arrangement  you  suggest  about  using 
infantry  as  couriers,  &c.,  in  idace  of  Griffin’s  men. 

Colonel  Griffin  has  been  spoken  to  once  about  answering  your  letter; 
60  R R— VOL  XVIII 


1090  NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XXX. 

he  said  he  had  prepared  au  answer  which  he  would  soon  send,  but  it 
has  not  come  in.  I wrote  you  this  morning  that  he  was  now  in  Bertie. 

You  said  nothing  about  Moore’s  battery.  What  is  to  be  done  with 
Griffin’s  artillery  company*?  It  seems  to  me  a dead  waste  of  horses  to 
put  an  artillery  company  in  one  of  our  regiments  of  cavalry. 

Keports  in  town  to-day  from  the  country  people  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river  that  the  enemy  is  reducing  his  force  in  Washington.  NTo  fact 
mentioned  showing  this  to  be  the  case. 

One  of  the  men  sent  toward  Plymouth  reported  to  Colonel  Martin  to- 
day that  only  three  regiments  remain  in  and  near  Plymouth — Eighty- 
eighth  Pennsylvania  and  Ninty-sixth  and  One  hundred  and  third  NTew 
York.  The  ^Ninty-sixth  is  at  Warren’s  Neck,  still  intrenching  there,  and 
also  immediately  around  the  town.  It  may  be  necessary  for  me  to  keep 
one  company  of  Griffin’s  regiment  for  some  days,  whilst  I am  making  the 
arrangement  for  the  infantry  to  take  their  places  as  cavalry  or  couriers. 

I have  sent  i)arties  out  on  the  Chowan  to  try  to  find  out  something  of 
what  is  going  on  there.  Will  keep  you  informed  of  everything  I hear. 

I am,  general,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  G.  MAETIN, 
Brigadier- General. 

The  enemy  is  evidently  increasing  his  intrenchments  at  Washington 
as  well  as  Plymouth.  I infer  from  this  he  intends  to  reduce  his  force. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  June  2,  1863. 

General  E.  E.  Lee,  Near  Frederichshurg  : 

Eeliable  intelligence  informs  that  the  enemy  have  evacuated  West 
Point,  and  probably  to  a great  extent  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  Point, 
and  are  marching  in  a column  of  2,000  or  3,000  men  on  both  sides  of 
the  Piankatank  northwest.  This  may  be  meant  to  cover  some  move- 
ment of  Hooker  to  the  Lower  Eappahannock,  and  across  or  up  the 
Piankatank,  or  it  may  be  a mere  diversion.  You  can  best  judge.  I 
telegraph  the  above  to  the  commander  at  Hanover  Junction  for  his 
information. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  W ar. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Taylorsville^  June  2,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey,  Commanding.,  cfic.,  Richmond: 

General  : I received  last  night  about  12  o’clock  a telegram  addressed 
to  the  commanding  officer  at  Hanover  Junction  and  from  the  Secretary 
of  War,  to  the  effect  that  a strong  cavalry  force  of  the  enemy  was  re- 
ported upon  reliable  authority  advancing  up  King  and  Queen  County, 
and  to  guard  the  railroad  bridges  over  the  Mattapony.  This  being 
more  in  General  Pettigrew’s  line,  and  he  being  under  your  command,  at 
least  so  considered  by  me,  I immediately  sent  a staff  officer  to  com- 
municate with  him.  He  i)laced  little  or  no  credence  in  the  report  j said 
that  he  had  a cavalry  scout  already  out  in  the  direction  indicated ; that 
all  the  railroad  bridges  are  guarded.  He  did  not  seem  to  know,  however, 
anything  regarding  Milford  Depot.  I attempted  to  telegraph  Milford  to 
ascertain  what,  if  any,  force  was  there,  but  failed.  I advised  him  to 
send  to  Hanover  Court-House  a guard,  but  he  replied  he  had  no  force 
to  spare.  I therefore,  considering  it  important,  started  one  of  Arm- 


Chap.  XXX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


1091 


istead’s  regiments  for  that  point  at  4 a.  m.  this  morning.  I suppose, 
however,  General  P.  has  communicated  the  steps  he  may  have  taken. 

I received  a telegram  yesterday  from  General  Lee  to  send  8 wagons 
and  a guard  to  N^ewton  for  bacon.  I know  of  no  such  place.  Telegraphed 
immediately  to  find  out  what  i)lace  was  meant.  As  usual  from  those 
headquarters,  received  no  reply.  There  is  a place  called  Newtown  in 
King  and  Queen  County  j that  may  be  the  one  intended.  I detailed  the 
guard,  but  have  not  ordered  the  train  off  on  account  of  the  news  of  the 
cavalry  raid.  Please  communicate  with  the  Secretary  of  War  in  regard 
to  these  matters,  letting  him  know  what  steps  I have  taken,  and  tele- 
graph me  at  once  should  anything  have  been  developed. 

I send  this  by  my  aide-de-camp,  Captain  Baird,  who  will  go  in  on 
horseback,  neither  myself  nor  staff'  being  allowed  to  travel  on  the  Fred- 
ericksburg cars  without  an  order  from  General  Lee.  This  circumstance 
and  its  great  detriment  to  the  facilities  of  expediting  military  move- 
ments of  importance  I have  reported  three  times  to  General  Lee^s  head- 
quarters (first  communication  two  weeks  since),  but  cannot  obtain  even 
the  scratch  of  a pen  in  reply.  It  would  be  well,  general,  to  mention  this 
fact  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  asking  for  some  authority  for  you  and 
myself  to  communicate  directly  with  each  other  and  by  this  train.  I 
sent  my  assistant  adjutant-general  down  by  the  Fredericksburg  train 
the  other  day  on  duty  and  he  was  summarily  ejected  at  Ashland. 

Captain  Baird  has  just  returned  from  a scout  to  the  Eappahannock 
and  can  probably  give  you  some  information  concerning  that  portion  of 
the  country.  I am  under  orders  to  be  ready  to  move  at  a moments 
notice  with  three  days’  rations  ; no  route  indicated. 

If  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  it,  and  you  think  it  not  injudicious,  I 
will  come  in  on  the  Central  train  and  meet  you  at  your  office  this  even- 
ing about  6.30. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  E.  PICKKIT, 

Major-  General. 

flndorsements.] 


War  Department,  June  2,  1863. 
This  paper  was  forwarded  by  General  Pickett  through  me  to  General 
Elzey,  who  requested  me  to  lay  it  before  the  honorable  Secretary  of 
War,  as  he  was  unable  from  sickness  to  see  him  personally. 
Kespectfully  submitted, 

E.  K.  BAIED, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


For  conference  with  General  Elzey  3d  June,  1863. 

J.  A.  S., 


Secretary. 


South  Anna  Bridge,  June  3, 1863. 

[Hon.  James  A.  Seddon:] 

The  enemy  encamped  last  night  at  Norman’s  Ferry,  on  the  Pamunkey, 
and  are  now  advancing,  I think,  to  South  Anna  Bridge.  Until  further 
developments  I shall  keep  one  regiment  and  one  gun  at  North  Annaj 
the  balance  I have  concentrated  here.  I am  glad  you  are  sending  more 
men.  One  more  regiment  will  be  enough.  Eeports  vary  as  to  their 
strength  from  3,000  to  10,000.  My  position  at  South  Anna  is  strong, 
and  unless  the  enemy  turn  me  I have  no  fear.  I will  do  mv  best. 

E.  D.  HALL, 
Colonel.,  Commanding. 


1092 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Petersburg,  Ya.,  June  3, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War^  C.  8.  A. : 

I hope  that  I Mill  not  be  regarded  as  intrusive  for  again  urging  that 
Kansom  be  sent  to  Korth  Carolina. 

The  political  reasons  are  still  stronger  than  the  military.  I am  sat- 
isfied that  if  the  Yankees  get  on  the  railroad  there  will  be  an  amount  of 
toryism  developed  not  now  dreamed  of.  Mr.  Warren,  of  Beaufort,  one 
of  the  Governor’s  council,  said  in  a speech  in  the  Legislature  that  if  the 
enemy  got  possession  of  the  railroad  it  would  be  time  for  I^orth  Caro- 
lina to  decide  to  whom  her  allegiance  was  due,  the  United  States  or  Con- 
federate States  Government.  Holden  and  his  followers  are  ready  to  go 
to  Goldsborough  to  meet  the  Yankees  and  welcome  them  to  the  State. 

The  Forty-second  and  Seventeenth  North  Carolina  regiments  are 
large  and  strong,  and  I would  be  willing  to  give  up  either  of  them  to 
secure  Eansom,  and  I presume  either  has  as  many  men  as  his  brigade. 
Very  respectfully, 

D.  H.  HILL, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Forces  Local  Defense, 

Third  Line  of  Defenses^  Darby  town  Load,  June  3, 1863. 
Maj.  T.  O.  Chestney, 

Assista7it  Adjutant- Ge^ieral,  cfic.,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  instructions 
the  forces  for  local  defense  are  distributed  on  the  Charles  City,  Darby- 
town,  and  New  Market  roads,  viz,  about  600  on  the  former,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Brown  j about  600  on  the  second,  under  Major  Waller; 
about  350  on  the  third,  under  Lieutenant  Minor  (Navy).  One  thousand 
of  the  militia  were  reported  on  the  way  last  night,  and  were  directed  to 
be  posted  on  the  Yarina  road. 

Everything  quiet  here. 

Very  respectfully, 

G.  W.  C.  LEE, 
Brigadier-  Genera  i. 

P.  S. — I omitted  to  mention  that  there  is  one  boat  howitzer  on  the 
New  Market  road  and  none  on  the  other  two  roads  of  which  I have 
charge.  If  there  is  danger  of  attack  on  these  roads  artillery  is  neces- 
sary. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  June  3, 1863. 

General  K.  E.  Lee  : 

Information  fully  confirmed  as  to  the  evacuation  of  West  Point  and 
movement  of  column  of  4,000  or  5,000  of  the  enemy,  flanked  by  a cir- 
cling cavalry  detachment,  probably  as  scouts,  on  the  north  and  west 
side,  to  the  Rappahannock,  in  Essex,  near  Tappahannock. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  TTar. 


A.PF»E)I:^DIX 


Embracing  documents  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  proper  sequence* 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


Orgmiization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  Virginia^  Seventh  Army 
Gorps^  commanded  by  Maj.  Gen,  John  A.  Dix,  January  31,  1863. 


Camp  Hamilton,  Va. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va. 


Col.  Anthony  Conk. 


Col.  Samuel  M.  Alford. 


139tli  New  York,  Col.  Anthony  Conk. 
11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  C, 
First  Lieut.  Augustus  H.  D.  Will- 
iams. 

Battalion  Pennsylvania  Heavy  Artillery 
(four  companies),  Maj.  Josex)h  Roberts. 


3(1  New  York,  Col.  Samuel  M.  Alford. 


Norfolk,  Va. 

Brig.  Gen.  Egbert  L.  Viele. 

99th  New  York,  Col.  David  W.  Wardrop. 

148th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  George  M.  Guion. 

173d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Daniel  Nagle. 

19th  Wisconsin,  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  Whipple. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Company  M,  Capt.  Gerard  Reynolds. 
New  York  Light  Artillery,  7th  Battery,  Capt.  Peter  C.  Regan. 


Suffolk,  Va. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  J.  Peck. 

Corcoran's  Irish  Legion.  Terry's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  Corcoran.  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  D.  Terry. 

69th  New  York,  Capt.  Jasper  M.  Whitty.  j 130th  New  York,  Col.  Alfred  Gibbs. 

155th  New  York,  Col.  William  McEvily.  167th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Charles  A. 
164th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  James  C.  Knoderer. 

Burke.  177th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  George  B.Wiest- 

I70th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  James  P.  ling. 

Mclvor.  I 


Provisional  Brigade. 

Col.  Robert  S.  Foster. 

13th  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  J.  Dobbs. 

6th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Albert  S.  Follansbee. 

112th  New  York,  Col.  Jeremiah  C.  Drake. 

165th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Charles  H.  Buehler. 

166th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Andrew  J.  Fulton. 

7th  Company  U.  S.  Sharpshooters,  Capt.  Joseph  S.  Arnold. 

(1093) 


1094 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Unassigned. 

1st  New  York  Mounted  Rifles,  Col.  Charles  C.  Dodge. 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Col.  Samuel  P.  Spear. 

Massachusetts  Light  Artillery,  7th  Battery,  Capt.  Phineas  A.  Davis. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  D,  Capt.  Frederick  M.  Follett. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  L,  Capt.  Robert  V.  W.  Howard. 

Wisconsin  Light  Artillery,  2c]  Battery,  Capt.  Charles  Beger. 

Wisconsin  Light  Artillery,  4th  Battery,  First  Lieut.  George  B.  Easterly. 

Yorktowx,  Va.* 

Maj.  Gen.  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 


Bus  Iced’s  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Richard  Busteed. 

4th  Delaware,  Col.  Arthur  H.  Grim- 
shaw. 

169th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Lewis  W. 
Smith. 

178th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  James  Johnson. 
179th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  William  H. 
Blair. 


Beserve  Ariillerg,  Fourth  Corps. 

Lient.  Col.  Edward  H.  Flood. 

New  York  Light  Artillery,  8th  Battery, 
Capt.  Butler  Fitch. 

1st  Pen  nsy  1 vani  a Light  Art  i llery , Battery 
E,  Capt.  Thomas  G.  Orwig. 

1st  Pennsylvania  Light  Artillery,  Battery 
H,  Capt.  Andrew  Fagan. 

5th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  M,  Capt.  James 
McKnight. 


Unassigned. 

172d  Pennsylvania,  Col.  Charles  Kleckner. 

6th  New  York  Cavalry  (3d  Battalion),  Maj.  William  P.  Hall. 

5th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col.  William  Lewis. 

Ist  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Battery  F,  Capt.  William  R.  Wilson. 
Ist  New  York  Light  Artillery,  Battery  H,  Lieut.  Charles  E.  Mink. 


CORI?,ESF»0]SrDEISrCE:.  ETC. 

Headquarters.  Petersburg^  Ya.^  March  12,  1SG3. 
His  Excellency  Zebulon  B.  Vance,  Governor  of  North  Carolina : 

Sir:  Your  favor  of  the  4tli  instant  was  received  at  Wilmington  on 
the  8th.  The  removal  of  General  Pryor  from  the  Blackwater  was  made 
necessary  by  other  movements  of  troops.  I can  assure  you  and  the  good 
people  in  whose  bejalf  you  write  that  the  change  will  in  no  way  dis- 
parage their  interest.  The  offlcer  now  in  command  on  the  Blackwater 
is  one  of  our  most  energetic  and  enterprising  brigadiers.  I can  safely 
assure  you  that  yourself  and  the  citizens  will  be  quite  well  satisfied  with 
the  change  after  the  ofiicer  is  known.  General  Pryor’s  command  was 
only  in  this  department  for  the  winter.  It  will  soon  return  to  the  com- 
mand where  it  properly  belongs — Western  Virginia.  1 hope  that  this 
may  be  a satisfactory  explanation  of  the  recent  change  on  the  Black- 
water. 

I thank  you  sincerely  for  your  kind  expressions  about  myself,  and 
trust  that  I may  be  able  to  fulfill  your  expectations.  We  have  many 
difflculties  to  contend  with,  and  one  of  the  most  serious  is  the  want  of 
system  and  order  in  our  transportation.  If  you  can  assist  us  in  regu- 
lating this,  I think  that  we  can  i^romise  you  important  results  in  our 
operations. 

* Includes  troops  at  Gloucester  Point  and  Williamsburg,  Va. 


Chap.  XXX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  1095 

It  was  my  intention  to  have  done  myself  the  honor  to  make  you  a 
flying  visit,  but  I find  that  I cannot  well  quit  my  post. 

With  the  greatest  respect,  I am,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  LONGSTREET, 
Lieutenant- Gener at j Commanding, 


General  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  112.  f Richmond^  August  15,  1863. 

I.  A court  of  inquiry  having  been  convened  at  Richmond  on  the  29th 
of  July,  1863,  pursuant  to  Paragraph  XVII,  Special  Orders,  No.  176, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  current  series,  to  examine  into 
certain  charges  preferred  against  Maj.  William  Norris,  chief  of  the 
signal  corps,  and  having  made  the  required  examination,  the  report  of 
facts  proven,  with  the  opinion  of  the  court  thereon,  is  published  for  the 
information  of  all  concerned. 

REPORT  OF  FACTS. 

1.  Major  Norris  was  not  intoxicated  on  the  31st  of  May,  1863. 

2.  He  did  not  reveal  the  alphabet  of  the  signal  corps  on  the  31st  of 
May,  1863. 

3.  The  enemy  knew,  or  had  opportunity  to  know,  the  locality  of  the 
signal  stations  between  City  Point  and  Olairmont  before  the  31st  of 
May,  1863,  none  of  which  were  disclosed  to  him  by  Major  Norris  on 
that  day. 

• 4.  The  dispatch  shown  to  Captain  Mulford  by  Major  Norris  was  a 
l^rivate  dispatch,  conveying  a report  of  successes  at  Vicksburg. 

5.  There  was  no  improper  intercourse  between  Major  Norris  and  any 
officers  or  persons  in  the  service  of  the  enemy,  on  the  31st  of  May,  1863  • 

OPINION. 

I.  The  court  is  of  opinion  that  the  charges  in  this  case  have  been 
loosely  made,  and  without  due  care  and  investigation,  and  should  not  be 
further  entertained.  The  court  is  also  of  opinion  that  the  private  and 
official  character  of  Major  Norris  remain  unaffected  by  this  proceeding. 

II.  The  charges,  of  which  Major  Norris  has  been  thus  fully  exonerated 
by  the  court,  were  made  without  that  consideration  which  their  serious 
character  demanded,  and  in  a manner  that  subjects  the  prosecutor,  Lieut. 
R.  A.  Forbes,  Second  Company  Independent  Signal  Corps,  to  the  grave 
censure  of  the  department.  The  personal  and  official  character  of  an  offi- 
cer is  not  to  be  lightly  assailed.  The  accuser  will  be  held  to  support  his 
charges  by  evidence ; and  in  an  especial  manner  is  he  required  to  avoid 
creating  the  impression  that  the  loose,  unofficial  statements  of  others 
are  facts  within  his  own  knowledge.  The  greatest  care  and  considera- 
tion should  be  manifested  by  those  preferring  charges,  particularly 
when  the  reputation,  personal  and  professional,  of  a superior  is  called 
in  question. 

III.  The  court  of  inquiry,  of  which  Lieut.  Col.  George  Deas,  Adju- 
tant-General’s Department,  was  president,  is  hereby  dissolved. 

By  order : 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  l7ispector  Ge^ieral. 


1096 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


ALTERNATE  DESIGNATIONS  OF  ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED  IN  THIS 

VOLUME* 

Adams’  (Zacliariali  T.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  D, 
Alexander’s  (Aldon)  Artillery.  See  Montgomery  True  Blues  Artillery. 

Alexandria  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Alford’s  (Samuel  M.)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  M Regiment. 

Allen’s  (L.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Wren’s  Cavalry. 

Allen’s  (L.  M.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  6Aih  Regiment. 
Allen’s  (William  A.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  5l8^  Regiment. 
Allis’  (James  A.)  Artillery.  See  Neiv  York  Troops. 

Amory’s  (Thomas  J.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  11  th  Regiment. 
Anderson’s  (Hiram,  jr. ) Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  92d  Regiment. 

Angel’s  (James  R.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Armistead’s  (A.  D.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troop)s. 

Armor’s  (David  M.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  lOls^  Regiment. 

Arnold’s  (Job)  Infantry.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  bth  Regiment. 

Arnold’s  (Joseph  S.)  Sharpshooters.  See  New  York  Troops,  1st  Battalion. 

Ashby’s  (George  E.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Avirett’s  (John  Alfred,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Bachman’s  (W.  K.)  Artillery.  See  German  Artillery. 

Badham’s  (William,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Zd  Bat- 
talion, Battery  B. 

Baker’s  (John  A.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regiment. 
Ball’s  (William  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  Ihth  Regiment. 

Barham’s  (Theo.  G.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Barnes’  (Calvin)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Barnes’ (H.  M.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  10th  Battalion, 
Company  B. 

Bartholomew’s  (Walter  G.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  21th  Regiment. 
Barton’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Beach’s  (Francis)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  10th  Regiment. 

Beger’s  (Charles)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Belger’s  (James)  Artillery.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  Ist  Regiment,  Battery  F. 
Belknap’s  (Jonathan  S.)  Infantry.  See  Netv  York  Troops,  85th  Regiment. 

Bell’s  (D)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Ath  Regiment. 

Bierer’s  (Everard)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  lllst  Regiment. 

Blair’s  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  119th  Regiment. 

Blake’s  (John  A.)  Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  “id  Regiment,  Heavy. 

Blount’s  (J.  G.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Boggs’  (Francis  J.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops,  12th  Battalion. 

Boughton’s  (Horace)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  143d  Regiment, 

Bowler’s  (George)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  4Qth  Regiment. 

Boyce’s  (R.)  Artillery.  See  Macbeth  Artillery. 

Brabble’s  (E.  C.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  32d  Regiment. 
Bradberry’s  (John  J.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Bradford’s  (W.  D.)  Artillery.  See  Confederate  Guards  Artillery. 

Bradley’s  (Thomas')  Sharpshooters.  See  New  York  Troops,  Ist  Battalion. 

Brady’s  (H.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  111th  Regiment. 

Branch’s  (J.  R.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Brockway’s  (C.  B.)  Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  Isf  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Brown’s  (H.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Brown’s  (Jack)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  59th  Regiment. 


Keferences  are  to  index  following. 


CuAi*.  XXX.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


1097 


Brown’s  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  Enfans  Perdus  Infantry. 

Brown’s  (John  E.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  ^2d  Regiment. 
Brown’s  (William  R.)  Infantry.  See  Nero  York  Troops,  168f/<  Regiment. 

Brown’s  (W.  Leroy)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  bth  Battalion,  Local  Defense 
(Arsenal). 

Buehler’s  (Charles  H.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  IQbth  Regiment. 

Buffum’s  (Martin  P.)  Infantry.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  4th  Regiment. 

Buie’s  (Duncan  M.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Bunting’s  (S.  R.)  Artillery.  See  No7'th  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Burgwyn’s  (H.  K.,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  No7'th  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  26th  Regi- 
ment. 

Burhans’  (Charles  H.)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  To7'k  Troops,  96th  Regiment. 

Burke’s  (James  C.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  I64th  Regiment. 

Burnham’s  (George  S.  ) Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  22d  Regiment. 

Burpee’s  (Thomas  F.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  21st  Regiment. 

Burroughs’  (Edgar)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  16th  Regiment. 

Burwell’s  (Philip  L.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Cabot’s  (Edward  C.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  44th  Regiment. 

Cady’s  (A.  Lester)  Artillery.  See  Jay  E.  Lee's  Ai’tillery. 

Camden  Guerrillas.  See  Willis  B.  Sanderlin’s  InfanWy. 

Campbell’s  (David)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Campbell’s  (Edward)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  86th  Regiment. 

Cantwell’s  (J.  L.)  Infantry.  SeeNondh  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  61st  Regiment. 
Cape  Fear  Artillery.  See  North  Cai'olina  Troops,  Confedei'ate. 

Carroll’s  (Gray)  Artillery.  See  Stribling's  Artillen'y. 

Caskie’s  (William  H.)  Artillery.  See  Hampden  Artillery. 

Cassel’s  (John)  Cavalry.  See  S.  P.  Spear's  Cavalry. 

Chambers’  (John  G.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Ti'oops,  2‘Sd  Regiment. 

Chambliss’  (John  R.,jr.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  VSth  Regiment. 

Chesterfield  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Church’s  (George  E.)  Infantry.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  11th  Regiment. 

Claassen’s  (Peter  J. ) Infantry.  See  Neiv  Yondc  Troops,  Vi2d  Regiment. 

Claiborne’s  (W.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Confederate  Troops,  Regulars,  7th  Regiment. 

Clark  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Rankin's  Ai'tillery. 

Clarke’s  (William  J.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  24th  Regi- 
ment. 

Clark’s  (John  D.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  H. 
Clopton’s  (Thomas  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Wiwn's  Cavalry. 

Codman’s  (Charles  R.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  46th  Regiment. 

Coffin’s  (Frederic  J.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Cogdell’s  (D.  A.)  Infantry.  See  John  N.  Whitford's  Partisans. 

Coit’s  (J.  C.)  Artillery.  See  Chesterfield  Artillery. 

Cole’s  (George  W.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix's  Cavalry. 

Comfort’s  (Felix)  Infantry.  See  Enfans  Perdus  Infantry. 

Confederate  Guard  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Confederate  Guards  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops. 

Conk’s  (Anthony)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  139th  Regiment. 

Connally’s  (John  K.)  Infantry.  See  North  Cai'olina  Troops,  Corf ederate,  66th  Regi- 
ment. 

Cornog’s  (George  T.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  P.  Spear's  Cavalry. 

Crabb’s  (George  W.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  6th  Regiment,  Battery  A. 
Crosby’s  (Hiram  B.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  21st  Regiment. 
Crowninshield’s  (Casper)  Cavalry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Cullen’s  (Edgar  M.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  96th  Regiment. 

Culpeper’s  (J.  F.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Battalion,  Battery  C. 


1098 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX, 


Cumming’s  (James  D.)  Artillery.  See  Cape  Fear  ArtiUery. 

Cumming’s  (Emory)  Cavalry.  See  Xeiv  York  Troops,  2M  Battalion. 

Curtis’  (N.  M.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  142fZ  Regiment. 

Curtiss’  (Carlton  B.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  ^8th  Regiment. 

Dabney’s  (W.  J.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Dandy’s  (George  B.)  Infantry,  See  New  York  Troops,  lO^tli  Regiment. 

Darling’s  (JoRn  A.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Joseph  Rolerts^  ArtiUery. 

Davis’  (Hasbrouck)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Yltli  Regiment. 

Davis’  (James  E.)  Artillery.  See  Montgomery  True  Bines  Artillery. 

Davis’  (Joseph  D.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  167//?,  Regiment. 

Davis’  (Phineas  A.)  Artillery.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  7th  Battery. 

Davis’  (William  W.  H.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  104//?-  Regiment. 

Day’s  (Joseph  M.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  40//?  Regiment. 

Day’s  (Samuel  C.)  Artillery.  See  Joseph  J.  Morrison's  Artillery. 

De  Forest’s  (Jacob  J. ) Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  81$/  Regiment. 

Denny’s  (J.  Waldo)  Infantry.  See  A.  B.  R.  Sprague's  Infantry. 

Derrom’s  (Andrew)  Infantry.  See  New  Jersey  Troops,  2bth  Regiment. 

Devane’s  (W.  S.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  61s/  Regiment. 
Dobbs’  (Cyrus  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  13//?  lUgiment. 

Doby’s  (James)  Cavalry.  See  Holcombe  legion. 

Dodge’s  (Charles  C.)  Mounted  Rifles.  See  New  York  Troops,  7ih  Regiment,  Cavalry 
Dodge’s  (John  C.,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  b2d  Regiment. 

Donohoe’s  (Michael  T.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  10//?  Regiment. 
Drake’s  (Jeremiah  C.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  112//?  Regiment. 

^Drennan’s  (James  M.)  Infantry.  See  A.  B.  R.  Sprague's  Infantry. 

Duke’s  (R.  T.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  46//?  Regiment. 

Durkee’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  98th  Regiment. 

Dyer’s  (Samuel  A.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  175//?  Regiment. 

Easterly’s  (George  B.)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  4th  Battery. 

Edmands’  (T.  F.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  24//?  Regiment. 

Edmundson’s  (H.  A.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  27th  Battalion,  P.  R. 

Elliott’s  (John  Thompson)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Ellis’  (Andrew  J.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  9d  Battalion, 
Battery  A. 

Elwell’s  (Andrew)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  23d  Regiment. 

Enfans  Perdus  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops. 

England’s  (Theophilus  L.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  89th  Regiment. 

Eure’s  (M.  L.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 
Evans’  (P.  G.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  bth  Regiment. 
Ewer’s  (Barnabas,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Fagan’s  (Andrew)  Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  Is/  Regiment,  Battery  H. 
Faison’s  (Paul  F. ) Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  b6th  Regiment. 
Farrar’s  (Judson  S.)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 

Fauquier  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Fellows’  (John  F.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops, 17th  Regiment. 

Perebee’s  (D.  D.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  4th  Regiment. 
Ferguson’s  (Alonzo)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  152?/  Regiment. 

Fitch’s  (Butler)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  8th  Battery. 

Fitz  Simmons’  (Charles)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix's  Cavalry., 

Flemming’s  (J.  A.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  49th  Regiment. 
Follansbee’s  (Albert  S.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Follett’s  (Frederick  M.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  4th  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery D. 

Folk’s  (George  N.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  7th  Battulion. 
Foster's  (Robert  S.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  13th  Regiment. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


1099 


Frankie’s  (Jones)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  V7th  Eegiment. 

French’s  (D.  A.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Fuller’s  (Thomas  C.)  Artillery.  See  J.  B.  Star7'’s  Artillerg. 

Fulton’s  (Andrew  J.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  166i/j  Regiment. 

Garden’s  (H.  R.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery. 

Garrard’s  (Jeptha)  Cavalry.  See  S.  IT.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Garrett’s  (W.  N.)  Infantry.  See  L.  M.  Allen’s  Infantry. 

Gee’s  (B.  H.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  b9th  Eegiment. 

German  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Gibbs’  (Alfred)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  ViOth  Eegiment. 

Gibbs’  (George  C.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Eegiment. 
Gibson’s  (A.  A.)  Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  2d  Eegiment,  Heavy. 

Gilliss’  (James)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  btJi  Eegiment,  Battery  A. 
Goode’s  (J.  Thomas)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops,  4th  Eegiment,  Heavy. 

Graham’s  (Edward)  Artillery.  See  Petersburg  Rocket  Artillery. 

Graham’s  (G.  W.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  1st  Eegiment. 
Graham’s  (J.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  IstEegt.,  Bat’y  G. 
Graham’s  (W.  A.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 
Grammer’s  (W.  T.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  5th  Eegiment. 

Gray’s  (Charles  O.)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  95th  Eegiment. 

Gregory’s  (David  E.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  14\th  Eegiment. 

Griffin’s  (Joel  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  624  Eegiment. 

Grimshaw’s  (Arthur  H.)  Infantry.  See  Delaware  Troops,  4th  Regiment. 

Guion’s  (George  M.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  148//i  Eegiment. 

Hall’s  (E.  D.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  46th  Eegiment. 
Hall’s  (Newton)  Artillery.  See  S.  H.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Hall’s  (William  P.)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  6th  Eegiment. 

Hampden  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Hampton  Legion.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Hargrove  Blues,  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Harris  Light  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops, 2d  Regiment. 

Harris’  (Thomas  W.)  Cavalry.  See  P.  G.  Evans’  Cavalry. 

Harrison’s  (George  P.,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  32d  Regiment. 

Hart’s  (T.  D.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  194th  Eegiment. 

Hasbrouck’s  (Henry  C.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  4th  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery L.  X 

Hawkins’  (Rush  C.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  9th  Eegiment. 

Hawley’s  (Louis  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  19th  Regiment. 

Haynes’  (Thomas  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  9th  Eegiment. 

Heckman’s  (Charles  A.)  Infantry.  See  New  Jersey  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Heine’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  103d  Eegiment. 

Hill’s  Ccmpany.  Official  designation  unknown.  See  Captain  Hill. 

Hill’s  (James  C.)  Infantry.  See  E.  T.  TV.  Duke's  Infantry. 

Hiller’s  (Frederick  L.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  16th  Battery. 

Hinds’  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  96th  Regiment. 

Hitchcock’s  (George  H.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  132d  Eegiment. 

Holbrook’s  (Charles  L.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  43d  Eegiment. 
Holcombe  Legion.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Holland’s  (W.  A.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Hook’s  (Cornelius,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  1st  Eegiment,  Battery  C. 
Howard’s  (R.  V.  W.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  4th  Eegiment,  Battery  L. 
Howell’s  (John  H.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Eegiment,  Battery  M. 
Howell’s  (Joshua  B.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsyvania  Troops,  85th  Regiment. 

Hudson’s  (James,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops, 8th  Eegiment. 

Humphrey  Troop,  Cavalry.  See  John  A.  Baker’s  Cavalry. 


1100 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Hunt’s  (Lewis  C.)  Infantry.  See  Xew  York  Troops,  92d  Regiment. 

Jack’s  (Joseph)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  168th  Regiment. 

Jacobs’  (Ferris,  jr.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix's  Cavalry. 

James  City  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  bth  Rtgimeni. 

Jenney’s  (Edwin  S.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battoi'y  F. 
Jocknick’s  (George  F.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix's  Cavalry. 

Johnson’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  178ih  Regiment. 

Johnson’s  (James  A.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  172d  Regiment. 

Johnson’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  148th  Regiment. 

Jones’  (John  A.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  44th  Regiment. 

Jones’  (John  Richter)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  68th  Regiment. 

Jordan’s  (John  V.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  91st  Regiment. 
Jourdan’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  168th  Regiment. 

Keese’s  (Oliver,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Ti'oops,  118th  Regiment. 

Henan’s  (Thomas  S.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  43d  Regiment. 
Kennedy’s  (T.  J.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Kilpatrick’s  ( Jndson)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

King’s  (Reuben  V.)  Infantry.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  86th  Regiment. 

Kleckner’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  112d  Regiment. 

Kleinz’s  (Christopher)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Knoderer’s  (Charles  A.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  167th  Regiment. 
Kurtz’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  23d  Regiment. 

Lamb’s  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  17th  Regiment. 
Lane’s  (James  S.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Lechler’s  (A.  A.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  176th  Regiment. 

Ledlie’s  (Janies  H.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Lee’s  (Francis  L.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  44th  Regiment. 

Lee’s  (Horace  C.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  27th  Regiment. 

Lee’s  (Jay  E.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  24th  Battery. 

Lee’s  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  99th  Regiment. 

Leggett’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  10th  Regiment. 

Leventhorpe’s  (C.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  llth  Regiment. 
Lewis’  (George  W.)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Lewis’  (W.  B.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  10th  Battalion, 
Company  A. 

Lewis’  (William)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Littleton’s  (John  K.)  Cavalry.  See  Wren's  Cavalry. 

Logie’s  (William  K.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  141si  Regiment. 

Lyman’s  (Luke)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  27th  Regiment. 

Lyon’s  (C.  A.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment. 

McAfee’s  (L.  M.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  49th  Regiment. 
Macbeth  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

McBryde’s  (M.  H.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 
McCandless’  (William  G.)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 
McCauley’s  (C.  M.  T.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  10th  Bat- 
talion, Company  C. 

McChesney’s  (Joseph  M.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  Regiment. 
McClees’  (N.)  Artillery.  See  J.  W.  Moore's  Artillery. 

McConihe’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  169th  Regiment. 

McDevitt’s  (Martin)  Artillery.  See  John  F.  Vallee's  Artillery. 

McEvily’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  Netv  York  Troops,  166th  Regiment. 

Mclntire’s  (A.)  Cavalry.  See  P.  G.  Evans'  Cavalry. 

Mclvor’s  (James  P.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  170th  Regiment. 

McKibbin’s  (David  B.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  168th  Regiment. 
McKnight’a  (James)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  6th  Regiment,  Battery  M. 


Chap.  XXX.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


1101 


McMahon’s  (James  P.)  Infantry.  See  Xew  York  Troops,  IQAtli  Regiment. 
McMahon’s  (J.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  6M  Regiment. 

McNary’s  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  l^Sth  Regiment. 

Macon  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops. 

Macon’s  (M.  C.)  Artillery.  See  Richmond  Fayette  Artillery. 

MacRae’s  (A.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Madison  Light  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops. 

Magruder’s  (John  Bowie)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  ^7th  Regiment. 

Mallett’s  (Peter)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Manchester’s  (H.  A. ) Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  Isi  Regiment,  Marine  Artillery, 
Marshall’s  (J.  K.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  52d  Regiment. 
Martin’s  (S.  Taylor)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Martin’s  (W.  F. ) Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  nth  Regiment. 
Maxwell’s  (Wilson  C.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  103(Z  Regiment. 

Mercer’s  (William  E.)  Artillery.  See  William  J.  Riggs’  Artillery. 

Merriman’s  (T.  Adams)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  92d  Regiment. 

Mink’s  (Charles  E.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  H. 
Minor’s  (R.  D.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  4th  Battalion,  Local  Defense  (Naval). 
Mitchell’s  (B.  B.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  P.  Spear’s  Cavalry. 

Mix’s  (John)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Mix’s  (Simon  H.)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Mizell’s  (Jonathan  T.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment. 
Moise’s  (E.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Confederate  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Montgomery  True  Blues,  Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Moore’s  (A.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  29th  Regiment. 

Moore’s  (A.  D.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regt.,  Bat’y  E. 
Moore’s  (J.  G.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Battalion,  Bat- 
tery C. 

Moore’s  (Julius  W.)  Cavalry.  See  John  A.  Baker’s  Cavalry. 

Moore’s  (J.  W.)  Artillery.  See  Forth  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Battalion. 
Morris’  (David  B.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  lUlst  Regiment. 

Morrison’s  (Joseph)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  89th  Regiment. 

Morrison’s  (Joseph  J.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  B. 
Moschell’s  (John  F.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Moseley’s  (E.  F.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Murchison’s  (Alexander)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regt. 
Miuphy’s  (Mathew)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  182d  Regiment. 

Murray’s  (Albert  M.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  bill  Regiment,  Battery  A. 
Nagle’s  (Daniel)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  173d  Regiment. 

Nelson’s  (William  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Thomas  Legion. 

Nethercutt’s  (J.  H.)  Rangers.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  8th  Battalion. 
Newkirk’s  (Abram  F.)  Cavalry.  See  John  A.  Baker’s  Cavalry. 

Nichols’  (J.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  J.  R.  Griffin’s  Cavalry. 

Nields’  (Benjamin)  Artillery.  See  Delaware  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Norfleet’s  (Hamlin)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Norfolk  Blues,  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Nyce’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  174th  Regiment. 

Onderdonk’s  (Benjamin  F.)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

O’Neil’s  (John)  Artillery.  See  William  J.  Riggs’  Artillery. 

Orwig’s  (Thomas  G. ) Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Osborn’s  (Francis  A.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  24th  Regiment. 

Osborn’s  (Thomas  O.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  ‘69th  Regiment. 

Otis’  (John  L.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  10th  Regiment. 

Owens’  (W.  A.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  53d  Regiment. 
Page’s  (P.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 


1102 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Palmetto  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Palmetto  Battalion  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Palmetto  Sharpshooters.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Pardee’s  (Benjamin  S.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  IQth  Regiment. 

Paris’  (Andrew  B.)  Artillery.  See  Staunton  Hill  Artillery. 

Pasquotank  Guerrillas,  Infantry.  See  EllioWs  Infantry. 

Paliton’s  (Alexander  G.)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Pease’s  (William  R.)  Infantry.  See  Neic  York  Troops,  With  Regiment. 

Peirson’s  (George  H.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  i)th  Regiment. 

Perkins’  (Elisha  A.)  Cavalry.  See  John  A.  BakeYs  Cavalry. 

Petersburg  Rocket  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Pickett’s  (Josiah)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  ‘2bth  Regiment. 

Plaisted’s  (Harris  ]\I.)  Infantry.  See  Maine  Troops,  Wth  Regiment. 

Poage’s  (Thomas)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  50th  Regiment. 

Pollock’s  (W.  K.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  \st  Regiment,  Battery  C. 
Pond’s  (Francis B.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  62d  Regiment. 

Pond’s  (Nathan  P.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Pool’s  (Stephen  D.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment 
Porter’s  (Francis  E.)  Infantry  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  8th  Regiment.' 

Potter’s  (Edward  E.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  Ist  Regiment. 
Preston’s  (William  C.)  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Radcliffe’s  (J.  D.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  61st  Regiment. 
Randolph’s  (John)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 
Rankin’s  (R.  G.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Ransom’s  (Alfred)  Artillery.  See  Neiv  York  Troops,  23d  Battery. 

Ransom’s  (M.  W.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  35th  Regiment. 
Raulston’s  (William  C.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  81st  Regiment. 

Regan’s  (Peter  C.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  7ih  Battery. 

Reid’s  (Thomas  M. ) Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  182d  Regiment. 

Reilly’s  (.James)  Artillery.  See  Rowan  Artillery. 

Reinhart’s  (H.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  John  A.  Baker’s  Cavalry. 

Reynolds’  (Gerard)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  llth  Regiment 
Rhett’s  (A.  Burnet)  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Richardson’s  (Colin)  Cavalry.  See  S.  if.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Richmond  Fayette  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Richmond’s  (Silas  P.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Richter’s  (Henry  M.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  25th  Regiment. 

Riggs’  (William  J.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  H. 
Ringold’s  (Benjamin)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  103d  Regiment. 

Ripley’s  (Edward  H.)  Infantry.  See  Vermont  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Roberts’  (Joseph)  Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Heavy. 
Roberts'  (W.  Dewees)  Cavalry.  See  S.  P.  Spear’s  Cavalry. 

Robertson’s  (J.  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  32d  Battalion. 

Rodgers’  (Andrew  J.)  Cavalry.  See  J.  R.  Robertson’s  Cavalry. 

Rogers’  (S.  H.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  ilth  Regiment. 
Rowan  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops. 

Ryerson’s  (Henry  O.)  Infantry.  See  New  Jersey  Troops,  10th  Regiment. 

Sanderlin’s  (Willis  B.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Sanders’  (Enos  C.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment. 
Sanders’ (Horace  T.)  Infantry.  See  fVisconsin  Troops,  19th  Regiment. 

Schultz’s  (Carl)  Artillery.  See  Charles  Beger’s  Artillery. 

Shaw’s  (H.  M.)  Infantry.  See  North  Corolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Sth  Regiment. 
Shingler’s  (W.  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Holcombe  Lrgion. 

Shurtleff’s  (William  S.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  AOth  Regiment. 
Slaten’s  (C.  W.)  Artillery.  See  Macon  Artillery. 


Chap.  XXX,] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


1103 


Sikes’  (J.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  IF.  C.  Claiborne's  Cavalry. 

Simpson’s  (John  G. ) Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  Is^  Eegiment,  Battery  A. 
Simpson’s  (Thomas)  Artillery.  See  James  Belger's  Artillery. 

Sisson’s  (Henry  T.)  Infantry.  See  Bhode  Island  Troops,  btli  Regiment. 

Small’s  (Nathaniel  W.)  Signal  Corps.  See  Confeierate  Troops. 

Smith’s  (Benjamin  G. ) Cavalry.  See  John  A.  Baler's  Cavalry. 

Smith’s  (Lewis  W.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  169I/t  Regiment. 

Smoot’s  (D.  L.)  Artillery.  See  Alexandria  Artillery. 

Spear’s  (Samuel  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  llth  Regiment. 

Sprague’s  (Augustus  B.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  51st  Regiment. 
Stahl’s  (William  H.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  \Wi  Battery. 

Stark’s  (A.  W.)  Artillery.  See  Armistead's  and  French's  Batteries. 

Starr’s  (J.  B.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regt.,  Bat'y  B. 
Staunton  Hill  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Stedman’s  (Griffin  A.,  jr.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  llth  Regiment. 

Stevens’  (Aaron  F.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  IWi  Regiment. 

Stevens’  (C.  H.)  Infantry.  See  South  Carolina  Troops,  2ith  Regiment. 

Stevenson’s  (John  S.)  Artillery.  See  Joseph  Roberts’  Artillery. 

Stevenson’s  (Robert  H.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  2‘lth  Regiment. 
Stewart’s  (Charles  H.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  ‘Sd  Regiment. 

Stone’s  (Henry  M. ) Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  2>d  Regiment. 

Storer’s  (Jacob  J.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  IWi  Regiment. 

Stribling’s  (Robert  M.)  Artillery.  See  Fauquier  Artillery. 

Sturdivant’s  (N.  A. ) Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Swindell’s  (Edward  S.)  Rangers.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Tabb’s  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops, 59th  Regiment. 

Tait’s  (George)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Taylor’s  (Alexander  W.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  lOlsI  Regiment. 

Tevis’  (C.  Carroll)  Infantry.  See  Delaivare  Troops,  Ath  Regiment. 

Tew’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  5th  Regiment. 

Thomas’  (George  W.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  I. 
Thomas’  (W.  H.)  Legion  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Thorp’s  (Thomas  J.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  130//i  Regiment. 

Tolies  (Samuel)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  15th  Regiment. 

Trigg’s  (Robert  C.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  5Ath  Regiment. 

Troxel’s  (Elias  S.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  15Sth  Regiment. 

Upham’s  (Charles  L.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  15th  Regiment. 

Vallee’s  (John  F.)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  Ath  Battery. 

Van  Wyck’s  (Charles  H.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  56th  Regiment. 

Voris’  (A.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  61ih  Regiment. 

Vought’s  (Philip  G.)  Cavalry.  See  New  York  Troops,  12th  Regimen  t. 

Wall’s  (John)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  3d  Regiment,  Battery  G. 

Wallace’s  (G.  A.)  Infantry.  See  IF.  B.  Tabb’s  Infantry. 

Waller’s  (Richard  P.)  Infantry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  2d  Battalion,  Local  Defense 
{Quartermaster's  Department). 

Ward’s  (George)  Artillery.  See  Madison  Light  Artillery. 

Ward’s  (John  E.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Wardrop’s  (David  W.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  ddlh  Regiment. 
Washington’s  (J.  A.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate, 56th  Regt. 
Waties’  (John)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Battalion,  Battery  B. 

Wead’s  (Frederick  F.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  98th  Regiment. 

Webb’s  (Louis  H.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Webb’s  (W.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Connecticut  Troops,  16th  Regiment. 

Wellman’s  (Abijah  J.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  85th  Regiment. 

Wheelan’s  (James  N.)  Cavalry.  See  Charles  C.  Dodge’s  Cavalry. 


1104 


NORTH  CAROLINA  AND  S.  E.  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XXX. 


Wheeler’s  (John  J.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  56//i  Regiment. 

Wheeler’s  (S.  J.)  Cavalry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  Battalion. 
Whipple’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  19th  Regiment. 

White’s  (Alvin)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  117th  Regiment. 

White’s  (David  B.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  81si  Regiment. 

Whitford’s  (John  N. ) Partisans.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 
Whitney’s  (Stephen)  Artillery.  See  Frederick  M.  FolleWs  Artillery. 

Whiton’s  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  43d  Regiment. 

Whitty’s  (Jasper  M.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  69th  Regiment. 

Wiestling’s  (George  B.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  llltli  Regiment. 
Wilkins’  (Edward)  Infantry.  See  Maryland  Troops,  Union,  2d  Regiment,  Eastern 
Shore  Home  Guards. 

Williams'  (Augustus  H.  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  ll//i  Regiment. 
Williams’  (Robert)  Cavalry,  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  Regiment. 

Willson’s  (John  M.)  Cavalry.  See  S.  H.  Mix’s  Cavalry. 

Wilson’s  (William  R.)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops,  Regiment,  Battery  F. 
Winans’  (Ira)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  99th  Regiment. 

Woodford’s  (Stewart  L.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  127th  Regiment. 

Wren’s  (John  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Virginia  Troops,  AOth  Battalion. 

Wright’s  (C.  G.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate. 

Wright’s  (S.  T. ) Artillery.  See  Firginm  Troops. 

Wyatt’s  (James  W.)  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Young’s  (W.  L.)  Artillery.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  Confederate,  19th  Battalion. 
Zabriskie’a  (Abram)  Infantry.  See  New  Jersey  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 


IINTDEX 


Brigades,  Divisions,  Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  are  '^Mentioned"  under  name  of 
commanding  officer;  State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation.  (See  Alternate 
Designations,  pp.  1096-1104.) 


Page. 

Abandoned  and  Captured  Property.  See  Refugees,  Freedmen  and  Abandoned 


Lands. 

Abbitt,  G.  W.  Mentioned  342 

Abercrombie,  John  J.  Mentioned.. 271,323,372,608 

Absentees.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 1053 

Hill,  D.  H 1052 

Lee,  Robert  E 1066 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 821,860,928 

A.  C.  Broderick,  Sloop.  Mentioned 431,437 

Ackerly,  Albert  J.  Mentioned 140 

Adams,  Thomas.  Mentioned 880 

Adams,  Zachariah  T.  Mentioned 34, 1049 

Adjutant-Generars  Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with  Innis  N.  Palmer 578, 589 


Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  214,  492. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  88,  580. 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A. 


Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 817, 826, 833, 1031 

Elzey,  Arnold 1058 

Evans,  N.  G 114 

French,  Samuel  G 773, 846, 861, 864, 873, 1028 

Hill,  A.  P 888 

Hill,  D.  H 1028, 1032, 1034, 1061, 1067, 1079, 1082, 1084 

Lee,  Robert  E 875, 1028, 1029, 1034 

Longstreet,  James 895, 

900, 907, 909, 913, 914, 918, 927, 930, 1029, 1032, 1034, 1037 

Martin,  W.  F 851 

Milligan,  J.  F 741 

Morris,  W.  S 958 

Pickett,  George  E 884 

Richmond  Press 958 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 848, 913, 922 

Winder,  J.  H 931 


Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  69,  748. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : No.  34,  953 ; No.  112,  1095. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  211,  743;  No.  2 62  , 770;  No.  288,  793; 

No.  298,  807. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  32  , 872;  No.  44,  889;  No.  99, 1020;  No. 

116,  1062;  No.  122,  1070;  No.  127,  1077. 

Aiken,  Mr.  Mentioned 456 

(1105) 

70  R R— VOL  XVIII 


1106 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Alabama  (290),  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 453,834 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Montgomery  True  Blues,  190, 191. 

Infantry — Companies:  Avirett’s,  154, 508.  Regiments:  4th,  782;  44th,  336, 

337,  637  ; 48th,  338. 

Albemarle,  District  of  the.  (Union.)  See  North  Carolina,  Department  of, 

Alden,  Alonzo.  Mentioned 272,295 

Alert,  Steamer.  Mentioned 241 

Alert,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 276,595,611,617,662 

Alexander,  Schooner.  Mentioned 437 

Alexander,  Aldon.  Mentioned 191 

Alexander,  Barton  S.  Mentioned 373 

Alexander,  E.  P.  Mentioned 947 

Alexander,  John  M.  Mentioned t 18 

Alexander,  W.  T.  Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 928 

Alford,  Samuel  M.  Mentioned 411, 

441,  442,  467,  468,  486,  494,  499,  532,  546,  574,  675,  677,  733,  736,  1093 

Alida.  Steam  Tng.  Mentioned 242 

Alleghanian,  Ship.  Mentioned 554 

Allen,  Acting  Master.  Mentioned 14 

Allen,  L.  M.  Mentioned 853,  867,  893 

Allen,  Richard  J.  Mentioned 364,  365 

Allen,  W.  A.  Mentioned 1020 

Allen,  William.  Mentioned 70 

Allen,  William  A.  Mentioned 117-119 

Allgood,  Horace.  Mentioned 880 

Allis,  James  A.  Mentioned 71, 72 

Allison,  Steamer.  Mentioned 58, 105, 106, 172, 181, 182, 223, 224, 229, 237, 646 

Ames,  J.  F.  Mentioned 351 

Amory,  Thomas  J.  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 527 

Moschell,  John  F 27 

Mentioned 21,26, 

27,  54-57,  66,  81,  85,  127, 129,  130, 186,  237, 246,  248,  251,  252,  343,  345, 346, 
349,  351, 365,  378,  402,  411, 468, 500, 524,  533,  548,  577,  598,  665,  666,  678, 736 
Reports  of 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  Operations  Dec.  14-17, 1862,  during  expedition  to.  75 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on,  Nov.  11,  1862  24 

Anderson,  General.  Mentioned 435 

Anderson,  Archer.  Mentioned 986 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  D.  H.  Hill. 

Anderson,  Fort,  N.  C.  Attack  on,  March  14,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Anderson,  Hiram,  jr 185 

Barstow,  Nathaniel  S 172 

Foster,  J.  G 185 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 170-172, 184, 186, 193, 194 

Reports  of 

Barstow,  Nathaniel  S 185 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 189 

Taylor,  David  A 184 

See  also 

March  6-10,  1863.  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from.  Reports  of 
Flicker,  Joseph.  Taylor,  David  A. 


INDEXo 


1107 


Page. 

Anderson,  Fort,  N.  C.  Attack  on,  March  14,  1863 — Continued. 

See  also 

March  8-16,  1863.  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  against.  Reports  oj 
Foster,  John  G.  Hill,  D.  H. 

Haskell,  John  C.  Pettigrew,  John  J. 

Anderson,  G.  T.  Mentioned 268,  605,  607,  632,  690,  915,  917, 1033 

Anderson,  Hiram,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 185 

Mentioned 100, 172, 184-186, 500, 577 

Anderson,  John  F.  Mentioned 512,585 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  Henry  TV.  Wessells. 

Anderson,  Richard  H.  Mentioned...., 488 

Andrew,  John  A.  Mentioned 391,395,461 

Andrews,  William  G.  Mentioned 849 

Andrews,  William  S. 

Mentioned 258 

Report  of  expedition  from  Yorktown,  Va.,  April  1,  1863  257 

Angel,  James  R.  Mentioned 64,65 

Annie  L.  Edwards,  Schooner.  Mentioned 223,224,242 

Antioch  Church,  Va.  Skirmish  at.  May  23,  1862.  See  Norfolk  and  Peters- 
burg Railroad,  Va.  Operations  on  the,  May  15-28,  1863. 

Arago,  Steamer.  Mentioned 470 

Armfield,  R.  F.  Correspondence  with  Governor  of  North  Carolina  886 

Armistead,  A.  D.  Mentioned 920 

Armistead,  L.  A.  Mentioned 385, 915, 917,  929, 1038, 1090 

Armor,  David  M.  Mentioned 181,500 

Arms,  Ammunition,  etc.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Army  Corps,  7th,  Department  of  Virginia.  Orders,  General  and  Special. 

See  Virginia,  Department  of. 

Army  Corps,  9th. 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E.,  resumes  command  of 539 

Composition  of  Third  Division  of,  left  in  Department  of  Virginia 570 

Third  Division  of,  transferred  to  Suffolk,  Va 3, 558, 562 

Transfer  of,  to  the 

Ohio,  Department  of .*.  3, 562-565, 946, 948-950, 953, 954, 956, 966 

Virginia,  Department  of 2, 149, 534, 536, 876, 877, 879, 888, 889, 896 

Army  Corps,  18th,  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

Brigade  and  division  organization  resumed 598, 599 

Constituted 492 

Foster,  John  G.,  assigned  to  command 492 

Orders,  General  and  Special.  See  North  Carolina,  Department  of.  ( Union.) 

Army  Corps,  Longstreet’s.  Transfer  of,  for  defense  of  Richmond.  2, 876, 880, 882-884 
Army  Headquarters. 

Correspondence  with 

Barnard,  JohnG 712 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 491,497,511,537,539 

Cullum,  George  W 712 

Dix,  John  A 11, 126, 285, 378, 382, 384-390, 392, 393 

395,  396, 398-401,  406,  409, 417, 435,  456, 459-462,  466, 473,  477-479,  482,  487^ 
488, 490-492, 494, 496, 497, 502, 503, 508, 509, 511, 513, 515,  517, 518, 522, 528, 
529, 531, 534, 536, 549, 551, 553, 555, 556, 558, 563,  568, 570, 579, 603, 608, 610, 
613, 618-620, 622, 624, 625, 632, 634-636,649, 653, 657, 660, 663, 666,  671, 679, 
682, 686-689, 699, 701, 704-707, 709, 711, 717-720,  725-727,  730,  732, 738, 740 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 540 


1108 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Army  Headquarters— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G. 401,  414,  447,457,  469,  476,  481,  489, 490, 520, 

524, 530, 533,  538,  541,  549, 556, 562,  622,  623,  627,  659,  699, 700,  709, 711,  713 

Heintzelman,  Samuel  P 608,637 

Hooker,  Joseph 683, 709 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 585-589,  591,  592,  595,  596,  599,  601,  603,  604, 609, 739 

King,  Rufus 706, 708 

McClellan,  George  B 375 

Mansfield,  J.  K.  F 385 

Naglee,  Henry  M 607,608 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 388 

Palmer,  Inuis  N 612, 617,  637 

Parke,  John  G 565 

Peck,  John  J 391, 

472,  600,  605,  606,  610,  614,  619,  620,  626,  632,  653,  667,  684,  692 

Totten,  J.  G 712 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  410,  492. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  229,  387 ; No.  290,  427 ; No.  394,  482 ; 

No.  414,  494. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  125,  563;  No.  136,  567;  No.  190,  659; 

No.  200,  686 ; No.  249,  740. 

Review  of  report  of  Board  of  Army  OfiScers  on  defenses  of  Yorktown,  Va..  381 
Army  Transportation.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Arnold,  H.  N.  T.  Mentioned 515 

Arnold,  Job. 

Mentioned 83,378 

Report  of  expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Nov.  1-12,  1862 23 

Arnold,  John  S.  Mentioned 1093 

Arnold,  Joseph  S.  Mentioned 734 

Arrow,  Steamer. 

Capture  of  the,  May  15,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Peck,  John  J 722 

Stratton,  Franklin  A * 356 

Viele,  Egbert  L 356 

Wessells,  Henry  W 3.55 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 355 

Reports  of 

Porter,  Francis  E 355 

Roberts,  W.  Dewees 356 

Men  ti  oned 355,  3.56, 731 

Arctic,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 820,863 

Ashby,  George  E.  Mentioned 64 

Ashland,  Va.  Skirmish  at.  May  3,  1863  3 

A.  S.  Pearcy,  Schooner.  Mentioned 402 

Averell,  V7.  W.  Mentioned 382 

Avery,  William  B.  Report  of  affair  near  Shiloh,  N.  C.,  Sept.  20, 1862 14 

Avirett,  John  Alfred,  ir.  Mentioned 508 

Aylett’s,  Va.  Skirmish  at.  May  5,  1863.  See  King  to  EaUecJc,  p.  708. 

B . Mentioned 1022 

Babcock,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 357, 417,  425,  427,  432,  699 

Babcock,  Courtlandt  G.  Mentioned 100 

Babcock,  O.  E.  Mentioned 565 

Bailey,  D.  J.  Mentioned 499 


INDEX. 


1109 


Page. 

Bailey,  John  L.  Mentioned 881 

Baily,  George  W.  Mentioned 44 

Baird,  E.  R. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 1091 

Mentioned 1091 

Baker,  Horace  P.  Mentioned 62,171,217 

Baker,  John  A. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 821,844,850,851,858 

Mentioned 70, 114,  564,  851,  913,  963, 1037, 1039 

Baker,  L.  S.  Mentioned 1088 

Baker,  William  N.  Mentioned 62 

Ball,  William  B.  Mentioned 777 

Ball,  Wilson  F.  Mentioned 100 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Mentioned 37, 108, 393, 459, 464, 482, 487, 488, 490,  790, 801 

Barber’s  Cross-Roads,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  May  23, 1863.  See  Norfolk  a7id  Pe- 
tersburg Railroad,  Va.  Operations  on  the,  May  15-28,  1863. 

Barbour,  Will  M.  Mentioned 961 

Barker,  Thomas.  Mentioned 44 

Barksdale,  R.  Mentioned 896 

Barnard,  John  G. 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 712 

Mentioned 712 

Barnes,  Mr.  Mentioned 144 

Barnes,  David  A.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  North  Carolina,  Goveriior  of. 

Barney,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 277,278,306,319,425,639,660,672,702 

Barreda,  Federico  L.  Mentioned 423 

Barrington,  Stephen  G.  Mentioned 951,1023 

Barrows,  A.  L.  Mentioned 944,  945 

Barstow,  Nathaniel  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 172 

Mentioned 61,170-172,184,185 

Keport  of  attack  on  Fort  Anderson,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1863 185 

Bartholomew,  Walter  G. 

Mentioned 145-147,  640,  736 

Report  of  demonstration  on  Plymouth,  N.  C.,  March  10-13,  1863 199 

Bartlett,  George  W.  Mentioned 87,368 

For  correspondence  as  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- Geueral,  see  H.  C.  Lee. 

Barton,  James. 

Mentioned 238 

Report  of  expedition  toward  Kiuston,  N.  C.,  April  16-21,  1863 238 

Bassett,  Samuel.  Mentioned 315 

Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

Expedition  from,  Feh.  12-13,  1863. 

Inventory  of  Ordnance,  etc.,  captured  at  Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C 155 

Reports  of  John  Richter  Jones 153, 154 

Skirmishes  at. 

Feh.  10,  1863 2 

May  23,  1863.  See  Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on.  May  20-23,  1863. 

Baughman,  Charles.  Mentioned 67 

Bayley,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned 206 

Baylor,  Thomas  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Johnson,  A.  B 664 

Ordnance  Department,  U.  S.  A 672 

Mentioned 482,664,667 


1110 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Beach,  Francis.  Mentioued 277, 294, 312, 575, 735 

Beatty,  Miller.  Mentioned .*  358,722 

Beaufort,  District  of.  (Union.)  See  North  Carolina,  Department  of. 

Beaumont,  Eugene  B.  Mentioned 632 

Beauregard,  G.  T. 

Correspondence  with.  ' 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 817, 826, 833, 1031 

Fraser,  John,  & Co 781,783 

Hill,  D.  H 892,1007,1012,1017,1021,1030,1036 

Longstreet,  James 905 

Mercer,  H.  W 817 

Pryor,  Eoger  A 790 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 806,813,825,833,836 

Walker,  W.  S 1013 

War  Department,  C.  S 799,  811-813, 816, 822, 1012, 1013, 1017 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 780,  791,  805, 806, 816,  821, 822, 825- 

827,833,  836,  838,  839,  842,  850,871,875,  881,1011,  1012,  1017,  1035,  1058 
Mentioned. . . 107, 108,  210, 740,  790,  799,  802-804,  812,  815,  816, 830, 832, 833, 844, 849, 
858,  864,  867,  868,  871-873,  875,  876,  882, 892,  897, 907,  908, 911, 912,  926, 962, 
972,  977, 979-982, 987,  998, 1014-1017, 1022, 10.32, 1052, 1076, 1080, 1081, 1089 

Beaver  Dam  Church,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Dec.  1,  1862 2 

Beckham,  R.  F.  Mentioned 742, 768 

Beecher,  Henry  B.  Mentioned 280 

Beecher,  Lina.  Mentioned 72,221 

Beegle,  Daniel  F.  Mentioned 97,102 

Beger,  Charles.  Mentioned 302, 303, 576,  734, 1094 

Behm,  Charles  F.  W.  Mentioned 45, 47, 259 

Belden,  Nathan  A.  Mentioned 322 

Belger,  James.  Mentioned 22, 23, 64, 65, 83, 246, 251, 252, 469,  501, 578, 737 

Belknap,  Jonathan  S.  Mentioned 577,737 

Bell,  Mr.  Mentioned 196 

Bell,  D.  Mentioned 750,788 

BeU,  William  F.  Mentioned 914 

Belo,  A.  H.  Mentioned 338-340 

Belvidere,  Steamer.  Mentioned 442,490,501,502 

Benbow,  H.  L.  Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 873 

Bender,  W.  G. 

Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A ' 757 

Mentioned 759,  765 

Benjamin,  Judah  P.  Mentioned 1056 

Benjamin,  Samuel  N.  Mentioned 565 

Benning,  Henry  L.  Mentioned 687,  688,  690,  692, 1044 

Benson,  Harvey  W.  Mentioned 258 

Benson,  Leon.  Mentioned 157,158 

Bernard,  Mr.  Mentioned 462 

Berry,  Major.  Mentioned 654 

Bice,  Augustus  G.  Mentioned 100 

Bierer,  Everard.  Mentioned 240, 242,  249, 578, 737 

Biggs,  Herman.  Mentioned 259,  457, 512 

Big  Swift  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  April  19,  1863.  See  Itinerary  1st  Bri- 
gade, bth  Division,  18th  Army  Corps,  p.  254. 

Bircham,  Henry.  Mentioned 294 

Birchmeyer,  Paul.  Mentioned 63,66,67 


INDEX. 


1111 


Page. 

Blackwater,  Va. 

Expedition  toward  the,  Jan.  8-10, 1863.  Report  of  Samuel  P.  Spear ’ 125 

Reconnaissances  to  the,  Dec.  8-12,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A : 469,  478, 479 

French,  Samuel  G : 45 

Peck,  John  J 41,42,469,477-479 

See  also  Dix  io  Halleck,  p.  466. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 40-42 

Reports  of 

Dix,  John  A 37, 38 

Peck,  John  J 38-40 

Sikes,  J.H 43 

Skirmishes  at  and  on  the. 

Oct.  3,  1862. 

Communications  from  John  J.  Peck 414 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 15, 18, 19 

Reports  of 

Dix,  John  A 15, 16 

Marshall,  J.  K 18 

Peck,  John  J 16, 17 

Oct.  29,  1862  1 

Dec.  2,  1862. 

Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 470 

See  also  Peck  to  Halleck,  p.  472. 

Reports  of 

Dix,  John  A 35 

Peck,  John  J 36 

Blackwater  Bridge,  Va.  Skirmish  at  Nov.  14,  1862.  See  Suffolk,  Va. 
Operations  about,  Nov.  12-14,  1862. 

Blackwell,  R.  W.  Mentioned 896 

Blagden,  E.  R.  Mentioned 170 

Blair,  William  H.  Mentioned 576,  734, 1094 

Blake,  E.  C.  V.  Mentioned 544, 545, 550 

Blake,  John  A.  Mentioned 288,576 

Blake,  William  E. 

.Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 545 

Mentioned 394,  399,  400,  404,  425,  587 

Blockade.  Enforcement  and  efficiency  of.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 417 

Beauregard,  G.  T 781 

Dix,  John  A 382, 394, 398, 404, 406, 408, 409, 412, 414, 417,  418, 421, 

426,  427,  431,  435-440,  443,  445,  449,  451, 454,  493,  540,  542, 544,  545,  553,  7.39 

Edisto,  Bark,  Master  of 621 

Fraser,  John  & Co 783 

Harris,  T.  A 510 

Lee,  S.  P 393,394,399,400,402,408, 

413,  416,  417,  420,  422,  425,  426,  428,  430,  432, 433, 438-440,  447,  490,  507,  510, 
515,  534,  541,  544, 545, 547, 550, 553, 580, 587, 588,  .595, 621, 651,  738,  740,  741 

Lincoln,  Abraham 452 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 429,  430,  448,  452 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S 450 

Viele,  Egbert  L .384 

War  Department,  U.  S 430,433,443,451,452,4.54 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 780, 938, 939 

See  also  Dix  to  Lee,  p.  409 ; Peck  io  Dix,  p.  540 ; Dix  io  Peek,  p.  541. 


1112 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Blodgett,  J.  J.  Mentioned 134, 138 

Blount,  Mr.  Mentioned 195,196 

Blount,  J.  G.  Mentioned 334,335 

Blount’s  Creek,  N.  C.  Action  at,  April  9,  1863.  Report  of  Francis  B.  Spinola.  245 
See  also  Itineraries  of  Palmer,  p.  219 ; Spinola,  p.  254  ; and  reports  of  Spinola, 
pp.  244, 247. 

Blunt,  Asa  P.  Mentioned 608 

Board  of  Army  Officers.  Defenses  of  Yorktown,Va. 

Appointed 379 

Report  of 379 

Review  of  report  of,  by  G.  W.  Cullnm 381 

Boggan,  W.  H.  Mentioned : 1020 

Boggs,  Francis  J. 

Mentioned 36,37,326,331,332 

Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Va.,  April  19, 1863 333 

Bolles,  John  A. 

Appointed  “Provost  Judge  ” for  Department  of  Virginia 503 

Mentioned 503 

For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  John  A.  Dix. 

Bolton,  Henry.  Mentioned 869 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon.  Mentioned 609 

Booker,  L.  Mentioned 335 

Boomer,  E.  Mentioned 210 

Boughton,  Horace.  Mentioned 734 

Bovey,  A.  E.  Mentioned 654 

Bowdish,  Isaac  B.  Mentioned 272,280 

Bowen,  Mr.  Mentioned 570 

Bowen,  J.  J.  Mentioned 512 

Bowen,  M.  Mentioned 498, 506 

Bowen,  N.  Mentioned 565 

Bowler,  George.  Mentioned 91,469,500 

Bozeman,  D.  L.  Mentioned 336 

Brabble,  E.  C.  Mentioned 810,951,954,1057 

Bracken,  John.  Mentioned 315 

Bradford,  J.  A.  J.  Mentioned 865 

Bradford,  W.  D.  Mentioned 331,332,334 

Bradley,  Thomas.  Mentioned ‘575 

Brady,  A.  M.  Mentioned 44 

Brady,  H.  J.  Mentioned 575 

Bragg,  Braxton.  Mentioned 284, 727,  812,  813,  816,  820 

Braham,  J.  B.  Mentioned 437 

Branch,  E.  B.  Mentioned 1037 

Branch,  James.  Mentioned 809 

Bratton,  John.  Mentioned 564,583 

Briggs,  Smith,  Steamer.  Mentioned 268, 

276, 277, 280, 610, 613, 616, 620, 636, 654,  674, 697 

Brigham,  Charles.  Mentioned 369 

Brightman,  Nicholas  W.  Mentioned 70 

Brilliant,  Schooner.  Mentioned 475 

Brinkerhoff,  Captain.  Mentioned 157, 158 

Bristol,  L.  A.  Mentioned 122 


British  Consul,  Charleston,  S.  C.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  JI.  P. 
Walker. 

Britton,  William  T.  Mentioned 


19 


INDEX. 


1113 


Brock,  E.  H.  Mentioned 

Brockway,  C.  B.  Mentioned 

Broderick,  A.  C.,  Sloop.  Mentioned, 
Brooks,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned  . 

Bronson,  David.  Mentioned 

Bronson,  Stephen.  Mentioned 

Brown, . Mentioned 

Brown, . Mentioned 

Brown,  A.  Benson.  Mentioned 

Brown,  C.  H.  Mentioned 

Brown,  Edward  L.  Mentioned 

Brown,  Edward  P.  Mentioned 

Brown,  Enoch.  Mentioned 

Brown,  G.  H.  Mentioned 

Brown,  H.  W.  Mentioned 

Brown,  Jack. 

Correspondence  with  Arnold  Elzey, 

Mentioned 

Brown,  John.  Mentioned 

Brown,  John  C.  Mentioned 

Brown,  John  E.  Mentioned 

Brown,  J.  W.  Mentioned 

Brown,  William  R.  Mentioned 

Brown,  W.  Leroy.  Mentioned 

Bruce,  G.  A.  Mentioned 

Bryan,  E.  P.  Mentioned 

Bryant,  Andrew  S.  Mentioned 

Buehler,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 

Buell,  Clarence.  Mentioned 

Buffum,  Martin  P.  Mentioned 

Bunch,  Robert.  Mentioned 

Bunting,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned 

Bunting,  Thomas  O.  Mentioned 

Burden,  Henry,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Burgess,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 

Burgess,  Nicholas.  Mentioned 

Burgess,  Peter.  Mentioned 

Burgess,  Stephen.  Mentioned 

Burgwyn,  H.  K.,  jr.  Mentioned 

Burhans,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 

Burke,  F.  E.  Mentioned 

Burke,  James  C.  Mentioned 

Burke,  William  H.  Mentioned 

Burleson,  Asa  R.  Mentioned 

Burnham,  George  S.  Mentioned 

Burns,  William  W.  Mentioned 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E. 

Assignments  to  command 


Page. 

295 

576 

431,437 

502 

89 

701 

562 

990 

95 

267 

153,154,514 

320 

880 

195,196 

737 

921 

802, 866, 901, 917, 952, 997, 998 

130 

532,546,574 

....  201,202,572,945,946,953 

274 

576,734 

1092 

316,320 

876 

369 

277,575,734,1093 

272,295 

..! 319,575,735 

781 

971,992 

198 

599,601 

259 

259 

259 

259 

192 

577 

43 

1093 

157,158,246,251 

260 

734 

565 


539 


Co-operation  of,  with  Dix  and  Foster.  Communications  from  Army  Head- 


quarters   497 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 491,497,511,537,539 

French,  William  H 562 

Parke,  John  G 563-565 

Quartermaster-Geuerafs  Office,  U.  S.  A 536 


1114 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E.— Continued. 

Mentioned 12, 284, 424, 457, 477-479, 483-485, 496, 507, 508, 525, 

539,  565, 567, 570, 784, 789, 813, 814, 817-820, 830, 837-839, 844, 882, 883, 886, 
889,  907,  908,  911,944,  946,948,950,  953,  954,960,961,963,966,  1030,1047 
Kesumes  command  of  9th  Army  Corps 539 

Burnt  Ordinary,  Va. 

Keconnaissance  to,  Dec.  17, 1862 2 

Skirmish  at,  Jan.  19,  1863.  See  Williamshurg,  Fa.  Scout  from,  Jan.  19, 

1863. 

Burpee,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned 735 

Burroughs,  Mr.  Mentioned 393 

Burroughs,  Edgar.  Mentioned 744,749 

Bush,  Elizabeth,  Schooner.  Mentioned 534 

Bush,  George.  Mentioned 534 

Bushnell,  Lyndes  C.  Mentioned 322 

Bust,  Edward.  Mentioned 595 

Busteed,  Richard. 

Assignments  to  command 482 

Correspondence  with 

Dix,  John  A 568,569 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 206 

Lewis,  William 203, 204 

Mentioned •. 205, 482, 568, 576, 1094 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va.,  March  29,  1863  203 

Butler,  Augustus  G.  Mentioned 70 

Butler,  Charles.  Mentioned 198 

Btitler,  Emory.  Mentioned 69 

Butler,  Francis  E.  Mentioned 288 

Butterfield,  Daniel.  Meptioned 549, 680, 683-685 

For  correspondence,  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  Joseph  Eoolcer. 

Buttz,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 36,37,280 

Buyers,  John.  Mentioned 514 

Buzzell,  Lewis  H.  Mentioned 288 

Byrd,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 256 

Byrd’s  Plantation,  Ware  River,  Va.  Expedition  to,  April  1, 1863.  See  York- 
town,  Va.  Expedition  from,  April  1, 1863. 

Byrne,  John.  Mentioned 141 

C . Mentioned 1022 

Cabot,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 577 

Cady,  A.  Lester.  Mentioned 64,  73, 177 

Cahawba,  Steamer.  Mentioned 492,501,502 

Cambloss,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 565 

Cameron,  John  W.  Mentioned 1052 

Campbell,  David.  Mentioned 11,388 

Campbell,  Edward.  Mentioned 577 

Campbell,  J.  A.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 1082 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  Asst.  Sec.  of  War,  see  War  Department,  C.  S. 

Cantwell,  J.  L.  Mentioned 760, 984 

Cantwell,  T.  J.  Mentioned 272 

Cape  Fear,  District  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Dec.  31,  1862 809 

Jan.  15,1863 879 

Jan.  31,1863  86.5,866 


INDEX. 


1115 


Page. 

Cape  Fear,  District  of  the.  (Confederate) — Continued. 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Feb.  28, 1863 901 

March  10, 1863  916,917 

March  16, 1863  922 

Eeport  of  siege  guns  and  field  artillery  in 1049 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C.,  assigned  to  command  of 770 

Capps,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 1070 

Captured  Property.  See  Abandoned  and  Captured  Property. 

Carraway,  William  W.  Mentioned 767 

Carrington,  C.  S.  Mentioned 874 

Carroll,  Gray. 

Correspondence  with  L.  M.  Shumaker 329 

Mentioned 332,334 

Carrsville,  Va. 

Affair  near,  Nov.  17, 1862.  Report  of  John  J.  Peck 33 

Skirmishes  near. 

Oct.  15,  1862 1 

May  15-16, 1863.  See  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad,  Va.  Operations 
on  the,  May  12-26, 1863. 

Cartwright,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 299 

Cartwright,  John.  Mentioned 259 

Case,  A.  L.  Mentioned 423, 426, 427, 656 

Casey,  Silas.  Mentioned 100,392,459 

Casey,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 457 

Caskie,  W.  H.  Mentioned 334, 335 

Caspar  Heft,  Schooner.  Mentioned 416 

Casselman,  William.  Mentioned 310 

Cassels,  John.  Mentioned 574 

Castello,  Jack.  Mentioned 74 

Caston, . Mentioned 178 

Caston,  Z.  M.  Mentioned 170,178 

Caswell,  Adin  W.  Mentioned 366 

Caswell,  Fort,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  February  23,  1863 2 

Cattell  & Moore.  Mentioned 416,417,427 

Causey,  C.  H.  Correspondence  with  William  Norris  . ..978, 993, 1026, 1055, 1058, 1067 

Cedar  Point,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  March  7-10,  1863 3 

Ceres,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 213-215,218,223,235,242-244 

Chamberlin,  James  R. 

Mentioned 30, 70-72, 159, 163, 247 

Report  of  demonstration  on  Kinston,  N.  C.,  March  6-8, 1862  163 

Chamberlin,  Thomas.  Mentioned 264 

Chambers,  John  G. 

Mentioned 25,76,468,501 

Report  of  operations  Dec.  11-16,  1862,  expedition  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C..  78 

Chambliss,  John  R.,  jr.  Mentioned 751,764 

Champion,  Steamer.  Mentioned 510 

Chancellorsville  Campaign.  April  27-May  6,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. ..  1028, 1029, 1032, 1034, 1037 

Dix,  JohnA 671,680,706,714 

Elzey,  Arnold 1052 

Hill,  D.  H 1034 


1116 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Chancellorsville  Campaign.  April  27-May  6,  1863— Continued. 

Communications  from 

Hooker,  Joseph 644, 658, 667,  672, 679, 683, 684, 691, 692 

Lee,  Robert  E 1024, 1028, 1029, 1049 

Lee,  W.  H.  F 1045 

Longstreet,  James 1032, 1033, 1037, 1042, 1045, 1050 

Peck,  John  J 644,  658,  667,  680,  683-685, 692,  709 

War  Department,  C.  S 1047 

See  also  Dix  to  Foster,  p,  667. 

Co-operation  of  Dix  and  Hooker 624, 

625, 649, 650,  690-692,  697-699, 701,  702,  704-707, 709, 714, 727,  728 
See  also  Stoneman^s  Raid,  April  29-Jfay  7,  1863. 

Chapin,  Samuel.  Mentioned 90 

Chapman,  B.  F.  Mentioned 74 

Chapman,  S.  F.  Mentioned 335 

Charleston,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1022 

Charleston,  S.  C.  Defenses  of.  Communications  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 1017 

Charleston  Harbor,  S.  C.  Engagement  in,  April  7,  1863.  Commuuications 
from 

War  Department,  C.  S 962,971,972 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 962,972 

Chase,  Salmon  P.  Mentioned 382,383,402,407,412,413, 

417-421, 423,  426,  427,  431, 433,  436,  438,  448,  449,  4.52,  456, 572,  573, 581,  587 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Treasury  Department,  U.  S. 

Cheever,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 78 

Cherry,  J.  B.  Mentioned 1020 

Chesapeake,  Schooner.  Mentioned 425 

Chesebrough,  Collins.  Mentioned 10 

Chestney,  T.  O.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  see  Arnold  Elzey. 

Chilton,  R.  H.  Mentioned 856 

Chocura,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 391 

Chuckatuck,  Va. 

Affair  at,  April  23,  1863.  Communications  from  S.  P.  Lee 650 

Skirmish  at,  May  3,  1863.  See  A])ril  11-May  4,  1863.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va. 
Reports  of 

Crosby,  Hiram  B.  Getty,  George  TV. 

Dutton,  Arthur  H.  Peck,  John  J. 


Church,  George  E.  Mentioned 734 

Churchill,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 350 

City  of  Hudson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 450 

Claassen,  Peter  J.  Mentioned 737 

Claiborne,  W.  C.  Mentioned 31, 43, 249,  7.55, 906, 1051 , 1089 

Clark,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 779 

Clark,  John  D.  Mentioned 65,  366,  368 

Clarke,  John  J.  Mentioned 989,1003,1025 

Clarke,  William  J.  Correspondence  with  D.  H.  Hill 1013 

Clay,  Cecil.  Mentioned 131,132,367,369,514 

Cleandon,  Joseph.  Mentioned 893 

Cleary,  Richard  F.  Mentioned 100 

Clift,  Henry  D.  Mentioned 48,49 

Clingman,  Thomas  L. 

Assignments  to  command 1034 

Correspondence  with  Governor  of  North  Carolina 852 


INDEX.  1117 

Page. 

Clingman,  Thomas  L. — Continued. 

Mentioned - 109-114,1*20, 

762,  770,  782,786,  791,  803,807-809,832,  833,  849,865,866,  878,882,  1013, 
1014,  1018,  1030,  1032,  1034-1036,  1041,  1042,  1048, 1057,  1058, 1079,  1086 

Report  of  engagement  at  Goldsborough  Bridge,  N.  C.,  Dec.  17,  1862 117 

Clothing,  Camp  and  Garrison  Equipage.  Supplies  of,  See  Munitions  of 
War. 

Coale,  John  H.  Mentioned. - 565 

Cochen,  Frederick.  Mentioned 216, 221 

Codman,  Charles  R. 

Mentioned 345, 346,  468, 500, 577,  736 

Reports  of 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  Operations  Dec.  14-16,  1862,  during  expedition  to.  80 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Expedition  toward,  April  27-May  1,  1863  349 

Coffield,  John.  Mentioned 552 

Coffin,  Frederic  J.  Mentioned 254,468,501,737 

Coffing,  John  C.  Mentioned 59,60 

Coit,  J.  C.  Mentioned 143-145,750 

Cole,  D.  Clinton.  Mentioned 100 

Cole,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  Simon  H.  Mix 508,509 

Mentioned 56, 91, 92, 508 

Report  of  operations  Dec.  12-16,  1862,  expedition  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C . . . 74 

Cole,  William  M.  Mentioned 241 

Coleman,  James.  Mentioned 666 

Coleman,  Thaddeus.  Mentioned 930,1057,1064 

Coleman,  Thomas  K.  Mentioned 336,337 

Colhoun,  E.  R.  Mentioned 15 

Collier,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 570 

Collier,  George  Washington.  Mentioned Ill 

Collins,  Alexander. 

Mentioned 526 

Statement  of 526 

Collins,  C.  R.  Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 756 

Collins,  James.  Mentioned 139 

Colorado,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 439 

Colored  Troops.  Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Foster,  John  G 723 

Stanly,  Ed 525 

See  also  Ralleck  to  Foster,  p.  659. 

Colquitt,  A.  H. 

Correspondence  with  D.  H.  Hill 1074, 1085 

Mentioned 1075,1078,1080,1086 

Colquitt,  Peyton  H.  Mentioned 801,865,866,871 

Colston,  R.  E. 

Assignments  to  command 807 

Mentioned 385,536, 

551,553,564,807,811,816,865,  888,891,  906,  909,  910,  916,  917,  1078,  1088 

Colyer,  Thomas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 240,241,618,640,646 

Comfort,  Felix.  Mentioned 50,501,577 

Commerce,  Steamer.  Mentioned. 277,  305, 658,  659 

Commodore  Barney,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned ....  277, 278, 306, 319, 425, 639, 660, 672, 702 

Commodore  Hull,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 211,213-215 

Commodore  Morris,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 256-258, 596, 607, 698 


1118 


INDEX. 


Page, 

Commodore  Perry,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 46, 146, 199, 355, 522, 524, 602 

Commodore  S.  F.  Du  Pont,  Steamer.  Mentioned 661 

Conduct  of  the  War.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 664 

Foster,  John  G 470,  471, 495,  497 

French,  Samuel  G 466,  481, 505,  778,  793,  826, 885 

Lee,  S.  P — — 666 

Martin,  J.  G 440,448 

Palmer,  Innis  N 552 

Potter,  Edward  E 424 

Sanders,  E.  C 538 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 471,  779 

Stanly,  Ed 498 

See  also  Dix  to  Halleck,  p.  568 ; Busteed  to  Dix,  p.  568 ; Dix  to  Busteed,  p. 

569. 

Cone,  A.  F.  Mentioned 742 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Engagement  at  Deserted  House,  Va.,  Jan.  30, 1863.  145 

Mentioned.  (Regulars. ) 

Ca^yalr j— Regiments:  7tli,  43-45,  142,180,216,236,247,249,253,670,671, 

755, 900, 963, 964, 1008, 1032, 1051. 

Signal  Corps — Small’s,  462,463. 

For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Cape  Fear,  District  of  the 809,  865, 866, 879, 901, 916, 917, 922 

Goldshorough,  N.  C 807 

North  Carolina,  Department  of 1086 

Richmond,  Department  of 807, 

810,  866, 901, 917, 920,  921, 952, 1036, 1058, 1059, 1086 

Southern  Virginia,  Department  of 978,1056,1067 

Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  Department  of 750, 

751, 759, 764, 788,  793, 865, 888, 900,  901, 915-917, 929, 930 
Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 888, 1061 

Davis,  Jefferson 750 

French,  Samuel  G 784 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 755 

Conk,  Anthony.  Mentioned 411,  467,  468,  486,  499,  532, 546, 574, 734, 1093 

Connaily,  John  K. 

Mentioned 325, 327,  328, 332,  333,  340, 788, 1000 

Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Va.,  April  19, 1663  338 

Connecticut,  Steamer.  Mentioned 502 

Connecticut  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/7fs  ; 8th,  271,  276,  287,  301,  30:3-305,  308,  312,  314,  317,  318, 

562,  570,  575,  640,  676,  735 ; 10th,  22,  56,  59,  60,  64,  67,  81,  83,  84,  101,  104, 

378,  468,  500,  547,  548,  577,  679,  738 ; 11th,  287,  294,  301,  306,  312-315,  562, 

570, 575,  676, 7:35;  15th,  287,  294,  301,  306, 312-314,  570,  575,  676,  735;  16th, 

287,  294,  301,  306,  312,  314,  562,  570,  575,  676,  735 ; 21st,  278,  287,  301,  306, 

316, 318-322,  562,  570,  575, 676,  735 ; 22d,  287,  318,  323,  676,  734. 

Connolly,  J.  Townsend.  Mentioned 296 

Connor,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 987 

Conrad  Fox,  Schooner.  Mentioned 423,  434 

Conron,  B.  Mentioned 272,294 

Conscription  Act.  Enforcement  of,  in  North  Carolina 745-747, 

752-754, 771-773,  821, 822,  880, 881,  886,  887^  998,  999 


INDEX. 


1119 


Page. 

Contrabands.  See  Slaves. 

Convoy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 518 

Conwell,  Russell  H.  Mentioned 89 

Cook,  A.  F.  Mentioned 934 

Cooke,  George  T.  Mentioned 134, 139 

Cooke,  James  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 767 

Gwynn,  Walter 767 

Mentioned 766,  767,  777 

Cooke,  John  R.  Mentioned 855, 882, 888, 998, 1011-1014, 1018, 1022, 1030, 1041, 

1042,  1045,  1048, 1051,  1052,  1057,  1063,  1071,  1074-1083,  1085, 1086, 1088 

Coon,  Myron  W.  Mentioned 70 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 784, 

789,  794,  833,  847, 927, 936, 1069, 1076, 1078, 1079, 1083 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraVs  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Cora,  Steamer.  Mentioned 765 

Corcoran,  Michael. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 464 

Mentioned 132, 

133-135, 139, 141, 271-274,  277-279, 286, 293-302, 305, 312, 315, 316, 461,  482, 
486-488,490,496,  497,  499,. 517,  528,  575,  653,  676,  690,  705,  734,  834,1093 
Reports  of 

Deserted  House,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30,  1863 136 

Suffolk,  Va.  Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863  288,290 

Core  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

Nov.  18,  1862 1 

March  7,  1863.  See  Kinston,  W.  C.  Demonstration  on,  March  6-8,  1863. 

April  17-18,  1863.  See  Report  of  Henry  Prince,  p.  225. 

Corley,  James  L.  Mentioned 1075 

Cornog,  George  T.  Mentioned 140,200,573 

Cornubia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 911 

Corrie,  Samuel  J.  Mentioned 114 

Corse,  M.  D.  Mentioned 341, 583, 680. 915, 917, 929, 946 

Cottingham,  H.  M.  Mentioned 757 

Couch,  Darius  N.  Mentioned 375,  379,  385, 876 

Councill,  J.  Calvin. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 797-800 

Mentioned 795,796 

Courts-Martial.  Case  of  Jacob  P.  Wilson 11-13 

Courts  of  Inquiry.  Case  of  William  Norris.  Facts  and  opinion 1095 

Cox,  Thaddeus.  Mentioned 539 

Crabb,  George  W.  Mentioned 303-305 

Cradle,  Henry.  Mentioned 157 

Craft,  Lucius  D.  Mentioned 62 

Creighton,  J.  B.  Mentioned 560 

Crosby,  Hiram  B. 

Mentioned 27  8, 306, 319, 320, 575 

Report  of  operations  May  3,  1863,  during  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va 321 

Crosby,  Pierce.  Mentioned 643,662,694,703 

Cross,  J.  L.  Mentioned 1082 

Crowninshield,  Casper.  Mentioned 261, 576 

Crusader,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 510,  .596 

Crutchfield,  S.  Mentioned 335 


1120 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Culbreth,  W.  F.  Mentioned 198 

Cullen,  Edgar  M.  Mentioned 737 

Cullen,  J.  S.  D.  Mentioned 896 

Cullum,  George  W, 

Correspondence  with.  Array  Headquarters 712 

Mentioned 623,712 

For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  Army  Headquarters. 

Cummings,  Emory.  Mentioned 737 

Cunningham,  George  A. 

Correspondence  with  Samuel  G.  French 340 

Mentioned Ill,  325,  331,  338-340 

Curtin,  A.  G.  Mentioned 1066 

Curtis,  Charles.  Mentioned 341 

Curtis,  N.  M.  Mentioned 357,734 

Curtiss,  Carlton  B. 

Mentioned 365, 366,  369, 737 

Report  of  demonstration  on  Kinston,  N.  C.,  May  20-23, 1863  367 

Cushing,  William  B.  Mentioned 34, 267, 270, 271, 276-278, 280,  307,  310, 319, 

320,  322,  616-618,  626, 628, 634, 639, 643, 645, 650,  661,  663,  674,  686,  694,  703 

Cutting,  E.  H.  Mentioned 413,420,421,423,426,427 

Dabney,  W.  J.  Mentioned 865 

Dacotah,  U.  S.  Mentioned 2 

Daland,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 350 

Dandy,  George  B.  Mentioned 49,50,501,738 

Daniel,  Junius. 

Correspondence  with 

Ferebee,  D.  D 1020 

French,  Samuel  G 745 

Hill,  D.  H 914, 924,  930, 932, 944, 951,  954, 974, 1011, 1046, 1057, 1062 

Pettigrew,  John  J 1012 

Mentioned 107, 188, 190, 192, 194, 195, 197,  670,  743, 744, 751, 759,  764, 786,  793, 

800,  802, 807,  816,  830,  855, 865, 872.  878,  883,  888,  891, 894, 896, 901, 916,  917, 
937, 938, 941, 945, 955, 991, 1004, 1013, 1050, 1051, 1053, 1063, 1078, 1079, 1082 
Reports  of 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on,  March  6-8,  1863  165 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  against,  March  8-11,  1863 196 

Darden,  Lewis  H.  Mentioned 198 

Darling,  John  A.  Mentioned 574,675,677,733,736 

Darr,  Francis.  Mentioned 523 

Davenport,  H.  K. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 453 

Lee,  S.  P 453 

Mentioned 15, 22, 34, 210, 578, 584, 688,  731 

Daves,  Graham.  Mentioned 997, 1018 

For  correspondence,  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  S.  G.  French. 

Davidson,  Hunter. 

Mentioned 743 

Placed  in  charge  of  sub-marine  defenses  of  James  River,  Va 743 

Davis,  Mr.  Mentioned 196 

Davis,  Alexander  H.  Mentioned 66 

Davis,  Charles  L. 

Mentioned 280 

Report  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4,  1863 272 


INDEX. 


1121 


Page. 

Davip,  David  S.  Mentioued - ir)4,945 

Davis,  George.  Mentioned 9h0,  081 

Davis,  Hasbrouck.  Mentioned 701,704 

Davis,  James  E.  Mentioned 190 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Joseph  R 750 

Lee,  Robert  E 850, 1077, 1078, 1089, 1088 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 757,  758, 761, 770, 771,-1067, 1077 

War  Dopartnieut,  C.  S 809, 

829,  894,  848,  860,  670,  891,  976, 1009,  1015,  1059,  1081,  1082 

Mentioned 281,  457,  463, 551, 557,  747,  750,  701,  762,  764,  765, 776-779,  799,  822, 

827, 895,  830,  840,  845, 861,  870,  871,  875, 877,  878,  884,  891,  900,  909,  923,  976, 
977,  981,  983,  999,  1008,  1015,  1034,  1050, 1053, 1067, 1076, 1079, 1081,  1082 

Davis,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned 280, 313, 575,  734, 822, 824 

Davis,  Joseph  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 750 

Erench,  Samuel  G *. 993 

Mentioned 110,  327, 565, 583, 604,  704,  705,  793,  800,  802,  807, 

830,  855,  865,  872,  877,  878,  888,  906,  909,  910,  918,  919,  926, 942,  998, 1002, 
1017,  1018,  1025,  1033,  1038-1040,  1056,  1067,  1079,  1083,  1085,  1086,  1088 

Davis,  Phineas  A.  Mentioned 134,136,138,139,200,201,576,735,1094 

Davis,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 1070 

Davi.s,  William  G.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Heth,  Henry 853 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 810, 867,  897 

Mentioned 853,  893, 898 

Davis,  William  W.  H. 

Mentioned 32, 548,  577, 678 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Gloucester  Point,  Va.,  Nov.  16,  1862 32 

Day,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 734 

Day,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 77 

•Day,  Samuel  C.  Mentioued 63 

Dean,  William  H.  Mentioned 44 

Dearborn,  O.  M.  Mentioued 565 

Dealing,  James. 

Mentioned 335,336,907,995,1021,1045,1046 

Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Va.,  April  19,  1863 334 

Deas,  George.  Mentioned 1095 

De  Camarra,  J.  B.  Mentioned 224 

Deep  Gully,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

March  13-14,  1863.  Report  of  Josiah^Pickett 187 

See  also  March  8-16,  1803.  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  against.  Reports  of 
Poster,  John  G.  Hill,  D.  H.  Palmer,  Iniiis  M.  (Itinerary.) 

March  30,  1863.  “ Record  of  Events,”  2d  Brig.,  5th  Div.,  18th  Army  Corps.  209 

De  Forest,  Jacob  J.  Mentioned 501,577,737 

Delaware,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  256, 257, 4^3 

Delaware  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries  : 1st,  272,  288,  294,  677,  735. 

lufantry — Regiments:  1st,  377,  385-387,  389;  4th,  260,  263,341,343,360, 

361,  490,  497,  499,  576,  677,  734,  1094. 

Dennis,  Private.  Mentioned ....  j,,. p,,,  „...  497 

71  R R— VOL  XVllI 


1122 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Dennis,  J.  F.  Mentioned 64,67 

Dennison,  Michael.  Mentioned 297 

Denny,  George  P.  Mentioned 350 

Denny,  J.  Waldo. 


Report  of  demonstration  on  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Nov.  11,  1862  25 

De  Peyster,  J.  Watts.  Mentioned 377 

De  Rosset,  W.  L.  Mentioned 985 

Derrom,  Andrew.  Mentioned 307,  312,  313, 316, 320, 575, 735 

Deserted  House,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of  ' 

Confederate  troops 145 

Union  troops 135 

Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 531 

French,  Samuel  G 144 

Peck,  John  J 531 

See  also  Dix  to  Lincoln,  x).  530. 

Reports  of 

Corcoran,  Michael 136 

McEvily,  William 140 

Peck,  John  J 132, 135 

Pryor,  Roger  A 142 

Spear,  Samuel  P 140 

Desperate,  H.  B.  M.  S.  Mentioned 738 

Devane,  W.  S.  Mentioned 115, 116, 118 

Devon,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 134 

Diascund  Bridge,  Va.  Reconnaissance  to,  Dec.  17,  1862 2 

Dickinson,  William.  Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 809 

Didier,  Auguste.  Mentioned 315 

Dimmock,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 744,765 

Dirigo,  Steam  Derrick.  Mentioned 688 

Dispatch,  Steamer.  Mentioned 522 

Divine,  John  F.  Mentioned 945 

Dix,  Charles  T.  Mentioned 403,518,522 

Dix,  John  A. 

Congratulatory  orders.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4,  1863  270 

Co-operation  with 

Burnside,  A.  E.  Communication  from  Army  Headquarters 497 

Foster,  John  G.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 451,460,572 

Pock,  John  J 453 

See  also  Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,  1862. 

Hooker,  Josejdi.  See  Chancell  or  sville  Campaign,  April  21-Mag  6,  1863. 

Correspondence  with 


Army  Headquarters 11,  126,  285,  378,  382,  384-390,  392,  393, 

395, 396,  398-400, 401,  406,  409,  417,  435,  456,  4.59-462,  466,  473,  477-479,  482, 
487,  488,  490-492, 494,  496, 497, 502,  503,  508, 509, 511, 513, 515, 517, 518,  522, 
.528,  529, 531,  534,  536, 549, 551,  553, 555, 556, 558, 563, 568, 570, 579, 603,  608, 
610,  613,  618-620, 622, 624, 625, 632,  634-636,  649, 6.53,  657,  660,  663,  666, 671^ 
679, 682, 686-689, 699, 701, 704-707, 711,  717-720,  725-727,  730, 732, 738, 740 


Blake,  W.  E 545 

Bnsteed,  Richard 568,569 

Corcoran,  Michael  464 


INDEX, 


1123 


Page. 

Dix,  John  A. — Contiinicd. 

Correspoudeiice  with 

Ferry,  O.  S 386,  399,  483-486,  488, 491,  494,  495,  497 

Flusser,  C.  W 403,  410 

Foster,  John  G 451,  465, 495, 496, 502,  518, 522, 572, 629,  634,  655, 667,  695 

Gordon,  George  II 702,  706 

Hooker,  Joseph 667, 671,  672, 689,  727,  730,  732,  733,  738 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D-.  130, 151, 205,  488, 491,  492,  515, 517, 529,  532,  582,  599,  603, 
622, 628, 641, 651,  652, 673, 689, 692,  693,  701,  702,  705, 714,  716,  717,  728,  732 

Kilpatrick,  Judson 707,710,721 

Lee,  John  C. 610 

Lee,  S.  P 387, 391, 393, 394,  399, 402-406, 408,  409, 411- 

414, 416, 417, 420-422,  425-428,  431-433,  435,  438-443, 447, 449, 450, 489, 490, 
507, 510, 515, 519, 522,  523,  531, 534, 535,  540-542, 544,  545,  547, 550, 553, 560, 
566, 580, 582, 585, 587, 588,  611,  615, 616,  621, 631,  634, 636, 639, 642, 644,  645, 
651, 654, 660, 666, 673,  685,  693, 694,  696-698,  704,  709,  713,  717,  731,  738-741 

Lincoln,  Abraham 455, 458, 462, 493, 530, 553 

Ludlow,  William  H 601 

Naglee,  Henry  M 462, 479, 482, 501, 505 

New  York  Times.  Editor  of  the 579 

Palmer,  Innis  N 578, 579, 585 

Peck,  John  J 401,  408,  414,  416, 

441, 444-446, 453-455, 458-460, 464, 465,  469,  470, 474,  476-479,  482,  484, 485, 
504, 505, 507,  509-513, 516, 517, 519-522, 524, 528, 530, 531, 534-543, 550-553, 
555-558, 560-562, 564-567, 571,  573, 610,  614-616, 620, 621,  625-628, 633, 635- 
637, 639, 641, 644, 650,  652-655,  657-659, 663, 664, 667, 671-673, 680, 684, 685, 
687, 689-691,  699,  701,  705, 709,  710,  714, 716, 718-720,  722-726, 729,  730, 738 

Quartermaster-GeneraPs  Office,  U.  S.  A 476,502,504,511 

Stager,  Anson : 483 

Stratton,  Franklin  A 689 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S 398,  445,  450,  451 

VanBuren,  D.  T 585 

Viele,  Egbert  L . 856,  384, 404, 501, 502, 542, 568, 611, 615 

War  Department,- U.  S 382, 387, 391, 

395,  418,  433, 436,  440,  443,  449, 451,  452, 454,  461, 472,  474, 480,  482, 521, 714 

Wilder,  C.  B 570,591,739 

Wise,  Henry  A 664 

Mentioned 11?  17", 

125, 151, 203, 204, 211, 212, 229, 267, 271, 277, 280, 281, 283, 306, 323, 376,  377, 
387, 388, 392, 407, 411, 429, 430,  436,  451, 457,  467-469, 477, 482, 486,  487, 489, 
490, 494,  497, 499, 511,  532, 540, 546, 557, 563, 564, 571, 574, 580, 585-587,  590, 
597, 609, 611,  613, 617,  618,  623, 630, 635, 637, 642, 659, 672,  675, 676, 686, 700, 
704,706,709,  712,733,  734,740,  844,  994,1026,  1030,  1055,  1078,1079,1093 

Orders  establishing  a Provisional  Court  in  Department  of  Virginia 503 

“Record  of  Events  ” 7ih  Army  Corps,  Ainil,  1863. 

Hickory  Forks,  Va.  Expedition  beyond,  April  27,  1863 343 

Seaboard  and  Roanoke  R.  R.,  Va.  Operations  on  the.  May  12-26,  1863.  354 

Reports  of 

Black  water,  Va. 

Reconnaissances  to  the,  Dec.  8-12,  1862 37,38 

Skirmishes  on  the. 

Oct.  3,  1862  15, 16 

Dec.  2,  1862  35 

Norfolk  and  Petersburg  R.  R.,  Va.  Operations  on  tlie.  May  15-28,  1863.  357 
Seaboard  and  Roanoke  R,  R.,  Va.  Operations  on  tJio,  May  12-26,  18()3.  354 


1124 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Dix,  John  A.— Continued. 

Rejiorts  of 

Suffolk,  Va. 

Expedition  from,  Sept.  2-3,  1862 4 

Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863 268,26'J 

Williamsburg,  Va. 

Reconnaissance  from,  Nov.  22,  1862 34 

Skirmish  at,  Sept.  9,  1862  n 

Winfield,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  March  23,  1863 201 

Znni,  Va.  Skirmish  near,  Oct.  25,  1862  19 

Resumes  command  of  the  Department  of  Virginia  609 

Staff.  Announcements  of 543 

D.,  Nellie,  Schooner.  Mentioned : 243,244 

Doaiie,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 105 

Doane,  Henry.  Mentioned 80,509 

Dobbins,  Jesse.  Mentioned 880 

Dobbins,  William.  Mentioned 880 

Dobbs,  Cyrus  J.  Mentioned 17, 18, 125, 132, 134, 139,  295, 575,  734, 1093 

Dobyns,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 144 

Dodge,  Charles  C. 

Correspondence  with  John  J.  Peck 551 

Mentioned 18,  31,  39, 126, 273, 

278, 279, 290, 298,  305,  357-3.59,  441,  444,  460,  541, 551,  555, 560, 561, 726, 1094 
Reports  of.  Suffolk,  Va. 

Reconnaissance  from,  March  7-9,  1863 179 

Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863  299 

Dodge,  George  S.  Mentioned 280 

Dodge,  John  C.,  jr.  Mentioned 49,  379,501,577,738 

Donelson,  D.  S. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 958 

Mentioned 909, 957, 9.58 

Donohoe,  Michael  T.  Mentioned 303,310,320,575,735 

Douglas,  Ander-son.  Mentioned...- 880 

Douglas,  Frederick.  Mentioned 70 

Dougla.s,  Jack.  Mentioned 880 

Douglas,  William  R.  C.  Mentioned 208,673 

Douglas,  William  W.  Mentioned 235,236 

Douglass,  Sandford.  Mentioned 880 

Dover,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  March  7,  1863.  See  Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonsira- 
iion  on,  March  6-8,  1863. 

Dover  Road,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  on  the,  Jan.  27-28,  1863.  Report  of  J. 

Richter  Jones 131 

Dow,  Henry.  Mentioned 22(5,239 

Drake,  Jeremiah  C.  Mentioned 277,280, 294, 295, .575, 734, 1093 

Drennan,  James  M. 

Mentioned 25-30 

Report  of  demonstration  on  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Nov.  11,  1862 27 

Drummond,  Charles.  Meiitioned .5(58 

Drummond,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 886,950 

DuBose,  W.  P.  Mentioned 114 

Dudley,  Alexander.  Mentioned 814 

Dudley  Station,  N.  C.  Rain  on,  Dec.  17,  1862.  Report  of  Charle.s  Fitz  Sim- 
mons  68 

See  also  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  ExpeiJiiion  to  Goldshoroufjh,  X.  C.  Reports  of 
Foster,  John  Gr.  Smith,  Gustavos  W, 


INDEX. 


1125 


Page. 

Duke, . Mentioned - 650 

Duke,  R.  T.  W. 

Correspondence  witli  Henry  A.  Wise 892 

Mentioned 342, 920 

Dumfries  and  Fairfax  Station,  Va.  Raid  on,  Dec.  27-29,  1862.  Coninnini- 

cations  from  Robert  E.  Lee 817 

Duncan,  Blanton.  Mentioned 429,456 

Duncan,  Ithean.  Mentioned 259 

DJincan,  Wilson.  Mentioned 259 

Dunlap,  James  H.  Mentioned 67 

Du  Pont,  Commodore  S.  F.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 6()1 

DuPont,  Samuel  F.  Mentioned 1030 

Durham,  S.  A.  Mentioned 114 

Durkee,  Charles.  Mentioned 501 

Dutton,  Arthur  H. 

Mentioned 278,  279,  287,  301,  302,  304,  307,  570,  575,  676,  735 

Report  of  siego  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4,  lt63 316 

Dwyer,  John.  Mentioned 134,139 

Dyer,  Samuel  A.  Mentioned * 240,  242,  243,  .578,  737 

Eagle,  Steamer.  Mentioned 214,215,218 

Eame.s,  A.  H.  Mentioned 273,274 

Early,  Jubal  A.  Mentioned 787 

Easterly,  G.  B.  Mentioned 303,  1094 

Eastern  Insane  Asylum,  Va.  Communications  from 

Dix,  JobiiA 664,673 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 622,  (528,  (573 


See  also  Siiydam  to  West,  p.  629  ; Dix  to  Keyes,  p.  651 : Keyes  to  Dix,  p.  652 ; 


Wise  to  Elzey,  p.  994. 

Eastern  Shore,  Va. 

Operations  on  the,  Aug.  20,  lS62-June  3,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Dix,  .John  A 449 

Lee,  S.  P 442 

Co-operation  of  Navy  U.  S.  with  Army 442 

Union  sentiment  in.  Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 455,4(52 

Ebbs,  John.  Mentioned 29-31,70  ' 

Edenton,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  Feb.  7,  1863 2 

Edenton  Road,  Va.  Skirmishes  on  the. 

April  12,  1863.  See  Beijort  of  Peck,  p.  274. 

15,  1863.  Report  of  Alexander  G.  Patton 291 

See  also  April  11-May  4,  1863.  Sieyc  of  Suffolk,  !«.  Peporls  of 
Corcoran,  Michael.  McEvily,  William.  Peck,  John  J. 

Dodge,  Charles  C.  Miii'iiliy,  Mathew  (Itinerary).  Stedinan,  Gridin  A.,  jr. 

April  24,  1863.  Report  of  George  E.  Pickett 340 

See  also  April  11-May  4,  18(53.  Sieye  of  Suffolk,  Va.  Reports  of 

Corcoran,  Michael.  McConihe,  John.  Peck,  John  J. 

Foster,  Robert  S.  Murphy,  Mathew  (Itinerary). 

Edgar,  Captain.  Mentioned 544,  .545 

Edisto,  Bark.  Mentioned .588,(521 

Edhsto,  Master  of  Bark.  Correspondence  with  S.  P.  Leo (521 

Edmands,  T.  F.  Mentioned ,577 

Edmeston,  Alexander  A.  Mentioned 100 

Edmundson,  H.  A.  Mentioned 807 

Edwards,  Annie  L.,  Schooner.  Mentioiu'd 22:5,224,242 


1126 


INDEX, 


^ Page. 

Edwards,  John.  Mentioned 1020 

Elizabeth  Bush,  Schooner.  Mentioned 534 

Elizabeth  City,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  Dec.  27,  1862  2 

Elizabeth  English,  Schooner.  Mentioned 432 

Elliott,  Gilbert.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S.. 853 

Elliott,  John  Thompson.  Mentioned 356,1067 

Ellis,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  on  Nevv  Eiver,  N.  C.,  Nov.  25,  1862.  Report  of 

W.  H.  C.  Whiting 34 

Ellis,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 1049 

Elwell,  Andrew.  Mentioned 577,  737 

Elzey,  Arnold. 

Assignments  to  command 794, 953 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 1058 

Brown,  Jack 921 

French,  Samuel  G 1069 

Lee,  G.  W.  C 1092 

Lee,  Robert  E 966,  979, 1066,  1070 

Longstreet,  James  . 871,  910,  918, 919,  953,  965,  968,  1023 

Pickett,  George  E 1090 

Pettigrew,  John  J 1041,  1044,  10.52, 1060 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 800,802 

Virginia,  Governor  of 978 

Wise,  Henry  A 153, 892, 920, 975,  994,  1006, 1019, 1035 

Mentioned 342, 739,  794,  807,  810,  856,  866, 889, 892, 901, 916, 917, 

952,  953,  967,  968,978,  1020,  1036,1041,  1066,  1071,1075,  1086,1089,1091 

Emilie,  Steamer.  Mentioned  223, 240, 242 

Emily,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  May  15,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Peck,  John  J 722 

Stratton,  Franklin  A 356 

Viele,  Egbert  L 356 

Wessel Is,  Henry  W 355 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 355 

Reports  of 

Porter,  Francis  E 355 

Roberts,  W.  Dewees 356 

Mentioned 3.55, 356, 731 

Emory,  William  H.  Mentioned 38,  379 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Alexander,  W.  T 928 

Bender,  W.  G 757 

Collins,  C.  R 756 

Cooke,  James  W 767 

Gilmer,  J.  F 743 

Gwynn,  Walter 754,  758, 763,  765, 767, 768, 813, 884 

Myers,  E.T.D 825 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 769 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 756,761 

Stevens,  W.  H 884 

War  Department,  C.  S 330,813,952,977,1008 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Army  Head  (pi  alters  540 

Foster,  John  G 540 


INDEX. 


1127 


Page. 

England,  Theophilus  L.  Mentioned 280,314,317,71^5 

English,  David.  Mentioned 432 

English,  Elizabeth,  Schooner.  Mentioned 432 

Ericsson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 536 

Erson,  Eric.  Mentioned 18 

Erwin,  A.  M.  Mentioned 119 

Escort,  Steamer.  Mentioned 157, 

’ • 158, 181 , 182, 215, 21G,  222, 224, 244, 612, 613, 618, 623, 646, 647 

Estes,  Lewellyn  G.  Mentioned 1 707 

Etheridge,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 460,403 

Etting,  S.  M.  Mentioned 331 

Eure,  M.  L.  Mentioned 746 

Evans,  Major.  Mentioned ! 750 

Evans,  A.  L.  Mentioned 114 

Evans,  N.,G. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 114 

French,  Samuel  G 824,  834 

Mallett,  Peter 115 

Mentioned 56,  58, 106-1 12, 117-119,  131,  770,  787,  788,  801-804,  807,  808,  822,  841, 

855,  859,  860,  865,  879,  891,  893, 898, 901,  917,  943,  945,  969-975, 977, 979, 980, 
982,983,  987,998,  1011-1014,1018,  1022,1030,  1032,  1041,1057,  1078,1084 
Report  of  operations,  Dec.  13-17,  1862,  during  cxiicdition  to  Goldsborough, 

N.  C , 112 

Evans,  P.  G.  Mentioned 122, 198,  755, 1051 

Everett,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 5,7,8 

Ewell,  Richard  S.  Mentioned 385,  739 

Ewen,  Clarence.  Mentioned. 139 

Ev^er,  Barnabas,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  J.  Fogerty  47 

Mentioned 48 

Reports  of  attack  on  Plymouth,  N.  C.,  Dec.  10,  1862  4.5-47 

Expedition.  (Proposed.)  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters : 537 

Ihirnside,  Ambrose  E 536,537 

Expounder,  Steamer.  Mentioned 502,504 

Fagan,  Andrew.  Mentioned 576,734,1094 

Fairchild,  Harrison  S. 

Mentioned 307,570,575 

Report  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4,  1863 308 

Fairfax,  J.  W.  Mentioned 896 

Fairfield,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  March  3,  1863.  See  Swan  Quarter,  N.  C.  Ex- 
2)cclition  to,  March  1-6,  1863. 

Fairly,  John  S.  Mentioned 838, 844, 1045, 1048 

Faith,  Andrew.  Mentioned 151,1.52 

Falen,  Michael.  Mentioned 295 

Farina,  Steamer.  Mentioned 584 

Farnsworth,  John  G. 

Correspon(lenc(5  with  Erasmus  D.  Keyes 628 

Mentioned  629 

Farnsworth,  Luther  H.  Mentioned 158 

Farquhar,  Francis  U. 

Mentioned 167, 512,  .58.5,  6.38 

Ropert  of  expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Marcli  6-10,  1863 174 


1128 


INDE^. 


PagSi 

Farrar,  Judson  S.  Mentioned 734 

Farroii,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned 240,241,243 

Fawcett,  Richard  W.  Mentioned... 134,139 

Faxon,  John.  Mentioned 276,308,313 

Fellows,  John  F. 

Mentioned 64, 92,  246,  «52,  349,  351,  378,  468, 500,  57t 

Report  of  opeiiit  ions,  Dec.  14-17,  18(52,  during  expedition  to  Goldsborough, 

N.  C 77 

Felt,  William  N.  Mentioned 280 

Ferebee,  D.  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Daniel,  Jnnins 1020 

Lewis,  D.  W 824 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 745,748 

Mentioned 19, 122,  198,  744,  755,  9' 5,  984,  901,  992,  1008 

Ferguson,  Alonzo.  Mentioned 734 

Ferrero,  Edward.  Mentioned 562 

Ferrill,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 19y 

Ferris,  Private.  Mentioned 670 

Ferry,  Orris  6. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 386,  399,  483-486,  488,  491,  494,  495,  497 

Mentioned 20,  38-40,  125,  269,  377,  385,  396,  468,  476, 

477,  479,  484,  494,  496,  499, 504,  505,  507,  514,  516,  533,  547,  548,  576,  .577, 678 
Reports  of 

JoynePs  Ferry,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Dec.  22,  1862  123 

Providence  Chnrch,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Dec.  28,  1862 123 

Suftblk,  Va.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  28,  1862 123 

Windsor,  Va.  Skirmish  near,  Dec.  22,  1862 123 

Fitch,  Butler.  Mentioned 576, 734, 1094 

Fitzgerald,  Louis.  Mentioned 512 

Fitz  Simmons,  Charles. 

Mentioned 56,  57,  227,  569 

Reports  of 

Dudley  Station,  N.  C.  Raid  on,  Dec.  17,  1862 68 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  Operations  Dec.  15,  1862,  during  expedition  to..  67 

Flagler,  D.  W.  Mentioned 457 

Flambeau,  Schooner.  Mentioned 224 

Flanner,  J.  H.  Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 10.35 

Flemming,  J.  A.  Mentioned 240 

Flood,  Edward  H.  Mentioned 468, 1094 

Flood,  Hugh  C.  Mentioned 141 

Flusser,  C.  W. 

Corresijondence  with 

Dix,  John  A 403,410 

Foster,  John  G 47,48 

Woodward,  Thomas  J i 462 

Mentioned 15, 

40-42,  45,  47, 145-147, 199, 259,  355,  474,  477,  .522,  523,  612,  613,  617,  618,  688 

Fogarty,  Thomas.  Mentioned 295 

Fogerty,  Thomas  J. 

Correspondence  with  Barnabas  Ewer,  jr 47 

Mentioned 47 

Folk,  Daniel.  Mentioned 251 

Follansbee,  Albert  S.  Mentioned 35, 37, 132, 139,  .575, 1093 


INDEX. 


1129 


Page. 

Pollett,  Frederick  M.  Mentioned 133, 134, 138, 130,  279, 288,  576, 735, 1094 

Folsom,  George  P.  Mentioned 526 

Foote,  Morris  C.  Mentioned 97 

Forbes,  Joseph.  Mentioned 14 

Forbes,  R.  A.  Mentioned 1095 

Ford,  Stephen.  Mentioned 940 

Forkner,  Samuel.  Mentioned 895 

Forrest,  French.  Mentioned 849 

Forrest,  N.  B.  Mentioned 706 

-Fonstler, . Mentioned 930 

Fo.sdick,  Stephen  M.  Mentioned 209 

Foster,  Benjamm  B.  Mentioned 280 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  John  J.  Pccli. 

Foster,  John  G. 

Address  to  soldiers  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina 671 

Assignments  to  command 492 

Congratulatory  orders.  Expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.,  Dec.  11-20, 

1862  .59,60 

Controversy  with  Hunter.  See  Note,  p.  538. 

Co-operation  with 

Burnside  A.  E.  Communications  from  Army  Headquarters 497 

Dix,  John  A.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 451,460,572 

Peck,  John  J 453 

See  also  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  Expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Also 
Dix  to  Ualleclc,  p.  460. 

Correspondence  with 

Amory,  Thomas  J.  C 527 

Anderson,  Hiram,  jr 185 

Army  Headquarters 401,  414,  447,  457, 469, 476,  481,  489,  490,  520, 

524, 530,  533,  538,  541, 549,  556, 562,  622,  623, 627,  659,  699,  700, 709, 711,  713 

Barstow,  Nathaniel  S 172 

Davenport,  H.  K 453 

Dix,  John  A 451, 465, 495,  496, 502, 518, 522, 572, 629, 634, 655, 667, 695 

Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A 540 

Flnsser,  C.  W 47,48 

French,  Samuel  G 466,470,481,495,497,505,885 

Jones,  J.  Eichter 163, 514, 529, 55*9, 696, 713, 716, 718,  724 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 592, 601 

Lee,  Francis  L 147, 560, 561, 566, 567 

Lee,  S.  P 630, 647, 656, 680, 681, 688, 715, 731 

Lyman,  Luke 561 

Martin,  J.  G 440,  448,  471 

Mix,  Simon  H 508 

Montgomery,  Augustus  S 1068 

Morris,  D.  B 182 

Palmer,  Innis  N 227, 228, 552, 584, 594, 612, 618, 638, 646, 647, 665 

Parker,  William  A 475 

Peck,  John  J 41,  42,  589 

Pickett,  Josiah (!40 

Potter,  Edward  E 390, 424 

Prince,  Henry 169,  223, 228-236,  631 , 635,  638, 670 

Sanders,  E.  C 538 

Spinola,  F.  B 668,733 


1130 


INDEX. 


Foster,  John  G. — Continued. 


Page. 


Correspondence  with 

Sprague,  A.  B.  R 560 

Stanly,  Ed 182,498,525 

Studley,  J.  M 564 

Wallis,  J.  W 674 

Wessells,  Henry  W 147, 355, 721 


Mentioned 37,38,40,41,61, 

62,  66,  68,  69, 71-75, 77, 82, 84-86, 90, 94, 96, 112, 113, 116, 163, 172, 185, 189, 
193, 201,  202, 217, 219-221, 223, 224, 227, 228, 230, 232, 240-244. 246-248, 252, 
254, 255, 275,  282,  283, 285,  344,  378, 390, 411, 424, 453, 455, 460, 465,  466, 468, 


469, 472, 473, 476, 478,  479,  485,  490-492, 494,  496,  497, 499-502,  504, 505, 507, 


511, 519,  522,  526, 528, 529, 533, 538,  540, 547, 548,  563, 576-580, 583,585, 586, 


588-595,  601-603,  607,  612,  617, 618,  622, 627, 632,  634, 638,  647, 668,  669, 678, 
689,  709,  736, 778, 779, 784, 793,  802,  814,  815,  819, 823, 824, 826, 828, 830, 834, 
838, 839,  854,  870, 876,  878, 881,  885,  897,  904, 905, 908, 911, 924, 969, 970, 972, 
973,  980,  982,  987,  988,  994,  1005,  1007,  1017,  1018, 1022, 1023, 1030, 1031, 
1036,  1045,  1047,  1048,  1050,  1051,  1053-1055,  1067,  1072,  1075-1081,  1087 
Orders  in  cases  of.  Mutinous  conduct  Marine  Artillery 471 


Reports  of 

Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,  1862 54 

Kinston,  N.  C. 

Demonstration  upon.  May  20-23,  1863 : 362,363 

Engagement  at,  Dec.  14,  1862 53 

New  Berne,  N.  C. 

Expedition  against,  March  8-16,  1863 183 

Expedition  from,  Nov.  1-12,  1862  20 

Washington,  N.  C. 

Attack  on,  Sept.  6,  1862  4,5 

Expedition  to,  April  17-19, 1863 212 


Siege  of,  and  pursuit  of  Confederate  forces,  March  30-April  20, 


1863 211,212 

Winfield,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  March  23,  1863 202 

Staff.  Announcements  of 512,523. 

Foster,  Nathaniel  H.  Mentioned 26 

Foster,  Robert  S. 

Mentioned 133-135, 137, 138, 268, 272, 

275, 277-279, 283, 286, 289, 290, 295,  300, 312,  315, 354, 355, 453, 468,  483-485, 
488, 499, 528, 575, 605, 606, 628, 637, 653, 676, 690, 7 16, 718-720,  730, 734, 1093 

Report  of  siege  of  Sufiblk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4,  1863 293 

Fowler,  Bernard.  Mentioned 14 

Fox,  Conrad,  Schooner.  Mentioned : 423,  434 

Fox,  Gustavus  V.  Mentioned 659, 731 

Foy,  Franklin.  Mentioned 987, 1057 

Francis,  John,  Schooner.  Mentioned 433,434,440 

Francis,  Joseph.  Mentioned 467 

Frankie,  Jones.  Mentioned 224, 246, 2.52,  475, 736 

Franklin,  Schooner.  Mentioned 515 

Franklin,  Va.  Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

Aug.  31,  1862  1 

Oct.  3,  1862.  See  Blachwaier,  Va.  Skirmish  on  the,  Oct.  3,  1862. 

Oct.  31,  1862.  Report  of  John  J.  Peck 20 

Nov.  18,  1862.  Report  of  John  J.  Peck 33,34 

See  also  Dix  io  Lincoln,  j).  458. 


indp:x. 


1131 


Page. 

Franklin,  Va.  Skirmislies  at  and  near — Continued. 

Dec.  2,  1862.  See  Blackivater,  Fa.  Skh'misli  on  ike,  Deo.  2,  1862. 

Marcli  17,  1863. 

Conminnications  from  John  J.  Peck 560 

Reports  of 

Peck,  John  J 199 

Spear,  Samuel  P 2U0 

Franklin,  William  B.  Mentioned 886 

Fraser,  John,  & Co. 

Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 781,783 

Mentioned 781 

Fredericksburg,  Va.  Battle  of,  Dec.  11-15,  1862.  Communications  from 

Stager,  Anson 483 

War  Department,  C.  S 799 

Freeborn,  Tug.  Mentioned 533 

Freeborn,  Thomas.  Mentioned 1.  180 

Freedmen.  See  Refugees,  Freedmen  and  Abandoned  Lands. 

Freeman,  Alfred  J.  Mentioned 322 

Fremont,  S.  L.  Mentioned 874 

French,  Colonel.  Mentioned i 906 

French,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 15,260 

French,  D.  A.  Mentioned 920 

French,  S.  B.  Mentioned 742 

French,  S.  Bassett.  For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  Virginia,  Governor  of. 
French,  Samuel  G. 

Assignments  to  command 861,  864, 953, 988, 1077 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. ..  773, 846, 861, 864, 873, 1028 

Cunningham,  George  A 340 

Daniel,  Junius 745 

Davis,  Joseph  R 993 

Elzey,  Arnold 1069 

Evans,  N.  G o24,  834 

Foster,  John  G 4G6,  470,  481,  495,  497,  505, 885 

Hood,  J.  B 1042 

Jenkins,  M 1010, 1018, 1033, 1043, 1086 

Longstreet,  James 328, 

337,  340,  906,  908,  914,  946,  948,  939,  993,997-999,  1001-1004,  1009,  1010, 
1015,  1016,  1020,  1021,  1025,  1026,  1033,  1037,  1039-1041,  1043,  1044,  1046 

Milligan,  J.  F 1003 

Myers,  Charles  D , 997 

North  Carolimi,  Governor  of 760,  762,  778,  784, 801 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 744 

Robertson,  B.  II 804,805 

Shumaker,  L.  M 328,991, 1000 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 743,747-749,751,755,757,762, 

768,  770,  777-779,  781,  788,  792,  793,  803,  811,  816,  824,  840,  841, 854,  870-872 

War  Department,  C.  S _ . . . . 45. 144, 742,  822,  823,  826,  867,  874, 1012 

Whiting,  W.  II.  C 785,852,855,863,868 

Mentioned 39,108,113, 

161, 274, 276,  291,  325, 326,  332,  334-  3:5(;,  3:58, 4:55,  444, 465, 6*32, 6:5:5, 653,  750, 
751,  758, 759,  761, 76:5-765, 767-769,  771 , 779, 781, 782,  786-794,  808,  809,  814, 
815,  826,  830, 845.  846,  855,  859,  865,  867,  871, 877,  878,  882,  888,  900, 916,  917, 
1)28,9:50,940,  941,946,  953,978,  988,993,  1014,  10:18,  1045, 1 0.5(5, 1067, 1077 


1132 


INDEX, 


Page. 

French,  Samuel  G.— Continued. 

Reports  of. 

Battery  Hnoer,  Hill’s  Point,  Va.  Capture  of,  April  19,  1S63 324 

Plymouth,  N.  C.  Attack  on,  Dec.  10,  1862 49 

Suffolk,  Va.  Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863  329 

Washington,  N.  C.  Attack  on,  Sept.  6,  1862 10 

French,  William  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 562 

Jones,  Samuel 935 

Mentioned 935-937 

Fricker,  Joseph. 

Mentioned 61 , 62, 170, 171 , 1 78 

Report  of  expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  6-10,  1863  171 

Frobel,  B.  W.  Correspondence  with 

Gwathmey,  Washington 842 

Lamb,  William 842 

Fuller,  Nehemiah  P.  Mentioned 77,78 

Fuller,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 11*1,118,119,121 

Fullerton,  Alexander.  Mentioned 67 

Fulton,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned - 575,734,1093 

Furness,  H.  K.  Mentioned 146 

Gafford,  G.  W.  Mentioned 44 

Gaillard,  B.  S.  Mentioned i 742 

Galego,  Schooner.  Mentioned 976 

Galena,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 398,  400,  741,  837,  886, 1058 

Gallivan,  John.  Mentioned 298 

Galloupe,  Isaac  F.  Mentioned 76 

Gardner,  Charles  T.  Mentioned  308 

Garnett,  Richard  B. 

Correspondence  with.  D.  H.  Hill..  918, 955,  971,  975, 978, 984,  988,  989,  991, 992, 1001 

Mentioned 189,195,218, 

230, 245, 277,  291,  590,  655,  657, 663,  680,  687, 696, 700,  883,  990, 991,  91.5-917, 
919,923,924,929,931,  932,  938,  941,  943,  956,962,964-966,969,1004,1025 

Report  of  expedition  against  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  8-16, 1863 195 

Garrard,  Jeptha. 

Mentioned 7-9, 24,  26, 29-31, 55-57,  65, 163, 178, 179, 246, 251, 252, 584 

Reports  of 

Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Operations  Dec.  15,  1862,  during  expedition  to..  69 
Mount  Olive  Station  and  Goshen  Swamp,  N,  C.  Affairs  at,  Dec.  16, 

1862  69 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from,  March  6-10,  1863 179 

Thompson’s  Bridge,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  December  17,  1862 69 

Garrett,  Frank  B.  Mentioned 509 

Garrett,  Joshua  L.  Mentioned 995 

Garrett,  W.  N.  Mentioned 810,811 

Geary,  John  W.  Mentioned 819 

Gee,  B.  H.  Mentioned 921 

General  Jesup,  U.  S.  S. 

Construction  and  equipment  of.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John.  A 404, 476 

Lee,  S.  P 393 

Viele,  Egbert  L 404 

Mentioned 476 


INDEX. 


1133 


Page. 

Georgia,  Steamer.  Mentioned.... 502 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries  ’ Macon,  190,  191. 

Cavalry— ; 62d,*  155,  150,  220,  221,  7.55,  854,  984,  1008,  1020,  1060, 

1086,  1087,  1089,  1090. 

Infantry — Regiments : 3d,  652  ; 25tli,  29tli,  30th,  866 ; 32d,  833,  866  ,*  46th, 

47th,  866 ; 53th,  751,  759,  704,  787,  802,  921,  997,  998, 1044. 

Geranium,  Schooner.  Mentioned 398 

Getty,  George  W. 

Mentioned • 149,  268, 270-272, 274-277, 279, 283, 286, 

287, 294, 297,  300,  312-314, 317,  319,  320,  558, 562-565, 570, 575,  582,  633,  637, 
641-643,  645, 653,  655,  058, 662, 663, 676,  686,  687,  690,  691, 694, 695, 725, 735 

Report  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  Aiiril  11-May  4,  1863 . ,301 

Gibbon,  H.  A.  Mentioned 587 

Gibbs,  Alfred.  Mentioned ....  35, 37, 123, 126, 132, 279, 491, 494, 496, 499, 575, 734, 1093 
Gibbs,  George  C.  (42dN.  C.) 

Correspondence  with 

Hill,  D.  H 946 

Longstreet,  James 945 

Mentioned 865, 947, 953, 1065 

Gibbs,  George  C.  (3dN.  Y.  Cav.)  Mentioned 73,164 

Gilbert,  Virgil.  Mentioned 213 

Giles,  Solomon.  Mentioned 602 

Gill,  Thomas  J. 

Case  of.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 439,441,449 

Lee,  S.  P 439,  450 

Mentioned-..., 450 

Gillis,  James  H. 

Mentioned 256-258,  360,  628, 689,  698, 699,  704 

Reports  of 

Matthews  County,  Va.  Expedition  into.  May  19-22,  1863  361 

Yorktown,  Va.  Expedition  from,  April  1,.1863 • 256,258 

Gilliss,  James.  Mentioned 575,735 

Gillmore,  Quincy  A.  Mentioned 457 

Gilmer,  J.  F. 

Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 743 

Mentioned 762, 767, 771,  853, 968, 976,  977 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A. 

Gist,  S.  R. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 801 

Mentioned 818, 828,  829,  832, 837,  842, 849,  866, 867,  871 

Glennon,  John.  Mentioned 298 

Gloucester  Co.,  Va.  Reconnaissance  to.  Doc.  12,  1862.  See  Yorktown,  Va. 

Iteconnaissance  from,  Dec.  11-15,  1862.  , 

Gloucester  C.  H.,  Va.  Expedition  to,  April  7,  1863. 

Co-o])cration  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 260,261 

Report  of  A.  H.  Grimshaw ‘260 

See  also  Keyes  to  Halleck,  p.  587. 

Gloucester  Peninsula,  Va.  Operations  on  the,  Aug.  20,  1862-June  4,  1863. 

Comniuuications  from  S.  P.  Leo 560 

See  also 

Nov.  16,  1862.  Gloucester  Point.  Skirmish  at. 

22,  1862.  Maitlicu's  County.  Destruction  of  Salt-Works  in. 

* Originally-  called  2d  Partisan  Xlaugurs,  Qo.  J.L  served  as  artillery. 


1134 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Gloucester  Peninsula,  Va.  Operations  on,  Aug.  20, 1862-June  4, 1863 — Cont’d. 

See  also 

Dec.  11-15,  1862.  YorJctown.  Beconnaissance from. 

April  1,  1863.  Yorktoivn.  Expedition  from. 

7,  1863.  Gloucester  C.  H.  Expedition  to. 

9-14,  1863.  Gloucester  Point.  Operations  against. 

12,  1863.  Hickory  Forks.  Reconnaissance  to  the  vicinity  of. 

27,  1863.  Hickory  Forks.  Expedition  heyo^nl. 

• May  15,  1863.  Robinson’s  Plantation,  King  and  Queen  Qounty.  Expe- 


dition to. 

19-22,  1863.  Matthews  County.  Expedition  into. 

Gloucester  Point,  Va. 

Operations  against,  April  9-14,  1863.  Report  of  D.  J.  Godwin 261 

Skirmish  at,  Nov.  16,  1862.  Reports  of 

Davis,  William  W.  H 32 

Naglee,  Henry  M 32 

See  also  Bix  to  Halleck,  p.  459. 


Godwin,  D.  J. 

Mentioned 341 

Report  of  operations  against  Gloucester  Point,  Va.,  April  9-14,  1863  261 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  • 

Confederate  troops  at.  Organization,  strength,  etc.,  Dec.  20,  1862  807 

Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20, 1862. 

Casualties,  returns  of.  Union  troops ..  60 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters f 473, 481 

Beauregard,  G.  T 806 

Dix,  John  A 473 

Foster,  John  G 469, 475, 476,  489 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 801 

Peck,  John  J 474 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 107 

Radcliffe,  James  D 794 

Robertson,  B.  H 804,805 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 801-803, 805,  806 

War  Department,  C.  S 802,803,805 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 794,802-806 

See  also  Dix  to  Halleck^  p.  478. 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Foster) 59,60 

Co-operation  of  Dix  and  Foster 37-43,  465, 466, 473,  476-479 

Reports  of 

Amory,  Tliomas  J.  C.,Dec.  14-17,  1862 75 

Chambers,  John  G.,  Dec.  11-16,  1862 78 

Codman,  Charles  R.,  Dec.  14-16,  1862  80 

Cole,  George  W.,  Dec.  12-16,  1862 74 

Evans,  N.  G.,  Dec.  13-17, 1862 112 

Fellows,  John  F.,  Dec.  14-17,  1862 77 

Fitz  Simmons,  Charles,  Doc.  15,  1862 67 

Foster,  John  G 54 

Garrard,  Jeptha,  Dec.  15,  1862 69 

Hall,  Newton,  Dec.  12-16, 1862 71 

Heckman,  Charles  A 91 

Holbrook,  Charles  L 80 

Howell,  Joshua  B,,  Dec.  13-17,  1862 101 


INDEX. 


11:^5 


Page. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C. — Continued. 

Exi)edition  to,  Dec.  11-20,  lrt62. 

Eeports  of 

Jacobs,  Ferris,  jr.,  Dec.  13-14,  1862  72 

Jenney,  Edwin  S I 66 

Ledlie,  James  H.,  Dec.  11-17,  1862 63 

Lee,  Horace  C 84 

Moscliell,  John  F.,  Dec.  11-16,  1862 •.  70 

Pickett,  Josiah 87 

Shurtleif,  William  S 88 

Smith,  Gustavus  W.,  Dec.  13-18,  1862 : 106-100 

Sprague,  A.  B.  R 81 

Steveus,  W.  H.,  Dec.  16-17,  1862 110 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G 82 

Taylor,  David  A.,  Dec.  11-17,  1862 61 

Wessells,  Henry  W.,  Dec.  5-21,  1862  95 

Zahriskie,  Abram 94 

See  also 


Dec.  12-15,  1862. — Neuse  River.  Operations  on  the. 

14,  1862. — Kinston.  Engagement  at. 

16,1862. — White  Hall.  Engagement  at. 

Mount  Olive  Station  and  Goshen  Swamp.  Affairs  at. 
17,  1862. — Dudley  Station.  Raid  on. 

Goldshorough  Bridge.  Engagement  at. 

Thompson's  Bridge.  Skirmish  at. 

Goldsborough  Bridge,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  Dec.  17, 1862.  Reports  of 


Clingman,  Thomas  L 117 

Pool,  Stephen  D 120 


See  also  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  Goldshorough,  JSf.  C.  Expedition  to.  Reports  of 


Airiory,  Thomas  J.  C. 
Evaus,  Nathan  G. 
Fellows,  John  F. 
Foster,  John  G. 
Ileckman,  Charles  A. 


Ledlie,  James  U. 
Lee,  Horace  C. 
Pickett,  Josiah. 
Shurtleff,  William  S. 
Smith,  Gustavus  W. 


Stevens,  Walter  H. 
Stevenson,  Thomas  G. 
Taylor,  David  A. 
Zahriskie,  Abram. 


Goldsborough,  John  R.  Mentioned 489 

Goldsborough,  L.  M.  Mentioned 383,  393,  404,  426, 437,  .555 

Goldthwaite,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 512 

Goode,  John,  jr.  Mentioned 742 

Goode,  J.  Thomas.  Mentioned 920 

Goodspeed,  Merritt  M.  Mentioned 70 

Goodwin,  Francis  E.  Mentioned 370 

Gordon,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 122 

Gordon,  George  H. 

Assignments  to  command - 659 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 702,  706 

Itinerary  2d  Division,  4th  Cor))s,  May  4-Juue  1, 1863  372 

Mentioned 279, 

281,  285,  372,  658,  659,  687,  690,  691,  704, 705, 707, 714,  723, 728,  730,  732-734 
Reports  of 

Robinson’s  Plantation,  Va.  Expedition  to.  May  15,  1863 357 

Suffolk,  Va.  Operations  May  1-4, 1863,  during  siege  of 323 

West  Point,  Va.  Evacuation  of.  May  31-June  1, 1863  372 

Goree,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 896, 1021 

Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned 770 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  sec  Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A. 


1136 


lis'JjEX. 


Pape. 

Goshen  Swamp,  N.  C.  Affair  at,  Dec.  16,18(52.  Report  of  Jeptha  Garrard..  6U 
See  also  Dec.  11-20,1862.  Expedition  to  (roldsboroiujh,  N.  C.  Reports  of 
Foster,  J ohn  G.  ^ Smitli,  Gustavus  TV. 

Gomaud,  George  E.  Meutioned 9,214,216,221,241,512,61,3,680 

Graham,  Edward.  Mentioued 10 

Graham,  George  W.  Mentioned 58,  59,  65,  93-95, 737 

Graham,  Joseph.  Mentioned 191 

Graham,  W.  A.  Mentioned 921,963 

Grammer,  W.  T.  Mentioned 737 

Granite,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 223 

Grant,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 230 

Grant,  U.  S.  Mentioued 284,1084,1089 

Graves,  George  W.  Meutioned 40, 210, 223, 243 

Gray,  Charles  O.  Mentioned 18, 59, 60, 92, 96-98, 100, 101, 116,  722 

Green,  Dr.  Mentioned 568 

Green,  Mr.  Mentioned .•  544 

Green,  W.  R.  Mentioned -44 

Gregg,  D.  McM.  Mentioned 707,710 

Gregory,  David  E.  Mentioned 734 

Gregory,  Lemuel  B.  Mentioned 291,292 

Greig,  Sherman.  Mentioned 68,227 

Grey,  Joseph.  Meutioned 170 

Grice,  Allen.  Mentioned 561 

Griffin,  Joel  R.  Meutioned 36,  37, 755, 10o8, 1051, 1064, 1087, 1089 

Grimes,  David  E.  Mentioned 89 

Grimshaw,  Arthur  H. 

Mentioned .576,  734, 1094 

Report  of  expedition  to  Gloucester  Court-House,  Va.,  April  7, 1863  260 

Grist,  Isaac  W.  Mentioned 198 

Guion,  George  M.  Mentioned 1093 

Guion,  Henry  T.  Meutioned 930,  944, 945,  986 

Gulf,  Department  of  the.  Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 488 

Dix,  John  A 487 

Gum  Swamp,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at.  May  22, 1863.  See  Kinston,  N.  C.  Demon- 
stration on,  May  20-23, 1863. 

Gurney,  William.  Mentioned 279, 287,  323,  627,  676,  734 

Gwathmey,  Washington. 

• Correspondence  with 

Frobel,  B.  W ' 842 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 843 

Mentioned 849 

Gwynn,  Walter. 

Correspondence  with 

Cooke,  James  W 767 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 754, 758, 763, 765, 767, 768,  813, 884 

Mentioned 756,  757, 761,  762,  767,  771, 810,  884 

Gwynn,  W.  B.  Mentioned 763 

Habeas  Corpus.  Writ  of,  suspended  at  Salisbury,  N.  C.,  and  vicinity 793 

Hadley,  M.  J.  Report  of  ordnance  stores  captured  at  Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C 155 

Hagemeister,  Du  Plat.  Mentioned 150 

Hahn,  Allen  W.  Mentioned 390 

Hale,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 934 

Hale,  Martin  G.  Mentioned . . . r - ^ , li^^ 


INDEX. 


1137 


Page. 

Halifax,  Steamer.  Mentioned 148 

Hall,  E.  D. 

Correspondence  \7itl1  War  Department,  C.  S 1091 

Mentioned 930 

Kail,  John.  Mentioned 97 

Hall,  Newton. 

Correspondence  with  J.  Richter  Jones 726 

Mentioned 8,54,55 

Rei)ort  of  operations  Dec.  12-16,  1862,  during  expedition  to  Goldsborough, 

N.  C 71 

Hall,  Rowland  M.  Mentioned 508 

I-Iall,  William  P.  Mentioned 32, 50, 51, 124, 260, 261, 576, 629,  707,  734, 1094 

Halleck,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 11, 202, 267, 277, 285, 392, 

412,  419, 427,  445, 451,  470, 476,  482, 518,  530, 536, 538, 540, 564,  .571,  572, 589, 
593, 613,  615,  618,  626,  629,  633,  637, 638, 641,  644,  645,  671, 681,  6c8,  718, 731 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters. 

Hampton,  Wade.  Mentioned 815,876,891,1044 

Hand,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 134, 139, 280, 354 

Plant,  ver  Station,  Va.  Skirmish  at.  May  3,  1863 3 

Hanovertown  Ferry,  Va.  Skirmish  at.  May  4, 1863  3 

Hardy,  Granville.  Mentioned 77 

Harkaway,  Schooner. 

Mentioned 1056 

Seizure  of.  Communications  from  W.  H,  C.  Whiting 1056 

Harkness,  Elijah  A.  Mentioned 129 

Harland,  Edward. 

Mentioned 277, 279, 287, 294, 301,  302, 306, 3.07, 315,  317, 570,  575,  658,  676, 735 

Report  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  Ajiril  11-May  4,  1863  312 

Harman,  William. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise. 808, 809 

Mentioned 796,  886 

Plarrington,  Samuel.  Mentioned 159,187 

Harris,  Robert.  Mentioned 666 

Harris,  T.  A.  Mentioned 270,278,280 

Plarris,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 167, 197, 913 

Harrison,  Scout.  Mentioned 923 

Harrison,  Asa  H.  Me-ntioiied 146 

Harrison,  Burton  N.  For  correspondence  as  Pvt.  Sec.,  see  Jeffoson  Davis. 
Harrison,  George  P.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 831,851 

Mentioned 809, 817,  821,  828, 844, 865, 866, 873, 896 

Harrison,  J.  W.  Mentioned 260 

Harrison,  Randolph.  Mentioned 798 

Hart,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 70 

Kart,  James  H.  Mentioned ^ 299 

Hart,  T.  D.  Mentioned .* 501,577,738 

Hart,  William,  Mentioned 66 

Hartwell,  Cephas  L.  Mentioned 134 

Harvey,  William  H.  Mentioned 859 

Harvie,  Lewis  E.,  Mr. 

Correspondence  with  War  Deiiartmeiit,  C.  S 951 

Mentioned 813 

Karvie,  Lev/is  E.,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 1008 

Harwood,  A.  A.  Mentioned 661 

713  R R-VOL  xyiu 


1138 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hasbrouck,  H,  C.  Meutioned 280,576,735 

Haskell,  John  C. 

Mentioned 192, 194, 196, 865, 954, 1004, 1007 

Report  of  exi)edition  against  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  8-16, 1863 190 

Haskin,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 608 

Hasty,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 44 

Hawkins,  Rush  C.  Mentioned 279, 280, 286,  309, 575, 676 

Hawley,  Louis  J.  Mentioned 920, 1006 

Hayes,  H.  Mentioned 764,  765 

Haynes,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 342 

Hays,  Alexander.  Mentioned 608,876 

Hazell,  Mr.  Mentioned 827 

Heckman,  Charles  A. 

Mentioned 55, 58, 59, 63, 65,  66, 74, 76,  77,  79,  85, 96, 98, 103, 

216,  220,  221,  378,  469,  500,  501,  548,  577,  602,603,623,638,678,700,1031 
Reports  of  . 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20, 1862 91 

Washington,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  April  17-19, 1863 221 

Hedrick,  John  J. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 848 

Jlentioned 849,922 

Heft,  Casper,  Schooner.  Mentioned 41G 

Heine,  William.  Mentioned .386,735 

Heintzelman,  Samuel  P. 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 608,637 

Mentioned 373, 834, 1066, 1070 

Henry  Burden,  Steamer.  Mentioned 599^  601 

Henry,  M.  W.  Mentioned 331,  334,  989, 991, 995, 1010, 1045, 1046 

Herbert,  George  H.  Mentioned 308 

Heth,  Henry. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  W.  G.  M 853 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 8.53,  854 

Mentioned 706, 1015, 1083, 1088 

Hetzel,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 171, 172 

Hickory  Forks,  Va. 

Expedition  beyond,  April  27, 1863.  “Record  of  Events,’’  7th  Army  Corps.  343 

Reconnaissance  to  vicinity  of,  April  12,  1863.  Report  of  C.  C.  Tevis 341 

Hicks,  Mr.  Mentioned 570 

Hicks,  A.  H.  Mentioned 241 

Hill,  Captain.  Mentioned 462 

Hill,  A.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Oflice,  C.  S.  A 888 

Mentioned 385,  706, 856, 1045 

Hill,  Daniel  H. 

Address  to  soldiers 894 

Assignments  to  command 847,  872,  894, 953 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 1028, 

1032, 1034, 1061, 1067, 1079, 1082, 1084 

Beauregard,  G.  T 892, 1007, 1012, 1017, 1021, 1030, 1036 

Clarke,  William  .J 1013 

Colquitt,  A.  II 1074, 10^*5 

Daniel,  .Tnnins 914,924,930,932,944,951,954,974, 1011, 1046, 1057, 1062 


INDEX. 


1139 


Page. 

Hill,  Daniel  H. — Continued. 

Corrcsi)on(lcuce  witli 

Garnett,  R.  13 918, 955, 971, 975, 978, 984, 988, 989, 991, 992, 1001 

Gibbs,  George  C 946 

Lee,  Robert  E 1063, 1069, 1071, 1074, 1075, 1079 

Long-street,  James 898,902, 

908,  920,  923,  925,  931,  932,  937,  941,  943,  947,  948,  953,  956,  962,  9()4, 
968,  972, 973,  975,  989,  990,  1031, 1032, 1046, 1047, 1050,  1057, 1061, 1072 

Marshall,  W.  H 1054 

Martin,  J.  G 985, 1033, 1059, 1064, 1065, 1087, 1089 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 919 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 1011, 1019 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 195, 883, 921, 985, 990, 1004, 1007, 1013, 1027 

Rains,  G.  J 1082 

Ransom,  R.,  jr 957, 971,  981,  985, 986, 1000, 1004 

Robertson,  D.  H 912, 1007, 1051 

War  Dei^artment,  C.  S 861, 

890, 983, 1005, 1016, 1047, 1048, 1050, 1052, 1053, 1059, 1076, 1079, 1092 

Whitford,  John  N 1022, 1054 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 893, 896, 904, 910, 

972,  982,  987,  1022,  1041,  1045,1048,1049,1052,1058,1070,1073,1076,1080 

Mentioned 5 - 189, 

190,  210,  211,  216,  220,  230,  232,236,  245,  246,  275,  277,278.  281-283,  285, 
291,  323,  330,  344,  385, 488,  549, 555, 562, 564, 587, 590, 605,  606, 614, 620, 622, 
623, 626, 627, 632, 644, 648, 650, 655, 667, 668,  684, 685, 689, 690, 692, 696, 699, 
700,  705, 742,  819,  831,  847, 851, 872, 891, 892,  901, 905, 907-909,  914, 916,  917, 
923,  924,  930,  937,  943,  945,  946,  949,  953,  959-961,  966,  969,  970,973,979, 
981, 983,  996-999, 1012,  1014,  1015,  1017,  1020, 1028,  1029,  1031,  1032, 1034, 
1035,  1045,  1058,  1064,  1066,  1069,  1077,  1078,  1081-1084,  1086,  1088,  1089 

Report  of  expedition  against  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  8-16, 1863  188 

Hill,  James  C.  Mentioned 892 

Hill,  J.  H.  Mentioned 116 

Hill,  James  H.  For  correspondence,  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  W.  I£.  C.  Whiting. 

Hill,  Samuel.  Mentioned 562 

Hill,  Tlieron  D.  Mentioned 59,  60 

Hiller,  Frederick  L.  Mentioned 735 

Hill’s  Point,  N.  C. 

Affair  at,  April  16, 1863.  See  reports  of  Foster,  p.  212 ; Potter,  pp.  218, 219. 
Engagement  at,  April  2, 1863.  See  report  of  Foster,  p.  212. 

Hill’s  Point,  Va.  Skirmish  near.  May  3, 1863.  See  April  11- Mag 1863.  Siege 
of  Suffolk,  Va.  Re2)orts  of 

Dutton,  Arthur  11.  Gotty,  Goorgo  W.  Peck,  John  J. 

Hindes,  Pulaski.  Mentioned 62 

Hinds,  George  W. 

Mentioned 500 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,  1862  100 

Hines,  John  C.  Mentioned 198 

Hinton,  Mr.  Mentioned 650 

Hitchcock,  E.  A.  Mentioned 59 

Hitchcock,  George  H.  Mentioned 168,578 

Hobbs,  Moses.  Mentioned 552 

Hoffman,  Southard.  Mentioned 81,89,217,233,512,612,613 

For  corresiiondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  G.  Fester ; also  Tunis  N.  Palmer. 
Hofman,  Mr.  Mentioned 961 


1140 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hoke,  R.  F.  Mentioned 928 

Holbrook,  Charles  L. 

Mentioned 69,76,468,500,577,736 

Reports  of 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to.  Dee.  11-20,1862 80 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Expedition  toward,  April  27-May  1, 1863  349 

Holden,  William.  Mentioned .512 

Holden,  William  W.  Mentioned 1092 

Holly,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned 757 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H.  Mentioned 859 

Holt,  E.  J.  Mentioned 156  I 

Homans,  George  H.  Mentioned 350 

Hood,  J.  B. 

Correspondenee  with  Samuel  G.  Freneh 1042 


Mentioned 275,291,324-326,332, 

334,  337, 339, 488,  549, 579, 583, 587, 604,  605, 625,  632, 641,  679,  680,  (>83,  690- 
692, 732, 876, 880,  882,  890,  898,  899, 915-917, 923, 925-927, 933, 937, 942,  944, 
963,970,989,995,1002,  1010,  1015,  1017,  1033,  1037-1042,  1045,  1047,  1052 

Hook,  Cornelius,  jr.  Mentioned 469, 501 

Hooker,  George  H.  Mentioned 96,101,102 

Hooker,  Joseph. 

Co-operation  of  Dix  with.  See  Chancellor sville  Campaign,  Va.,  April  27- 


May  6,  1863. 
Correspondence  with 
Army  Headquarters 

Dix,  John  A 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D .. 
Kilpatrick,  J iidson , . 
Peck,  John  J 


683,709 

667, 671,  672, 689,  727, 730,  732,  733, 738 

683,687,730,739 

721 


582,  . 


586, 600, 606,  644, 653,  655, 6.58, 667, 672, 679,  680, 683, 684, 691, 692' 

Mentioned 189, 267, 279, 281, 282,  284, 285,  324, 549, 567, 586, 587, 604, 610, 616, 

624,  630, 632, 633,  639,  644,  649, 650,  662, 668,  680, 683-685, 687, 691, 693, 696, 
699, 706,  709, 711, 714^  720, 721,  723,  724, 728, 730, 738, 739, 876,  877,  882, 883, 
896,  898, 911, 922, 942, 944, 951, 953, 954, 959, 967,  lOCl,  1002, 1014, 1024, 1036, 
1046-1048, 1054,  1055,  1057,  1063,  1066,  1069,  1070,  1075,  1078,  1087,  1090 


Hopkins,  Mr.  Mentioned 7-97 

Hopkins,  Dickinson  S.  Mentioned 341 

Hopkins,  F.  Mentioned 666 

Horton,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 271,277 

Horton,  William  L.  Mentioned 364,365 

Host,  Mr.  Mentioned 570 

Howard,  James.  Mentioned 742 

Howard,  Oliver  O.  Mentioned 1029 

Howard,  Robert  V.  W.  Mentioned 126, 1094 

Howell,  Joshua  B. 

Mentioned 79, 96, 99, 500,  548, 577, 678, 738 

Report  of  operations  Dec.  13-17,  during  expedition  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C.  101 

Hudgin,  Walter  G.  Mentioned 342 

Hudson,  City  of.  Steamer.  Mentioned 450 

Hudson,  James,  jr.  Mentioned 578 

Huffman,  G.  D.  Mentioned 342 

Huger,  Battery,  Va.  Capture  of,  April  19,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Carroll , Gray •‘^29 

Cunningham,  George  A 340 


INDEX. 


1141 


Page. 

Huger,  Battery,  Va.  Capture  of,  April  19,  18C3— Coiitinnod. 

Comiiiunicatioiis  from 

Dix,  JolinA 

Frencb,  Samuel  

Longstreet,  James 

Peck,  John  

Peuclleton,  W.  F . . . . 

Shumaker,  L.  M 

Stribliug,  R.  M 

See  also  Longstreet  to  Scddon,  p.  1014. 

Reports  of 

Boggs,  F.  J 

Counally,  John  

Deariug,  James 

French,  Samuel  G 

Jones,  John  A - 

Shumaker,  L.  

Stribliug,  R.  

Ward,  John  E 

See  also  April  11-May  4,  1863.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Fa.  Reports  of 

Dutton,  Arthur  H.  ^ Getty,  George  W.  Peck,  John  J. 

Hughes,  John  H.  Mentioned 

Hughes,  N.  Mentioned 

Hughes,  Patrick  J.  Mentioned 1^4, 138 

Hughston,  Robert  S.  Mentioned 

Hull,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned - 211,213-215 

Hume,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Humphreys,  George  W.  Mentioned 

Hunchback,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 25, 170, 172, 185, 223, 224, 230, 231 

Hungary  Station,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  May  4,  1883  

Hunt,  Franklin  L.  Mentioned 498, 507, 885 

Hunt,  John  S.  Mentioned 

Hunt,  Lewis  C. 

Mentioned 96,  500, 548,  599, 679, 1060, 1064 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,  1862 99 

Hunt,  William  C.  Mentioned 

Hunter,  David. 

Controversy  with  Foster.  See  Note,  p.  538. 

Mentioned 567, 570, 577, 633, 711, 890, 904, 905, 911, 1018, 1030, 1046, 1047, 1050 

Hunter  Woodis,  Steamer.  Mentioned. 

Hutchings,  W.  V.  Mentioned 

Hutchins,  Robert.  Mentioned - 

Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 12th,  360,701,  705-708,  1044. 

Infantry-/?e^//we/7fs:  39th,  35,  37,  377,  487,  548,  577,  678,  738. 

Indiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

IniB^ntvj-Regiments:  13th,  17,  18,  44, 125, 132-139, 286, 289, 293-295, 298, 377,  487, 
575,  676, 734,1093. 

Intercourse.  See  Trade  and  Intercourse. 

International,  Ship.  Mentioned 492,494 

Iredell,  C.  T.  Mentioned ^44 

Ironsides,  U.  S.  S.  Sec  New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S. 

Jack,  Joseph.  Mentioned 578,737 

Jackson,  D.  A.  Mentioned ^0 

Jackson,  George.  Mentioned 121,122,1048 


1142 


INDEX. 


rage. 

Jackson,  Thomas  J. 

Death  of,  auuounced 1073 

Mentioned . J 39, 284,  385, 551,  552,  714, 739, 1045, 1048, 1055, 1057, 1073 

Jacksonville,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  Jan.  20,  1863.  See  New  Berne,  N.  C. 
Reconnaissance  from,  Jan.  17-21,1863.  ' 

Jacob  Marten,  Sloop.  Mentioned 595 

Jacobs,  Ferris,  jr. 

Mentioned 69, 154, 159, 163, 164,  366, 556 

Reports  of 

Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Operations,  Dec.  13-14, 1862,  during  expedition  to.  72 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on,  March  6-8, 1863  162 

James,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 280,566 

James  River,  Va. 

Defenses  of. 

Communications  from 

Brown,  Jack 921 

Davis,  Jefferson 870 

French,  Samuel  G 870 

Longstreet,  James 908 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 870, 871 

War  Department,  C.  S 743,870,871 

Davidson,  Hunter,  placed  in  charge  of  submarine 743 

Naval  operations.  Communications  from 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 743 

Milligan,  J.  F 741 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 376 

Operations  on  south  side  of,  Aug.  20, 1862-June  3, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 846,909,1084 

Army  Headquarters 459, 479, 511 

Daniel,  Junius 745 

Dix,  John  A 386,  387,  398,  400, 403,  408, 410,  454,  455, 459, 460, 464, 

465, 473,  474,  476,  477, 479, 483-486, 507-509,  513,  517-521, 534, 537, 538, 540, 
541,  549-551,  553,  555,  556,  558, 561, 563,  567,  579, 627, 628, 698, 717,  719, 720 

^Dodge,  Charles  C' 551 

Elzey , Arnold 871, 919 

Ferebee,  D.  D 745,748 

Ferry,  O.  S 399,  483-485, 488, 495 

French,  Samuel  G 846, 906, 1069 

Harman,  William 808, 809 

Jenkins,  M 940,  946, 961, 1086 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 592, 593 

Lee,  Robert  E 784, 846, 851 

Lee,  S.  P 393, 413, 519, 566, 693, 713 

Longstreet,  James 909, 910, 918, 050, 956, 1045, 1094 

Mansfield,  Joseph  K.  F 385 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 442 

Peck,  John  J 401,  416,  441, 444,  446, 453,  455, 458-460, 464, 

465,  474,  476, 482, 485, 504, 507, 510-513,  516, 517, 519-522,  524, 528, 530, 531, 
.534-537,  539, 540, 542, 543, 550-552, 5.55-558,  5(52,  564-566,  .571, 573,  582,  .586, 
626,  627, 639,  644,  652,  654, 657, 658, 673,  699,-705, 710,  714, 719, 723, 725, 744 

Pryor,  Roger  A 790, 845, 877, 879, 888 

Roberts,  W.  Dewees 693 

Smith,  Gustavus  W '. 743,747-749,751.800,845 


INDEX, 


1143 


Pago. 


James  River,  Va. — Coiitiuued. 

Operations  on  south  side  of,  Aug.  20,  1862-Juno  3,  1803. 


Communications  from 

Strattou,  Franklin  A 093 

Vielc,  Egbert  L 542 

War  Department,  C.  S 845,850 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  Avith  Army 303, 


400,  403, 410, 411  413, 510, 5G0, 003; 004, 008, 702-704 


See  also 

Aug.  31,  1862.  Franklin.  Skirmish  at. 

Sept.  2-  3,  1862.  Suffolk.  Expedition  from. 

Oct.  3,1862.  Blackwatei'.  Skirmish  on  the,  near  Franklin. 

Jtlackwater.  Affair  on  the,  near  Zuni. 

15,  1862.  Carrsville.  Skirmish  near. 

25,  1862.  Zuni.  Skirmish  near. 

20,  1862.  Blackwater.  Skirmish  on  the. 

31,  1862.  Franklin.  Skirmish  at. 

Nov.  12-14,  1862.  Suffolk.  Operations  about,  including  skirmishes  {12th) 
at  Providence  Church  and  (lAth)  at  Blackwater  Bridge 
and  Zuni. 

17,  1862.  Carrsville.  Affair  near. 

18,  1862.  Franklin.  Skirmish  at. 

Dec.  1,1862.  Beaver  Dam  Church.  Skirmish  at. 

2,  1862.  Blackwater.  Skirmish  on  the,  near  Franklin. 

8-12,  1862.  Suffolk.  Recoyinaissances  from,  to  the  Blackwater,  and 
skirmishes  at  and  about  Zuni. 

22,  1862.  Windsor  and  at  JoynePs  Ferry.  Skirmishes  near. 

28,  1862.  Su  ffolk  and  at  Providence  Church.  Skirmishes  near. 

Jan.  8-10,  1863.  Blackwater.  Expedition  from  Suffolk  toward  the. 

0,  1863.  Providence  Church.  Skirmish  near. 

30,  1863.  Deserted  House,  or  Kelhy’s  Store,  near  Suffolk.  Engage- 
ment at. 

Fob.  5,  1863.  Olive  Branch  Church.  Skirmish  near. 

7,  1863.  Olive  Branch  Church.  Skirmish  at. 

Mar.  7-  0,  1803,  Suffolk.  lieconnaissance  from,  and  skirmish  {9th)  near  • 
Wmdsor. 

17,  1863.  Franklin.  Skirmish  near. 

25,  1863.  Norfolk.  Affair  at. 

April  11-May  4,  1863.  Suffolk.  Siege  of . 

May  12-26,  1863.  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad.  Operations  on  the, 
and  skirmishes  (15</t,  16^/i)  near  Carrsville. 

15-28,  1863.  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad.  Operations  on  the, 
and  skirmishes  {17 th)  near  Providence  Church  and 
(23d)  at  Antioch  Church  and  Barber’s  Cross-Roads. 

Also  Dix  to  Ilalleck,  pp.  388,380,305,306;  Dix  to  Lee,  p.  412;  Dix  to 
Lincoln,  p.  458;  LAncoln  to  Dix,  p.  458;  Keyes  to  Halleck,  p.  587 ; 
Dix  to  Foster,  p.667;  French  to  Vance,  p.  7(50;  Smith  to  Lee,  p.  786. 


James,  W.  H. 

Corr(\s])on  den  CO,  witli  North  Carolina,  Governor  of 957 

Mentioned 849 

J.  C.  Roker,  Schooner.  Mentioned 475 

Jenkins,  A.  G. 

Correspondence  with  North  Carolina,  Governor  of 863 

Mentioned 895, 002, 0.34, 935 


1144 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Jenkins,  M. 

Correspondence  with 

French,  Samuel  G 1010, 1018, 1033, 1043, 1086 

Longstreet,  James 923,  940, 946, 961, 963 

Mentioned 275, 291, 329,  330,  355,  549, 571, 

583,683,704,705,722,909,  910,  917,  930,993,  1010,  1016,  1017,  1025,  1033, 
1038,  1039,  1043,  1044,  1056,  1066,  1067,  1071,  1075-1079,  1082-1086,  1088 
Jenney,  Edwin  S. 

Mentioned 63,64 

Report  of  expedition  to  Goldsborongh,  N.  C.,  Dec.  11-20, 1862  66 

Jessie,  Steaffmer.  Mentioned 1022 

Jesup,  General,  U.  S.  S.  See  General  Jesup,  U.  S.  S. 

Jocknick,  George  F. 

Mentioned 8,213,218,390,737 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Washington,  N.  C.,  Feb.  13,  1863  156 

John  A.  Warner,  Steamer.  Mentioned 295, 387, 422, 429 

John  Brooks,  Steamer.  Mentioned ,502 

John  Farron,  Steamer.  Mentioned 240,241,243 

John  Francis,  Schooner.  Mentioned 433,434,440 

John  L.  Lockwood,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 172, 182,  223, 229, 241-244, 463, 630 

John  Rice,  Steamer.  * Mentioned 705 

Johnson,  Captain.  Mentioned 280 

Johnson,  A.  B. 

Correspondence  with  T.  G.  Baylor 664 

Mentioned 280 

Johnson,  Jairies.  Mentioned .576,734,1094 

Johnson,  James  A.  Mentioned 734 

Johnson,  William.  Mentioned 575,735 

Johnston,  George  H.  Mentioned 216,221 

Johnston,  James  C.  Mentioned 526 

Johnston,  Joseph  E.  » 

, Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 1082 

Mentioned 777,  847, 1077, 1080, 1082, 1084, 1089 

Jones,  John  A.  Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Unger,  Va.,  April  19,  1863 337 

Jones,  John  R.  Correspondence  with  Gustavus  W.  Smith 751 

Jones,  J.  Richter. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 163, 514,  529,  559, 696, 713,  716, 718,  724 

Hall,  N 726 

Death  of,  announced 729 

Mentioned 155, 22.5-227,  343-348,  350,  362-371,  ,5,57,  .577, 665, 729, 1073 

Reports  of 

Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C.  Expedition  from,  Feb.  12-13, 1863 1,53, 154 

Kinston,  N.  C.  v 

Demonstrations  on. 

March  6-8, 1863 160 

May  20-23, 1863 364 

Operations  April  30, 1863,  during  expedition  toward 351, 3,53 

Neuse,  Dover,  and  Trent  roads,  N.  C.  Reconnaissances  on,  ,Jan.  27-28, 

1863  --  131 

Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C.  Skirmish  ,at,  April  20, 1863 239 

Jones,  Richard  P.  Mentioned 814,819 

Jones,  Samuel. 

Correspondence  with 

Frencli,  William  H 935 


INDEX, 


1145 


Page. 

Jones,  Samuel — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

War  Department,  C.  S 935,936 

Mentioned 563, 787, 803, 815, 902, 909, 934, 935, 1078, 1088, 1089 

Jones,  Warner  T.  Mentioned 814 

Jones,  W.  E.  Mentioned 946,948 

Jordan,  K.  T.  MentioTied 340 

Jordan,  John  V.  Mentioned 121 

Jordan,  Thomas.  Mentioned 881 

For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Statf,  see  G.  T.  Beauregard. 

Josselyn,  Francis.  Mentioned 217 

Jourdan,  James. 

Itinerary  of  2d  Brigade,  5th  Division,  18th  Army  Corps.  Siege  of  Wash- 
ington, N.  C.,  April  7-22,  1863 , 254 

Mentioned 167, 173, 176, 225-227, 238, 473, 548, 578, 599, 679,  736, 737 

‘‘  Record  of  Events,”  2d  Brigade,  5th  Division,  18th  Army  Corps.  Skirmish 

near  Deep  Gully,  N.  C.,  March  30,  1863 209 

Joy,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 157 

Joyce,  W.  A.  Correspondence  with  Governor  of  North  Carolina 880 

Joyner’s  Ferry,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Dec.  22,  1862.  Report  of  Orris  S.  Ferry  ..  123 

Joynes,  W.  T.  Mentioned 874 

Judson,  J.  A.  Mentioned .365 

For  correspondence  as  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  see  Innis  N.  Palmer. 

Keese,  Oliver,  jr,  Mentioned 735 

Keith,  C.  C.  F.  Mentioned 61,62 

Keith,  James  A.  Mentioned * 881, 893, 898, 909 

Kelly’s  Store,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30,  1863.  See  Deserted  House,  Va. 

Kelton,  J.  C.  For  correspondence,  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Army  Headquarters. 

Kemper,  J.  L.  Mentioned 687,'688, 

692, 915, 917, 929,  931-933, 937,  938, 941, 951, 956, 957,  960-962, 964, 966, 969 

Ketinebec,  Steamer.  Mentioned 501 

Kennedy,  John  T.  Mentioned 986,1007 

Kennedy,  T.  J.  Mentioned 65,66,737 

Keiinely,  John.  Mentioned 295 

Kent,  Frank  D.  Mentioned 158 

Kent,  Jonathan  W.  Mentioned 70 

Kent,  William  P.  Mentioned 130 

Keokuk,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 592 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D. 

Assumes  command  (temporarily)  of  Department  of  Virginia 586 

Corresj)ondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 585-589, 591, 592, 595, 596,  .599, 601, 603, 604, 609,  7.39 

Busteed,  Richard 206 

Dix,  John  A 130, 151, 205,  488,  491,  492, 515, 517,  .529, 532,  .582, 599, 60.3, 

622, 628, 641, 651,  652, 673,  689,  692,  693,  701,  702,  705,  714, 716,  717, 728, 732 

Farnsworth,  John  G 028 

Foster,  John  G 592, 601 

Hooker,  Joseph 683, 687, 7.30, 739 

Kilpatrick,  Judson 3,59 

King,  Rufus 26.3-265, 601  607 

Lee,  S.  P .522,  .596,  .597, 60.3-605, 611 

Lewis,  William .517,  .573 

McClellan,  George  B 373,  374,  378 

Palmer,  Innis  N .592,59.3 


1146 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 


Peck,  John  J 593, 597-600, 603, 606 

West,  Robert  M - 266, 629, 693 

Mentioned 49,  203, 256, 258, 260, 266, 267, 281, 361,  376-378, 


381,  382,  385,  388, 389,  411,  433,  434,  445, 467,  468, 486,  494, 499, 532, 546, 568, 
574,  576,  591, 593, 596, 597,601, 607,  612,  616, 618, 660,  665,  675, 677,  689, 692, 
702,704,706,707,721,727,730,  732-734,  1025,  1026,  1058,  1078,  1079,  1094 


Reports  of 

Matthews  County,  Va.  Expedition  into.  May  19-22, 1863 359 

Olivo  Branch  Church,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  7, 1863  149, 150 

Williamsburg,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Ajiril  11, 1863  262 

Yorktown,  Va.  Expeditions  from. 

Jan.  7-9, 1863 124 

April  1,1863  256 

Kilpatrick,  Judson. 

Correspondence  with 

Dix,  John  A 707, 710,  721 

Hooker,  Joseph 721 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 359 

Mentioned 360,  361, 706-708,  730, 732 

Report  of  expedition  into  Matthews  County,  Va.,  May  19-22, 1863 360 

Kimball,  Edgar  A.  Mentioned : 272,705 

Kimberly,  W.  H.  Mentioned 436 

Kimberly  & Bros.  Mentioned 423,  434 

Kincaid,  James'  M.  Mentioned 18 

King,  Elison.  Mentioned 893 

King,  Reuben  V.  Mentioned 376,377,411,577 

King,  Rufus. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 706,708 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 263-265,601,607 

War  Department,  U.  S 706,708 

West,  Robert  M 266, 612 

Mentioned 570, 677,  734 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va.,  April  11,  1863 262-266 

King  and  Queen  County.  Va.  Reconnaissance  to,  Dec.  12,  1862.  See  York- 
town, Fa.  Reconnaissance  from,  Dec.  11-15, 1862. 

Kinsly,  Scout,  Mentioned 1022 

Kinston,  N.  C. 

Demonstrations  on. 


March  6-8,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Foster,  .John  G.... 549, .556 

Jones,  .J.  Richter 163 

Reports  of 

Chamberlain,  James  R 163 

Daniel,  .Junius 165 

.Jacobs,  Ferris,  jr 162 

.Jones,  .J.  Richter 160 

Pickett,  .Josi.ah 158 

May  20-23,  1863. 

C.asualties.  Returns  of.  Union  troops 363 

Communic.ations  from  .Jolin  G.  Foster 729 


INDEX. 


1147 


Kinston,  N.  C.— Continued. 

Demonstrations  on. 

May  20-23,  1863. 

Itinerary  of  Palmer’s  division,  18th  Corps 

Medals  of  honor  (Union)  awarded 

Keports  of 

Curtiss,  Carlton  B 

Foster,  John  G 

Jones,  J.  Richter 

Lyman,  Luke 

Peirson,  George  H 

Pickett,  Josiah 

Richmond,  Silas  P 

Engagement  at,  Dec.  14,  1862. 

Communications  from  N.  G.  Evans 

Reports  of 

Foster,  John  G 

Hinds,  George  W 

Hunt,  Lewis  C 

Leggett,  Robert 

Mallett,  Peter 

Maxwell,  Wilson  C 

Taylor,  Alexander  W 

Wellman,  Abijah  J 

See  also  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  Expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C. 


Page. 


364 

369 

367 

362,363 

364 

366 

365 

370 

371 

114,115 

53 

100 

99 

84 

115 

104 

103 

98 

Reports  of 


Amory,  Thomas  J.  C. 
Chambers,  John  G. 
Codman,  Charles  E.. 
Evans,  Nathan  G. 
Fellows,  John  F. 
Foster,  John  G. 


Heckman,  Charles  A. 
Howell,  Joshua  B. 
Jenney,  Edwin  S. 
Ledlie,  James  H. 
Pickett,  Josiah. 
Shurtleff,  William  S. 


Smith,  Gustav  us  W. 
Stevenson,  Thomas  G. 
Taylor,  David  A. 
Wessells,  Henry  W. 
Zabriskie,  Abram. 


Expeditions  toward. 

April  16-21,  1863. 

Communications  from  Henry  Prince 631, 635, 638 

Reports  of 

Barton,  James 238 

Prince,  Henry 225 

Richmond,  Silas  P 238 

See  also  Itinerary  2d  Brigade,  ^th  Division,  p.  254. 

April  27-May  1,T863. 

Communications  from 

Foster,  John  G G55 

Palmer,  Innis  N 065 

Reports  of 

Codman,  Charles  R .349 

Ilplbrook,  Charles  L ♦. 349 

Jones,  J.  Richter 351,353 

Lyman,  Luke 348 

Palmer,  Innis  N 343-345 

Peirson,  George  H 347 


Kinston  Road,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  on  the,  Dec.  11-12,  1862.  See  Dec.  11-20, 
1862.  Expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Reports  of 


Foster,  John  G.  Heckman,  Charles  A.  Smith,  Gu.stavus  W. 

Hall,  Newton.  Moschell,  John  F.  Zabriskie,  Abr.ani. 


1148 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Kirby,  Mr.  Mentioned 409 

Kleckner,  Charles.  Mentioned 576,1094 

Kleinz,  Christopher. 

Mentioned 152 

Reports  of  skirmishes  at  and  near  Olive  Branch  Church,  Va. 

Feb.  5,  1863 .• 148 

Feh.  7,  1863 150 

Knapp,  George  H.  Mentioned 89 

Knight,  G.  B.  Mentioned 200 

Kingsley,  Franklin.  Mentioned 70 

Knoderer,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 132,135,1.39,1093 

Knox,  J.  B.  Mentioned 171,217,613 

Koerner,  P.  W.  Oscar,,  Mentioned 192 

Kurtz,  John.  Mentioned 24, 26, 29, 378 

Lacy,  John  S.  Mentioned 144 

Lamb,  John  C.  Mentioned 49,953 

Lamb,  William. 

Correspondence  with 

Frobel,  B.  W 842 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 843,857 

Mentioned 849,  911 

La  Motte,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 360, 361 

Lamson,  R.  H. 

Correspondence  with  S.  P.  Lee €42 

Mentioned 267, 268, 270, 271, 276, 278, 280, 281, 283,  304,  307, 

317,  318,  320,  322,  617,  634,  635,  637, 642-645, 661-663,  666,  674,  686,  694, 703 

Report  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  Aju-il  11-May  4, 1863 662 

Lane,  Barna.  Mentioned 1013 

Lane,  James  H.  Mentioned 856 

Latrobe,  O.  Mentioned 896 

Law,  E.  M.  Mentioned 325, 


326, 332-334, 336-340, 680, 782, 915, 917, 1002, 1014, 1040, 1042 


Lawrence,  G.  M.  Mentioned 1 322 

Leary,  John.  Mentioned 298 

Leary,  John  S.  Mentioned §52 

Leary,  J.  S.,  jr.  Mentioned 552 

Leatherby,  William  D.  Mentioned 351 

Lechler,  A.  A.  Mentioned .577,738 

Ledlie,  James  H. 

Mentioned 56, 59, 411, 469,  471,  472, 501, 533, 547,  .549, 576, 678, 679 

Report  of  operations  Dec.  11-17,  1862,  during  expedition  to  Goldshorough, 

N.  C 63 

Lee,  Charles.  Mentioned 1084 

Lee,  Fitzhugh.  Mentioned 150, 260, 265, 587, 600, 899 

Lee,  Francis  L. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 1*47, 560,  .561, 566, 567 

Mentioned 83,  468,  500, 577, 737 

Report  of  expedition  to  Plymouth,  N.  C.,  Feh.  1-10,  1863 145 

Lee,  G.  W.  C.  Correspondence  with  Arnold  Elzey 1092 

For  correspondence  as  Aide-de-Camp,  see  Jefferson  Davis. 

Lee,  Horace  C. 

Correspondence  with  Innis  N.  Palmer 602 

Mentioned 21,  5 1,  .57,  .58,  65,  87,  88, 18(5, 187, 249,  34.5, 

346,  363-365,  368,  370,  371, 378,  468,  469,  .500,  533, 518,  577, 598, 6(i5, 678, 736 
Report  of  expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.,  Dec.  11-20, 1862  84 


INDEX. 


1149 


Page. 

Lee,  Jay  E.  Mentioned  04,73,89,91,469,501,578,737 

Lee,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 610 

Mentioned 273, 276, 280,  370, 377 

Lee,  Marshall.  Mentioned 1013 

Lee,  Richard  H.  Mentioned 198 

Lee,  Robert  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 875, 1028, 1029, 1034 

Davis,  Jefferson 856, 1077, 1078, 1083, 1088 

Elzey,  Arnold 966,  979, 1066, 1070 

Hill,  D.  H 1063, 1069, 1071, 1074, 1075, 1079 

Longstreet,  James - 883, 

896, 898, 903, 906, 911, 921 , 923, 924, 926, 927, 933, 937, 942-944, 946, 
948-950,  954,  958-960,  966,  969,  996,  999,  1018,  1024,  1037, 1049 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 928, 1072 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 1056,  1065 

Smith,  Gnstavns  W 768, 771, 784,  786,  803,  818,  882 

War  Department,  C.  S 801,  802, 805, 810, 812, 814,  817,  819,  825,  844-846, 

851,876,877,  879,  880,  882,  889,  974,  998,1009,1017,1066,1072,1090,  1092 

Mentioned 275,  281,  282,  335, 385,  484,  524,  556,  587,  588,  024, 

639,  667,  680,  682,  684,  685, 708, 709,  720,  723,  724, 727, 730,  732, 7.33, 739,  740, 
748,  749,  751-753,  757,  760, 762,  768, 771,  776,  777, 779, 780, 782, 786,  789, 790, 
799, 801,  816,  823, 825, 827, 830-833, 836-838, 840,  841,  845,  847,  850,  871, 873, 
874,891,900,919,925,927,932,953,1027-1029,  1032,  1037,  1044,1047,1048, 
1050-1052,  1062,  1006,  1067,  1069,  1070,  1076,  1079-1082,  1085,  1086,  1091 

Lee,  S.  P. 

Correspondence  with 

Davenport,  H.  K 453 

Dix,  John  A 387, 391,  393,  394,  399,  402-406,  408, 409,  411- 

414,  416,  417,  420-422,  425-428, 431-433,  435,  438-443,  447, 449,  450,  489, 490, 
507, 510,  515, 519, 522,  523,  531,  534, 535,  540-542,  544, 545,  547,  550,  553, 560, 
566,  580,  582,  585, 587;  588,  611,  615,  616,  621, 631,  634, 636,  639, 642,  644, 645, 
651,  654,  660,  666,  673,  685,  693, 694,  696-698, 704,  709,  713,  717,  731, 738-741 

Edisto,  Master  of  Bark 621 

Foster,  John  G 630,  647,  656,  680,  681,  688,  715,  731 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 522, 596,  597,  603-605,  611 

Lamson,  R.  H 642 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 429,  430,  442,  448,  650 

Peck,  John  J 595, 606, 607,  611, 617,  618,  621,  634, 635,  643,  702 

Stepping  Stones,  U.  S.  S.,  Commanding  Officer 510 

Instructions  to  naval  officers 400 


Mentioned 4, 15, 16,  48, 183, 210, 256,  258, 263, 267, 269-271, 276, 

280, 281,  388, 403, 404,  407,  408,  419,  420,  430,  436-438,  440,  442,  451-453,  457, 
493, 511,  541,  553,  554, 579, 586,  590, 596,  616-618,  629,  635,  637,  639,  663, 687 
Lee,  S.  S.  Mentioned 751,  759,  764,  793,  810, 901,  917,  952, 1036, 1086 


Lee,  W.  H.  F.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 1045 

Leesville,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  April  4,  1863.  See  report  of  Peek,  p.  278.  Also 
from  '^Record  of  Events f p.  271. 

Leggett,  Robert. 

Mentioned 59, 83, 468, 500 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,  1862  84 

Lehmann,  T.  F.  Mentioned 577,737 

Lemons,  William.  Mentioned 93,95 


1150 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Letcher,  John.  Mentioned 827, 831 , 834, 840, 977, 978,  lOOG 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Virginia,  Governor  of. 

Leventhorpe,  C.  Mentioned 113,122,145,804,805,906,974 

Lewis,  D.  W.  Correspondence  with  D.  D.  Ferebee 824 

Lewis,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with 

. Palmer,  Innis  N 569 

Prince,  Henry 177 

Mentioned 167-170, 172,  17.3,  177,  252,  362,  737 

Report  of  expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  6-10,  1863  177,  178 

Lev/is,  William. 

Correspondence  with 

Bnsteed,  Richard 00,3^  204 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 517,  573 

Mentioned 130, 151,  201,  203,  206,  517,  .529,  576,  734,  1094 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va.,  March  29, 1863  205 

Lewis,  William  Gaston.  Mentioned 915,933 

Liebenau,  J.  H.  Mentioned 404 

Ligget,  Grey.  Mentioned 1020 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 455,  458,  462,  493,  530, 553 

Orders,  Nov.  12, 1862.  Trade  and  Intercourse 452 

Proclamation.  Trade  and  Intercourse 572 

Mentioned 11, 401, 421,  433,  4.38,  445,  450,  452,  460,  492, 

525,  536,  541,  565,  572,  57.3,  581,  651, 667, 711,  730, 739,  741,  837,  854,  894,  905 

Lindsay,  William  J.  Mentioned 62, 171 

Little  Magruder,  Steamer.  Mentioned 124 

Little,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 115 

Little  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  Nov.  2,  1862.  See  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expe- 
dition from,  Nov.  1-12, 1862. 

Little,  Thomas.  Mentioned 150 

Livingston,  John  W.  Mentioned 403,713 

Lizzie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 475,939,1035 

Lockwood,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 442,449,494 

Lockwood,  John  L.,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 172,182,223,229,241-244,463,630 

Logie,  William  K.  Mentioned 734 

Long  Island,  Steamer.  Mentioned 640 

Long,  A.  L.  For  correspondence  as  Military  Secretary,  see  Robert  E.  Lee. 

Long,  John  O.  Mentioned 749,973 

Long.street,  James. 

Assignments  to  command 895 

Assumes  command  of  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina 896 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 895, 

900, 907, 909, 913, 914, 918, 927, 930, 1029, 1032, 1034, 1037 

Beauregard,  G.  T 905 

Elzey,  Arnold \ 871, 910, 918, 919, 953, 965, 968, 1023 

French,  Samuel  G 328, 

337,  340,  906,  908,  914,  946,  948,  989,  993,997-999,  1001-1004,1009,  1010, 
1015,  1016,  1020,  1021,  1025,  1026,  1033,  1037,  1039-1041,  1043,  1044,  1046 

Gibbs,  George  C - 945 

Hill,  D.  H 898,  902, 

908, 9^^0,  923, 925,  931, 932, 937, 941,  943, 947,948,  9.53,  956, 962,  964,  968, 
972,  973,  975,  989,  990,  1031,  1032,  1046,  1047,  10.50,  10.57,  1061,  1072 


INDEX. 


1151 


Page. 

Loiigstreet,  James — Coutinued. 

Correspoiuleuce  with 

Jenkins,  M 923,  940,  946,  961,  963 

Lee,  Robert  E 883,  896,  898, 903, 906,  911, 921,  923, 924, 926,  927, 933,  937, 

942-944, 946, 948-950,  954, 958-960, 966,  969,  996,  999,  1018,  1024,  1037,  1049 

Lynch,  W.  F 1071 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 1094 

Pendleton,  W.  N 335 

Pickett,  George  E 967 

Pryor,  Roger  A 896 

Ransom,  R.,  jr 949, 960,  961 

Robertson,  B.  II 963 

War  Department,  C.  S 326,  910,  967,  970,  972, 

^ 977, 979, 981, 983, 996,  998, 1002, 1014, 1015, 1025, 1039, 1042, 1045, 1050, 1051 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 905,  907,  913,  920,  943,  945, 947,  9 19, 961, 962,  972,  973 

Mentioned 20, 184, 265, 269, 275, 277, 278, 281-285, 290, 291,  323, 324,  329-331, 

334, 335, 385,  441,  444,  446, 453,  455,  457,  463,  549,  551,  553, 556-55^,  5(52,  564, 
571, 583, 586, 590, 591 , 599-601,  605-607,  619,  620,  623,  626,  627,  630,  632,  633, 
635, 639, 641, 644, 650, 653-656, 658,  660,  663,  664, 667, 671, 679, 680, 682-685, 
687-690, 692, 696, 699,  703, 704,  707,  709,  720, 723,  724, 727,  732, 739, 740,  882, 
889-892, 906, 908,  910, 911, 913,  916-918, 922, 924, 946, 953,  957,  966,  972, 974, 
975, 977, 979, 980, 982,  983,  987, 990,  1003, 1008-1011,  1015, 1016, 1019, 1027, 
1029,  1030,  1033,  1034,  1036,  1043,  1047,  1052,  1066,1075,  1078,  1079,  1088 

Staff.  Announcements  of 896 

Transfer  of  Corps  of,  for  defense  of  Richmond,  Va 2,  876, 880, 882-884 

Loomis,  Hiram  C.  Mentioned 322 

Loomis,  John  B.  Mentioned 140, 539 

Louisiana,  Steamer.  Mentioned 387 

Louisiana,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 5,7,213,224,241 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Battalions  : 4th,  866. 

Lovell,  Mansfield.  Mentioned 836 

Low.  Captain.  Mentioned 510 

Low,  Thomas..  Mentioned 242 

Ludlow,  Edwin.  Mentioned 280,404,425,476,702 

Ludlow,  William  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 601 

• Mentioned 408, 518, 521,  .528, 543, 593, 695,  704, 710 

Lyman,  Luke. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster .561 

Mentioned 345, 366, 369, 469,  .500, 560, 561, 566, 567, 577 

Reports  of 

Kinston,  N.  C. 

Demonstration  on.  May  20-23,  1863  ; 366 

Expedition  toward,  April  27-Ma.y  1,1863 348 

Washington,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  Feb.  13, 1863 1.55 

Lynch,  William  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Longstreet,  James 1071 

War  Department,  C.  S 789, 858 

Whiting,  W.  IT.  C 820,  863 

Mentioned 8.58,  875, 919,  939, 980, 981 

Lynch,  William  H.  Mentioned .570 

Lyon,  C.  A.  Mentioned t 7,213,533 


1152 


INDEX, 


Page. 

McAiially,  J.  Mentioned ^ 27::>,21)7 

Macaidle,  George.  Mentioned 280 

McCain,  John  C.  Mentioned 18 

McCandless,  William  G. 

Mentioned 50, 51, 130, 151 

Report  of  scout  from  Williamsburg,  Va.,  Jan.  19, 1863 130 

McCann,  C.  Mentioned 144 

McCann,  William  P.  Mentioned 210, 217, 223,  224,  251, 612, 647 

McCawley,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 409 

McChesney,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 95,214,217,594,678,737 

McChesney,  W.  W.  Mentioned 94 

McClees,  N.  Mentioned 121,122 

McClellan,  George  B. 

Correspondence  -with 

Army  Headquarters 375 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 373, 374,  378 

Mentioned 380,  387-390,  392,  397,  399,  401, 624, 814, 838 

McConihe,  John. 

Mentioned 734 

Report  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  17-May  4,  1863 295 

McConnell,  S.  P.  Mentioned 142 

McConnoll,  Alex.  Mentioned 291,292 

McCrady,  Captain.  Mentioned 990 

McCreery,  W.  W.  Mentioned 1007 

McCurdy,  T.  B.  ‘ Mentioned 335 

McCurdy,  Wilbur  G.  Mentioned 134 

MacDearmid,  John.  Mentioned 210,213,214,223,242-244 

McDevitt,  Martin.  Mentioned 321,322 

McDonald,  J.  B.  Mentioned 565 

McDonald,  J.  R.  Mentioned 879 

McDougall,  James  A.  Mentioned 888 

McElroy,  John  S.  Mentioned 810, 867 

McEvily,  William. 

Mentioned 1.32, 139, 280, 298,  575, 735, 1093 

Reports  of 

Deserted  House,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30,  1863 140 

Suffolk,  Va.  Siege  of,  Ajnil  11-May  4,  1863 298 

McGowan,  Samuel.  Mentioned 706 

Mclvor,  James  P.  Mentioned 306, 575,  735, 1093 

McKechnie,  Robert.  Mentioned 27(5,  308 

McKeever,  E.  Mentioned 214,218,224,241 

McKennie,  B.  Mentioned 742 

McKibbin,  David  B.  Mentioned 188,578,737 

McKittrick,  William  H.  Mentioned 124 

McKnight,  James.  Mentioned 57(5,734,1094 

McLaiie,  James  J.  Mentioned 201,202 

McLane,  John  B.  Mentioned 390 

McLean,  J.  R.  Mentioned 116 

McMahon,  Edward.  Mentioned 936 

McMahon,  J.  J.  Mentioned 142,145,807 

McMahon,  James  P.  Mentioned 284,289,291,292,29(5,297,299,575,735 

McMullen,  Mr.  Mentioned 144 

McNary,  William  H.  Mentioned 569,  .578,  737 

McNeill,  J.  II.  Mentioned , 914,915 


INDEX. 


1153 


Page. 

McNeill,  Samuel.  Mentioned 130 

McNiclety,  J.  Mentioned 666 

MacRae,  J.  C.  Mentioned 116,1089 

McRae,  John.  Mentioned 116 

Mabie,  Jeremiah  D.  Mentioned 465 

Macon,  M.  C.  Mentioned 334 

Madcap,  James.  Mentioned 893 

Magill,  D.  B.  Mentioned 310,311 

Magruder,  John  Bankhead.  Mentioned 749 

Magruder,  John  Bowie.  Mentioned 340 

Magruder,  Little,  Steamer.  Mentioned 124 

Mahaska,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 50,515,544,550 

Mahon,  James  D.  Mentioned 280 

Mahone,  William.  Mentioned 38.5 

Maine,  State  of.  Steamer.  Mentioned 387 

Maine  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 11th,  49,  51,  487,501,  548,  .577,  678,738. 

Mallett,  Peter. 

Correspondence  with  N.  G.  Evans 115 

Mentioned 114,  752,  753 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,  1862 115 

Mallory,  S.  R.  Mentioned 767, 869, 939, 967, 980, 981, 1008, 1024 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  C.S. 

Manchester,  Horace  A. 

Mentioned 58 

Report  of  operations  on  the  Neuse  River,  Dec.  12-15, 1862 105 

Mann,  B.  N.  Mentioned 58,59,78 

Mann,  E.  N.  Mentioned 116 

Manning,  J.  H.  Mentioned 896 

Manning,  P.  T.  Mentioned 896,969 

Mansfield,  J.  K.  F. 

Assignments  to  command 387 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 385 

Mentioned 4,  376, 377,  387-389 

Marblehead,  Schooner.  Mentioned 412,413,418-423,426,427 

Marcy,  R.  B.  For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  George  B.  McClellan. 

Margaret,  Steamer.  Mentioned 1022 

Marine  Artillery.  Mutinous  conduct  of.  Order  of  John  G.  Foster 471 

Mariner,  Steamer.  See  Lizzie,  Steamer. 

Marsh,  Daniel  J.  Mentioned 87 

Marsh,  T.  B.  Mentioned 565 

Marsh,  Timothy  S.  Mentioned 185,186 

Marshall,  Humphrey.  Mentioned 803,909,1078,1088 

Marshall,  J.  K. 

Mentioned 117-120,750 

Report  of  skirmish  on  the  Blackwater,  Va.,  Oct.  3, 1862  18 

Marshall,  W.  C.  Mentioned 333 

Marshall,  W.  H. 

Correspondence  with  D.  H.  Hill 1054 

Mentioned 1053 

Marten,  Jacob,  Sloop.  Mentioned 595 

Martin,  J.  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 440,448,471 

73  R R— VOL  XVIII 


1154 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Martin,  J.  G. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Hill,  D.  H 985, 1033, 1059, 1064, 1065, 1087, 1089 

War  Department,  C.  S 752 

Mentioned 10,  385,  424,  470,  481,  750,  752,  753,  762,  784,  1074, 1079,  1086'^ 

Martin,  Patty,  Schooner.  Mentioned 259 

Martin,  S.  Taylor.  Mentioned 143-145,331,332 

Martin,  William.  Mentioned 995 

Martin,  William  F. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 851 

Mentioned 760,  865, 975, 984, 1046, 1057, 1087, 1090 

Martindale,  John  H.  Mentioned 608 

Maryland  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Regiments : 2d  B.  S.  Home  Guards,  449;  5th,  377,  387. 
Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— ^affer/es  ; 7th,  35,  37,  132, 133,  135-137,  139,  140,  300,  288, 

289, 293,  294,  305,  313,  355,  377,  408,  468,  483,  487,  576,  677,  735,  1094. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  12,  390 ; 2d,  260,  343,  576,  629,  677. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/7ts  / 3d,  47,  48,  57,  60,  84-87,  90,  167,  168,  173,  175,  176,  225, 
237-239,  248,  249, 371,  372,  457,  469, 501,  548,  578,  584,  599, 674, 679,  737 ; 5th, 

60,  63,  73,  84-86, 186,  187,  219,  220,  223,  249,  346-348,  363,  365-367,  369,  370, 

457,  469,  500,  548,  577,  584,  598,  678,  736,  737  ; 6th,  35,  .37,  132,  135,  139, 141, 

286, 487,  575, 676, 1093 ; 8th,  148, 225, 249, 468, 501,  548, 578, 599, 674, 679, 737; 

17th,  24,  25,  55-57,  60,  64,  65,  75-79,  85,  88,  92-94,  97,  98,  219,  220,  222,  246, 

248, 249,  252,  343,  345,  349-351,  378,  468,  500,  548,  577,  598,  678,  736  ; 23d,  24, 

25,  55,  60,  75,  76,  78-80,  93,  96,  97,  222,  378,  468,  501,  548,  577,  602,  678,  737  ; 

24th,  6,  7,  9,  23, 24,  56,  60, 83,  378,  468,  500,  547,  548,  577,  679,  738 ; 25th,  25- 
30,  57, 60,  84-88,  90, 158-160, 162, 164, 186, 187, 199, 363-367, 389-371,  378, 469, 

500,  ^48,  556,  577,  598,  640,  678,  736  ; 27th,  57,  60,  84-88,  212,  214,  216,  217, 

343,  345,  346, 348, 351,  352, 363-370,  378,  469,  500, 548, 577, 598, 678, 736 ; 40th, 

287,  323,  372,  676,  734  ; 43d,  57,  60,  69,  75,  76,  80,  186, 187,  215,  217-220, 222, 

246,  248,  249,  252,  346,  349,  457,  468, 500,  548,  577,  598,  678,  736 ; 44th,  22,24, 

56,  60,  83,  145-147, 212,  215-217,  222,  345,  351,  457,  468,  500, 548,  577, 599, 679, 

737 ; 45th,  55,  60,  75,  76,  80,  81,  97,  104,  220,  343-345,  349-351,  365,  457,  468, 

500,  548,  577,  598,  678,  736  ; 46th,  55,  60,  64, 84-86,  88-91,  186,  187,  220,  346, 
363-367,  369,  457,  469,  500,  548,  577,  598,  640,  678,  736;  51st,  54,  60,  63,  72, 

75,  81,  82, 129, 130, 176,  177, 186, 468,  500, 527,  548,  556, 577,  598,  678,  736,  914. 

Massasoit,  Steamer.  Mentioned 147,259,640 

Masten,  Cornelius  S.  Mentioned 291,292 

Mattamuskeet  Lake,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  March  7-14,  1863.  Report  of 

David  B.  Morris 180 

Matthew  (Colored). 

Mentioned 526 

Statement  of 526 

Matthews  County,  Va. 

Destruction  of  Salt  Works  in,  Nov.  22,  1862.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 462 

Naglee,  Henry  M , 462 

Expedition  into.  May  19-22, 1863. 

Communications  from  Erasmus  D.  Keyes 359 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 359-361 

Reports  of 

Gillis,  James  H 361 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 359 

Kilpatrick,  Judson 360 


INDEX, 


1155 

Page. 


Matthews  County,  Va. — Continued. 

Reconnaissance  to,  Dec.  12,  1862.  See  Yorktoivn,  Fa.  Reconnaissance  from, 

Dec.  11-15, 1862. 

Maury,  J.  M.  Mentioned 952, 1036, 1086 

Maxwell,  Wilson  C. 

Mentioned 18, 35, 37, 96, 99, 500, 577,  737 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,  1862  104 

Mayes,  John.  Mentioned 68 

Mayo,  Joseph.  Mentioned 977 

Meade,  R.  K.  Mentioned 849 

Means,  W.  N.  M.  Mentioned 122 

Medals  of  Honor.  (Union.)  Awarded.  Demonstration  on  Kinston,  N.  C., 

May  20-23, 1863  369 

Meigs,  Montgomery  C.  Mentioned 467,537,582,637 

. For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Qaartermaster-GeneraVs  Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Melton,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned 742,749,771,922 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  Gustaviis  W.  Smith. 

Memminger,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 813 

Menzies,  A.  A.  Mentioned 140 

Mercer,  H.  W.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 817 

Mercer,  William  E.  Meutioned 9 

Merrimac,  Steamer.  (Blockade  Runner.)  Meutioned 1017,1022 

Merrimac,  Steamer.  (U.  S.  Transport.)  Meutioned 389,390,392 

Merrimac,  No.  1,  C.  S.  S.  See  Virginia,  C.  S.  S. 

Merrimac,  No.  2,  C.  S.  S.  See  Bichmond,  C.  S.  S. 

Merriman,  T.  Adams.  Mentioned 100, 737 

Merrimon,  A.  S. 

Correspondence  with  North  Carolina,  Governor  of 881,893 

Mentioned 897,  898 

Merrill,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 61, 170, 171, 184, 185 

Mersereau,  Thomas  J.  ^^entioned 64 

Messinger,  Daniel.  Mentioned 75, 512 

Metamora,  Steamer.  Mentioned 444,448,450 

Metcalf,  Henry.  Mentioned 514 

Mews,  Wesley  B.  Mentioned 170 

Micha,  George.  Mentioned 168 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  26th,  272,  286,  676,  734. 

Middlesex  County,  Va.  Reconnaissance  to,  Dec.  13, 1862.  See  Yorktoivn,  Va. 
Reconnaissance  from,  Dec.  11-15, 1862. 

Middaugh,  Levi  S.  Mentioned 30 

Militia.  Calls  for,  etc 822, 

823, 827, 831, 832, 834-836, 840-842, 855, 1011, 1019, 1027, 1028, 1045 

Miller,  Levi.  Mentioned 100 

Milligan,  J.  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A... 741 

French,  Samuel  G 1003 

Mentioned 750,  788, 997 

Millward,  James,  jr.  Mentioned 409, 421, 425, 428, 433, 588, 621 

Milroy,  R.  H.  Mentioned 819,1070 

Mink,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 50,360,576,734,1094 

Minnesota,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 383,886,993,1058 

Minor,  R.  D.  Mentioned 1092 


1156 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Minot,  Edward  J.  Mentioned 349 

Mississippi  Troops.  Motioned. 

Artillery,  Liight— Batteries : Confederate  Guards,  324,  325,  331,  334,  900, 

916,  917,  929,  989,  1010,  1021,  1056,  1067 ; Madison  Light,  1038. 

Infantry — Regiments:  2d,  11th,  566;  42d,  566, 751, 759,  764. 

Mitchel,  O.  M.  [?].  Mentioned 1078 

Mitchell,  B.  B.  Mentioned 575,735 

Mitchell,  James  T.  Mentioned 18 

Mitchell,  S.  P.  Mentioned 896, 1037, 1039, 1043 

Mix,  John. 

Mentioned 5-7,24,25,70,91,411 

Report  of  attack  on  Washington,  N.  C.,  Sept.  6, 1862 7 

Mix,  Simon  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Cole,  George  W 508,509 

Foster,  John  G 508 

Mentioned 390,  469, 501, 527,  533, 547, 549,  576, 678, 679, 736,  737 

Report  of  reconnaissance  from  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Jan.  17-21, 1863 127 

Mizell,  Jonathan  T.  Report  of  attack  on  Plymouth,  N.  C.,  Dec.  10,  1862 48 

Modern  Greece,  Steamer.  Mentioned 415,416 

Moffatt,  Edward  S.  Mentioned 61,62 

Monday,  Samuel  L.  Mentioned 200,201 

Monitor,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 400,504,837 

Montauk,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 505 

Montebello,  Ship.  Mentioned 501 

Montgomery, [?].  Mentioned 690 

Montgomery,  Augustus  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 1068 

Mentioned 1067,1072 

Montgomery,  John  H.  Mentioned 79 

Monticello,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 2 

Moody,  John  S.  Mentioned 436 

Moore,  A.  C.  Mentioned 807 

Moore,  A.  D.  Mentioned 255 

Moore,  Helen.  Mentioned 893 

Moore,  Henry  J.  Mentioned 14 

Moore,  J.  G.  Mentioned 1049 

Moore,  Wade.  Mentioned 893 

Moore,  Walter  J.  Mentioned 198 

Morenus,  Harvey  B.  Mentioned 165 

Morey,  John  B.  Mentioned 744,1018 

Morgan,  Joseph.  Mentioned 259 

Morgan,  Thomas  A.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 544,545,592 

Morris,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 256-258,596,607,698 

Morris,  David  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 182 

Mentioned 181, 223, 557, 577, 737 

Report  of  expedition  to  Mattamuskeet  Lake,  N.  C.,  March  7-14,  1863 180 

Morris,  P.  A.  S.  Mentioned 43 

Morris,  Richard  H.  Mentioned 1 277, 280, 303, 305, 307, 310, 317, 672 

Morris,  W.  S.  ’Correspondence  with  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  OflQce,  C.  S.  A ...  958 

Morris,  William  W.  Mentioned 671 

Morrison,  Joseph.  Mentioned 575 

Morrison,  Joseph  J.  Mentioned 63-65,92,102 


INDEX, 


1157 


Page. 

Morse,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 357,  393,  408,  413,  417,  425,  699,  704 

Morse,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 157,158 

Morton,  James  St.  C.  Mentioned 457 

Morton,  William.  Mentioned 893 

Moschell,  John  F. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  J.  C.  Araory 27 

Mentioned 68 

Keports  of 

Goldsborough,  N.  C.  Operations  Dec.  11-16, 1862,  during  expedition  to.  70 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on,  Nov.  11,  1862 29,30 

Moseley,  E.  F.  Mentioned 744,762 

Moses,  R.  J.  Mentioned 896,899,942,943 

Mosier,  Levi.  Mentioned 162, 165 

Moss,  Thomas.  Mentioned 260 

Motley,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 357 

Mott,  W.  J.  Mentioned...* 273,274 

Moulton,  Orson.  Mentioned 87 

Mount  Olive  Station,  N.  C.  Affair  at,  Dec.  16, 1862.  Report  of  J.  Garrard..  69 
See  also  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  Expedition  to  Goldsborough,  jSf,  C.  Reports  of 


Foster,  John  G.  Smith,  Gustavus  "W. 


Mount  Washington,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 276, 616, 651, 661, 662 

Mulford,  John  E.  Mentioned 1095 

Mulholland,  Mrs.  Mentioned 138 


Munford,  George  W.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Virginia,  Governor  of. 

Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 817 

Army  Headquarters 392, 540 

Baylor,  T.  G 664,  672 

Beauregard,  G.  T 817,821 

Davis,  Jefferson 761,860,870 

Dix,  John  A 466,470,482,483,485,491,521,532,667 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 330,769 

Ferry,  O.  S 483,491 

Foster,  John  G 540 

French,  Samuel  G 874 

Garnett,  R.  B 988 

James,  W.  H 957 

Jenkins,  A.  G 863 

Johnson,  A.  B 664 

Lee,  Robert  E 771, 943 

Lee,  S.  P 582 

Longstreet,  James • 942 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 758,769,771,856,1026 

Peck,  John  J 391,521 

Robertson,  B.  H .'  805 

Ruffin,  Frank  G 766 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 78l 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A 764,912 

War  Department,  C.  S 860,  871,  873 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 868,  899,  904, 910, 940, 972, 988, 1000, 1005 

See  also  Smith  to  French,  p.  768;  Whiting  to  Smith,  pp.  773,  783;  Whiting  to 
Vance,  j).  790;  Frgor  to  Smith,  p.  845;  Smith  to  Seddon,  p.  8.58; 

Hill  to  Seddon,  p.  890 ; Daniel  to  Hill,  ji.  924 ; Ransom  to  Hill, 
p.  981. 


1158 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Murchison,  Alexander.  Mentioned 750 

Murdoch,  Joseph.  Mentioned 351 

Murphy,  Mathew. 

Itinerary  of  3d  Brigade,  1st  Division,  7th  Corps.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va., 

April  9-May  3 ii,96 

Mentioned 13'2, 140, 277,  280, 284, 286, 296, 575, 676, 735 

Murphy,  Peter  M.  Mentioned 7,  8 

Murray,  Albert  M.  Mentioned 305,  307 

Murray,  Alexander.  Mentioned 52,58,183,579,588 

Murray,  H.  R.  Mentioned 274,280,307 

Mutiny. 

Marine  Artillery.  Order  of  John  G.  Foster 471 

2d  E.  S.  (Maryland)  Infantry.  Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 449 

7th  New  York  Cavalry.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 550 

Dodge,  Charles  C 551 

Peck,  John  J 551 

96th  New  York  Volunteers.  Communications  from  John  G.  Foster 518 

Myer,  A.  J.  Mentioned 258 

Myers,  A.  C.  Mentioned 107,758,761,859 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Quartermaster-GeneraVs  Office,  C.  S.A. 

Myers,  Charles  D.  Correspondence  with  Samuel  G.  French 997 

Myers,  E.  T.  D.  Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.A 825 

Myers,  J.  Mentioned 512 

Myers,  Stephen.  Mentioned 1020 

Myrick,  George.  Mentioned 87,368 

Mystic,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 515, 699,  704 

Nagle,  Daniel.  Mentioned 575,735,1093 

Nagle,  James.  Mentioned 149 

Naglee,  Henry  M. 

Assignments  to  command 563,652 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 607, 608 

Dix,  John  A 462, 479,  482, 501, 505 

Mentioned 212, 

216,  219,  221, 222, 380, 462,  468, 479, 491, 494, 496,  499-501, 505, 512, 516,  524, 
528, 533, 547, 548, 563, 576, 594,  622,  623, 652, 678,  695,  737, 822,  824, 844, 1054 
Reports  of 

Gloucester  Point,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Nov.  16,  1862  32 

Washington,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Aj)ril  17-19,  1863 220 

Yorktown,  Va.  Reconnaissance  from,  Dec.  11-15,  1862 49 

Nahant,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 530,533,857 

Nanns,  Mr.  Mentioned 762 

Nash,  Nathaniel.  Mentioned 404 

Nash, ‘Richard  E.  Mentioned 520  521 

Naval  Vessels.  Construction  of.  Communications  from 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 766,875,919 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 777,912 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 939, 1035 

See  also  General  Jesiip,  TJ.  S.  S. 

Navy,  C.  S.  Co-operation  with  Army.  Communications  from 

Lynch,  W.  F 789,1071 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 919 

Whiting,  W.  11.  C 820, 863, 869 

See  also  Siiffiolk,  Va.  Siege  of,  April  ll-Mag  4,  1863. 


INDEX. 


1159 

Page. 


Navy,  U.  S. 

Co-operation  with  Army.  Communications  from 


Dix,  John  A 654, 696, 697, 709 

Foster,  John  G 647,715 

Lee,  S.  P 630, 631,  673, 681, 688, 696, 709, 713, 717,  731 

See  also 


Aug.  20,  1862-June  3,  1863.  Eastern  Shore,  Va.  Operations  on  the. 

James  River,  Va.  Operations  on  south  side  of. 

North  Carolina.  Operations  in. 

Peninsula,  Va.  Operations  on  the. 

Sept.  6,  1862.  Washington,  N.  C.  Attack  on. 

Oct.  3,  1862.  Blackwater,  Va.  Skirmish  on  the. 

Nov.  1-12,  1862.  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from. 

22,  1862.  Matthews  County,  Va.  Destruction  of  Salt-Works  in. 
Dec.  8-12,  1862.  Blackwater,  Va.  Reconnaissances  to  the. 

10,  1862.  Plymouth,  N.  C.  Attack  on. 

12-15,  1862.  Neuse  River,  N.  C.  Operations  on  the. 

Jan.  7-9,  1863.  Torktown,  Va.  Expedition  from. 

13,  1863.  West  Point,  Va.  Expedition  to. 

Feb.  1-10,  1863.  Plymouth,  N.  C.  Expedition  to. 

Mar.  10-13,  1863.  Plymouth,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on. 

14,  1863,  Anderson,  Fort,  N.  C.  Attack  on. 

30-Apr.  20,  1863.  Washington,  N.  C.  Siege  of. 

Apr.  1,  1863.  Yorktown,  Va.  Expedition  from. 

6,  1863.  Nixonton,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at. 

7,  1863.  Gloucester  Court-House,  Va.  Expedition  to. 

11-May  4,  1863.  Suffolk,  Va.  Siege  of. 

16,  1863.  Pumunkey  River,  Va.  Affair  on. 

May  15,  1863.  Emily  and  Arrow,  Steamers.  Capture  of. 

Robinson’s  Plantation,  King  and  Queen  County,  Va. 
Expedition  to. 

19-22,1863.  Matthews  County,  Va.  Exjyedition  into. 


Instructions  to  officers  of.  (Lee) 400 

Navy  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Hill,  D.  H 919 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 766,777,875,912 

War  Department,  C.  S 976, 1023 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 1024 

Navy  Department,  TJ.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 388 

Lee,  S.  P 429,430,442,448,650 

War  Department 376,  430,  442,  451,  452 


Negroes. 

Enlistment  of,  for  U.  S.  Navy.  Communications  from  S.  P.  Lee 489 

Freedmen  and  Slaves.  See  Refugees,  Freedmen,  and  Abandoned  Lands.  Also 
Slaves. 

Nellie  D.,  Schooner.  Mentioned 243,244 

Nelson,  Charles.  Mentioned 886 

Nelson,  William  B.  Mentioned 8-53 

Nethercutt,  John  H.  Mentioned 858,914,1054,1074 

Neuse,  Districc  of  the.  (Union.)  See  North  Carolina,  Department  of. 

Neuse  River,  N.  C.  Operations  on  the,  Dec.  12-15,  1862. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 58,61, 105, 106 

Report  of  Horace  A.  Manchester 105 

See  also  report  of  Foster,  p.  58. 


1160 


INDEX 


Page. 

Neuse  Road,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  on  the,  Jan.  27-28,  1863.  Report  of  J. 


Richter  Jones 131 

New  Berne,  N.  C. 

Demonstration  on,  Nov.  11,  1862. 

Communications  from  John  F.  Moschell 27 

Reports  of 

Amory,  Thomas  J.  C 24 

Denny,  J.  Waldo 25 

Drennan,  James  M 27 

Moschell,  John  F 29,30 

Richter,  Henry  M 28 

Expedition  against,  March  8-16,  1863. 

Communications  from  D.  H.  Hill 195 

Itinerary  of  Palmer’s  division,  18th  Corps,  March  7-15 186 

Reports  of 

Daniel,  Junius,  March  8-11 196 

Foster,  John  G 183 

Garnett,  Richard  B 195 

Haskell,  John  C.,  March  8-14 190 

Hill,  D.  H 188 

Pettigrew,  John  J 192 

Prince,  Henry,  March  15-16 187 

Robertson,  B.  H.,  March  9-15 197 


See  also 

March  13-14,  1863.  Deep  Gully,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  at. 
14,  1863.  Anderson,  Fort,  N.  C.  Attack  on. 


Expeditions  from 
Nov.  1-12,  1862. 

Communications  from  John  G.  Foster 447 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 22 

Reports  of 

Arnold,  Job 23 

Foster,  John  G 20 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G 22 

See  also  Smith  to  French,  p.  768.  • 

March  6-10,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Foster,  John  G 169,  549,  556 

Prince,  Henry 177 

Reports  of 

Farquhar,  Francis  U 174 

Fricker,  Joseph 171 

Garrard,  Jeptha 179 

Lewis,  George  W 177, 178 

Prince,  Henry 166 

Rice,  Pitkin  B 172 

Richmond,  Silas  P 175 

Sprague,  A.  B.  R 176 

Taylor,  David  A 170 

Reconnaissance  from,  Jan.  17-21,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Amory,  Thomas  J.  C 527 

Dix,  John  A 529 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 854 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C. 855 


INDEX.  1161 

Page. 


New  Berne,  N.  C. — Continued. 

Reconnaissance  from,  Jan.  17-21,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Mix,  Simon  H 127 

Sprague,  Augustus  B.  R 129 

See  also  Foster  to  Halleoh,  p.  524. 

Newbould,  Mr.  Mentioned 545 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry— /?e5'//we/7fs  ,*  10th,  286,  301-30*4,  308,  317,  318, 562,  570, 575,  676, 735  ; 
13th,  287,  301,  303,  305.  308,  312,  315-318,  562,  570,  575,  676,  735. 

New  Jersey  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry— /?e^//ne/7fs ; 9th,  25,  55-58, 60,  63,  65,  70,  74,  76-78,  85,  88,  91-96,  98, 
99,  102,  222,  378,  469,  501,  548,  577,  602,  678,  737  ; 10th,  272,  286,  297,  676, 


735 ; 25th,  287,  303,  305,  312,  313,  316,  317,  562, 570, 575,  676,  735. 

New  Ironsides,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 400 

Newkirk,  Abraham  F. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 808 

Mentioned 34,821 

Newport  News,  Va.  Army  Corps,  9th,  transferred  to,  Feh.  9-21,1863 149 

Newspapers. 

Dix  contradicts  statement  in  New  York  Times 579 

Newhould,  Mr.  Expelled  from  Department  of  Virginia 545 

New  York,  Steamer.  Mentioned 502 

New  York  Times,  Editor  of  the.  Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 579 

New  York  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  lAght— Battalions : Rocket,* * * §  402,  414.  Batteries:  Allis’t  55,  68, 
71,  366,  569 ; 7th,  377,  468,  487,  575,  677,  735,  1093 ; 8th,  487,  576,  677,  734, 
1094;  16th,  272,288,  294,  677,  735  ; 19th,  272,  288,  677,  735  ; 23d,  54,  57, 
63-65,  69,  82, 223, 240,  243,  252,  469,  472,  501,  527, 549,  578,  679,  737  ; 24th, 
25, 54,  55,  60,  63-65,  73,  85, 177,  469,  472,  501,  549,  578,  640,  679,  737.  Regi- 
ments : 1st  {Batteries)  F,  377,  468, 487,  576,  677,  734,  1094 ; H,  49,  377,  468, 
487,  576,  677,  734,  1094 ; 3d,t  21,  54,  85, 103, 181,  402,  414,  447,  469,  471,  472, 
501,  549,  557,  578,  679,  737  ; {Batteries)  B,  55,  58,  60, 63-65,  77,  78,  86,  91,  92, 
96,  99, 102,  104,  175  ; D,  65 ; E,  56,  60,  63-65 ; F,  60,  63-67, 69,  98 ; G-,  7, 212, 
216,  217, 390  ; H,  6-10, 57,  58, 60,  63-65,  85-87,  89, 167, 187, 225,  249,  2.52,  345, 
363, 365, 368-370 ; 1, 56, 60, 63-65 ; K,  57, 60, 63-66, 69 ; M,  372;  1st  Marine, 
22, 60, 105,106,390,471,472. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  23d,  737.  Regiments : 2d,  360,  361,  706-708 ; 3d,  6-10, 
24, 28-31 , 54-57, 59,  60, 64, 67-75,  86,  127-129, 154,  156-160, 162-165,  177, 178, 
181,187,212-214,216,  220,225,  226,  239,240,246,251,345,  351,  353,362,  366, 
369,370,390,402,441,  447,  469,500,  501,  508,  .509,524,527,533,  547,549,556, 
557, 569,  576,  671,  679, 724, 726,  737, 1064  ; 6th,  50, 124, 260,  263,  377,  468,  487, 
576, 677, 707, 734, 1094;  7th,$  4, 15, 17, 18,  31, 123, 126, 127,  133, 138, 179, 180, 
278,288,289,291,292,  296,299,303,  305,  306,321,  322,  377,468,483,487,511, 
530,  540, 550-552,  576,  677,  735, 1055, 1094  ; 12th,  737. 

Infantry— ^affa//o/7S : Enfans  Perdus,  50,  377,  380,  487,  496,  501,  532,  548, 
574,  577,  678,  738;  1st  Sharpshooters,  286,  292,  293,  575,  676,  734,  1093. 
Regiments:  3d,  272, 288, 377, 385-387, 389,  468, 486, 487, 499, 574,  677, 691, 736, 
979, 1026, 1093 ; 4th,  377,  385-387,  389  ; 9th,  271,  279,  286, 302,  308, 562,  570, 
575, 582,  592, 593,  .598,  671,  676,  691, 979 ; 13th,  25th,  377 ; 54th,  1037;  56th, 
49,  51,  487,  501,  548,  577,  678,  738;  81st,  487,  501,  548,  577,  603,  678,  737 ; 

* Became  23(1  and  24th  New  York  Batteries  in  Sept.,  1862. 

t Howitzer  battery,  attached  to  3d  New  York  Cavalry. 

I Batteries  designated  when  practicable. 

§ First  Mounted  Kifles. 


1162 


INDEX. 


Page. 

New  York  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry— /?e^//ne/7fs;  85th,  60, 92, 95-98, 100,  249,  259,  377,  487,  500,  548,  577, 

584,  599,  679,  737,  1060  ; 89th,  271,  276,  286,  302,  304,  305,  308,  312,  314,  317, 

562, 570, 575,  640,  676,  735 ; 92 d,  60, 95-97, 99, 100, 104, 172, 184,  377,  487,  500, 

548,  577,  599, 679,  737,  1060, 1064  ; 96th,  18, 56, 59,  60, 92, 95-98, 100, 101, 103, 

104,  248,  249,  377,  487,  500,  518,  548,  577,  584,  599,  679,  722,  737, 1060,  1064, 

1090;  98th,  487,  501,  548,  577,  603,  678,  737;  99th,  272,  277,  287,  292,  293, 

299,  359,  376,  377,  468,  487,  499,  501,  575,  676,  677,  729,  735,  1093 ; 100th,  33, 

49,  50,  487,  501,  548,  678,  738;  103d,  278,  286,  301,  302,  305,  306,  308,  312, 

316,  562,  570,  575,  584,  676,  735,  1090 ; 112th,  125, 133, 135, 137,  279,  286,  289, 

293,  294,  487,  .575,  676,  734,  1093;  115th,  124,  496,  497,  499,  508,  515,  529; 
117th,  271,  278,  286,  303-306,  309-311,  318,  608,  676,  735;  118th,  272,  287, 

294,  299,  359,  677,  735;  127th,  287,  294,  323,  676,  734;  130th,  35,  37,  125, 
132-137,  139,  286,  292,  293,  392,  487,  575,  676,  734,  1093;  132d,  168,  173,  225, 

249,  459,  487,  548,  569,  578,  599,  679, 7.37;  139th,  468,  487,  499,  574,  595,  677, 

734,  1093 ; 141st,  287,  323.  676,  734 ; 142d,  287,  323,  3.57,  676,  734  ; 143d, 

287,  294,  306,  313,  323,  676,  734;  144th,  287,306,323,676,734;  148th,  468, 

. 487, 575, 677, 735, 1093;  152d,  272, 286,  299,  676,  734 ; 155th,  125,  126,  132, 

134, 135, 137-141, 286,  289,  296-298, 487, 575, 676, 735, 1093 ; 158th,  173,  225, 

249,  454,  468,  470, 487,  499,  548, 569,  578,  599,  679,  726,  737 ; 164th,  125,  126, 

135,  141,  286,  289,  296-298,  487,  575,  676,  735,  1093;  168th,  576,  677,  734; 
169th,  272,  286,  294,  295,  608,  676,  734 ; 170th,  286,  289,  296, 297,  306,  313, 

487,  575,  676,  735,  1093;  175th,  487;  182d,^  132-135,  137,  138,  140,  286, 


296,  298,  487,  575, 676,  735, 1093. 

Nichols,  J.  W.  Mentioned 1008 

Nicoll,  James  R.  Mentioned 10 

Nicoll,  Sylvester  D.  Mentioned 5-7 

Nields,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 735 

Nixon,  Richard.  Mentioned 280 

Nixonton,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  April  6, 1863. 

Co-operalion  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 259,260 

Report  of  Enos  C.  Sanders 259 

Noble,  Mrs.  Mentioned 727 

Nolan,  Patrick.  Mentioned 134, 139 

Non  combatants.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 405,409 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 600 

Lee,  S.  P 404-406,411 

Peck,  John  J 626 

See  also  Eastern  Insane  Asylum,  Fa. 

Norcom,  James.  Mentioned 526,527,552 

Norfleet,  Hamlin.  Mentioned 19 

Norfleet  House,  Va.  Engagements  near  the. 

April  14,  1863.  See  report  of  Peek,  p.  274. 


April  15,  1863.  See  reports  of  Getty,  p.  301;  Peck,  p.274. 
Norfolk,  Va. 

Alfair  at,  March  25,  1863.  Communications  from 


Dix,  John  A 568 

Viele,  Egbert  L 568 

Blockade  of.  See  Blockade. 

Election  of  member  of  Congress.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 474 

War  Department,  U.  S 472 

Emancipation  celebration  at 501,502 


\lso  called  COtli  New  York  National  Guard  Artillery. 


INDEX. 


1163 


Page. 

Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad,  Va.  Operations  on  the,  May  15-28, 1863. 
Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 725,  726 

Peck,  John  J 724,726 

Itinerary  of  Wistar’s  Reserve  Brigade,  Department  of  Virginia 359 

Reports  of 

Dix,  John  A 357 

Peck,  John  J 358,  359 

Norris,  William. 

Correspondence  with  C.  H.  Causey 978, 993, 1026, 1055, 1058, 1067 

Court  of  Inquiry  in  case  of.  Facts  and  opinion 1095 

Mentioned 878, 1024, 1095 

North  Carolina,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 981 

North  Carolina. 

Address  to  soldiers  in.  (Hill) 894 

Coast  and  river  defenses.  Communications  from 

Cooke,  James  W 767 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 754, 756-758,  761,  763,  765,  767-769,  813, 884 

Gwynn,  Walter 767 

Longstreet,  James 1072 

Lynch,  W.  F 789,858,1071 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 766 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 777, 1027 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 757 

War  Department,  C,  S 853 

See  also  French  to  Vance,  p.  760.  Also  Wilmington,  N.  C.  Defenses  of. 
Conscription  act.  Enforcement  of.  Communications  from 

Armfield,  R.  F 886 

Joyce,  W.  A 880 

Lee,  Robert  E 998, 999 

Martin,  J.  G 752, 754 

North  Carolina,  Adjutant-General  of 753,754 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 753,771,821 

Pool,  John 745 

Siler,  D.W 772 

War  Department,  C.  S 752 

Depredations  in.  Communications  from 

Davis,  W.  G.  M 810,853 

Donelson,  D.  S 958 

Heth,  Henry 853 

Merrimon,  A.  S 821,  881, 893 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 854,867,897 

War  Department,  C.  S 909,  957 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 879 

Habeas  corpus.  Writ  of,  suspended  at  Salisbury,  N.  C.,  and  vicinity 793 

Hill,  D.  H.  Assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of  troops  in 847,872,894 

Military  departments  embracing 748,953 

Militia.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 823,834 

Hill,  D.  H 1011 

North  Carolina,  Arljutant-Gemiral  of 841 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 1019 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 832 

War  Department,  C.  S 822,827,831,836,840 

See  also  Smith  to  Seddon,  p.  854 ; Vance  to  Seddon,  p.  1027  ; Seddon  to  Vance, 
p.  1045. 


1164 


INDEX. 


Page. 

North  Carolina — Continued. 

Operations  in,  Aug.  20,  1862-June  3,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 872, 1067 

Army  Headquarters 469,659 

Baker,  John  A 858 

Beauregard,  G.  T 791,833,838,839 

Clarke,  William  J 1013 

Cole,  George  W 508,509 

Colquitt,  A.  H 1085 

Daniel,  Junius 914, 924, 930, 932, 944, 1011, 1012, 1046, 1057 

Davenport,  H.  K 453 

Davis,  Jefferson 757 

Evans,  N.  G 824,834 

Ferebee,  D.  D 1020 

Foster,  John  G 541, 644, 656, 700 

French,  Samuel  G 760,762,822-824,864 

Garnett,  R.  B 918 

Gibbs,  George  C 945 

Hall,  N 726 

Hill,  D.  H 946, 1007, 1011, 1022, 1030, 1048, 1050, 1053, 1073, 1074, 1092 

Jones,  J.  Richter 514, 559, 696, 713, 716, 718, 724 

Lee,  Francis  L 560, 561, 566, 567 

Lee,  H.  C 602 

Lee,  Robert  E 875, 906, 933, 966, 1024 

Lee,  S.  P 443,453,680 

Lewis,  D.  W 824 

Lewis,  G.  W 569 

Longstreet,  James 898, 900, 902, 905, 908, 909, 914, 920, 923, 925, 

926,  933,  947-949,  953,  961,  962,  964,  973,  975,  1014, 1031, 1032, 1047, 1050 

Lyman,  Luke 1 561 

Marshall,  W.  H ’ 1054 

Martin,  J.  G 985, 1033, 1059, 1064, 1065, 1087, 1089 

Mix,  Simon  H 508 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 749, 1019 

Palmer,  Innis  N 569,  637, 638,  641 

Parker,  William  A 475 

Peck,  John  J 537 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 883, 921, 1004, 1007, 1013, 1027 

Pickett,  Josiah 602,640 

Pool,  .John 745 

Potter,  Edward  E 390' 

Prince,  Henry 670' 

Ransom,  R.,  jr .957, 960, 971, 981, 985,  986, 1000, 1004 

Robertson,  B.  H ’ 912,963,1007,1051 

Sharp,  R.  J 1030 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 749, 

777, 808, 811, 816, 832, 836, 838, 840, 841, 844, 854, 858 

Spiuola,  F.  B 733 

Sprague,  A.  B.  R 560 

Studley,  J.  M 564 

Wallis^J.  W 674 

War  Department,  C.  S 822,  836,  844, 851, 1045 

Whitford,  John  N 1054 


INDEX. 


1165 


North  Carolina — Ccntmued. 

Operations  in,  Aug.  20,  1862-jLme  3,  1863. 


Page. 


CommunicatioDS  from 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 808, 837, 838, 858, 863, 864, 867, 907, 910, 987, 1070 


Woodward,  Thomas  J 462 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 443,457,462, 


475,  533,  541, 557, 578, 584, 585, 586,  602, 612, 617, 618, 656, 657, 659, 680, 681 


See  also 

Aug.  30,  1862.  Plymouth.  Skirmish  near. 

Sept.  6,  1862.  Washington.  Attack  on. 

17-20,  1862.  Shiloh.  Operations  at  and  about. 

Nov.  1-12,  1862.  New  Berne.  Expedition  from,  including  skirmishes 
{2d)  at  Little  Creek  and  Eaivle’s  Mill. 

11,  1862.  New  Berne.  Demonstration  on. 

18,  1862.  Core  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

25,  1862.  Ellis,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of  the,  on  New  River. 

Dec.  10,  1862.  Plymouth.  Attack  on. 

11- 20,1862.  Goldshorough.  Expedition  from  New  Berne  to. 

27,  1862.  Elizabeth  City.  Skirmish  at. 

Jan.  17-21,  1863.  Neiv  Berne.  Reconnaissance  from,  to  Pollocksville, 
Trenton,  Young^s  Cross-Roads,  and  Onslow,  and 
skirmishes  {19th)  at  White  Oak  Creek  and  {20th) 
near  Jacksonville. 

27-28,  1863.  Neuse,  Dover,  and  Trent  Roads.  Reconnaissances  on 
the. 

Feb.  1-10,1863.  Plymouth.  Expedition  from  New  Berne  to. 

2,1863.  Wale's  Head,  Currituck  Beach.  Destruction  of  Salt- 
Works  at. 

7,  1863.  Edenton.  Skirmish  near. 

10,  1863.  Batchelder's  Creek.  Skiimiish  at. 

12- 13,  1863.  Batchelder’s  Creek.  Expedition  from,  and  skh'nnsh 

(13<^)  at  Sandy  Ridge. 

13,  1863.  Washington.  Skirmish  near. 

23,  1863.  Fort  Caswell.  Engagement  at. 

Mar.  1-  6,  1863.  Swan  Quarter.  Expedition  from  New  Berne  to,  and 
skirmishes  (3(?  Ath)  near  Fairfield  and  Swan  Quarter. 

6-  8,  1863.  Kinston.  Demonstration  on,  including  skirmishes 
{7th)  at  Core  Creek  and  near  Dover. 

6- 10,  1863.  New  Berne.  Expedition  from,  to  Trenton,  Pollocks- 

ville, Young's  Cross-Roads,  and  Swansborough. 

7- 10,  1863.  Cedar  Point.  Expedition  from  Newport  Barracks  to. 

7- 14,1863.  Mattamuskeet  Lake.  Expedition  from  New  Berne  to. 

8- 16,  1863.  New  Berne.  Expedition  against,  including  skirmishes 

{ldth,lith)  at  Deep  Gully  and  attack  {lith)  on 
Fort  Anderson. 

10-13,  1863.  Plymouth.  Demonstration  on. 

23,  1863.  Winfield.  Skirmish  at. 

24,  1863.  Rocky  Hock  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

30,  1863.  Deep  Gully.  Skirmish  near. 

30-April  20,  1863.  Washington.  Siege  of,  and  pursuit  of  the 
Confederate  forces. 

April  6,  1863.  Nixonton.  Skirmish  at. 

27-May  1,  1863.  Kinston.  Expedition  from  New  Berne  toward, 
and  skirmish  {28th)  at  Wise's  Cross-Roads. 


1166 


INDEX. 


Page, 

North  Carolina — Continued. 

Operations  in,  Aug.  20,  1862- June  3,  1863. 

See  also 

May  5,  1863.  Peletier’s  Mill.  Skirmish  at. 

15,  1863.  Emily  and  Arroiv.  Capture  of  the  steamers. 

20-23,  1863.  Kinston.  Demonstration  on,  and  skirmishes  (22d)  at 
Gum  Swamp  and  (23d)  at  Batchelder’s  Creek. 

Also  Smith  to  French,  p.  762;  Smith  to  Lee,  p.  786. 

Proclamations  of  Governor  to  people  and  soldiers  of 753,  860- 

Uniou  sentiment  in 463, 815, 1053, 1092' 

North  Carolina,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office. 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1862:  Sept.  22,  754. 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1863:  Jan.  12,  841. 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  : No.  7,  753. 

North  Carolina,  Department  of.*  (Confederate.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 1077 

Davis,  Jefferson 1077 

Lee,  Robert  E 1075 

• War  Department,  C.  S 1076 

Clingman,  T.  L.,  assigned  to  duty  in 1034 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc..  May  31,  1863 1086 

Embraced  in  the  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina 748^ 

Hill,  D.  H.,  assigned  to  command  of 953 

Limits  extended 1077 

Orders,  Geueral,  series  1863:  No.  20,  1073. 

Proposed  extension  of  limits.  Communications  from  Robert  E.  Lee 1066 

Re-established,  and  limits  defined 953 

North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Address  to  soldiers  of  the.  tFoster) 67L 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 490,  539, 709 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 539 

Dix,  John  A 528 

Foster,  John  G 414, 457, 524, 699, 713 

Artillery.  Organization  of,  in 472 

Naglee,  Henry  M.,  assigned  to  duty  in 563 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No. 64,471;  No. 65, 472;  No.76,475;  No.  81, 59. 
Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  14,  512;  No.  18,  60;  No.  22,  518;  No. 

26,  523;  No.  54,  598;  No.  60,  644;  No.  62,  652;  No.  64,  659; 

No.  68,  671;  No.  79,  723;  No.  81,  729. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863 : No.  11, 512 ; No.  13,  514 ; No.  14,  516 ; (Prince), 

No.  1,  224  ; (Spinola),  No.  1,  242;  No.  2,  243. 

Palmer,  Innis  N.,  assigned  to  duty  in 492 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 481, 490-492, 608, 612, 634, 711 

Dix,  John  A 490-492,  494-496,  502, 504, 505,  511, 518, 634, 695 

Ferry,  O.  S 494, 497 

Foster,  John  G 401, 476, 562 

Hunter,  David 602 

Naglee,  Henry  M 501,  .505, 607 

Peck,  John  J 504,50.5 

See  also  Foster  to  Halleck,  pp.  622, 623. 


* From  Sept.  19,  1862,  to  April  1,  1863,  embraced  in  the  Department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 


INDEX, 


1167 


North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (UnioD) — Continued. 

Subdivisions  of. 

Albemarle,  District  of  the. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 652, 660 

Wessells,  Henry  W.,  assigned  to  command 652 

Beaufort,  District  of. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 659 

Spinola,  F.  B.,  assumes  command  of 733 

Neuse,  District  of  the. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 6.52 

Designated  “ District  of  Beaufort  ” 659 

Naglee,  Henry  M.,  assigned  to  command 652 

Pamlico,  District  of  the. 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 652, 660 

Orders,  General,  series  1S63 : No.  2 , 669;  No.  3,  670;  No.  5,682. 

Prince,  Henry,  assigned  to  command 652 

Union  troops  in. 

Constituted  18th  Army  Corps 492 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Aug.  31,  1862 378 

Sept.  30, 1862 411 

Nov.  30,  1862 468,469 

Dec.  31,  1862 500,501 

Jan.  31,  1863 533 

Feb.  28,  1863 547-549 

March,  1863 576-578 

April  30,  1863  678, 679 

May  31,  1863 736-738 

North  Carolina,  District  of.  (Confederate.)  Orders,  General,  series  1862: 

No.  2,  754. 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of. 

Correspondence  with 

Armfield,  K.  F 886 

Clingman,  T.  L 852 

Davis,  Jefferson 757, 758, 761, 770, 771, 1067, 1077 

Davis,  W.  G.  M 810,867,897 

French,  Samuel  G 760, 762, 778, 784, 801 

Heth,  Henry 853, 854 

Hill,  D.  H 1011,1019 

James,  W.  H 957 

Jenkins,  A.  G 863 

Joyce,  W.  A 880 

Lee,  Robert  E 928, 1072 

Longstreet,  James 1094 

Merrimon,  A.  S 881,  893 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 766,777,875,912 

Pool,  John 745 

Rhett,  T.  S 770 

Ruffin,  Frank  G 766 

Siler,  D.  W 772 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 749,  856 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A 764,769 

War  Dei)artment,  C.  S 779,792, 

821,822,827,831,840,851,873,895,897,902,909,  934,  957,  1026,  1027,  1045 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 790, 879, 887 

Proclamations  to  the  people  and  soldiers  of  North  Carolina 753,860 


1168 


INDEX. 


Page. 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Hearj—Batta/ions : 10th, ""  786,  809,  865,  866,  917,  922;  (Compa- 
nies) A,  B,  C,  922.  Companies : Barnes’,  922  ; Buie’s,  865,  866,  917,  922; 
Holland’s,  922 ; McBryde’s,  922 ; MacRae’s,  922 ; Rankin’s,  865,  866, 
917,922;  Tait’s,  922;  Webb’s,  142.  Regiments:  3dt  (Companies)  T , 120. 
Artillery,  lAglat— Battalions  : Sd,!  121, 122,  865,  866, 879, 901, 917 ; (Batteries) 

A,  1049 ; B,  807, 1049 ; C,  1049.  Batteries  : Bunting’s,  113, 807, 975  ; Cape 
Fear,  807;  Lane’s,  335,  884,  916,  917,  963,  995;  Rowan,  782,  904,  917, 

975,  991.  Regiments:  lst,§  110,  113,  118,120,457,803;  (Batteries)  C,  190- 
192,1020;  E,  255, 1004,  1007,  1087,  1090;  F,  865,  866,  917;  2d|l  (Batteries) 

B,  111,  113, 115, 117-121,  807, 954,  971,  975  ; D,  34,  866,  917. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  7th,  772;  12th,  255,  1062.  Companies : Norfleet’s,  19; 
Swindell’s  Rangers,  984.  Regiments : 2d.  743, 746,  7.51, 759, 764, 921, 963, 

1038;  3d,  34,  111,  112,  529,  564,  693,  750, 767  865,  866, 917, 941,  963, 990,  1056, 

1067;  4th,  19,  121,122,197,457,670,750,755,771,984,1044,1051;  5th,  121, 

122, 160, 197, 198,  631,  638,  713,  755,  913,  957, 1051, 1060. 

Infantry— ^affa//o/7s:  Mallett’s,  113,807;  Whitford’s,  192,  194,253,508, 

883,  894  ; Wright’s,  1074 ; 2d,  974, 1046 ; 8th,  72, 154,  225, 240,  255,  631, 932, 

933,  945,  1074,  1087.  Companies:  Bradberry’s,  809,  865, 866, 879,  901,  917; 
Burwell’s,  807 ; Elliott’s,  356,  1067 ; Sanderlin’s,  356.  Regiments : 1st, 

3d,  982;  8th,  117-119,  457,  791,  866;  11th,  113,  121,  122,  791,  808,  1033, 

1041;  17th,  47,  49,  146,199,  457,760,  975,984,  1004,  1033,  1064,  1065,1089, 

1092;  25th,  364;  26th,  192, 193, 4.57, 803;  31st,  121, 122,  441,  457,  791, 804, 

866;  32d,951;  35th,  170,961,982;  42d,  201, 202, 945, 946, 1033, 1089, 1092; 

43d,  160,951;  44th,  192,1041;  45th,  163;  46th,  1011;  47th,  113,  1064; 

49th,  226,  240,  255,  982;  50th,  945,  974;  51st,  117-119,  457,  760,781,782, 

791, 866,  879;  52d,  18, 19,  111,  117-120,  556,  803, 1041 ; 53d,  745, 951 ; 54th, 

751, 759,  764 ; 55th,  325-328,  332,  338-340,  556,  788,  910, 997,  998,  1002, 1010, 

1015, 1016, 1033 ; 56th,  364,  658, 785,  791,  808, 896, 1033 ; 57th,  751, 759,  764 ; 

58th,  362 ; 61st,  113,  115, 118, 119,  760,  781,  782,  785,  791,  808,  865, 866, 917 ; 

64th,  810, 853. 

Miscellaneous — Thomas’  Legion,  811,  853. 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry— /?e^//n e/7 fs ; 1st,  6, 7,  9,  13, 14, 47-49, 157, 201, 202, 212, 213, 216, 217, 

259, 260, 533,  547, 549, 576, 675,  678, 679, 737. 

North  Carolina  and  Southern  Virginia,  Department  of.  See  Virginia  and 
Xoi'th  Carolina,  Department  of. 

Northerner,  Steamer.  Mentioned 145, 147, 181, 182, 223, 224, 584 

Northern  Virginia.  Operations  in, 

Sept.  3-Nov.  15,  1862.  Communications  from  Giistavus  W.  Smith 751 

Nov.  15,  1862-Jan.  25,  1863.  See  Dumfries  and  Fairfax  Station,  Va.  Raid 


on,  Dec.  27-29, 1862. 

April  27-May  6,  1863.  Chancellorsville  Campaign. 

Northern  Virginia,  Army  of.  (Confederate.) 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863 ; No.  14,  847. 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 1079, 1082 

Daniel,  Junius 1062 

Davis,  Jefferson 1083 


* Companies  designated  -wlien  practicable, 
t Called  also  40tli  Hegiraent. 

I Batteries  designated  when  practicable. 

§ Called  also  lOtb  Regiment.  Batteries  designated  when  practicable. 

II  Called  also  36tb  Regiment. 


INDEX. 


1169 

Pago. 


Northern  Virginia,  Army  of.  (Confederate) — Continued. 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A f27, 7;?8,  740 

Hill,  D.  II 1074, 1082 

Hooker,  Joseph 727 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 7:50 

Lee,  Robert  E 1018, 1063, 1066, 1069, 1071, 1078, 1079.  lOort 

Peck,  John  J 7:58 

War  Department,  C.  S 1079 

Steuart,  George  assigned  to  duty  in 1070 

Northrop,  Lucius  B.  Mentioned 7v  (),  771, 774,  777,  942 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  sec  Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  J. 

North  Shore,  Steamer.  Mentioned 228,229,241,242,355 

North  Star,  Steamer.  Mentioned 188 

North  State,  Steamer.  Mentioned 105, 106, 157, 158, 181, 182,  6i:5 

Noyes,  Mr.  Mentioned 409 

Noyes,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 295 

Noyes,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 725 

Nyce,  John.  Mentioned 577,  7.38 

Obenchain,  William  A.  Mentioned 832, 849 

O’Brien,  Daniel.  Mentioned 156,213 

Ocean  Wave,  Steamer.  Mentioned 105,106,526,527 

O’Connell,  P.  A.  Mentioned 565 

O’Connor,  John.  Mentioned 225 

Ohio,  Department  of.  Transfer  of  9th  Corps  to.  Communications  from 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 564 

Dix,  John  A 565 

French,  William  H 562 

Parke,  John  G 56.3-565 

See  also  Lee  to  Lonejstreet,  pp.  946,949,954,966;  Longstreet  to  Lee,  pp.  948, 

950;  Longstreet  to  Bill,  pp.  948,  956;  Longstreet  to  Whiting,  p.  949; 
Longstreet  to  Ransom,  p.  949  ; Elzeg  to  Longstreet,  p.  9.53.  Also 
Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  3. 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Iniawtry— Regiments:  62d,  35,  37,  377,  487, 505,  548, 577,  678, 738 ; 67th,  377, 

487,  497, 548, 577, 678, 738. 

Olds,  Glaucus  E.  Mentioned 767 

Olive  Branch  Church,  Va.  Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

Feb.  5,  1863.  Report  of  Christopher  Kleinz IS; 

Feb.  7,  1863. 


Communications  from 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 151 

Wise,  Henry  A 153 

Reports  of 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 149, 150 

Kleinz,  Christopher 150 

Tabb,  William  B 152 

Wise,  Henry  A 152 

Onderdonk,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 123,278,279,576,7:15 

O’Neil,  James*S.  Mentioned 100 

O’Neil,  John.  Mentioned 9 

O’Neil,  Thomas.  Mentioned 159,  :370 


Onslow,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  Jan.  20,  1863.  See  New  Bernc^  N.  C.  Rgt 
connaissance  from,  Jan,  17-21, 1863, 


74  R R-  -yOL  XVIII 


1170 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Ord,  E.  O.  C.  Mentioned 1 716,727-729 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A,  Correspondence  with 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 769 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 868, 10:55 

Ordnance  Department,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  T.  G.  Baylor 672 

Ordway,  Albert.  Mentioned 646,  647 

Organization,  Strength,  etc. 

Confederate  Troops 750, 751, 

759,  764,788,  793,807,809,  810,865,866,  879,888,900,901,915- 

917,  920-922,  929, 9.30, 952, 978, 1036, 1056, 1058, 10.59, 1067, 1086 

Union  Troops - 376-378,  :384, 385, 396, 411, 467-469,  486, 

487,  497,  499-501,  532,  533,  546-549,  574-578,  675-679,7.33-738,1093,1094 

Orwig,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 7:14, 1094 

Osborn,  Francis  A.  Mentioned 378, 468, 500, 514, 548, 577, 678, 738 

Osborn,  Thomas  O.  Mentioned 35,37,577,738 

Otis,  John  L.  Mentioned 7,38 

Ould,  Robert.  Mentioned 388, 474, 771, 1077 

Outwater,  James  D.  Mentioned 280 

Owens,  William  A.  Mentioned 745 

Padrick,  Pilot.  Mentioned 215 

Page,  Mrs.  Mentioned 526 

Page,  P.  R.  Mentioned 920 

Page,  T.  J.  Mentioned 751,759,764,793,807,810,866,901,917 

Palfrey,  E.  A.  For  correspondence,  see  Adjt.and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 
Palmer,  Innis  N. 

Assignments  to  command 492 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General,  U.  S.  A 578,589 

Army  Headquarters 612,617,637 

Dix,  John  A 578,579,585 

Foster,  John  G 227, 228, 552, 584, 594, 612, 618, 638, 646, 647, 665 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 592, 593 

Lee,  Horace  C *. 602 

Lewis,  George  W 569 

Pickett,  Josiah ! 594,602,640,641 

Prince,  Henry 228 

Spinola,  F.  B 248,251 

Itineraries  of  1st  Division,  i8th  Army  Corps. 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonstration  on.  May  20-23,  1863  ,364 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  against,  March  8-16, 1863 186 

Washington,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  March  30-April  20,  1863  219 

Mentioned 186, 187, 211, 212, 224, 228, 

229, 231, 233-235, 241, 243, 248-250,  :349, 350,  353,  372,  492, 547, 548, 576, 577, 
585, 588, 591, 593,  594, 598,  601, 603,  607, 622, 629,  674,  675, 678, 7.36, 984, 1054 

Report  of  expedition  toward  Kinston,  N.  C.,  April  27-May  1,  1863  343-345 

Palmer,  William  H.  Mentioned 70 

Pamlico,  District  of  the.  (Union.)  See  North  Carolina,  Department  of . 
Pamunkey  Peninsula,  Va.  Operations  on,  Aug.  20,  1862-Jnne  3,  1863.  See 
Jan.  7-  9,  1863.  Torktoicn.  Expedition  from. 

April  16,  1863.  Pamunkey  Eiver.  Affair  on  the. 

May  7,1863.  West  Point.  Occupied  hy  Union  forces. 

31-J«»e  1,  1863.  West  Point.  Evacuated  hy  Union  forces. 

Pamunkey  River,  Va.  Affair  on,  April  16,  1863. 

Communications  from  Erasmus  D.  Keyes 628 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 342,628 

Report  of  Peyton  Wise 342 


INDEX. 


1171 


Page. 

Pannill,  William.  Mentioned 998,999 

Pardee,  Benjamin  S.  Mentioned .378 

Paris,  A.  B.  Mentioned 1049 

Parke,  John  G.  Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 565 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 563-565 

Parker,  Private.  Mentioned 19 

Parker,  Foxhall  A.  Mentioned 50, 124,  462, 488,  489, 510, 522 

Parker,  Jacob.  Mentioned 764, 766 

Parker,  Seth.  Mentioned 552 

Parker,  William  A.  Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 475 

Parsons,  W.  W.  Mentioned 936 

Passaic,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 505, 837 

Patapsco,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 530,857 

Patton,  Alexander  G. 

Mentioned  289, 296, 358 

Report  of  skirmish  on  the  Edenton  Road,  Va.,  April  15,  1863 291 

Patty  Martin,  Schooner.  Mentioned 259 

Paul,  Captain.  Mentioned 261 

Paxton,  E.  F.  Mentioned 1045 

Peabody,  Oliver  W.  Mentioned 350 

Pearce,  J.  H.  For  correspondence  as  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  see  Henry  A.  Wise. 

Pearcy,  A.  S.,  Schooner.  Mentioned 402 

Pearson,  Richmond  M.  Mentioned ‘ 887 

Pease,  William  R. 

Mentioned 280,  303,  304,  307, 318, 320, 7.35 

Reports  of  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4,  1863  309-311 

Peck,  John  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 391, 

472,  600, 605, 606, 610, 614, 619, 620, 626, 632, 653, 667, 684, 692 

Dix,  John  A 401, 408, 414, 416, 

441, 444-446, 453-455, 458-460, 464,  465, 469, 470, 474,  476-479,  482, 484, 485, 
504, 505,  507, 509-513, 516,  517,  519-522, 524, 528,  530,  531, 534-543, 550-553^ 
555-558, 560-562, 564-567, 571, 573, 610, 614-616, 620, 621, 625-628, 633, 635- 
637, 639, 641, 644, 650, 652-655, 657-659, 663, 664, 667,  671-673, 680, 684, 685, 
687, 689-691, 699, 701,  705, 709,  710, 714, 716, 718-:20,  722-726, 729,  730,  738 

Dodge,  Charles  C 551 

Foster,  John  G 41, 42, 589 

Hooker,  Joseph 582, 

586, 600, 606, 644, 653, 655, 658, 667, 672, 679, 680, 683, 684, 691, 692 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 593,597-600,603,606 

Lee,  S.  P 595, 606, 607, 611, 617, 618, 621, 634, 635, 643, 702 

Stratton,  Franklin  A 693 

Viele,  Egbert  L , 542, 614, 620, 627, 654, 722 

Mentioned 12, 13, 15, 16, 20, 35, 38,  40, 41 , 43, 54, 58, 95, 125, 126, 136, 139, 201, 

202,  262,  267-270, 273, 274, 283, 284, 295, 299, 312, 359, 377, 379, 380, 385, 388, 
389,  392,  395-399,  401,  403, 411, 413,  437,  458-460,  465,  467,  468, 473,  477-480, 
486,  499, 501,  509,  513,  519,  531,  .532, 536,  .540,  .542,  .545,  546, 549, 551, 555, 556, 
563,  574,  575, 580, 582, 585, 586,  .589, 591, 592, 595-597, 599, 600,  603, 604,  606, 
609, 610, 613,  617,  619, 621, 632, 636, 642,  643, 653, 656, 601-663, 666, 668,  675, 
676, 683, 687, 689, 694-696, 699, 701, 711, 712, 732-734, 738, 822, 824, 834, 1093 

Ib'ports’of 

Blackwater,  Va. 

R(‘connaissance8  to  the,  Dec,  8-12, 1862 38-40 


1172 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Peck,  John  J. — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Blackwater,  Va. 

Skirmishes  on  tlie. 

Oct.  3, 1862  16, 17 

Dec.  2, 1862  30 

Carrsville,  Va.  Affair  near,  Nov.  17, 1862  33 

Deserted  House,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30, 1863 132, 135 

Franklin,  Va. 

Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

Oct.  31,1862 20 

Nov.  18,  1862  33,34 

March  17,  1863 199 

Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad,  Va.  Operations  on  tLe,  May  15-28, 

1863 358,359 

Providence  Church,  Va.  Skirmish  near,  Jan.  9,  1863 127 

Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad,  Va.  Operations  on  the,  May  12-26,* 

1863 354,355 

Suffolk,  Va. 

Operations  about,  Nov.  12-14,1862 31 

Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863  274,281,284 

Winfield,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  March  23, 1863 202,203 

Peebles,  James  E.  Mentioned 931 

Pegram,  R.  B.  Mentioned 385 

Peir.son,  George  H. 

Mentioned 223,  346,  347,  363,  364,  370,  371, 469, 500, 577,  736 

Reports  of  Kinston,  N.  C. 

Demonstration  on.  May  20-23, 1863  365 

Expedition  toward,  April  27-May  1, 1863 347 

Peletier’s  Mill,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at.  May  5, 1863.  See  report  of  Foster,  p.  362. 

Pelham,  John.  Mentioned 940 

Pelouze,  Louis  H.  Mentioned 543 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  John  A.  Bix. 

Pemberton,  John  C.  Mentioned 816,1052,1071,1080,1084 

Pender,  W.  D.  Mentioned 782, 856 

Pendleton,  James  M.  Mentioned 7 

Pendleton,  W.  N. 

Correspondence  with  James  Longstreet 335 

Mentioned 762 

Peninsula,  Va.,  The. 

Defense  of,  measures  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 375,  382 

McClellan,  George  B 373, 375 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 376 

Operations  on,  Aug.  20,  1862-J une  3,  1863.  , • 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 388,  479 

Baird,  E.  R 1091 

Busteed,  Richard 568 

Causey,  C.  H 1067 

Councill,  J.  Calvin 797,799 

Dickinson,  William 809 

Dix,  John  A 385, 445, 517, 569, 651, 689, 693, 705, 707, 716,*  111,  729, 730 

Elzey,  Arnold * , t t , , , t , 


INDEX. 


1173 

Page. 


Peninsula,  Va.,  The—Continued. 

Operations  on  the,  Aug.  20,  1862-Juue  3,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Hall,  E.  D 1091 

Harman,  William 808,809 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 488, 

492, 517, 529, 573, 596, 598, 604, 605, 611, 622, 629,  641,  652, 687,  689, 693, 714 

King,  Eufus 607,612 

Lee,  G.  W.  C 1092 

Lee,  Robert  E 979, 1065, 1070, 1071 

Lee,  S.  P 387,391,442,522,597,605 

Lewis,  William 517 

Longstreet,  James 968, 1023 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 442 

Peck,  John  J 729,730 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 1041, 1060 

Pickett,  George  E 1090 

Shiugler,  W.  P ’ 742 

Smith,  Gustavns  W 742, 747, 800 

War  Department,  C.  S 1091 

West,  Robert  M 693 

Wise,  Henry  A 795, 798, 800, 920, 975, 994, 1006, 1019. 1035 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 378, 


380, 387, 388, 391, 397, 522, 596-598, 604-607, 611, 689, 698, 699, 704, 731 

See  also 

Sept.  9,  1862.  Williamsburg.  Skirmish  at. 

Nov.  22,  1862.  Williamsburg.  Beconnaissance  from. 

Dec.  17,  1862.  Diascund  Bridge  and  Burnt  Ordinary.  Beconnaissance 
to. 

Jan.  ip,  1863.  Williamsburg.  Scout  from,  and  skirmish  at  Burnt  Ordi- 
nary. 

Mar.  29,  1863.  Williamsburg.  Skirmish  at. 

April  11,  1863.  Williamsburg.  Skirmish  at. 

Also  Dix  to  Halleck,  pp.  388,  389,  395,  396;  Keyes  to  Halleck,  p.  609; 

Smith  to  French,  p.  762 ; Scddou  to  Longstreet,  p.  967. 

Penn,  William  (Ve.ssel).  Mentioned 448 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy— /?e^//ne/jts  ; 2d,  387;  3d,  272,  288,  468,  487,  574,  576,671, 


677,  735, 736, 1026, 1093, 

Artillery,  Light — Regiments:  Lst  {Batteries),  A, 287, 570, 575, 676, 735;  E,  H, 
487, 576, 677, 734, 1094. 

QdYiAvj— Regiments  : 4th,  377, 390 ; 5th,  11, 12, 50, 51, 124, 131, 148-152,  201, 
205,  206,  262,  263,  377,  468,  487,  493,  517,  576,  595,  596,  598,677,734,1094; 
11th,  18,  35, 123,  125, 132,  133,  135-137,  139,  140,  200-202,  278,288,  289,  293, 
•356,  377,  468,  483,  487,  574-576,  607,  677, 693,  735, 736,  941, 1093, 1094. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/7fs;  52d,  49,  487,  501,  548,577,  678,  738;  58th,  131, 153-155, 
160,  161,  225,  226,  239,  240,  343-345,  347,  348,  351,  352,  362-371,  377,  487,  505, 
514,  .547,  548,  577,  665,  678,  724,  729,  737  ; 85th,  55,  60,  79,  95-97,  99,  101-104, 
377,  487,  500,  .548,  577,  678,  738 ; 88th,  1090 ; 101st,  92,  9.5-97, 100, 103, 180- 
182,223,248,249,377,  487,500,548,  577,  584,  .599,679,737,984,  1060;  103d, 
18,  35,  37,  60,  96,  97, 99,  100, 102,  104, 181, 182,  249,  377,  487,  .500,  548,  577,  .599, 
679,  737,  1060 ; 104th.  32,  33,  487,  501,  .548,  577,  678,  738  ; 158th,  173,  188, 
224,  240-242,  219,  254, 487,  499,  548,  578,  599,  679,  737  ; 165th,  125,  135,  286, 
289,  293,  487,  499,  575,  676,  734,  1093  ; 166th,  286,  289,293,  487,  499,  57.5,  676, 
734,  1093 ; 167th,  132-136,  139,  141,  286,  487,  499,  575,  676,  734, 1093 ; 168th, 
168,  173,  176,  487,  499,  548,  578,  599,  679,  7.37  ; 169th,  260,  360,  487,  499,  576, 


1174 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry — Regiments:  169th — (continued),  677,734,1094;  171st,  173,  240, 

242,  249,  254,  487,  499,  548,  578,  599,  679,  737;  172d,  487,489,499,576,677, 

734, 1094 ; 173d,  487,  575, 677, 735, 1093 ; 174th,  487,  499,  505,  548,  577,  678, 

738 ; 175th,  173,  223,  240,  242,  243, 249, 254,  487,  499, 548, 578, 599, 679,  737  ; 
176th,  487,  499,  548,  577,  678,  738 ; 177th,  487,  499,  575,  677,  735,  1093 ; 
178th,  263, 266, 487,  499,  576,  629,  677,  734,  1094 ; 179th,  487, 499, 576, 677, 

734, 1094. 

Perkins,  Edwin  J.  Mentioned 106 

Perkins,  Elisha  A.  Mentioned 529 

Perkins,  William  W.  Mentioned 59,60 

Perry,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 46,146,199,355,522,524,602 

Peters,  E.  P.  Mentioned 66 

Petersburg,  Va.  Defenses  of  (immediate).  Communications  from 

French,  Samuel  G 742 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 762 

See  also  Smith  to  Lee,  p.  786. 

Pettigrew,  J.  J. 

Correspondeuce  with 

Daniel,  Junius 1012 

Elzey,  Arnold 1041,1044,1052,1060 

Ferebee,  D.  D 745,748 

French,  Samuel  G - 744 

Hill,  D.  H 195,883,921,985,990,1004,1007,1013,1027 

Lee,  Robert  E 1056, 1065 

Mentioned 110, 117, 166, 184, 185, 188-191. 196, 230, 236, 245, 249, 

250, 274,282, 285,  435,  444, 537,  566, 590,  750, 752, 788, 803,  804,  807,  808,  830, 
841, 855, 865, 872, 874, 888, 891, 901, 916, 917, 924, 932, 938, 941,  945, 954, 974, 
990, 991, 1008, 1012, 1033, 1034, 1053, 1059,  1078, 1079,  1082, 1086, 1088-1091 

Report  of  expedition  against  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  8-16,  1863 192 

Phelps,  Mrs.  Mentioned 495 

Phenix,  Dawson.  Mentioned 582 

Philadelphia  Inquirer.  Extract  from  “The  Gallant  Campaign  at  Suffolk”...  282 

Phillips,  Rolla  O.  Mentioned 96 

Phoenix,  Steamer.  Mentioned... 224,613,638 

Picket,  Steamer.  Mentioned 5-7 

Pickett,  George  E. 

Assignments  to  command 889 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 884 

Elzey,  Arnold 1090 

Longstreet,  James 967 

Mentioned 275,  290,  291,  334,  549,  564,  583,  587,  604, 605, 

632, 679,  680,  683,  691 , 732, 738,  876-878, 880, 882, 883,  889,  890,  898, 909, 910, 
915-917,923-927,929,931-933,937,938,942,957,963,  995,  1021,  1038-1041, 
1043-1046,  1056,  10.59,  1062,  1066,  1071,  1075,  1077-1079,  1088,  1089,  1091 

Report  of  skirmish  on  the  Edeuton  Road,  Va.,  April  24, 1863  340 

Pickett,  Jcsiah. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 640 

Palmer,  Innis  N 594,  602, 640, 641 

Mentioned 162, 164, 170, 367,  368,  378,  469, 500, 556, 577, 584,  641, 736 

Reports  of 

Deep  Gully,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  at,  March  13-14, 1863 187 

Goldshoroiigh,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,1862 87 


INDEX. 


1175 


Page. 

Pickett,  Josiah — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonstrations  on. 

March  6-8, 1863  158 

May  20-23, 1863  ’ 370 

Pierce,  Samuel  C.  Mentioned 508 

Pierce,  Seymour  B.  Mentioned 100 

Piggott,  Mary  Ann.  Mentioned 801 

Pilot  Boy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 533 

Pioneer,  Steamer.  Mentioned 425-428 

Pitt,  F.  G.  Mentioned 1008 

Plaisted,  Harris  M.  Mentioned 49,51,501,577,738 


Mentioned 


545 


48 

47 

47 

45 


Planter,  Steamer. 

Plymouth,  N.  C. 

Attack  on,  Dec.  10,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Flusser,  C.W 

Fogerty,  Thomas  J 

Foster,  John  G 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 
Reports  of 

Ewer,  Barnabas,  jr 45-47 

French,  Samuel  G 49 

Mizell,  Jonathan  T 48 

Defenses  of  (immediate).  Communications  from  Henry  W.  Wessells 721 

Demonstration  on,  March  10-13, 1863. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 199 

Report  of  Walter  G.  Bartholomew 199 

Expedition  to,  Feh.  1-10,  1863. 

Communications  from  , 

Foster,  John  G 147 

Wessells,  Henry  W 147 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 145-148 

Report  of  Francis  L.  Lee 14.5 

Fort  at,  named  “Fort  Wflliams” 644 

Skirmish  near,  Aug.  30,  1862 1 

Poage,  Thomas.  Mentioned 142, 144, 145, 807 

Poindexter,  P.  Mentioned 340 

Pollock,  William  K.  Mentioned 578 

Pollocksville,  N.  C. 

Expedition  to,  March  6-8,  1863.  See  New  Berne,  N C.  Expedition  from, 

March  6-10,  1863. 

Reconnaissance  to,  Jan.  17,  1863.  See  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance 
from,  Jan.  17-21,  1863. 

Pond,  Francis  B.  Mentioned 35,37,577,738 

Pond,  Nathan  P.  Mentioned 251,352,353,509,569 

Pool,  John.  Correspondence  with  Governor  of  North  Carolina 745 

Pool,  Stephen  D. 

Mentioned 110, 112, 11.3,  441,  872, 1043 

Report  of  engagement  at  Goldshofough  Bridge,  N.  C.,  Dec.  17, 1862 120 

Poor,  Walter  S.  Mentioned 292 

Pope,  John.  Mentioned 385,624 

Porteaux,  M.  B.  Mentioned 935,  937 

Porter,  Burr.  Mentioned 287,323,676,734 


1176 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Porter,  Francis  E. 

Mentioned 737 

Reports  of 

Emily  and  Arrow,  Steamers.  Capture  of,  May  15, 1863 355 

Wale’s  Head,  N.  C.  Destruction  of  Salt  Works  at,  Feb.  2,  1863  148 

Porter,  Henry.  Mentioned 512 

Port  Royal,  Steamer.  Mentioned 105, 106 

Portsmouth,  Va.  Blockade  of.  See  Blockade. 

Potomac,  Army  of  the.  (Union.j 

Army  Corps,  9tli,  transferred  to  Newiiort  News,  Va.,  Feb.  6-21,  1863  149 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  Corps:  4th  (Keyes),  No.  86,  379. 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 378, 382,  386,  387,  395,  399, 732 

Dix,  John  A 382,  387 

See  also  Mansfield  io  Balleck,  p.  385. 


Potter,  Edward  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G *. ..  390,424 

Washington,  N.  C.,  Commanding  Officer  Confederate  forces  nearest. ..  424 

Mentioned 4-6,9,22,59,79,113, 

175, 177, 178, 186, 212, 214, 215, 228, 232,  441,  512, 547, 549, 556, 612, 669, 1020 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  John  G.  Foster. 


Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  6,  424. 

Reports  of.  Washington,  N.  C. 

Attack  on.  Sept.  6,  1862 6 

Operations,  April  16-17,  1863,  during  siege  of 218,219 

President,  C.  S.  See  Jefferson  Davis. 

President,  U.  S.  See  Abraham  TAncoln. 

Prime,  Frederick  E.  Mentioned 457 

Prince,  Frederick  W.  Mentioned 66 

Prince,  Henry. 

Assignments  to  command 652,  669,  670 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 169, 223, 228-236,  631,  635,  638,  670 

Lewis,  George  W 177 

Palmer,  Innis  N 228 

Mentioned 170-172, 

174, 175, 179, 211, 216, 227, 228, 232, 238, 242-244, 247-249, 254,  520, 533,  547, 
548,  550,  556,  576, 578,  584, 589, 599,  638, 646, 647, 652,  668,  669,  678,  679,  737 
Reports  of 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Expedition  toward,  April  16-21,  1863  225 

New  Berne,  N.  C. 

Expedition  from,  March  6-10, 1863 166 

Operations,  March  15-16, 1863,  during  expedition  against 187 

Washington,  N.  C.  Operations,  April  4-6,  during  siege  of 222 

Pringle,  William  B.  Mentioned 170, 178 

Prisoners,  Political.  Arrest,  etc.  Communications  from  Samuel  G.  French . 77rt 
Prisoners  of  War.  Treatment,  etc.  Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 387 


See  also  Smith  to  French,  j).  770  ; Cooper  io  Bill,  p.  1061.  Also  Special  Orders, 


No.  127,  p.  1077. 

Private  Property.  Action  touching. 

Comniunications  from 

Foster,  John  G /. 182, 475 

French,  William  H 935 


INDEX. 


1177 

Page. 


Private  Property.  Action  toucliing — Continued. 

Communications  from 

Jenkins,  A.  G 863 

Jones,  Samuel *. ! 93.5,936 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 525, 792, 895, 934 

Prince,  Henry 669 

Slaght,  James  C 527 

Stanly,  Ed - 182, 525 

War  Department,  C.  S 792,902,935 

See  also  Dix  to  Ferry,  p.  386 ; Bolles  to  Wilder,  pp.  570,  591 ; Whiting  to 
Smith,  p.  773. 

Statements  of 

Collins,  Alexander 526 

Matthew  (Colored) 526 

Tuttle,  W.  W 526 

Prouty,  M.  F.  Mentioned 75,512 

Providence  Church,  Va.  Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

Nov.  12*  1862.  See  Suffolk,  Va.  Operations  about,  Nov.  12-14, 1862. 

Dec,  28, 1862.  Report  of  Orris  S.  Ferry 123 

Jan.  9, 1863. 

Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 126 

Report  of  John  J.  Peck 127 


May  17,  1863.  See  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  B.  R.,  Va.  Operations  on.  May 
15-28,  1863. 

Providence  Church  Road,  Va. 

Reconnaissance  on  the,  Maj'^  3, 1863.  Report  of  Griffin  A.  Stedman,  jr 315 

See  also  April  11-May  4.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.  Reports  of 


Dutton,  Arthur  H.  Getty,  George  W.  Harland,  Edward.  Peck,  John  J, 

Skirmish  on  the,  April  12,  1863.  See  report  of  Peck,  p.  274. 

Pryor,  Roger  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Beauregard,  G.  T 790 

Longstreet,  James 896 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 845 

War  Department,  C.  S 877,  879, 885,  888, 889 

Mentioned 36,  37,  40, 123, 125, 126, 132, 136, 144, 145, 179,  496, 

510,  512, 513, 518, 519, 521, 524, 528-531,  534-537, 539, 540,  551-553,  555, 562, 
566, 604,  808,  830, 845,  8-16. 851, 877-879, 882,  889,  896,906,  1078,  1088,  1094 

Report  of  engagement  at  Deserted  House,  Va.,  Jan.  30, 1863  142 

Putney,  H.  M.  Mentioned 350 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  War  De- 
partment, C.  S 107 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E ,536 

Dix,  John  A ' 476,502,504,511 

Radcliffe,  James  D. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 794 

Mentioned 112-115, 760, 768,  778, 794 

Rains,  Gabriel  J. 

Correspondence  with  D.  H.  Hill 1082 

Mentioned 743,  750, 752,  762,  808,  862,  1022, 1082 

Rains,  George  W.  Mentioned 1083 

Raleigh,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1024, 1041 

Ramseur,  S.  D.  Mentioned 928 


1178 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Rancier,  Henry.  Mentioned 30 

Randall,  J.  Mentioned 1020 

Randolph,  George  W.  Mentioned 743,749,754-* 

756,  761,  767, 768, 770, 773,  774, 777, 779,  781, 783,  789,  813, 823, 862, 900, 913 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  TFar  Departvient,  C.  S. 

Randolph,  J.  Innis.  Mentioned 759 

Randolph,  John.  Mentioned 746 

Rankin,  S.  C.  Mentioned 163 

Ransom,  Alfred.  Mentioned 63-65, 82, 240, 243, 469,  501 , 527, 578,  737 

Ransom,  M.  W.  Mentioned 961,982 

Ransom,  R.,  jr. 

Correspondence  with 

Hill,  D.  H 957,  971,  981,  985,  986, 1000,  1004 

Longstreet,  James 949,960,961 

Mentioned 189,  344, 

364,  385, 631, 638, 679,  818,  820, 825, 830,  832,  833, 836, 840, 841, 846-848, 850, 
855,  856,  875, 879,  882, 888, 893,  900, 901, 917, 925, 930, 932, 938, 941, 943, 945, 
947, 954,  955, 961,  962,  969,  972,  974,  979,  980,  982,  987,  991, 1023, 1030-1034, 
1046,  1047,  1050-1052,  1057,  1063,  1071,  1073-1080,  1082,  1083-1088,  1092 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C.,  Ai)ril  20,  1863  255 

Raulston,  William  C.  Mentioned 577 

Rawle’s  Mill,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  Nov.  2,  1862.  See  Netv  Berne,  N.  C.  -Expe- 
dition from,  Nov.  1-12,1862. 

Read,  Walter  A.  Mentioned 320 

Reagan,  John  H.  Mentioned 768,945 

Redfern,  Alfred.  Mentioned 1020 

Reed,  J.  Mentioned 666 

Reed,  Jacob  A.  Mentioned 61,62,217,218 

Reed’s  Ferry,  Va.  Skirmish  near.  May  3,  1863.  See  April  11-May  4,  1863. 

Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.  Reports  of 

Crosby,  Hiram  B.  Dutton,  Arthur  H.  Getty,  George  "W.  Peck,  John  J. 
Refugees.  See  Refugees,  Freedmen  and  Abandoned  Lands. 

Refugees,  Freedmen  and  Abandoned  Lands.  Action  touching. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  office,  U.  S.  A 580 

Dix,  John  A 570,591,739 

Orders  of  War  Department,  U.  S 580 

Regan,  Peter  C.  Mentioned 575,735,1093 

Reid,  James  A.  Mentioned 989,992 

Reid,  J.  J.  Mentioned 116 

Reid,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 735 

Reilly,  James.  Mentioned 904,964,978,984,990,992 

Reinhart,  H.  W.  Mentioned 1 Ill 

Reinmuller,  John  E.  Mentioned 150 

Renshaw,  R.  T.  Mentioned 4,5,210,218 

Reynolds,  Gerard.  Mentioned 693, 1093 

Rhett,  Thomas  S. 

Correspondence  with 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 770 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 1000 

Mentioned 793,  807, 810,  866, 901, 912, 917, 952, 965, 1029, 1059, 1086 

Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Regiments : 1st  (Ratteries),  F,  21-23, 25, 54,  56, 58,  60, 63-66, 

73,  83,  85-88, 90, 94, 176, 187, 221, 246, 248, 251, 252,  402, 447, 469,  472, 501,  549. 

566, 578,  679,  737. 


INDEX.  1179 

Page. 

Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned— Continued. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/7/s;  4th,  278,  287,  301,  302,  306, 316,  319, 321, 562, 570, 575, 

676, 735 ; 5th,  23,  25,  56. 60, 83, 215, 216, 218, 219, 222, 249, 378, 468, 500,  548, 

577, 599, 612, 623, 679, 737 ; 7th,  562 ; 11th,  286,  323, 608, 676,  734. 

Rice,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned 705' 

Rice,  Nathan  P.  Mentioned 223 

Rice,  Pitkin  B.  Report  of  expedition  from  New  Berne,  N.  C,,  March  6-10, 

1863  172 

Rice,  Randall  H.  Mentioned 315 

Richards,  G.  C.  Mentioned 351 

Richards,  John  R.  Mentioned 156 

Richardson,  Colin. 

Mentioned 73, 181 

Report  of  expedition  to  Swan  Quarter,  N.  C.,  March  1-6,  1863 157 

Richardson,  James  M.  Mentioned 222 

Richardson,  William  H.  Mentioned 834 

Richmond,  C.  S.  S.  (Merrimac  No.  2.)  Mentioned 385, 

397, 400, 435, 641, 720, 743, 968, 976, 997, 999, 1002, 1009, 1019, 1025, 1062 

Richmond,  Va. 

Batteries  around,  and  distances  from,  the  Capitol 929 

Defenses  of  (immediate). 

Communications  from 

Elzey,  Arnold 1058 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 928 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 742,794 

War  Department,  C.  S 1020 

Elzey,  Arnold,  assigned  to  command  of 794 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  1,  742. 

Smith,  Gustavus  W.,  assign^  to,  and  assumes  command  of 742 

Riots  in.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 931,958 

Elzey,  Arnold 978 

Virginia,  Governor  of 977 

See  also  Elzey  to  Longsireet,  p.  965. 

Transfer  of  Longstreet’s  Corps  for  defense  of 2, 876, 880, 882-884 

Richmond,  Department  of.*  (Confederate.) 

Colston,  R.  E.,  assigned  to  duty  in 807 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Dec.  20,  1862  807 

* Dec.  31,  1862  810 

• Feb.  1,  1863 866 

March  1,  1863 ^ 901 

March  10,  1863 917 

March  14,  1863 920,921 

April  1,  1863 952 

May  1,  1863 1036 

May  13,  1863 1058,1059 

May  31,  1863 1086 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 95.3 

Elzey,  Arnold,  assigned  to  command 953 

Limits  extended 1020 

Richmond  Examiner.  Extract  from.  “ Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.” 284 

Richmond  Press.  Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s 

Office,  C.  S.  A 958 


* Formally  constituted  April  1,  1803. 


1180 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Richmond  Sentinel.  Extract  from.  “ Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.’’ 633 

Richmond,  Sila.s  P. 

Mentioned 85, 168,  469, 501, 578, 737 

Reporls  of 

Kinston,  N.  C. 

Demonstration  on,  May  20-23,  1863 371 

Expedition  toward,  April  16-21,  1863  238 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from,  March  6-10,  1863 175 

Washington,  N.  C.  Operations,  April  7-10,  1863,  during  siege  of 237 

Richter,  Henry  M. 

Mentioned 26,28,30 

Report  of  demonstration  on  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Nov.  11,  1862 28 

Riddick,  Mr.  Mentioned 967 

Riely,  John  W.  Mentioned 794,997 

Riggs,  F.  Mentioned 1023 

Riggs,  William  J.  Mentioned 8, 64, 65 

Rinaldo,  H.  B.  M.  Steamer.  Mentioned 714,738 

Ringold,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 278, 288,  306, 575, 687 

Ripley,  Edward  H.  Mentioned 735 

Ripley,  James  W.  Mentioned 520,522 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ordnance  Department,  U.  S.  A. 

Risley,  Edwin.  Mentioned 311 

Rives,  Alfred  L.  Mentioned 756 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A. 

Rives,  Charles  M.  Mentioned 191,192 

Roberts,  Coleman.  Mentioned .341 

Roberts,  Joseph.  Mentioned 376,  377, 1093 

Roberts,  Samuel  G.  Mentioned 246,252 

Roberts,  W.  Dewees. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  A.  Stratton 693 

Mentioned 3.56,  535,  693 

Report  of  capture  of  the  steamers  Emily  and  Arrow,  May  15,  1863 356 

Robertson,  Beverly  H. 

Correspondence  with 

French,  Samuel  G 804,805 

Hill,  D.  H 912,1007,1051 

Longstreet,  James 963 

Mentioned 109,  113,  166, 188, 189,  196,  529, 

564,  602,  755, 768, 787, 788,  803,  804,  807,  844, 854, 855, 858, 865, 888,  891, 900, 
901,915-917,924,  955,957,  961,  971,  984,  1004,  1007,  1059,  1071,  1075.  1088 
Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  against,  March  9-15,  1863 197 

"White  Hall,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  Dec.  16,  1862 121 

Robertson,  J.  B.  Mentioned 326,339,915,917,1002 

Robertson,  J.  R.  Mentioned 797,798,800,920,975 

Robinson,  William.  Mentioned :’)57 

Robinson,  W.  T.  Mentioned 154 

Robinson’s  Plantation,  Va.  Expedition  to,  May  15,  1863. 

. Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 3.57 

Report  of  George  H.  Gordon 357 

Rocky  Hock  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  March  24,  1863 3 

Rodgers,  John.  Mentioned 398,408 

Rodman’s  Point,  N.  C. 

Affair  at,  April  16,  1863.  See  Report  of  Foster,  p.  212;  Potter,  pp.  218,  219. 


INDEX. 


1181 


Rodman’s  Point,  N.  C. — Continued. 

Engagements  at. 

April  1, 1863,  See  report  of  Foster,  p.  212. 

April  4-5,  1863.  See  report  of  Foster,  p.  212. 

Skirmish  at,  March  30, 1863.  See  report  of  Foster,  p.  212. 

Rogers,  Edmund  Law.  Mentioned 1045,1046 

Rogers,  H.  J.  Mentioned 628, 630, 633, 997 

Rogers,  Samuel  N.  Mentioned 62 

Rogers,  S.  H.  Mentioned 113 

Roker,  J.  C.,  Schooner.  Mentioned 475 

Roper,  John  L.  Mentioned 36,  37, 125 

Rosecrans,  W,  S.  Mentioned 507,953,954 

Ross,  Major.  Mentioned 974 

Rowe,  Frederick  A.  Mentioned 271, 277, 280, 658, 659, 663 

Ruffin,  Frank  G. 

Correspondence  with  North  Carolina,  Governor  of 766 

Mentioned 765 

Ruffin,  Thomas.  Mentioned 1026 

Rush,  David  G.  Mentioned 97 

Russell,  David  A.  Mentioned 472 

Russell,  Le  Grand.  Mentioned 461 

Ryerson,  Henry  O.  Mentioned 735 

Salisbury,  N.  C.  Writ  of  habeas  eorpus  suspended  at,  and  in  vicinity  of.. 793 

Saltonstall,  William  G.  Mentioned 210,427 

Sanderlin,  Willis  B.  Mentioned 356 

Sanders,  A.  H.  Mentioned 538 

Sanders,  Enos  C. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 538 

Mentioned 14, 15, 525, 675 

Reports  of 

Nixouton,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  April  6, 1863  259 

Shiloh,  N.  C.  Atfair  at.  Sept.  17, 1862 13 

Sanders,  Horace  T.  Mentioned 735 

Sanderson,  John  W.  Mentioned 82 

Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  at. 

Feb.  13, 1863.  See  Batchelder's  Creek,  N.  C.  Expedition  from,  Feb.  12-13, 1863. 

April  20,  1863.  Reports  of 

Jones,  J.  Richter 239 

Ransom,  R.,jr 2.55 

Willson,  John  M 239 

See  also  report  of  Prince,  j).  226. 

Sanford,  Charles  D.  Mentioned 366,367 

Sawtell,  Edward  D.  Mentioned 135 

Scales,  P.  P.  Mentioned 163 

Schenck,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 1025 

Schlachter,  F.  Mentioned 61,62 

Schriver,  Scout.  Mentioned 967 

Schulz,  Carl.  Mentioned .• 303 

Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad,  Va.  Operations  on  the.  May  12-26,1863. 
Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 719, 720, 722,  723, 725 

Feck,  John  J 716,718,722-724 

“ Record  of  Events,”  7th  Corps 354 

Reports  of 

Dix,  John  A 354 

Feck,  John  J.... «...  354, 355 


1182 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Seabury,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 280 

Seawell,  John  T.  Mentioned 51 

Seddon,  James  A.  Mentioned 107, 782, 794, 799, 816- 


818,  823,  825, 826, 831, 848, 858, 860, 869-871, 875, 884, 888, 893, 896, 904, 908, 
918, 919,  927,  931,  935-937,  958,  966,  969,  972-974, 977, 978, 999, 1011, 1015, 
1028,  1029,  1043,  1047,  1055,  1058,  1059,  1070,  1077,  1081-1083,  1090,  1091 
For  correspondence,  etc.  see  War  Department,  C.  S. 


Sedgwick,  John.  Mentioned 534, 565, 906, 944, 1048 

Selby,  Milton.  Mentioned 196 

Seward,  William  H.  Mentioned 277,44.3,445,667 

Seymour,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 223, 243 

Seymour,  Horatio.  Mentioned 994 

Sharp,  R.  J. 

Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 1030 

Mentioned 167,896 

Sharp,  William.  Mentioned 1020 

Shaw,  E.  F.  Mentioned 198 

Shaw,H.  M.  Mentioned 111,117,118 

Shawsheen  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 170-172 

Shays,  Scout.  Mentioned 1041,1045,1048,1070 

Shearer,  William  B.  Mentioned 70 

Sheldon,  Oscar.  Mentioned 509 

Shelton,  Aronnata.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  David.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  David,  of  Sipus.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  Isaac.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  James.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  James,  jr.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  Rod  (Stob  Rod).  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  Sipus.  Mentioned 893 

Shelton,  Will.  Mentioned 893 

Shenk,  R.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Treasury  Department,  U.  S 429 

Mentioned 429, 456 

Shepard,  Jeremiah  M.  Mentioned 322 

Sheridan,  John.  Mentioned 100 

Shiloh,  N.  C.  Operations  at  and  about. 

Sept.  17,  1862.  Report  of  Enos  C.  Sanders 13 

Sept.  20,  1862.  Report  of  William  B.  Avery 14 

Shingler,  W.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Gustaviis  W.  Smith 742 

Mentioned 793,920 

Shingleur,  James  A.  Mentioned 333 

Shumaker,  L.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Carroll,  Gray .' 329 

French,  Samuel  G 328, 991, 1000 

Stribling,  R.  M 328 

Menti  ohed * 324,  325,  327,  336, 338 

Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Va.,  April  19, 1863  331 

SlnirtlefF,  William  S. 

Mentioned 577,736 

Report  of  expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.,  Dec.  11-20,  1862 88 

Sigel,  Franz.  Mentioned 751,818,819,864,876 


INDEX. 


1183 


Page. 

Sikes,  J.  H. 

Mentioned * . . . . 45 

Report  of  reconnaissances  to  the  Blackwater,  Va.,  Dec.  8-12,  1862 43 

Siler,  D.  W.  Correspondence  with  Governor  of  North  Carolina 772 

Simms,  John  M.  Mentioned 60 

Simons,  E.  R.  Mentioned 1020 

Simonton,  Charles  H.  Correspondence  with  W.  II.  C.  Whiting- 806 

Simpson,  John  G.  Mentioned 277,289,575,735 

Simpson,  Thomas.  Mentioned 221 

Sinclair,  Jefferson.  Mentioned 570 

Singeltary,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 955,956 

Sisson,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 215, 216, 222,  .577, 612, 737 

Slaght,  James  C. 

Correspondence  with  W.  W.  Tuttle 527 

Mentioned 512,526 

Slaten,  C.  W.  Mentioned 190 

Slaves. 

Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 391,461,464,501 

Viele,  Egbert  L 502 

War  Department,  U.  S 395 

See  also  Foster  to  French,  p.  497 ; Stanly  to  Foster,  p.  498  ; French  to  Foster, 
p.  505  ; Fool  to  Vance,  p.  745. 

Also  Refugees,  Freedmen  and  Abandoned  Lands. 

Employment  of,  as  laborers.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 480,726,739 

French,  Samuel  G 742 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 887, 896 

See  also  Halleclc  to  Foster,  p.  659 ; Wallis  to  Hoffman,  p.  674 ; Melton  to 
French,-^.  7.57  ; Gilmer  to  Gicynn,  pp.  758,  763 ; Gilmer  to  Melton,  p. 

761  ; Barnes  to  Smith,  j).  779;  French  to  Randolph,  p.  742;  Smith  to 
J.ee,  !>.  786;  Whiting  to  Hill,  pp.  904, 1076  ; Martin  to  Hill,  p.  1089. 

Insurrection  of  (proposed).  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jetferson 1077 

Lee,  Robert  E .• 1072 

Montgomery,  Augustus  S 1068 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 1067 

Sheer,  George  R.  Mentioned 398 

Slocum,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 819 

Small,  Nathaniel  W.  Mentioned 1003 

Smith  Briggs,  Steamer,  Mentioned 268, 

276. 277, 280, 610, 613, 616, 620, 636,  654,  674, 697 

Smith,  Chandler.  Mentioned 44 

Smith,  E.  Kirby.  Mentioned 856,872,1084,1089 

Smith,  F.  W.  Mentioned 807,860 

Smith,  George  (Lieutenant).  Mentioned 1.50 

Smith,  George  (Scout).  Mentioned 1022,1023 

Smith,  Gustavus  W. 

Assignments  to  command i 742,748 

Correspondence  witli 

Beauregard,  G.  T 806,813,825,833,836 

Elzey,  Arnold 800, 802 

Engineer  Departiuent,  C.  S.  A 756,761 

French,  Samuel  G 743,747-749,751,755,757,762, 

768, 770, 777-779, 781, 788, 792, 793, 803, 811, 816,  824,  840, 841, 854,  870-872 


1184 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Smith,  Gustavus  W. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Jones,  John  R 751 

Lee,  Robert  E 768, 771, 784, 786, 803,  818, 882 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 749,  856 

Pryor,  Roger  A 845 

Shingler,  W.  P 742 

War  Department,  C.  S 471,742,776,782, 

792,  799,  801, 805,  808,  832, 836,  838,  844, 845, 847, 850, 854,  858,  870,  871,  878 


794,  802-806,  808,  816,  830,  833, 837, 838, 844, 850, 855, 857,  858,  864,  867,  869 

Wise,  Henry  A 795 

For  correspondence  as  Actg.  Sec.  of  War,  see  War  Department,  C.  S. 

Mentioned 107, 

113, 117, 462,  557, 558,  742, 748, 751, 7.56, 759, 761, 763, 764,  768, 773, 776,  777, 
793,  798,  802, 805-807, 810-812, 814-816, 820, 823-825, 827-829,  833. 834, 839, 
844,  845,  848, 850-853, 856, 860-862,  868,  872,  895, 896, 900, 906, 908,  913, 928 
Reports  of  operations,  Dec.  13-18, 1862,  during  expedition  to  Goldshorough, 


N.  C 106-109 

Staff.  Announcements  of 742 

Smith,  James  G.  Mentioned 91 

Smith,  John  F.  Mentioned 280 

Smith,  Lewis  W.  Mentioned 576,734,1094 

Smith,  M.  B.  Mentioned 44 

Smith,  M.  T.  Mentioned 338-340 

Smith,  William  (Mr.).  Mentioned 256 

Smith,  William  (Corporal).  Mentioned 10 

Smith,  W.  H.  Mentioned 764-766 

Smith,  William  F. 

Itinerary  of  9th  Corps.  Transfer  to  Newport  News,  Va.,  Feb.  6-28,  1863. . . 149 

Mentioned 149, 536-539, 541, 546, 551,  564*  .565, 876, 906, 922 

Smith’s  Plantation,  Ware  River,  Va.  Expedition  to,  April  1,  1863.  See 
Yortitown,  Va.  Expedition  from,  April  1,  1863. 

Smoot,  D.  L.  Mentioned 331-333 

Smyth,  William.  Mentioned 360 

Snelling,  F.  G.  Mentioned 512 

Snipes,  T.  B.  Mentioned 170 

Soederquist,  Oscar.  Mentioned 280 


Somerton  Road,  Va.  Skirmish  on  the,  April  13,  1863.  See  Ajiril  11-May  4, 
1863.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.  Reports  of 


Corcoran,  Michael.  Fo-ster,  Pobert  S.  Peck,  John  J- 


Sorrel,  G.  Moxley.  Mentioned 896, 947, 997 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  James  Longstreet. 

South  Atlantic  Coast.  Affairs  on,  generally.  Communications  from  John 

G,  Foster 538 

South  Carolina. 

Operations  in.  Communications  from  G.  T.  Beauregard 1007,1021 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 873 

Beauregard,  G.  T 881 

Longstreet,  James 979,981 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 871 

War  Department,  C.  S 867,871,977,979.980,983,1058,1059 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 871,872,980,982,1058 

See  also  Notes,  pp.  871.,  875;  Longstreet  to  Sed^on^  p.  996. 


INDEX. 


1185 


Page. 

South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Battalions:  Palmetto  {Batteries),  "B,  C,  866.  Batteries: 
Chesterfield,  142, 145,  324, 332,  333, 1056  ; German,  917,  995  ; Macbeth, 
113,115,917;  Palmetto,  2d,  917,995;  Preston’s,*  821,  866;  Rhett’s[?], 

74. 

Infantry— ^affa//o/7s  ; 7th,  866.  Regiments : 1st,  5th,  6th,  564  ; 16th,  866  ; 

17th,  113;  22d,  71,79,113  ; 23d,  113;  24th,  809,  821,833,866;  25th,  74, 

866  ; Palmetto  Sharpshooters,  564. 

Miscellaneous — Hampton  Legion,  940;  Holcombe  Legion,  113,  751,759, 

764,  793, 795,  798,  920,  975,  994, 1006. 

South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida.  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Cliugman,  T.  L.,  relieved  from  duty  in 1034 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  95,1034. 
rjouth.  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  190,  602. 

Ke-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A .522,530,536 

Foster,  John  G 512, 514,  516,  520,  522,  524,  .530,  .533 

See  also  Dix  to  Halleck,  p,  529. 

Viele,  Egbert  L.,  assigned  to  duty  in  the 567 

Southeastern  Virginia.  Operations  in,  Aug.  20,  1802-June3,  1863.  Communi- 
cations from 

Adjutant  and  Inspeetor  General’s  Oftice,  C.  S.  A .'r84 


Causey,  C.  H 978,  993, 1026, 1055, 105^s 

Duke,  R.  T.  AV 892 

Elzey,  Arnold 953 

French,  Samuel  G 948 

Lee,  Robert  E 876,  880,  882,  883,  898,  921,  927, 946,  949, 954, 1024 

Longstreet,  James 896, 903, 923-926,  946, 948, 950,  958-960, 1057, 1061 

Pryor,  Roger  A 877,  879,  888,  889,  896 

Tabb,  W.  B 886 

War  Department,  C.  S 877,879,882,^85,889,927 

Wise,  Henry  A 892 

See  also 


Eastern  Shore. 

Gloucester  Peninsula. 
James  River. 

Pamunkey  Peninsula. 
Peninsula,  The. 

Southern  Virginia,  Department  of.t  (Confederate.) 
Confederate  troops  in,  organization,  strength,  etc. 

April  10, 1863  

May  10, 1863  

May  20, 1863  

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 

French,  Samuel  G. 

Assigned  to  command  of 

Relieved  from  command  of 

Merged  into  Department  of  North  Carolina 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  4, 1038. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863  : Nos.  3,  7,  327. 
Southfield,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 


978 

1056 

10(57 

953 

953 

1077 

1077 


46-48, 223, 230, 243, 259,  443,  613 


Company  A,  1st  Heavy  Arlillery. 

75  R R--VOL  XVIH 


t Foiuiiilly  constituted  April  1,  18G3. 


1186 


INDEX, 


Page. 

South  Quay  Bridge,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  May  1,  1863.  See  report  of  Peck,  p.  274  ; 

‘^Record  of  Events, p.  271 ; Itinerary,  p.  298. 

South  Quay  Road,  Va.  Skirmish  on,  April  11, 1863.  See  report  of  Peck,  p.  274. 
Southwest  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  at,  Dec.  13-14,  1862.  See  Dec.  11-20, 

1862.  Expedition  to  GoldshorougJi,  N.  C.  Reports  of 

Cole,  George  W.  Heckman,  Ckarles  A.  Smith,  Gustavus  W. 

Evans.  Nathan  G.  Howell,  Joshua  B.  "Wessells,  Henry  W. 

Foster,  John  G.  Ledlie,  James  H.  Zahriskie,  Abram. 


Spaulding,  S.  R.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 504,630,631,705,706 

Spear,  Samuel  P. 

Mentioned 16-18, 20, 35-37,  40, 

43,  132-134,  137-139, 199,  277-279,  289, 293, 300,  401, 414,  416, 453,  470,  474, 
483-485, 507, 509, 510, 513, 550, 551, 553, 560,  563, 576, 653, 710, 735, 941, 1094 
Reports  of 

Blackwater,  Va.  Expedition  toward  the,  Jan.  8-10,1863  125 

Deserted  House,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30,  1863 140 

Franklin,  Va.  Skirmish  near,  March  17,  1863 200 

Spence,  Alexander.  Mentioned 568 

Spencer,  John  A.  Mentioned 134, 139 

Spinks,  Jackson  C.  Mentioned 44 

Spinola,  Francis  B. 

Assignments  to  command 733 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 668,  733 

Palmer,  Inuis  N 248, 251 

Wessells,  Henry  W 252,253 

Itinerary  of  1st  Brigade,  5th  Division,  18th  Array  Corps,  siege  of  Washing- 
ton, N.  C.,  March  31-April  21, 1863  254 

Mentioned 123,167,172,173,176,216, 

219,  224, 228, 229, 233-235, 237, 254, 468, 485, 486, 488, 491, 494, 496, 497, 499, 
505,  548,  578,  584,  589,  590,  594,  599,  617,  622, 646, 669,  679, 737, 1023, 1054 
Reports  (*f 

Blount’s  Creek,  N.  C.  Action  at,  April  9, 1863  245 

Swift  Creek  Village,  N.  C.  Expeditious  to,  April  13-21, 1863  246, 252 

Washington,  N.  C.  Operations  during  siege  of. 

April  1-4, 1863  240 

April  8-9,  1863 244,247 

Spittle,  William.  Mentioned 321,322 

Sprague,  Augustus  B.  R. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 560 

' Mentioned 170,172,468,500,577,736 

Reports  of 

Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,  1862 81 

New  Berne,  N.  C. 

Expedition  from,  March  6-10,  1863 176 

Reconnaissance  from,  Jan.  17-21,  1863 129 

Sprague,  William.  Mentioned 461 

Sprinkle,  Hugh.  Mentioned 880 

S.  R.  Spaulding,  Steamer.  Mentioned u..  504,630,631,705,706 

Stackpole,  J.  L.  Mentioned 512 

Stacy,  Joshua  T.  Mentioned '552 

Stager,  Anson.  Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 483 

Stahl,  William  H.  Mentioned 735 

Stanly,  Ed. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 182,498,525 

Mentioned 157,  449, 497, 498, 505, 506, 826, 905, 966 


INDEX 


1187 


Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 


Page. 
394, 395, 


401,  402, 407, 410, 414,  417-420,  430, 433, 435,  438,  440, 444, 445, 448, 
450-454,  469,  473, 480,  508,  521, 570, 587,  650,  651,  659, 711,  718,  731 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  JFar  Department,  U.  S. 


Stark,  A.  W.  Mentioned 920 

Starr,  J.  B.  Mentioned 120, 121 , 865, 971 

State  of  Maine,  Steamer.  Mentioned 387 

Stedman,  GrifSn  A.,  jr. 

Mentioned 313,  575, 735 

Reports  of 

Providence  Churcli  Road,  Va.  Reconnaissance  on  the.  May  3, 1863 315 

Suffolk,  Va.  Operations  during  siege  of,  April  11-30,  1863 315 

Stepping  Stones,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 271, 

276, 304, 305, 314,  317, 510,  661,  666,  697, 702 
Stepping  Stones,  U.*S.  S.,  Comdg.  Officer.  Correspondence  with  S.  P.  Lee.  510 

Stetson,  Abisha.  Mentioned 148,206 

Stetzel,  George.  Mentioned 18, 123, 140, 558 

Steuart,  George  H. 

Assignments  to  command 1070 

Mentioned.. 1070 

Stevens,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 955 

Stevens,  Aaron  F.  Mentioned 307,312,315,575,735 

Stevens,  Clement  H.  Mentioned • 801,821,828,857,896 

Stevens,  Hazard.  Mentioned 276,308,313 

Stevens,  Walter  H. 

Correspondence  with  Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 884 

Mentioned 109, 110, 869, 885, 1009 

Report  of  operations, Dec.  16-17, 1862,  expedition  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C..  110 

Stevenson,  Captain.  Mentioned 354 

Stevenson,  John  S.  Mentioned 735 

Stevenson,  R.  H.  Mentioned 83 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G. 

Mentioned 21, 22, 54,  .56,  85,  378,  402,  411 , 468,  500, 548, 599,  679, 700 

Reports  of 

Goldsborough,  N C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,1862  82 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from,  Nov.  1-12, 1862  22 

Stewart,  Andrew.  Mentioned 97, 1('4 

Stewart,  Charles  H.  Mentioned * 578 

Stewart,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 280,707,718,720 

Stewart,  James,  jr.  Mentioned 95 

Stirling,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 280 

Stone,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 424 

Stone,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 66,173,246,252,501 

Stone,  J.  M.  Mentioned 802 

Stoneman,  George.  Mentioned 701, 706, 708, 1018, 1024, 1029, 1058 

Stoneman’s  Raid.  April  29-May  7, 1863.  Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 684,689,  702,730 

Hooker,  Joseph 683,  721,  730,  732 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 687,689,701,730 

Kilpatrick,  Jndson 707,710,721 

King,  Rufns 706,  708 

Longstreet,  James 1046,1051 

Peck,  John  J 684 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 1044 


1188 


INDEX. 


Stoneman’s  Raid.  April  29-May  7, 1863 — Continued.  Communications  from 


War  Department,  C.  S 1039 

War  Department,  U.  S 708 

See  also 


May  3,  1863.  Ashland  and  Hanover  Station,  Va.  Skirmishes  at. 

4-  5,  1863.  Hangar >/  Station,  TanstaWs  Station,  Hanovertown 
Ferrg,  and  Ayletfs,  Va.  Skirmishes  at. 

Also  Bix  to  Halleck,  p.  704 ; Longstreet  to  Hill,  p.  1047. 

Also  Note,  p.  1036. 


Storer,  Jacob  J.  Mentioned 316,320 

Stratton,  Franklin  A, 

Correspondence  with  ^ 

Dix,  John  A 689 

Peck,  John  J 693 

Roberts,  W.  Dewees 693 

Viele,  Egbert  L 350 

Mentioned 36, 37, 126, 199, 200, 202, 203, 271, 276, 277, 280, 285, 356,  358, 

524,  528, 530,  539,  542,  626, 639,  644,  650,  652,  654,  657, 658, 663, 689, 699, 722 
Stribling,  Robert  M. 

Correspondence  with  L.  M.  Shumaker 328 

Mentioned 325,  326,  328,  331-335, 969 

Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Va.,  April  19,  1863 336 

Stringham,  S.  H.  Mentioned..., 437 

Strong,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 7 

Strong,  Edward  N.  Mentioned 512 

Strong,  Janies  H.  Mentioned 512 

Strong,  R.  P.  Mentioned 273,  274, 260 

Stroup,  Private.  Mentioned 19 

Stuart,  J.  E.  B.  Mentioned  39, 


341,  520, 815, 817, 818, 936, 996, 1018, 1024, 1029, 1048, 1071 


Studley,  John  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  G.  Foster 

Mentioned 

Sturdivant,  N.  A.  Mentioned 

Sturgis,  Russell,  jr.  Mentioned 

Sturgis,  Samuel  D.  Mentioned 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 

Subsistence  Stores.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Suffolk,  Va. 

Engagement  near,  Jan.  30,  1863.  See  Deserted  House,  Va.* 

Evacuation  of,  by  Union  forces,  July  3,  1863.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 

Barnard,  John  G 

Cullum,  George  W 

Dix, John  A 

Totten,  J.  G 

Expedition  from,  Sept.  2-3, 1862.  Report  of  John  A.  Dix 

Operations  about,  Nov.  12-14,  1862.  Report  of  John  J.  Peck 

Reconnaissance  from,  March  7-9,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 

Peck,  John  J 

Report  of  Charles  C.  Dodge 


..  564 

129, 560 
750, 788 
349, 350 
562-565 


764, 769 
. 940 


712,717,718 

712 

712 

....  711,718 

712 

4 

31 


555 

555 

179 


INDEX. 


1189 


Page. 

Suffolk,  Va. — Continued. 

Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863. 

Casualties.  Eeturns  of.  Union  troops 286-288 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 595,682 

Baylor,  T.  G 664,672 

Davis,  Jefferson 976,1009 

Davis,  Joseph  R 993 

Dix,  John  A 285, 

603, 608, 610, 611,  613-616,  619,  621, 625, 626, 628, 630, 632, 633, 635-637, 639, 
642, 645, 653, 655, 657-659, 663, 664, 667, 671, 682, 685-689, 691, 692, 701 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 330,977,1008 

French,  Samuel  G 991, 

993, 995, 1000, 1010, 1015, 1016, 1018, 1025, 1033, 1038, 1042, 1043 

Hood,  J.  B 1042 

Hooker,  Joseph 606, 679, 683, 684, 691, 692 

•Jenkins,  M 963 

Johnson,  A.  B 664 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 595-599, 601, 603, 604 

Lamson,  E.  H 642 

Lee,  John  C 610 

Lee,  Robert  E 906, 966, 974, 996, 1009 

Lee,  S.‘  P 611,  615, 616, 618, 621, 634, 635, 639, 642-644, 651 , 660, 694, 702 

Longstreet,  James 910,944, 

958,  959,  962, 963, 968, 969, 973, 977, 988-990, 996-999, 1001-1004, 1009, 
1010,  1014-1016,  1020,  1021,  1025,  1026,  1031,  1033,  1037-1042,  1044 

Milligan,  J.  F 1003 

Myers,  Charles  D 997 

' Navy  Department,  C.  S 976 

Peck,  John  J 597, 

599,  600,  603,  605-607,  610,  614-617,  619,  620,  625-628,  632-635,  637,  639, 
641, 644, 650, 653-655, 658, 663,  664, 667, 672,  683-685, 687, 689, 690,  692, 699 

Pickett,  George  E 967 

Stratton,  Franklin  A 689 

Van  Buren,  D.  T 599 

War  Department,  C.  S 967,976,977,998 

See  also  Keyes  to  Halleck,  p.  604 ; Dix  to  Foster,  p.  667 ; Longstreet  to  Lee, 
p.  942;  Xee  to  Longstreet,  p.  942;  Longstreet  to  Hill,  p.  964. 

Congratulatory  orders.  (Dix)  270 

Co-operation  of 

Navy,  C.  S.,  with  Army 907, 

910, 944, 950, 959,  967, 968, 974, 976,  977, 996-999, 1008, 1009 

Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 268-271,275- 

28*0,  303-307, 309-311,  317-339,  .580,  597, 600,  603,  607,  610,  611,  615-621,  625, 
626,  ()34-037,  639,  CAQ-CAo,  650, 651 , 660-663,  672,  685, 686,  694 , 695, 702-704 
Extracts  from 

Philadelphia  Inquirer 282 

Richmond  Examiner 284 

Richmond  Sentinel 633 

Itineraries  of 

Murphy’s  brigade,  1st  Division,  7th  Corps,  A]>ril  9-May  3, 1863 296 

Terry’s  brigade,  1st  Division,  7th  Corj)S  Ajuil  11-30,18(53 292 

Wardrop’s  Reserve  Brigade,  April  24-May  1,  1863 298 

“Record  of  Events.”  Department  of  Virginia 271 


1190 


INDEX. 


Page. 


Suffolk,  Va.—Continued. 

Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  186.3. 

Keports  of 

Corcoran,  Michael 288,290 

Crosby,  Hiram  B.,  May  3, 1863 321 

Davis,  Charles  L 272 

Dix,  John  A 268, 269 

Dodge,  Charles  C 299 

Dutton,  Arthur  H 316 

Fairchild,  Harrison  S 308 

Foster,  Robert  S 293 

French,  Samuel  G 329 

Getty,  George  \V 301 

Gordon,  George  H.,  May  1-4, 1863 323 

Harland,  Edward 312 

Lamson,  R.  H 1 662 

McConihe,  John,  April  17-May  4, 1863  295 

McEvily,  William 298 

Pease,  William  R.,  April  19-May  4, 1863 309-311 

Peck,  John  J 274,281,284 

Stedman,  GrifiQu  A.,  jr.,  April  11-30, 1863  315 

See  also 


April  15,  1863.  Edenton  Road  Skirmish  on  the. 

19,  1863.  Batlenj  Huger  Capture  of. 

23,  1863.  Chuckatuck.  Affair  at. 

24,  1863.  Edenton  Road.  Skirmish  on  the. 

May  3,  1863.  Providence  Church  Road.  Reconnaissance  on  the. 
Skirmish  near,  Dec.  28, 1862. 


Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 496' 

Report  of  Orris  S.  Ferry 123 

Third  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps,  transferred  to' 3,  558,  562 

Sullivan,  Captain.  Mentioned 280 

Suydam,  C.  C.  Mentioned 360,361 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 

Swan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 277,305,659 

Swan  Quarter,  N.  C. 

Expedition  to,  March  1-6,  1863.  Report  of  Colin  Richardson 1.57 


Skirmish  near,  March  4,  1863.  See  Swan  Quarter,  N.  C.  Expedition  to, 
March  1-6,  1863, 

Swansborough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  March  9,  1863.  See  Kew  Berne,  N.  C. 


Expedition  from,  March  6-10,  1863. 

Sweeny,  Talbot.  Mentioned 629,995 

Swift  Creek  Village,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  April  13-21,  1863. 

Communications  from  Henry  W.  Wessells 252,253 

Report  of  Francis  B.  Spinola j J 246,252 

See  also  Itinerary  1st  Brigade,  bth  Division,  18th  Army  Corps,  p.  254. 

Swindell,  Edward  S.  Mentioned 988 

Sylvan  Shore,  Steamer.  Mentioned 240,241 

Tabb,  William  B. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 886 

Mentioned 152, 153, 206, 207, 877, 920, 976, 994 

Reports  of 

Olive  Branch  Church,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  7,  1863.. 215 

Williamsburg,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  March  29, 1863 207 


INDEX. 


1191 


Page. 

Taliaferro,  V.  H.  Mentioned 142,179 

Tallmadge,  Grier.  Mentioned 480 

Tamblyn,  W.  Mentioned 273-275, 280 

Tansill,  Robert.  Mentioned 922 

Tappan,  Lewis  W.,  jr.  Mentioned 349 

Tatum,  George  M.  Mentioned 198 

Taylor,  Alexander  W. 

Mentioned 96 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,1862 103 

Taylor,  David  A. 

Mentioned 158,185 

Reports  of 

Anderson,  Fort,  N.  C.  Attack  on,  Marcli  14,  1863 184 

Goldsborougli,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,  1862 61 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from,  Marcli  6-10,  1863 , 170 

Washington,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  and  pursuit  of  Confederate  forces,  March 

30-April  20,  1863 217 

Taylor,  D.  L.  Mentioned 512 

Taylor,  O.  F.  Mentioned 799,800 

Taylor,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 492 

Taylor,  Rowley  P.  Mentioned 135 

Taylor,  W.  H.  For  correspondence  as  Asst.  Adj.  Gen.,  see  Eohert  E.  Lee. 

Teazer,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 626 

Terrell,  L.  R.  Mentioned 338,  339 

Terry,  Henry  D. 

Assignments  to  command 494 

Itinerary  of  1st  Brigade,  1st  Division,  7th  Corps.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va., 

April  11-30,  1863 292 

Mentioned 272, 

273, 276, 277, 27d,  286, 299,  312, 494, 575, 590,  592, 593, 676, 677,  734, 1093 
Tevis,  Charles  Carroll. 

Mentioned 261,343 

Report  of  reconnaissance  to  vicinity  of  Hickory  Forks,  Va.,  April  12, 1863.  341 

Tew,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 26,27,29,30 

Tew,  George  W.  Mentioned 215,468,500 

Thayer,  A.  M.  Mentioned 273-275,280,307 

Thomas  A.  Morgan,  Steamer.  Mentioned 544,545,592 

Thomas  Colyer,  Steamer.  Mentioned 240,241,618,640,646 

Thomas,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 444,448,490,511,541,589,738,739 

Thomas,  George  W.  Mentioned 64 

Thomas,  Lorenzo.  Mentioned 388,473,716,717 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjuiant-GeneraV s Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Thomas,  W.  H.  Mentioned 811 

Thompson,  Mr.  Mentioned 725 

Thompson,  George  S.  Mentioned 100 

Thompson,  Lewis.  Mentioned 745,747 

Thompson,  W.  B.  Mentioned 758,759 

Thompson’s  Bridge,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  Dec.  17,  1862.  Report  of  Jeptha 

Garrard 69 

See  also  Dec.  11-20, 1862.  Expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.  lleporis  of 
Foster,  Jolin  G.  Lcdlie,  James  11.  Smith,  Gnstavus  W. 

Thorburn,  C.  E.  Mentioned 866 

Thorp,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 132,134,137,139,280 

Thrupp,  Arthur  T.  Mentioned 738 


1192 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Timothy,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 198 

Titus,  Samuel  N.  Mentioned 356,358,722 

Tolies,  Samuel.  Mentioned 575 

Tomlin,  Robert.  Mentioned 261 

Tompkins,  William  D.  Mentioned 340 

Toner,  John  J.  Mentioned 261,341 

Toombs,  Robert.  Mentioned 915, 917 

Torpedoes.  Use  of,  as  means  of  warfare.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 743 

Rains,  G.  J 1082 

War  Department,  C.  S 1082 

See  also  Whiting  to  Hill,  p.  1022. 

Totten,  Joseph  G. 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 712 

Mentioned 712,829 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department,  U.  S.  A. 

Townley,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 95 

Towns,  Randolph.  Mentioned 953,1059,1060 

Townsend,  Robert.  Mentioned 688 

Tracey,  John,  jr.  Mentioned 134,138 

Trade  and  Intercourse. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 580 

Army  Headquarters 392 

Busteed,  Ricliard 204 

Dix,  John  A 205,  456, 523, 531,  535 

Jones,  J.  Richter 529 

Lee,  S.  P 522,523,535 

Lincoln,  Ahraham 572 

Peck,  JohnJ 639 

Prince,  Henry 682 

Shenk,  R.  W 429 

Smith,  Gustavus  W ' 777 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S 429 

War  Department,  C.  S 951 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 938-940 

See  also  Peclc  to  Dix,  p.  540 j Dix  to  Peck,  p.  541.  Also  Blockade. 

Orders  of  War  Department,  U.  S 580 

Proclamation  of  Abraham  Lincoln 572 

Transportation.  (Railroad  and  Water.)  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 490,  619, 620 

Beauregard,  G.  T 813 

Dix,  John  A 465,  487, 490,  492, 502, 504, 511, 619 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 825,952 

Ferry,  O.  S 487 

Foster,  John  G 516,533,541 

Harvie,  Lewis  E 951 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 591,. 592 

Naglee,  Henry  M 601 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 875 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 779,912 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 744 

Wadley,  W.  M 874 

War  Department,  C.  S 813,873 


INDEX. 


1193 


Page. 

Transportation.  (Railroad  and  Water) — Continued. 

See  also 

May  12-26,  1863.  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  B.  B.  Operations  on  the. 

15-28,  1863.  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  B.  B.  Operations  on  the. 

Also  Palmer  to  Foster,  p.  584  ; Whiting  to  Smith,  p.  780 ; Smith  to  Sed- 
don,  p.  858;  Longstreet  to  Hill,  p.  902. 

Treadwell,  C.  H.  Mentioned 274 

Trea.siiry  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Dix,  John  A 398, 445,  450,  451 

Shenk,  R.  W 429 

War  Department,  U.  S 429 

Trenton,  N.  C. 

Expedition  to,  March  6-7,  1863.  See  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Expedition  from, 

March  6-10,  1863. 

Reconnaissance  to,  Jan.  18,  1863.  See  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance 
from,  Jan.  17-21,  1863. 

Trent  Road,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  on  the,  Jan.  27-28,  1863.  Report  of  J. 

Richter  Jones 131 

Trigg,  Robert  C.  Mentioned 142,  145,  807 

Trowbridge,  James  L.  Mentioned 321,322 

Troxel,  Elias  S.  Mentioned 1.  188,  224,  242 

Tucker,  Captain.  Mentioned. 424 

Tucker,  John.  Mentioned 409 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S. 

Tunstall’s  Station,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  May  4,  1863.  See  Keyes  to  Dix,  p.  701. 

Tuttle,  W.  W. 

Correspondence  with  James  C.  Slaght 527 

Mentioned 526 

Statement  of. 526 

Tyler,  George  O.  Mentioned .* 80 

Tyndale,  Hector. 

Assignments  to  command 740 

Mentioned 740 

Tyson,  Josiah.  Mentioned 170 

Uncle  Ben,  Steamer.  Mentioned 416 

Underwriter,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 602 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Deserted  House,  Va.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  30,  1863 135 

Goldshorough,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  Dec.  11-20,  1862 60 

Kinston,  N.  C.  Demonstration  upon.  May  20-23,  1863 363 

Suffolk,  Va.  Siege  of,  April  11-May  4,  1863 286-28S 

Washington,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  etc.,  March  30-April  16,  1863 217 

Mentioned.  (Regulars.) 

Artillery,  Light — Regiments : 1st  (Batteries),  C,  469,  471,  472,501,  549, 

578, 679, 737  ; 4th  (Batteries),  D,  17, 18,  20, 132, 135, 136, 139, 288, 295,  377, 

468,  483,  487,  576,  677,  735,  1094 ; L,  35,  37,  125,  288,  305,  306,  313,  377, 

468,  483,  487,  576,  677,  735,  1094  ; 5th  (Batteries),  A,  287,  303,  305,  318, 
570,575,  676,  7.35;  5th  (Batteries),  M,  487,  576,  677,  734,  1094. 

For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

North  Carolina,  Department  of 378, 

411, 468,  469,  500,  501 , 533, 547-549, 576-578, 678, 679,  736  -738 

Virginia,  Department  of 376,  377,  384,  385,  396,  411, 

467, 468, 486, 487, 497,  499,  532,  546,  574-576,  675-677,  733-736,  1093,  1094 


1194 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Union  Troops— Continued. 

Recruitment,  organization,  etc.  Communications  from 


Adjutant-GeueraFs  Office,  U.  S.  A 492 

Dix,  John  A 666,672 

Foster,  John  G 472 

Peck,  John  J 472,  671 

Wessells,  Henry  W 598 

See  also  Colored  Troops. 

Upham,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 1 313,735 

Upshur,  C.  Littleton.  Mentioned 876 

Vaiden,  Judith.  Mentioned 799,801 

Vaiden,  Victoria.  Mentioned 801 

Vallee,  John  F.  Mentioned 293,310,317,576,734 

Valley  City,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 146,355,391 

Van  Alen,  James  H. 

Assignments  to  command 427 

Mentioned 374, 377, 427 

Van  Buren,  D.  T. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 585 

Mentioned 542,543 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  A.  Dix;  also  Erasmus  D.  Keyes. 

Vance,  Zebulon  B.  Mentioned  . 107, 

441, 447, 457, 752, 753, 769, 777, 779, 782, 789, 792,  80.3,  819,  823,  832, 842, 854, 
855,  860,  861,  874,  880,  888,  896,  928,  935,  937,  1053, 1065, 1072, 1073, 1077 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  North  Carolina,  Governor  of. 

Van  Heusen,  Stephen.  Mentioned 67 

Van  Ness,  William  W.  Mentioned 565 

Van  Wyck,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 738 

Vaughan,  W.  R.  Mentioned 341 

Vaughn,  Augustus  D.  Mentioned 295 

Vaun,  George.  Mentioned 198 

Venable,  S.  W.  Mentioned 874 

Vermont  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry— /?e^//ne/7fs ; 9th,  272, 287, 299,  302-305, 317, 318,  359, 625, 677, 735. 
Vessels.  See  Naval  Vessels. 

Vezin,  H.  A.  Mentioned ' 130 

Victoria,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 423 

Viele,  Egbert  L. 

Assignments  to  command 567 

Correspondence  with 

Dix,  John  A 356,  384,  404,  .501,  .502, 542, 568,  611,  615 

Peck,  John  J 542,  614, 620, 627, 654,  722 

Stratton,  Franklin  A 356 

Mentioned 275, 279,  356,  376, 377,  384,  393,  404,  405,  408,  409,  411, 412, 

417,  421, 423,  427,  467, 468,  474,  486, 494,  499,  519, 520,  523, 531,  532, 535, 542, 
546, 567, 568, 570, 574, 575, 580, 583, 595, 615, 626,  675,  677, 7 12, 733,  735, 1093 

Virginia,  C.  S.  S.  (Merrimac,No.  1.)  Mentioned 385,416 

Virginia. 

Military  departments  embracing 748, 953, 1077 

Militia.  Communications  from 

Virginia,  Adjutant-General  of 835 

Virginia,  Governor  of 834 

War  Department,  C.  S 827,840 

Operations  in,  Aug.  20,  1862-Juue  3,  1863.  See 
Northern  Virginia. 

Southeastern  Virginia, 


INDEX.  1195 

♦ Page. 

Virginia,  Adjutant-General  of. 

Correspondence  witli  Virginia,  Governor  of 834 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863 : Jan.  9,  835. 

Virginia,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 482, 570 

Dix,  John  A 388, 389, 395, 396, 435, 458, 462, 488, 563, 568, 582, 667 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 586, 587, 609 

Lincoln,  A 458 

Bolles,  John  A.,  appointed  “ Provost- Judge”  to  try  cases  in ,503 

Busteed,  Richard,  assigned  to  duty  in 482 

Dix,  John  A.,  resumes  command  of 609 

Gordon,  George  H.,  assigned  to  duty  in 6.59 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D.,  assumes  temporary  command  of 586 

Mansfield,  J.  K.  F.,  relieved  from  duty  in 387 

Newhonld,  Mr.,  expelled  from 545 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  6,  503.  Corps : 7th,  No.  19, 12. 

Orders,  General,  series  1863 : Corps : 7th,  No.  13, 543 ; No.  32,  270.  April 
6,  586.’ 

Provisional  court  established.  Orders  of  John  A.  Dix ,503 

“ Record  of  Events”  during  siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  11-May  4, 1863 271 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 388, 

389, 392, 393, 401, 466, 534, 536, 608, 613, 619, 620, 624, 637, 660, 679 

Dix,  John  A 390, 392, 494, 508, 515, 536, 619, 621, 624-626, 671 

Heintzelman,  S.  P 608 

Terry,  Henry  D.,  assigned  to  duty  in 494 

Transfer  of  9th  Army  Corps  to 2, 149, 534, 536, 876, 877, 879, 888, 889, 896 

Tyudale,  Hector,  assigned  to  duty  in 740 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Aug.  31,  1862  .376,377 

Sept.  5,  1862  384,  385 

Sept.  20,  1862  396 

Sept.  30,  1862 411 

Nov.  30,  1862  467, 468 

Dec.  20,  1862  486, 487 

Dec.  30,  1862 .497 

Dec.  31,  1862 499 

Jan.  31,  1863 5.32, 109.3, 1094 

Feb.  28,  1863 546 

March  27,  1863  (3d  Division,  9th  Army  Corps) 570 

March  31,  1863 574-576 

April  30,  1863  67.5-677 

May  31,  1863 733-736 

Viele,  Egbert  L.,  relieved  from  duty  in 567 

Wistar,  Isaac  J.,  assigned  to  duty  in 686 

Virginia,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Elzey,  Arnold 978 

Virginia,  Adjutant-General  of 834 

War  Department,  C.  S 827,834,977 

Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  Department  of.*  (Confederate.) 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 861,895,914 

Davis,  Jefferson * 891 


* Geographical  comtnaiKl  of  Smith,  afterward  Longstreet. 


1196 


INDEX. 


f Page, 

Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (Confederate) — Continued. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

French,  Samuel  G 864 

Hill,  D.  H : 890 

Lee,  Robert  E 817-819,  856,  911 

Longstreet,  James .• 930 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 786,872 

War  Department,  C.  S 814,861,891 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Sept.  30,  1862 750,  751 

Oct.  20,  1862  759 

Oct.  31,  1862 764 

Nov.  30,  1862 788 

Dec.  10,  1862 793 

Jan.  31,  1863 865 

.Feb.  20,  1863 888 

Feb.  28,  1863 900 

March  1,  1863 901 

March  9,  1863 •. 915 

March  10,  1863 916,917 

March  19,  1863 929 

March  20,  1863 930 

Constituted,  and  limits  defined 748 

French,  Samuel  G. 

Assigned  to  and  assumes  command 861,  864 

Temporarily  assigned  to  command  of  artillery  serving  on  the  Black- 

water 988 

Orders,  Circulars,  series  1862 : Dec.  12,  794. 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  15,  794. 


Orders,  Special,  series  1863;  April  14,988;  May  2,  1038;  May  4,  1045; 


No.  39,  909;  (French)  No.  2,  995. 

Longstreet,  James,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 895,896 

Pickett,  George  E.,  assigned  to  duty  in 889 

Re-enforcemeuts  for.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 813 

Clingman,  T.  L 852 

Davis,  Jefferson 770,  823,  848 

French,  Samuel  G 822,  823 

Lee,  Robert  E 801,812,817-819,825 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 768,838,847 

War  Department,  C.  S 801,810-812 

See  also  Smith  to  Lee,  p.  786;  Notes,  p.  871. 

Smith,  Gustavus  W.,  assigned  to  command  of 748 


Spbdi visions  of.  See 

Xorth  Carolina,  Department  of, 

Richmond,  Department  of. 

Southern  Virginia,  Department  of. 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments  : 4th,  920,  995. 

Artillery,  Battalions : 12th.  1056, 1067.  Batteries  : Alexandria,  331, 

333,  1001,  1069,  1076;  Armistead’s,  920;  Blount’s,  995;  Branch’s,  917; 
Dabney’s,  787,  807,  997,  1076;  Fauquier,  279,  324,  325,  328,  329,  331-338, 
989,  995, 1001, 1004, 1009,  1014  ; French’s,  920 ; Hampden,  335,  995  ; Mar- 
tin’s, 142,  145,  331 ; Norfolk  Blues,  787 ; Petersburg  Rocket,  17,  19, 


INDEX. 


1197 


Page. 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Petersburg  Rocket  (continued),  35,  36,  42; 
Richmond  Fayette,  334,  995  ; Staunton  Hill,  866,  917 ; Sturdivant’s, 

900,  916,  917,  930,  978;  Wright’s,  142,  145;  Wyatt’s,  190,  191.  Regi- 
ments : 1st,  900,  916,  917,  930,  978,  1067. 

Cav'alry — Battalions : 27th,  142,  807 ; 32d,  795,  798, 800,  920,  975, 1006 ; 40th, 

341,  1059,1070.  Companies:  Barham’s,  1038,  1039.  Regiments:  5th,  341, 

..  1006;  9th,  342;  10th,  795,  920,  976,  1006,  1019;  13th,  751,  759,  764,  787, 

845  ; 15th,  749,  752,  759, 764,  787,  845. 

Infantry — Battalions:  City,  684, 1059;  2d,  Local  Defense  (<3- 1092; 

4th,  Local  Defense  (Naval),  1092;  5th,  Local  Defense  (Arsenal),  1092. 
Companies:  Confederate  Guard,  900,916,  917,930;  Hargrove  Blues, t 
900,  916,  917,  930,  978.  Regiments:  1st,  929;  5th,  658;  8th,  215;  14th, 

340;  17th,  289;  26th,  920,  995  ; 29th,  341,  807,  900,  916, 917,  930  ; 32d,978, 

1067  ; 46th,  208,  342,  343^892,  920, 1019 ; 50th,  142, 145,  519,  807  ; 54th,  142, 
145,807;  57th,  929;  59th,  207, 208, 209,  920, 995, 1019 ; 61st,  751,759,764, 

787, 845 ; 63d,,  142, 145,  807. 

Militia— /?e^//ne/7fs;  18th,  22d,  26th,  31st,  39th,  42d,  43d,  49th,  50th, 

53d,  63d,  64th,  66th,  69th,  73d,  83d,  84th,  96th,  98th,  101st,  110th, 


117th,  156th,  168th,  172d,  195th,  835. 

Voliva,  Thomas.  Mentioned 181 

Voorhees,  B.  F.  Mentioned 433 

Voris,  Alvin  C.  Mentioned 577,738 

Vought,  Philip  G.  Mentioned 737 

Wadley,  William  M. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 874 

Mentioned 859,873 

Wadsworth,  James  S.  Mentioned 409 

Wageley,  Louis.  Mentioned 26,30 

Wager,  Peter  H.  Mentioned 622,  651,  652,ti95 

Waldron,  S.  W.,  jr.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Henry  Prince. 

Wale’s  Head,  N.  C.  Destruction  of  Salt-Works  at,  Feb.  2,  1863.  Keport  of 

Francis  E.  Porter 148 

Wales,  Thomas  B.,  jr.  Mentioned 350 

Walker,  George  H.  Mentioned 257,258 

Walker,  H.  H.  Mentioned 749,802,1059 

Walker,  H.  P.  Correspondence  with  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 1056 

Walker,  Lindsay  R.  Mentioned 762 

Walker,  W.  S.  Correspondence  with  G.  T.  Beauregard 1013 

Wall,  Richard.  Mentioned 90 

Wallace,  G.  A. 

Mentioned , 207 

Eeporc  of  skirmish  at  Williamsburg,  Va.,  March  29,  1863  208 

Waller,  Richard  P.  Mentioned 1092 

Wallick,  William  F.  M.  Mentioned 294 

Wallis,  J.  W.  Correspondence  wilh  John  G‘.  Foster 674 

Walton,  J.  B.  Mentioned 8,6 

Walton,  Thomas.  Mention6d 896 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Baird,  E.K 1091 

Beauregard,  G.  T 799, 811-813, 816, 822, 1012, 1013, 1017 

Campbell,  J.  A 1082 

Davis,  Jefferson 803,  823,  834,  848,  860, 870,  891,  976, 1009,  lOl.S,  1053, 1081, 1082 


Four  batteries  serving  at  Petcrsbm  g,  Va.  t Originally  Company  I,  Pith  Virginia  Infantry. 


1198 


INDEX, 


Page. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with — Continued. 

Donelson,  D.  S 958 

Elliott,  Gilbert 853 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 330, 813, 952, 977, 1008 

French,  Samuel  G 45,  144,  742,  822,  823,  826,  867,  874, 1042 

Hall,  E.  D 1091 

Harvie,  Lewis  E 9.")1 

Hill,  D.  H.  861, 890, 983, 1005, 1016, 1047, 1048, 1050, 1052, 1053, 1059, 1076,  .1079, 1092 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 1082 

Jones,  Samuel 935,936 

Lee,  Eobert  E 801,  802,  805,  810,812, 814,  817,  819,  825,  844-846, 

851,876,877,879,880,  882,889,  974,  998,  1009,  1017,1066,1072,  1090,  1092 

Lee,  W.  H.  F 1045 

Longstreet,  James 326,  910,  967, 970,  972, 

977, 979, 981, 983, 996, 998, 1002, 1014, 1015,. 1025, 1039, 1042, 1045, 1050, 1051 

Lynch,  W.  F 789,858 

Martin,  J.  G 752 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 976, 1023 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 779, 792, 

821,  822,  827,  831,  840,851,873,895,897,902,909,  934,957,1026,1027,1045 

Pryor,  Roger  A 877,  879,  885,  888, 889 

Quarterraaster-GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 107 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 471, 742, 776, 782, 

792, 799, 801, 805, 808, 832, 836,  838, 844, 845, 847, 850,  854,  858,  870,  871, 878 

Virginia,  Governor  of 827, 834, 977 

Wadley,  W.  M 874 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 774, 781, 782, 862, 867, 872, 875, 892, 897, 

899, 904, 912, 938, 939, 951, 962, 971,  977, 980, 983, 988, 1005,  1024, 1058, 1081 


War  Department,  U.  S. 

•Correspondence  with 

Dix,  JohnA 382,387,391, 

395, 418,  433,  436,  440, 443, 449,  451, 452,  454, 461, 472,  474,  480, 482,  521, 714 

King,  Rufus 706,708 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 376,430,442,451,452 

Treasury  Department,  U.  S 429 

Orders,  March  31,  1863  580 

Orders  in  cases  of 

Abandoned  and  Captured  Property 580 

Trade  and  Intercourse €80 

Ward, . Mentioned 409 

Ward,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 760 

Ward,  Giles  F.  Mentioned,. 99,100 

Ward,  John  E. 

Mentioned 317,575,735 

Report  of  capture  of  Battery  Huger,  Va.,  April  19,  1863 314 

Ward,  Robert  B.  Mentioned ‘ 132 


Wardrop,  David  W. 

Mentioned 272, 279, 287, 298,  359, 575, 677, 729, 735, 1093 

Itinerary  of  Reserve  Brigade.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  April  24-May  1 298 


Warner,  John  A.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 295,387,422,429 

Warren,  Edward  J.  Mentioned 1092 

Washburn,  Israel,  jr.  Mentioned 461 

Washington,  N.  C. 

Attack  on,  September  6,  1862. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 5 


INDEX. 


1199 

Page. 


Washington,  N.  C. — Continued. 

Attack  nij^  September  6,  186::^. 

Reports  of 

Foster,  John  G 4,5 

French,  Samuel  G 10 

Mix,  John 7 

Potter,  Edward  E 6 

Defenses  of  (immediate). 

Communications  from 

Prince,  Henry 669,670 

Spinola,  F.  B 668 

Prince,  Henry. 

Assigned  to  command  of  the 669 

Relieved  from  command  of  the 670 

Expedition  to,  April  17-19,  1863.  Reports  of 

Foster,  John  G 212 

Heckman,  Charles  A 221 

Naglee,  Henry  M 220 

See  also  March  20-April  20,  1863.  Siege  of  Washington,  N.  C.,  and  pursuit 
of  Confederate  forces.  Reports  of 

• Foster,  John  G.  Palmer,  Innis  N.  {Itinerary) . 

Siege  of,  and  pursuit  of  Confederate  forces,  March  30-April  20,  1863.  * 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  Troops 217 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 586,  .589,  711 

Daniel,  Junius 951,954,974 

Dix,  John  A 585,  618,  622, 629 

Foster,  John  G 223, 228, 231-235, 594, 622, 623,  627 

Garnett,  Richard  B 955,  971, 975, 978, 984,  988,  989,  991, 992, 1001 

Hunter,  David 602 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 585, 588, 589, 591-593,  601 

Lee,  S.  P 631 

Longstreet,  James 931, 932, 937, 941, 943, 945, 968-970, 972, 973, 990 

Ludlow,  William  H .601 

Palmer,  Innis  N 227, 

228, 248, 251, 578, 579,  584, 585, 589, 593, 594, 612, 617, 618, 646 

Peck,  John  J 590 

Pettigrew,  J.  J 985,990 

Prince,  Henry  228-230, 2.36 

Van  Buren,  D.  T 585 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 943, 972 

See  also  Dix  to  Hallech,  p.  579  ; Longstreet  to  Lee,  pp.  942, 959, 960 ; 

Lee  to  Longstreet,  p.  943. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 211- 

215, 217, 218, 223, 224, 228-232, 241-244 

Itineraries. 

Jourdan,  James,  2d  Brigade,  5th  Division,  18th  Army  Corps 254 

Palmer,  Innis  N.,  Ist  Division,  18th  Army  Corps 219 

Spinola,  F.  B,,  Ist  Brigade,  5th  Division,  18th  Army  Corps 254 

Wessells,  Henry  W.,  4th  Division,  18th  Army  Corps 222 

Reports  of 

Foster,  John  G 211,212 

Potter,  Edward  E.,  April  16-17, 1863  218,219 

Prince,  IleTiry,  A})ril  4-6, 1863  222 

Richmond,  Silas  P.,  April  7-10, 1863 237 


1200 


INDEX. 


« 

. , Page, 

Washington,  N.  C.— Continued. 

Siege  of,  and  pursuit  of  Confederate  forces,  March  30-April  20,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Spinola,  F.  B., 

April  1-4,  1863  240 

April  8-9,  1863  244,247 

Taylor,  David  A 217 

See  also 

April  9, 1863.  Blount’s  Creek.  Action  at. 

13-21, 1863.  Swift  Creek  Village.  Expedition  to. 

.16-21,1863.  Kinston.  Expedition  toward. 

17-19, 1863.  Washington.  Expedition  to. 

20, 1863.  Sandy  Bidge.  Skirmish  at. 

Skirmish  near,  Feb.  13, 1863.  Reports  of 

Jocknick,  George  F 156 

Lyman,  Luke 155 

Washington,  N.  C.,  Comdg.  Officer  Confederate  forces  nearest.  Corre- 
spondence with  Edward  E.  Potter 424 

Washington,  Depaitment  of.  Orders,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  57,  608. 

Washington,  James  A.  Mentioned 945,956 

Washington,  John  C.  Mentioned .• 024, 982 

Waterbury,  Mr.  Mentioned 333 

Waterman,  James  H.  Mentioned 90 

Watson,  P.  H.  Mentioned 436 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S. 

Watts,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 888 

Wave  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 897 

Wead,  Frederick  F.  Mentioned 577, 737 

Webb,  W.  W.  Mentioned ,577 

Weber,  Max.  Mentioned 377 

Webster,  Ralph  C.  Mentioned 97 

Weehawken,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 530, 533, 857 

Welles,  Gideon.  Mentioned 2, 

4, 15, 34, 45, 52, 124, 183, 210, 267, 385, 397, 402,  407, 409,  412,  413,  417- 
421,  427,  429,  431,  433,  436,  438,  440,447-449,451,537,587.597,651 
For  correspondence,  etc^  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S. 

Wellman,  Abijah  J. 

Mentioned , 92,96,500 

Report  of  engagement  at  Kinston,  N.  C.,  Dec.  14,  1862 98 

Wells,  Francis  S.  Mentioned 223 

Wells,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 59,  60 

Wells,  W.  W.  Mentioned 131,367,369 

Wentz,  Erasmus  L.  Mentioned 716,724 

Wenzel,  John  P.  Mentioned 206 

Wessells,  Henry  W. 

Assignments  to  command 652 

Correspondence  with 

Foster,  John  G 147,  355, 721 

Spinola,  F.  B 252, 253 

Itinerary  of  4th  Division,  18th  Army  Corps.  Siege  of  Washington,  N.  C., 

March  15-April  13,  1863  222 

Mentioned 20,  33,  34,  38,  39,  41,  42, 54-59, 74, 77,  79,  81, 

85, 92, 94, 98-100, 227, 253, 254,  376,  377,  385, 414,  454, 459,  460, 468-470,  473, 
474, 476,  477, 480,  484,  487,  491,  494, 496,  499, 500, 505,  512, 516,  .5.33, 547,  .548, 
576, 594, 598,  617, 618,  647, 652,  668, 678, 679,  737, 982, 988, 1060, 1064, 1087 


INDEX. 


1201 


Wessells,  Henry  W. — Cou tinned. 

Keport  of  operations,  Dec.  5-21,  1862,  during  expedition  to  Goldslborough, 

N.  C 95 

West  Branch,  Va.  Engagement  at  mouth  of,  April  14,  1863.  See  April  11- 
May  4,  1863.  Siege  of  Suffolk,  Va.  Beports  of 
Getty,  George  W.  Peck.  Joku  J. 

West,  Department  of  the.*  French,  Samuel  G.,  assigned  to  duty  in 1077 

West  End,  Steamer.  Mentioned 276, 

280, 305,  408, 413,  483, 484,  610,  616,  621, 625,  636, 658,  674,  697 

West,  George.  Mentioned 1007,1017 

West,  James.  Mentioned 880 

West,  Robert  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 266, 629, 693 

King,  Kufus 266, 612 

Mentioned 262-266, 595, 596, 598, 601, 607, 677, 693, 717, 728,  729, 734, 995 

West  Point,  Va. 

Affair  near,  April  16,  1863.  See  Pamunkey  River,  Va. 

Evacuation  of,  hy  Union  forces.  May  31-June  1,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 730 

Dix,  John  A 72^,732,733 

Lee,  S.P 731 

War  Department,  C.  S 1090, 1092 

Itinerary  of  Gordon’s  division,  4th  Corps,  May  4-June  1,  1863 372 

Report  of  George  H.  Gordon - 372 

Expeditions  to, 

Jan.  7-9,  1863.  See  Torktoivn,  Va.  Expedition  from,  Jan.  7-9,  1863. 

Jan.  13,  1863. 

Communications  from  Erasmus  D.  Keyes 515 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 515 

Occupation  of,  hy  Union  forces.  May  7,- 1863.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 624,701,709 

Dix,  John  A 649, 690, 691, 699, 701,  702,  704-706 

King,  Rufus 706 

Lee,  Robert  E 10.56 

Lee,  S.  P 698,704 

Peck,  John  J 690 

See  also  I)ix  to  Lee,  p.  697 ; Dix  to  Halleck,  p.  707. 

West  Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  16th,  608. 

Wetherill,  Samuel.  Mentioned 33,125,126,140,280 

Wharton,  Captain.  Mentioned 1047 

Wheaton,  William  L.  Mentioned 585,613 

For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.  and  A.  A.  A.  G.,  see  Tunis  N.  Palmer. 

Wheelan,  James  N.  Mentioned 4, 126, 133, 138, 180, 303, 305 

Wheelan,  William.  Mentioned 19 

Wheeler,  John  J.  Mentioned 49,501,577 

Whipple,  Charles.  Mentioned - 575,1093 

White,  A.  Mentioned 539 

White,  Alvin.  Mentioned 735 

White,  David  B.  Mentioned 737 

White,  Edward.  Mentioned 119 

* J<).seph  E.  Jobnatou’s  geographical  command. 

7G  R R — VOL  XVIII 


1202 


INDEX. 


Page. 

White  Hall,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  Dec.  16, 1862.  Eeport  of  B,  H.  Robertson.  121 
See  also  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  Expedition  to  GoldshoroiigJi,  N.  C.  Reports  of 
Amory,  Thomas  J.  C.  Hall,  Newton.  Pickett,  Josiah, 

Chambers,  John  G.  Heckman,  Charles  A,  Smith,  Gustavus  W. 

Codman,  Charles  li.  Holbrook,  Charles  L.  Stevenson,  Thomas  G. 

Fellows,  John  F.  Jenney,  Edwin  S.  Taylor,  David  A. 

Foster,  John  G.  Ledlie,  James  H.  Zabriskie,  Abram. 

White  Hall  Bridge,  N.  C.  Affair  at,  Dec.  15, 1862.  See  Dec.  11-20,  1862.  Ex- 
pedition to  Goldshorougli,  N.  C.  Reports  of 

Foster,  John  G.  Smith,  Gustavns  "W. 

White,  John  E.  Mentioned 272,299 

Whitehead,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 223,243,260 

Whitehead,  Mr.  Mentioned 125 

Whitehead,  Jeff.  Mentioned 44 

Whitehead,  V/.  B.  Mentioned 44 

White  House,  Va.  Expedition  to,  Jan.  7-9,  1863.  See  YorMoivn,  Va.  Expe- 
dition from,  Jan.  7-9,  1863. 

White  Oak  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  Jan.  19,  1863.  See  Neiv  Berne,  E.  C. 

Recon  naissa  nce  from,  Jan.  17-21,  1863. 

Whitford,  Edward.  Mentioned 1023 

Whitford,  John  D.  Mentioned 859 

Whitford,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with  D.  H.  Hill 1022,1054 

Mentioned 194, 255,  824, 914, 921, 924, 971, 990, 1012, 1053, 1074, 1085 

Whiting,  Jasper  S.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen- 
eraVs  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C. 

Address  to  people  of  Wilmington,  N.  C 787 

Assignments  to  command 770 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 848,913,922 

Baker,  John  A 821,844,850,851,858 

Beauregard,  G.  T 780,791,805,806,816,821,822, 

825-827, 833,  836, 838, 839, 842, 850, 871, 875, 881, 1011, 1012, 1017, 1035, 1058 

Benhow,  H.  L 873 

Flanner,  J.  H 1035 

French,  Samuel  G 785, 852, 855, 863,  868 

Gist,  S.  R 801 

Gwathmey,  Washington 843 

Harrison,  George  P.,  jr 831,851 

Hedrick,  John  J 848 

Hill,  D.  H 893,896,904,910, 

972,982,987,1022,1041,1045,  1048,  1049,1052,  1058,1070,  1073,  1076,  1080 

Lamb,  William 843,857 

Longstreet,  James 905, 907,  913, 920,  943, 945,  947,  949, 961, 962, 972, 973 

Lynch,  W.  F 820,863 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 1024 

Newkirk,  Abrabam  F 808 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 790,  879,  887 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 868, 1035 

Radcliffe,  James  D 794 

Rhett,  T.  S 1000 

Sharp,  R.J 1030 

Simonton,  Charles  H 806 


- INDEX.  . 1203 

Page. 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Smith,  Gustavos  W 773,  780, 783, 786, 789, 791, 

794, 802-806, 808, 816,  830,  833,  837, 838,  844,  850,  855, 857,  858, 864, 867,  869 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A 940 

Walker,  H.  P 1056 

War  Department,  C.  S 774, 781, 782, 862, 867, 872, 875, 892, 897, 

899, 904, 912,  938, 939, 951, 962,  971,  977, 980, 983, 988, 1005, 1024, 1058, 1081 

Mentioned 108, 167, 189, 770, 771,  773, 776,  7^-2, 783,  787, 788,  793,  794,  801, 

809,  832,  833,  836, 838,  840,  844,  856,  858,  859,  864-866,  868,  871,  873,  875,  879, 
890,  901,  903,  905,  909,  911,  916,  917, 921, 925,  938,  941, 947, 949,  961, 962,  964, 
965, 969, 972, 983, 986, 990, 998, 1000, 1012-1015,  1018,  1023,  1030, 1034, 1059 

Report  of  capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Ellis,  on  New  River,  N.  C.,  Nov.  25, 1862  34 

Whitner,  W.  H.  Mentioned 144 

Whitney,  Russell  M.  Mentioned 259 

Whitney,  Stephen.  Mentioned 18,134,280 

Whiton,  John  C.  Mentioned 736 

Whitty,  Jasper  M.  Mentioned 1093 

Whytal,  Thomas  G.  Mentioned 509 

Widow,  Schooner. 

Mentioned 985 

Seizure  of.  Communications  from  R.  B.  Garnett 984 

Wiestling,  George  B.  Mentioned 735, 1093 

Wilcox,  Cadmus  M.  Mentioned 704,  705 

Wild,  E.  A.  Mentioned 659,723 

Wilder,  C.  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 570,  591, 739 

Mentioned 391 , 395, 570 

Wiley,  W.  J.  Mentioned 197, 198 

Wilkes,  Charles.  Mentioned 438,555 

Wilkeson,  Bayard.  Mentioned 134 

Willard,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 880 

Willard,  Elkana.  Mentioned 880 

Willard,  Lee.  Mentioned 880 

Willard,  Lucinda.  Mentioned 669 

Willard,  William.  Mentioned 880 

Willcox,  Orlando  B.  Mentioned 149,  457,  562-.505 

William  Penn,  Vessel.  Mentioned 448 

Williams,  Augustus  H.  D.  Mentioned 1093 

Williams,  Fort,  N.  C.  Fort  at  Plymouth,  N.  C.  (So  called) 644 

Williams,  Griffin  S.  Mentioned 242 

Williams,  John.  Mentioned 880 

Williams,  L.  B.  Meniioned 170 

Williams,  R.  K.  Mentioned 116 

Williams,  Seth.  Forcorrespondeuceas  Assistant  Adjutant-General,  see  George 
B.  McClellan  ; also  Joseph  Hoqjcer. 

Williams,  Thomas.  Mentioned 644 

Williams,  Willis.  Mentioned 14 

Williamsburg,  Va. 

Reconnaissance  from,  Nov.  22,  1862. 

Communications  from  John  A.  Dix 461 

Report  of  John  A.  Dix 34 

Scout  from,  Jan.  19,  1863. 

Communications  from  Erasmus  D.  Keyes 130 

Report  of  William  G.  McCaudless 130 


1204 


INDEX. 


Williaiiisburg,  Va. — Continued. 

Skirmishes  at. 

Sept.  9,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 11 

Dix,  John  A 387,  390 

Court-martial  in  case  of  Jacob  P.  Wilson 11-13 

Eeport  of  John  A.  Dix 11 

March  29,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Busteed,  Richard 203,204,206 

Dix,  John  A 205 

Reports  of 

Busteed,  Richard 203 

Lewis,  AVilliam 205 

Tahb,  William  B 207 

AVallace,  G.  A 208 

Wise,  Henry  A 206 

April  11,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 728 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 263-266, 595 

King,  Rufus 266 

West,  Robert  M 266 

Reports  of 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 262 

King,  Rufus 262-266 

Williamson,  Samuel  M.  Mentioned 148, 150 

Willson,  John  M. 

Mentioned 8, 68,  368, 424, 559 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Sandy  Ridge,  N.  C.,  April  20,  1863  239 

Wilmington,  N.  C. 

Address  to  people  of.  (Whiting) 787 

Defenses  of  (immediate).  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 770,773,  817 

Beauregard,  G.  T 836,838,839,1011,1017 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A 756 

Frobel,  B.  W 842 

Hill,  D.  H 893,1005 

Longstreet,  James 913 

Lynch,  W.  P 858 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 1023, 1024 

Rhett,  T.  S 770 

War  Department,  C.  S 912 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 773, 

774,  790,  820,  827,  831,  842,^843,  848,  852,  857,  862,  863,  867-869,873,887, 
892,  896,  899,  904,  913,  922,*  980,  982,  988,  1000, 1005, 1022, 1024,  1049,  1076 

See  also  Vance  to  Seddon,  p.  1027. 

Operations  about.  Communications  from 

Beauregard,  G.  T 842,850 

Martin,  W.  F 851 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 821, 842-844,  848, 850,  851, 1041, 1045, 1048, 1052 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Insx)ector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 826. 1031 

Beauregard,  G.  T 816,  817,  822,  825,  826,  836, 1011-1013, 1017, 1034-1036 


INDEX. 


1205 


Page. 

Wilmington,  N.  C. — Continued. 

Re-enfurcements  for.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 1015,1082 

Gist,  S.  R 818 

Longstreet,  James 907,  920 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 770,  776, 782, 788,  792,  816,  830,  832 

War  Department,  C.  S . ..  776,  777,  782,  816,  980, 983, 1012, 1015-1017, 1081, 1082 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C 773, 

774,  780-783, 785-787,  789-791,  801,  825, 833,  897, 1022, 1035, 1080, 1081 
See  also  Smith  to  Lee,-p.  786  ; Longstreet  to  Seddon,  pp.  996, 1014.  Also 
Notes,  pp.  799,  908. 

Sux^plies  for.  Communications  from  W.  H.  C.  Whiting 940 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C.,  assigned  to  command  of  the  Cax)e  Fear  River 770 

Wilson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 105,177,241,242 

Wilson,  C.  C.  Mentioned 865,866 

Wilson,  H.  W.  Mentioned 59,  527 

Wilson,  Jacob  P. 

Court-martial  in  case  of 11-13 

Mentioned 12,13,390 

Wilson,  James'.  Mentioned 272, 299 

Wilson,  John  E.  Mentioned 544 

Wilson,  William  R.  Mentioned 576,734,1094 

Winans,  Ira.  Mentioned 376,  377 

Winder,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 931 

Mentioned 707,  708,  749,  751,  793,  794, 978, 1059, 1062, 1077 

Windsor,  Va.  Skirmishes  near. 

Dec.  22,  1862.  Report  of  Orris  S.  Ferry 123 

March  9,  1863.  See  Suffolk,  Va.  Iteconnaissauce  froin,  March  7-9,  1863. 

Winfield,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  March  23,  1863.  Reports  of 

Dix,  John  A 201 

Foster,  John  G 202 

Peck,  John  J 202,203 

See  also  Gihhs  to  Longstreet,  p.  945. 

Winnisimmet,  Steamer.  ' Mentioned 361 

Winston,  J.  R.  Mentioned 165 

Winterbotham,  John  R.  Mentioned 134,138 

Wisconsin  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— i?affer/es : 2d,  1.33,137,  288,294,302,  303,307,  317,318,377, 

468,  487,  576,  677,  734, 1094  ; 4th,  278,  288,  293,  294,  303,  306,  309,  310,  317- 
319, 321, 322, 377, 468, 487,  576,  677, 734, 1094. 

Infantry— /?e^//ue/7fs:  19th,  271,287,  299,303,305,317,318,359,377,468,487, 

575, 625, 677, 735, 1093. 

Wise,  Henry  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Councill,  J.  Calvin 797-800 

Dickinson,  William 809 

Dix,  John  A 664 

Duke,  R.  T.  W 892 

Elzey,  Arnold 153,  892,  920, 975,  994, 1006, 1019, 1035 

Harman,  William 808,809 

Smith,  Gustavus  W 795 

Tabb,  William  B 886 

Mentioned 262-265, 435,  464,  563,  .598,  600,  601,  604,  607, 

610, 622, 628, 629, 641,  651, 6.52,  673, 684, 728,  7.33,  751,  759,  762, 764,  786,  793, 
800,  807,  810,  814,  866,  901,  917,  952, 1)65-968,  970,  1032,  1036, 1059, 1086, 1088 


1206 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Wise,  Henry  A. — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Olive  Brancli  Church,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  7,  1863 152 

Williamsburg,  Va.  Skirmish  at,  March  29,  1863 206 

Wise,  Peyton.  Report  of  affair  on  the  Pamunkey  River,  April  16, 1863  312 

Wise’s  Cross-Roads,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  April  28,  1863.  See  Kinston,  N.  C. 

Expedition  toward,  April  27-May  1,  1863. 

Wistar,  Isaac  J. 

Assignments  to  command 686 

Itinerary  of  Reserve  Brigade,  Department  of  Virginia,  during  operations 

• on  the  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad,  Va.,  May  15-28,  1863...  359 

Mentioned 686,  729, 735 

Withers,  John.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  A.  and  I.  G.'s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Woodford,  Stewart  L.  Mentioned 734 

Woodis,  Hunter,  Steamer.  Mentioned 611 

Woods,  Jo.  Mentioned 893 

Woodward,  Thomas  J.  Correspondence  with  C.  W.  Flusser 462 

Wool,  John  E.  Mentioned 388, 389,  392,  428,  430,  436, 437, 442, 449, 480 

Wooten,  James.  Mentioned 880 

Worth,  Gustavus  A.  Mentioned 280 

Worth,  William  K.  Mentioned 79 

Worthington,  W.  N.  Mentioned 121,122,1051 

Wren,  John  F.  Mentioned 1070 

Wright,  A.  R.  Mentioned 385 

Wright,  Clement  G.  Mentioned 1008, 1074 

Wright,  Dempsey.  Mentioned 259 

Wright,  P.  M.  Mentioned 788 

Wright,  Horatio  G.  Mentioned 948 

Wright,  William.  Mentioned 259 

Wright,  S.  T.  Mentioned 144,145,750 

Wyandotte,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 432,439,444,450,588 

Wyatt,  James  W.  Mentioned 191 

Yorktown,  Va. 

Defenses  of. 

Board  of  Army  Officers  to  examine. 

Appointed 379 

Report  of 379 

Review  of  report  of,  by  G.  W.  Cullum 381 

Communications  from 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 378,  380 

McClellan,  George  B 373, 374 

Peck,  John  J 391 

Memorandum  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores 381 

Expeditions  from. 

Jan.  7-9,  1863. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 124 

Report  of  Erasmus  D.  Keyes 124 

April  1,  1863. 

Co-operation  of  Navy,  U.  S.,  with  Army 256-258 

Reports  of 

Andrews,  William  S 257 

Gillis,  J.  H 256,258 

Keyes,  Erasmus  D 256 


INDEX.  1207 

Page. 

Yorktown,  Va.— Continued. 

Reconnaissance  from,  Dec.  11-15,  1862. 

Communications  from 

Dix,  John  A 479 

Naglee,  Henry  M 479,482 

Report  of  Henry  M.  Naglee 49 

Van  Alen,  James  H.  Relieved  from  command  at 427 

Young,  George  F.  Mentioned 274,280 

Young,  Louis  G.  Mentioned 193 

Young,  W.  L.  Mentioned 849, 922, 923,  1049 

Young’s  Cross-Roads,  N.  C. 


Expedition  to,  March  7,  1863.  See  New  Berne,  N.  C,  Expedition  from, 
March  6-10,  1863. 

Reconnaissance  to,  Jan.  19,  1863.  New  Berne,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  from. 


Jan.  17-21,  1863. 

Zabriskie,  Abram. 

Mentioned 92, 501, 577,  737 

Report  of  expedition  to  Goldshorough,  N.  C.,  Dec.  11-20,  1862  94 

Zeigler,  M.  G.  Mentioned 114 

Zent,  Samuel  M.  Mentioned 294 

Zuni,  Va. 

Affair  near,  Oct.  3,1862.  See  Blaclcwater,  Va.  Skirmish  on  the,  Oct.  3, 1862. 
Skirmishes  at  and  near. 

Oct.  25, 1862.  Report  of  John  A.  Dix 19 


Nov.  14, 1862.  See  Suffolk,  Fa.  Operations  about,  A^ou.. 12-14, 1862. 

Dec.  8-12  1862.  See  Blackwater,  Va.  Reconnaissance  to,  Dec.  8-12, 1862. 

o 


, ...V-  • '1' .. 

■'■■}■■  ji  .>,4,  /,* ..-ii,, . t 


■•(.  .Sy, 


. » »;  *.  .’  ■■■■  « 

■ f ■■'•;- 

•-  - ■ ’"41 


" m 

. .■,rv,ii..l_rr,4  ■ 


" / - li 


■•'  V.,>  a‘i,  .. 


■■■•  ■"  ‘^rv 


■ >:  / ..fr  ‘y 
’."'i'.’.'fA 


■fA 


‘ -5 


.‘•a  •“'’■• 


i 

.1 


4 • , 


. A.*. 


V / 


