Book_ 


.$ 


Gopi^lit]^". 


^v 


/ 


GOPnUGHT  DEPOSm 


\ 


HISTORY  OF  THE  CAMPAIGN 


.  T.  j.  mi 


IN   THE 


Shenandoah  Valley  of  Virginia. 


FROM   NOVEMBER  4,  1861,  TO  JUNE   17,  1862. 


BY 

WILLIAM    ALLAN, 

FORMERLY    LIEUTENANT-COLONEL    AND   CHIEF   ORDNANCE    OFFICER,  SECOND   CORPS,  A.N.V. 


WITH 

FULL  MAPS  OF  THE  REGION  AND  OF  THE  BATTLE-FIELDS 

BY 

JED.   HOTCHKISS, 

FORMERLY   CAPTAIN    AND   TOPOGRAPHICAL    ENGINEER,  SECOND    CORPS,  A.N.V. 


^t:z  % 


PHILADELPHIA 

J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  &  CO. 

1880. 


Copyright,  1880,  by  William  Allan. 


^0 


kA 


d;edication. 


TO 

THE    PEOPLE    OF    LEXINGTON,  VIEGINIA, 

IN   WHOSE   MIDST 
JACKSON   MADE   HIS   HOME   IN   LIFE, 

AND   CHOSE   HIS   KESTING-PLACE   IN  DEATH. 


PREFACE. 


The  operations  of  General  T.  J.  Jackson  in  the  Valley  of  Virginia, 
during  the  first  half  of  the  year  1862,  constitute  one  of  the  most  bril- 
liant and  interesting  episodes  of  the  great  Civil  War.  The  theatre 
on  which  they  took  place  aiforded  a  quick  and  easy  approach  to  the 
Federal  capital  and  to  the  northern  States.  The  mountains  and 
rivers  of  the  Valley  gave  to  an  active  and  skilful  commander  many 
opportunities  of  neutralizing  great  disparity  of  force.  The  celerity, 
energy,  and  skill  which  Jackson  manifested  on  this  field  excited  the 
admiration  of  his  countrymen  and  produced  a  feeling  nearly  akin  to 
consternation  among  his  foes.  His  campaign  had  a  most  important 
bearing  upon  all  the  military  operations  in  Virginia  in  the  spring  and 
summer  of  1862,  for  he  caused  to  be  detained,  for  the  defence  of 
Washington  and  Maryland,  forces  in  the  aggregate  four  or  five  times 
as  numerous  as  his  own,  and  thus  in  a  fatal  degree  hampered  and 
paralyzed  McClellan.  The  story  of  this  campaign  will  always  be 
interesting  to  the  actors  in  it  on  both  sides,  and  not  merely  to  them ; 
to  the  student  of  military  art  it  affords  an  admirable  example  of  an 
aggressive-defensive  campaign,  and  one  of  the  best  instances  in  modern 
times  of  the  degree  to  which  skill  and  daring  may  neutralize  superi- 
ority of  numbers  and  resources. 

Our  aim  has  been  to  give  an  accurate  history  of  this  campaign  from 
official  sources.  Dr.  Dabney's  "  Life  of  Jackson"  was  written  during 
the  war,  and  without  access  to  the  Federal  sources  of  information. 
Much  has  been  ^vritten  since,  but  generally  in  the  shape  of  personal 
narratives,  or  of  statements  based  upon  the  newspaper  correspondence 
of  the  time.  Such  accounts  are  of  coiu-se  imperfect,  and  some  of  them 
are  so  partisan  in  cliaracter  as  to  be  of  no  value.     Until  recently  the 

6 


6  PREFACE. 

official  reports  were  in  a  large  degree  iuaccessible,  hut  this  Is  uo  longer 
the  case.  As  will  he  seen  by  the  foot-notes,  we  have  been  at  pains 
to  verify  all  important  statements  about  numbers, — in  a  great  many 
instances  from  the  original  MS.  returas  themselves. 

Our  thanks  are  due  to  Adj.-Gen.  Townseud  and  to  Gen.  M.  W. 
Wright  for  facilities  extended  to  as  in  the  examination  of  papers  in 
theii"  offices,  to  Dr.  Jones,  secretary  of  the  Southern  Historical  Society, 
for  many  favors,  and  to  A.  P.  Tasker,  Esq.,  of  the  Confederate 
archive  office,  and  J.  Vs^ .  Kirkly,  Esq.,  of  the  adjutant-general's  office 
(the  well-known  historian  of  the  First  Federal  Maryland  regiment), 
for  frequent  and  valued  courtesies. 

In  addition  to  the  official  rej)orts,  we  have  been  indebted  to  the 
various  lives  of  Jackson  by  Maj.  J.  Esten  Cooke,  Miss  Randolph, 
and  an  "  Ex-Cadet,"  and  especially  to  the  earliest  and  very  valuable 
biography  of  Jackson  by  his  former  chief  of  staff,  Dr.  R.  L.  Dabney. 
We  have  also  drawn  from  the  Historical  Papers  of  Gen.  G.  H. 
Gordon,  of  Massachusetts,  and  the  reminiscences  of  Gen.  Strother, 
and  from  many  others,  to  whom  our  obligations  are  acknowledged  in 
the  text  or  notes. 

A  full  diary  kept  by  Maj.  Hotclikiss  during  the  greater  part  of  this 
campaign  has  been  of  great  value.  AVe  are  also  indebted  to  a  diary 
kept  by  J.  A.  Waddell,  Esq.,  of  Staunton,  Virginia. 

The  maps  have  been  prepared  by  D.  C.  Humphreys,  C.  E.  of  the 
United  States  river  surveys,  under  the  direction  of,  and  from  the 
material  furnished  by,  Maj.  Jed.  Hotclikiss,  of  Staunton,  Virginia. 
Maj.  Hotclikiss  was  topographical  engineer  for  Gen.  Jackson  during 
this  and  his  subsequent  campaigns,  and  possesses  by  far  the  most 
valuable  mass  of  topographical  data  now  in  existence  relating  to 
these  campaigns.  Maj.  Hotchkiss  has  also  furnished  much  valuable 
information  besides  that  directly  credited  in  the  narrative. 

W.  A. 

McDONOGH,  Md., 
May  1,  1880. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER    I. 

PAGE 

ROMNEY  9 

CHAPTER    II. 
Kernstottx .33 

CHAPTER    III. 
McDowell 65 

CHAPTER    IV. 
Winchester 83 

CHAPTER    Y. 
Cross  Keys  and  Port  Republic        ........  130 


]% 

B 


HISTORY  OF  THE  CAMPAIGN 

OF 

GEN.  T.  J.  (STONEWALL)  JACKSON 

IN   THE 

SHENANDOAH  VALLEY  OF  VIRGINIA. 
1861-62. 


CHAPTER    I. 

ROMNEY. 

The  long  struggle  between  the  two  great  sections  of  the  United 
States  came  to  an  issue  of  arms  in  the  spring  of  1861.  For  years 
the  course  of  events  had  tended  to  this  result.  The  North,  great  and 
growing,  filled  with  the  most  advanced  ideas  as  to  popular  govern- 
ment, human  rights,  universal  equality  and  fraternity,  and  tending, 
because  of  the  immense  expansion  of  commerce  and  manufactures,  to 
a  centralized  government,  chafed  and  fretted  against  the  barriers 
interposed  by  a  strict  construction  of  the  Constitution  to  an  exten- 
sion of  its  civilization  over  the  entire  country.  The  foundations  on 
which  the  Union  had  been  reared  seemed  narrow  and  antiquated  to  a 
people  whose  growth  had  been  unprecedented,  and  who,  by  an  im- 
mense infusion  of  un-English  immigration,  had  lost  much  of  their 
reverence  for  the  traditions  and  principles  of  the  Fathers  of  the 
Republic.  The  South,  more  conservative  in  principle  and  practice ; 
less  changed  by  immigration ;  believing  slavery  the  best  relation  for 
the  negro,  and  a  necessary  condition  of  permanence  in  a  purely 
democratic  state;  saw  no  safety  for  its  institutions,  except  in  strict 
adherence  to  constitutional  guarantees,  and  watched  with  the  utmost 
jealousy  any  encroachments  attempted  upon  the  defences  which  the 
Constitution  had  thrown  around  the  weaker  party.  When  the  long 
political  struggle  culminated  in  the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  to  the 
presidency  in  1860,  some  of  the  southern  States  thought  it  time  to 

2  9 


ISTo.! 


10  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE  VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

dissolve  the  Union,  and  seek  safety  in  a  separate  government  from  the 
anti-shivcry  dehige  whieh  seemed  to  them  about  to  spread  over  the 
land.  The  border  slave  States  held  baek  for  a  time,  and  Virginia 
especially,  whieh  had  contril)uted  so  largely  to  the  formation  of  the 
Union  originally,  exertod  all  her  influence  to  bring  about  a  peace 
between  the  conflicting  sections,  but  in  vain.  Meantime,  Mr.  Lin- 
coln entered  upon  office  March  4,  1861.  In  a  few  weeks  his  concilia- 
tory sentiments  yielded  to  the  pressure  of  the  public  opinion  of  his 
political  associates  in  the  North.  Early  in  April  a  decided  stand 
was  taken  against  further  concession  to  the  seceding  States.  It  was 
determined  to  reinforce  Fort  Sumter,  in  Charleston  harbor.  On  the 
13th  of  April  the  fort  was  attacked  by  the  Confederates  and  taken. 
On  April  15,  President  Lincoln  issued  his  call  for  seventy-five 
thousand  troops  to  suppress  "  insurrectionary  combinations."  On 
April  17,  Governor  Letcher,  of  Virginia,  refused  to  obey  the  Presi- 
dent's call  for  troops,  and  on  the  same  day  the  Virginia  convention, 
all  its  efforts  for  peace  having  failed,  and  the  issue  being  now  war  on 
the  one  side  or  the  other,  repealed  the  ordinance  by  which  the  State 
had  originally  adopted  the  Federal  constitution,  and  seceded  from 
the  Union. 

The  authorities  of  Virginia  at  once  took  steps  to  organize  such 
military  force  as  she  possessed.  Volunteers  were  called  for,  and  such 
as  were  not  ready  for  immediate  service  were  ordered  to  Richmond, 
where  a  camp  of  instruction  was  established.  In  a  few  days  it  was 
determined  to  bring  down  the  senior  cadets  from  the  Virginia  Mili- 
tary Institute,  at  Lexington,  to  be  used  in  drilling  the  recruits.  On 
Sunday  morning,  April  21,  the  order  reached  Lexington,  Virginia, 
requiring  those  cadets  to  report  at  Richmond,  under  command  of 
Maj.  T.  J.  Jackson,  then  Professor  of  Natural  and  Experimental 
Philosophy  in  the  Virginia  Military  Institute. 

Maj.  Jackson  was  born  at  Clarksburg,  Western  Virginia,  January, 
1824,  entered  West  Point  in  1842,  graduated  in  1846,  distinguished 
himself  in  the  march  on  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1847  as  a  lieutenant 
in  Magruder's  battery,  was  brevetted  captain  for  gallant  and  meritori- 
ous conduct  at  Churubusco,  August  20,  and  major  at  Chapultepec, 
September  13,  1847.  He  accompanied  his  command  after  the  close 
of  the  Mexican  war  to  Fort  Hamilton,  whence  he  was  sent  to  Fort 
Meade,  near  Tampa  bay,  Florida.  While  here  he  was  elected,  in 
1851,  to  the  above-named  professorship  in  the  Virginia  Military 
Institute,  and  resigning  from  the  army  he  removed  to  Lexington. 
Here  he  resided  for  the  next  ten  years. 


ROMNEY.  11 

At  one  o'clock  on  Sunday,  the  21st  of  April,  1861,  the  cadets,  under 
Maj.  Jackson,  took  up  their  line  of  march  for  Staunton,  en  route  to 
Richmond.  He  then  left  his  home  for  the  last  time.  A  little  more 
than  two  years  afterwards  all  that  was  mortal  of  "Stonewall"  Jackson 
Avas  borne,  amid  the  tears  and  lamentations  of  his  countrymen,  to 
the  simple  village  churchyard  of  Lexington.  Maj.  Jackson  was  first 
assigned  to  duty  at  the  camp  of  instruction,  near  Richmond,  but  at 
the  end  of  a  week  he  was  commissioned  as  colonel  by  the  State  of 
Virginia,  and  ordered  to  take  command  at  Harper's  Ferry,  Virginia. 
He  arrived  there  on  the  29th  of  April,  and  held  command  until 
superseded  by  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,*  who,  upon  the  adhesion  of 
Virginia  to  the  Confederate  States,  was  sent  by  the  authorities  of  the 
latter  to  take  charge  of  this  important  post.  Col.  Jackson  was  then 
placed  in  command  of  one  of  the  brigades  of  the  army  gradually 
collecting  under  Gen.  Johnston.  He  was  made  brigadier-general  on 
July  3,  and  marched  to  Manassas  on  the  18th  and  19th,  when  Gen. 
Johnston  moved  to  the  assistance  of  Beauregard.  At  Manassas,  July 
21,  Jackson  contributed  materially  to  the  victory  won  by  the  Con- 
federates, his  brigade  checking  the  tide  of  Federal  success,  and  ren- 
dering conspicuous  service.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  received 
the  sobriquet  of  "  Stonewall,"  from  an  expression  used  by  Gen.  Bee 
in  reference  to  Jackson's  brigade.^ 

*  Gen.  Johnston  assumed  command  on  the  23d  of  May. 

*  The  first  battle  of  Manassas  was  fought  on  Sunday,  July  21,  1861,  between 
the  Federal  army,  under  Gen.  Irwin  McDowell,  and  the  Confederate  forces, 
under  Gens.  J.  E.  Johnston  and  Beauregard.  The  latter  commanded  the  army 
which  had  gradually  gathered  at  Manassas  to  resist  the  Federal  advance  from 
Washington,  while  Gen.  Johnston,  with  the  "Army  of  the  Shenandoah,"  con- 
fronted Gen.  Patterson,  who  was  advancing  from  the  Potomac,  at  Williamsport, 
towards  Winchester,  in  the  "  Valley  of  Virginia."  A  forward  movement  by 
McDowell  being  imminent,  Gen.  Johnston  was  ordered  to  unite  "  if  practicable" 
with  Beauregard  to  resist  it.  Slipping  away  from  Patterson's  front  on  the  18th 
of  July,  he  arrived  with  a  part  of  his  command,  including  Jackson's  brigade, 
at  Manassas  on  the  20th,  and,  after  consultation  with  Beauregard,  determined 
to  attack  McDowell  the  next  day,  in  order  to  fight  him  before  Patterson  could 
join  him.  McDowell,  however,  who  was  moving  without  reference  to  Patterson, 
had  determined  upon  an  advance  on  the  same  day.  Johnston's  plan  was  to 
throw  forward  his  right  across  Bull  Kun  and  advance  directly  upon  Centreville, 
the  heart  of  the  Federal  position.  For  this  purpose  the  mass  of  the  Confeder- 
ates were  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  the  lower  fords  of  Bull  Run,  near  the  direct 
road  from  Manassas  to  Centreville,  while  the  upper  fords,  opposite  the  Con- 
federate left,  were  guarded  by  small  bodies.  McDowell,  on  the  other  hand, 
determined,  by  a  wide  circuit,  to  cross  the  stream  entirely  beyond  the  Confeder- 
ate left  and  thus  turn  and  overwhelm  that  flank.      A  miscarriage  of  orders 


/! 


12  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE  VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

On  the  7th  of  October  he  was  made  major-general,  in  recognition 
of  his  services  at  the  battle  of  Manassas,  and  soon  after  was  assigned, 
under  Gon.  Johnston,  to  the  command  of  the  Valley  district,  with 
head(iuarters  at  A\'inchostcr,  A^irginia.  (jNIap  No.  I.)  On  November  4 
he  left  Manassas  for  the  latter  place.  He  held  this  command,  in  a 
considerable  degree  an  independent  one,  until  the  middle  of  the  fol- 
lowing June.  This  period  in  his  career  is  in  many  respects  the  most 
interesting.  It  embraces  the  difficulties  and  struggles  through  whicli 
he  rose  to  fame,  and  covers  that  wonderful  campaign  in  the  Valley  of 
Virginia  which  filled  the  South  with  unbounded  admiration  of  his 
genius,  and  has  placed  his  name,  in  the  estimation  of  the  world,  high 
on  the  roll  of  captains.  It  is  a  sketch  of  Jackson's  career  during  this 
eriod  that  we  propose  now  to  give. 

The  birthplace  and  early  home  of  Gen.  Jackson  was  Clarksburg, 
in  Western  Virginia,  and  from  the  opening  of  the  war  he  had  burned 
with  a  desire  to  be  ordered  to  service  in  that  region.  He  had  fre- 
quently expressed  his  wish  to  aid  in  expelling  the  Federal  troops  from 
the  home  of  his  childhood,  and  when  assigned  to  the  Valley  district 
his  first  thoughts  were  turned  towards  the  execution  of  such  a  design. 

delayed  the  Confederates  until  McDowell's  march  to  their  left  was  discovered, 
when  new  dispositions  became  necessary.  On  the  Confederate  left  Evans,  rein- 
forced by  Bee  .and  Bartow,  and  still  later  by  Hampton,  threw  his  command  in  the 
path  of  the  Federal  army  (which,  having  crossed  Bull  Run  unopposed  at  Sudley's 
ford,  was  pouring  down  on  the  flank),  and  stubbornly  contested  the  ground  until 
forced  to  retreat  before  the  mass  of  McDowell's  troops.  As  the  Confederates 
were  being  borne  back  Jackson's  brigade  reached  the  field,  and,  promptly  form- 
ing, checked  the  Federal  advance  and  gave  the  broken  commands  time  to  rally. 
Then  succeeded  an  hour  or  two  of  severe  fighting.  A  bold  eSbrt  on  the  part  of 
the  Confederates  was  made  to  drive  back  the  Federals  and  regain  the  lost 
ground.  They  succeeded  in  sweeping  back  McDowell's  lines  and  capturing  a 
number  of  guns,  but  the  Federals  soon  made  a  countercharge  and  retook  the 
position  and  artillery.  Again,  mustering  all  his  strength,  Beauregard,  who 
commanded  in  person  on  this  part  of  the  field,  hurled  it  against  the  Federal 
lines.  Fresh  troops  were  arriving,  which  he  sent  against  the  Federal  right  flank. 
Jackson  firmly  held  the  centre  of  the  advance.  The  Federal  lines  were  ag.ain 
broken,  the  guns  again  captured.  The  arrival  of  Kirby  Smith's  and  of  Early's 
troops  enabled  Beauregard  to  press  his  advantage,  to  drive  back  McDowell's 
right  flank,  and  to  throw  it  into  confusion.  The  defeat  quickly  changed  into  a 
rout,  and  this  rout  into  one  of  the  most  remarkable  panics  on  record.  It  was 
in  the  last  successful  effort  of  the  Confederates  that  Bee  and  Bartow  wore  slain, 
and  it  was  just  before  the  former  fell  that,  to  animate  his  thinned  and  wavering 
lines,  he  pointed  to  Jackson's  brigade,  and  said,  "  See,  there  is  Jackson  stand- 
ing like  a  stone  wall ;  let  us  determine  to  die  here  and  we  will  conquer."  Such 
was  the  origin  of  the  sobriquet  of  "  Stonewall."     It  is  now  immortal. 


ROMNEY.  13 

The  campaign  of  the  summer  and  fall  in  Western  Virginia  had 
not  been  favorable  to  the  South.  Gen.  Robert  S.  Garnett,  who  had 
commanded  the  first  considerable  force  in  that  region,  had  been  out- 
manoeuvred by  Gen.  McClellan,  compelled  to  retreat  from  his  posi- 
tions at  Leedsville  and  Rich  mountain  \Wth  loss,  and  when  overtaken 
at  Carrick's  ford,  on  Cheat  river,  July  13,  had  been  defeated  and 
killed.  This  gave  the  Federals  control  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
State  of  Virginia,  west  of  the  Alleghanies  and  north  of  the  Great 
Kanawha  river.  In  the  valley  of  this  river  an  effort  was  made  a 
month  later,  by  Gen.  Floyd,  with  a  Confederate  brigade,  to  wrest  a 
portion  of  this  territory  from  them,  but  because  of  his  small  force,  and 
the  ^vant  of  co-operation  on  the  part  of  Gen.  Wise  (commanding  a 
part  of  the  Confederate  troops  in  that  region),  he  failed  to  effect  any 
results  of  permanent  value. 

Gen.  Lee,  who  had  been  sent  to  take  command  after  the  death  of 
Garnett,^  with  a  considerable  reinforcement,  either  through  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  coimtry,  or  the  inexperience  of  his  subordinates,  or  both, 
failed  to  regain  the  advantages  lost  by  Garnett,  and  was  reduced  to 
merely  preventing  any  further  encroachments  of  the  enemy.  He 
directed  an  advance  upon  the  Federal  positions  on  Cheat  mountain  and 
at  ElkAvater  on  September  12,  but  it  miscarried  because  the  column 
under  Col.  Rust  failed  to  attack.  He  then  drew  off  a  large  part  of 
Loring's  force  to  unite  with  Floyd  and  Wise  in  opposing  Rosecrans's 
movement  up  the  Kanawha  valley,  but  the  Federal  commander  with- 
di-ew,  and  active  operations  ceased.  About  the  1st  of  November  Gen. 
Lee  was  ordered  elsewhere,  and  the  approach  of  winter  and  the  inac- 
cessible character  of  the  country  rendered  further  operations  almost 
impossible.  ""^^ 

AVhen,  therefore,  Gen.  Jackson  was  assigned  to  the  command  of 
the  Valley  of  Virginia,  the  enemy  had  possession  of  all  the  State 
north  of  the  Great  Kanawha  and  west  of  the  Alleghanies,  and  had 
pushed  their  outposts  into  that  mountain  region  itself,  and,  in  some 
cases,  eastward  of  the  main  range.  Thus  Gen.  Kelly,  under  direction 
of  Gen.  Rosecrans  who  commanded  all  the  Federal  forces  in  Western 
Virginia,  had  captured  Romney,  the  county-seat  of  Hampshire,  forty 
miles  west  of  Winchester,  and  now  occupied  it  with  a  force  of  five 

^  Gen.  Lee  was  sent  to  Western  Virginia  immediately  after  the  first  battle  of 
Manassas,  wliich  occurred  on  July  21,  (Taylor's  "Four  Years  with  General 
Lee,"  p.  16.)  At  that  time  Gen.  Loring  commanded  the  forces  lately  under  Gar- 
nett, and  Gens.  Floyd  and  Wjse  each  had  a  brigade  in  the  Kanawha  valley.  The 
three  were  independent  of  each  other. 


14  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61.-62. 

thousand  (5000)  men.  This  movement  gave  tlie  Federals  control 
of  the  fertile  valley  of  the  South  Branch  of  the  Potomac.  Another 
force  oconj)ie(l  Bath,  the  county-seat  of  Morgan,  almost  due  north  of 
Winchester,  while  the  north  bank  of  the  Potomac  was  everywhere 
guarded  by  Union  troops.  (Maps  Nos.  I  and  II.) 
y  The  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  was  open,  and  available  for  the 
supply  of  the  Union  troops  from  Baltimore  to  Harper's  Ferry,  and 
again  from  a  point  opposite  Hancock  westward.  The  section  of 
about  forty  miles,  from  Harper's  Ferry  to  Hancock,  lying  for  the 
most  part  some  distance  wathin  the  Virginia  border,  had  been  inter- 
rupted and  rendered  useless  by  the  Confederates,  but  this  gap  was 
.  supplied  by  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,  Avhich  w^as  open  all  the 
way  from  Cumberland,  Maryland,  to  Georgetown,  in  the  District  of 
Columbia. 

Jackson  recommended  a  bold  plan  of  operations  to  dispossess  the 
enemy  and  recover  the  territory  that  had  been  lost.  He  had  seen 
how  his  predecessors  had  been  hampered  in  trying  to  operate  from 
Staunton  westward,  by  the  difficult  and  inaccessible  nature  of  the 
country.  On  that  route  a  wide  belt  of  mountains,  destitute  of  sup- 
plies and  for  the  most  part  penetrated  by  nothing  but  indifferent 
wagon  roads,  intervened  between  the  scene  of  operations  and  the 
Confederate  base  of  supplies.  This  had  proved  a  most  serious 
hindrance.  Jackson  proposed  now  to  move  along  the  Baltimore  and 
1/  Ohio  railroad  and  the  turnpikes  parallel  to  it,  and  thus  enter  Western 
Virginia  from  the  northeast.  In  this  way  he  could  turn  the  left 
flank  of  the  enemy's  forces,  place  himself  on  their  communications, 
and  force  them  to  evacuate,  or  fight  under  circumstances  of  his  own 
selection.  This  mode  of  approach,  it  was  true,  was  far  more  exposed 
to  the  enemy,  but  it  was  easier ;  it  lay  through  a  much  more  popu- 
lous and  cultivated  region ;  it  would  aiford,  to  some  extent,  the  use 
of  a  railroad  for  supplies ;  and  it  would  soon  place  him  in  the  midst 
of  some  of  the  most  fertile  parts  of  West  Virginia.  To  carry  out  this 
plan  he  asked  that  his  old  brigade,  which  had  been  left  at  Manassas, 
and  all  the  forces  operating  along  the  line  of  the  Alleghanies,  south- 
west of  Winchester,  should  be  concentrated  under  his  command. 
This  would  have  given  him  fifteen  or  sixteen  thoiLsand  (15,000  or 
16,000)  men,  the  least  force  with  Mdiich  he  thought  it  possible  to 
undertake  so  considerable  an  enterprise. 

The  Confederate  authorities  deemed  it  impossible  to  comply  fully 
with  his  wishes.  His  own  brigade  was  promptly  sent  to  him,  and 
one  of  the  brigades  of  Loring's  trooj)S  reached  him  early  in  De- 


ROMNEY.  15. 

cember.^  Subsequently  two  more  brigades,  under  Gen.  Loring  him- 
self, were  added,  but  all  these  troops  only  increased  the  small  force 
of  two  or  three  thousand  State  militia,  which  had  been  assembled 
in  the  district  itself,  to  about  eleven  thousand  (11,000)  men.^  The 
greater  part  of  Gen.  Loring's  force  did  not  arrive  until  Christmas, 
thus  preventing  any  important  movements  during  November  and 
December. 

But  meantime  Gen.  Jackson  Avas  not  idle.  When  he  entered  upon 
his  new  command  there  were  but  three  fragmentary  brigades  of  State 
militia  and  a  few  detached  companies  of  cavalry  in  the  Valley  dis- 
trict. These  troops  were  poorly  armed,  and  the  militia  was  almost 
entirely  without  discipline  or  experience.  In  order  to  increase  this 
force  he  first  caused  the  militia  which  had  not  yet  been  summoned, 
or  which  had  been  released,  to  be  called  out,  and  in  a  short  time 
the  brigades  under  Brig.-Gens.  Carson,  Meem,  and  Boggs  were  in- 
creased in  the  aggregate  to  about  three  thousand  (3000)  men.  He 
consolidated  the  cavalry  companies  into  a  regiment,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieut.-Col.  Ashby.  Prompt  measures  were  taken  to 
equip  and  discipline  these  troops.  About  the  middle  of  November, 
the  first  brigade — his  own — was  sent  up  from  Manassas,  and  by 
the  1st  of  December  he  had  at  hand  some  four  thousand  (4000) 
troops,  and  knew  that  a  part  of  Loring's  command  was  en  route  to 
join  him.' 

*  Gen.  Loring,  after  the  withdrawal  of  Gen.  Lee,  had  command  of  all  the 
troops  west  of  Staunton,  except  those  under  Floyd,  in  the  Kanawha  valley. 
Gen.  Wise  had  been  ordered  to  duty  elsewhere  about  the  1st  of  October. 
When  Loring  was  ordered  to  Winchester  to  join  Jackson,  Gen.  Edward  John- 
son was  left  with  a  brigade  and  some  artillery  and  cavalry  at  Camp  Alle- 
ghany, where  the  Staunton  and  Parkersburg  turnpike  crosses  the  Alleghany 
mountains. 

*  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  says  (Johnston's  Narrative,  pp.  83,  84)  the  "effective 
total"  of  troops  in  the  Valley  district  at  the  end  of  November  was  3700.  Add 
nine  per  cent,  for  officers,  and  Jackson's  force  at  that  time  (consisting  of  the 
militia  and  the  "  Stonewall"  brigade)  may  be  placed  at  about  4000.  At  the 
end  of  December  the  "  effective  total"  under  Jackson,  from  the  returns,  was 
10,241,  or,  adding  officers,  about  11,200. 

'  Jackson's  notions  of  discipline  are  illustrated  by  an  incident  of  this  time. 
Immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  "  Stonewall"  brigade  in  the  Valley,  a 
stringent  order  was  issued  which  prevented  officers  of  even  the  highest  grades 
from  passing  the  pickets  around  the  camps  except  upon  passes  from  head- 
quarters, and  it  was  required  that  these  passes  should  specify  whether  the 
officer  was  on  public  or  private  business.  This  order  led  to  the  following 
protest  and  reply  : 


16  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

While  waiting  for  tlie  reinforcementB  that  would  enable  him  to 
strike  a  blow,  he  detcrniincd  to  annoy  the  enemy  by  preventing  any 
attempt  to  reconstriK^t  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  and  by  doing 
such  damage  as  was  possible  to  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  eanal,  which 
runs  along  the  north  bank  of  the  Potomac.  For  this  purpose  the 
cavalry  was  actively  engaged  in  scouting  the  country  along  that 
river,  and  early  in  December  a  small  force  of  infantry  and  a  battery 
were  sent  down  to  break  Dam  No.  5,  seven  miles  above  Williamsport, 
which  supplied  a  long  level  of  the  canal  with  water.  This  force 
appearetl  at  Dam  No.  5  on  the  afternoon  of  December  6,  and  during 
the  next  two  days  kept  up  an  active  skirmish  with  the  Federal  troops 
on  the  north  side  of  the  river.  Under  cover  of  this  fire  the  Confed- 
erates attempted  to  break  the  dam  on  the  night  of  the  7th,  but  effected 

"Camp  near  Wixchester.  Virginia, 
"November  16,  1801. 
"Major: — The  undersigned,  having  read  General  Orders  No.  8,  transmitted 
from  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the  Valley,  so  far  as  it  includes  and 
relates  to  officers  of  their  rank,  respectfully  submit:  That  it  is  an  unwarranted 
assumption  of  authority,  and  involves  an  improper  inquiry  into  their  private 
matters,  of  vrhich,  according  to  the  official  usage  and  courtesy  of  the  army,  the 
major-general  commanding  has  no  right  to  require  information  ;  it  implies  their 
abuse  of  the  privileges  accorded  in  every  other  department  of  the  army  to 
officers  of  their  rank,  which  there  has  been  nothing  in  their  conduct  to  justify ; 
it  disparages  the  dignity  of  the  offices  which  they  have  the  honor  to  hold,  and, 
in  consequence,  detracts  from  that  respect  of  the  force  under  their  command 
which  is  necessary  to  maintain  their  authority  and  enforce  obedience.  There- 
fore they  complain  of  the  order,  and  ask  that  it  may  be  modified. 

"Respectfully  submitted." 
(Signed  by  all  the  regimental  commanders  of  the  brigade.) 
"  Maj.  a.  H.  Jackson, 

"A.  A.  Gen'l." 

"  Headquarters  Vallev  District, 
"November  17,  1861. 
"  The  major-general  commanding  desires  me  to  say  that  the  within-combined 
protest  is  in  violation  of  the  Army  Regulations  and  subversive  of  military  dis- 
cipline.    He  claims  the  right  to  give  his  pickets  such  instructions  as  in  his 
opinion  the  interests  of  the  public  service  require. 

"  Colonels   ,   on  the  day    that   their  regiments   arrived   at  their 

present  encampment,  either  from  incompetency  to  control  their  commands  or 
from  neglect  of  duty,  so  permitted  their  commands  to  become  disorganized  and 
their  officers  and  men  to  enter  Winchester  without  permission,  as  to  render 
several  arrests  of  officers  necessary. 

"  If  officers  desire  to  have  control  over  their  commands,  they  must  remain 
habitually  with  them,  and  industriously  attend  to  their  instruction  and  comfort, 
and  in  battle  lead  them  well,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  command  their 
admiration. 

"  Such  officers  need  not  apprehend  loss  of  respect  resulting  from  inserting  in 
a  written  pass  the  words  '  on  duty,'  or  '  on  private  business,'  should  they 
have  occasion  to  pass  the  pickets. 

"By  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  .Jackson. 

"A.  H.  Jackson, 

"A.  A.  Gen'l." 


ROMNEY.  17 

little  or  no  damage.  The  next  evening  they  retired.  Not  satisfied 
with  the  result,  Jackson  made  another  effort  a  few  days  later  to  break 
Dam  No.  5.  Taking  the  cavalry,  a  part  of  the  militia,  and  his  old 
brigade  ("Stonewall"),  he  left  Winchester  on  the  16th.  Next  day, 
having  disposed  troops  between  Falling  Waters  and  Dam  No.  5,  so 
as  to  provide  against  a  flank  movement,  and  having  sent  forces  to 
make  demonstrations  at  Dam  No.  4  and  at  Williamsport,  he  collected 
the  main  body  for  an  attack  on  Dam  No.  5.  Under  cover  of  the 
infantry  and  artillery  stationed  on  the  hills  on  the  south  side  of  the 
river,  parties  were  sent  to  break  away  this  dam  at  the  end  nearest  the 
Virginia  side.  Col.  Leonard,  with  a  part  of  the  Thirteenth  Massa- 
chusetts, the  Fifth  Connecticut,  and  a  battery,  was  guarding  this  part 
of  the  Federal  line.  He  kept  up  a  vigorous  and  annoying  fire  on  the 
working  parties.  Not  much  was  accomplished  by  the  Confederates 
until  Capt.  Holliday,^  of  the  Thirtj'-third  Virginia,  and  Capt.  Robin- 
son, of  the  Twenty-seventh  Virginia,  volunteered  to  go  down  by  night 
with  their  companies  and  cut  out  the  cribs.  They  made  brave  efforts 
to  do  this,  standing  waist-deep  in  the  cold  water,  and  under  the  con- 
stant fire  of  the  enemy.  A  partial  breach  was  effected,  and  the  cribs 
so  loosened  that  the  next  freshet  made  a  wide  gap  in  the  dam, 
and  rendered  useless,  for  the  time,  a  long  stretch  in  the  canal.  While 
this  attack  was  in  progress  several  regiments  were  sent  up  from  Fred- 
erick, Maryland,  to  reinforce  Col.  Leonard,^  and  the  short  time  in 
which  the  whole  of  Banks's  command,  at  the  latter  place,  could  reach 
Williamsport,  rendered  it  inadvisable  for  Jackson  to  cross  the  river. 
Having  done  all  the  damage  he  could  to  the  canal  from  the  south 
side,  he  withdrew  on  the  21st,  and  returned  to  Winchester. 

While  engaged  in  this  expedition,  news  had  come  of  the  decisive 
repulse  by  Gen.  Edward  Johnson  of  the  attack  made  by  the  Federals 
upon  his  position  at  Camp  Alleghany.  This  occurred  on  the  1 3th  of 
December.^     Gen.  Jackson  advised  that  this  force  be  now  sent  to 


1  Afterwards  colonel  of  the  Thirty-third  Virginia  regiment,  and  subsequently 
Governor  of  Virginia. 

^  The  "  Record  of  Events"  on  Banks's  division  return  for  this  period  says 
that  on  the  18th  of  December  the  Fifth  Connecticut,  Twenty-ninth  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  First  Maryland  regiments,  Company  F,  of  the  Fourth  United  States 
artillery,  and  two  companies  of  Maryland  cavalry  were  ordered  to  Williams- 
port. 

'  Gen.  Edward  Johnson,  with  from  1200  to  1500  men  and  two  batteries,  occu- 
pied Camp  Alleghany,  which  is  fifteen  miles  west  of  Monterey,  on  the  Staunton 
and  Parkersburg  turnpike.     lie  was  attacked  by  Gen.  Milroy,  with  from  1700 


^ 


18  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    "^ ALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1801-6!?. 

reinforce  liini  or  be  moved  towards  JMoorefield,  so  as  to  co-operate 
with  liim  in  an  advance  on  Romney.^  This  was  not  done,  and  later 
in  the  winter  Johnson  was  forced  to  fall  back  to  the  Shenandoah 
mountain,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  a  flank  movement  against  him  from 
Romncy. 

Jackson,  soon  after  his  return  to  Winchester,  was  gratified  to 
meet  Gen.  Loring;,  the  last  two  of  whose  brigtides  arrived  there  at 
Christmas.^ 

Gen.  Loring,  who  was  to  retain  command  of  his  own  troops  and  to 
be  second  to  Jackson,  had  three  infantry  brigades,  under  Col.  W.  B. 
Taliaferro,  Col.  Wm.  Gilham,  and  Brig.-Gen.  S.  R.  Anderson  re- 
spectively, and  Mayre's  and  Shumaker's  batteries.  These  troops 
numbered  nearly  six  thousand  (GOOO),  and  increased  Jackson's  entire 
force  to  about  eleven  thousand  (11,000)  men.^ 

Jackson  had  now  all  the  troops  that  his  superiors  thought  it  judi- 
cious to  spare  him.  He  had  been  most  anxious  to  make  an  effort  to 
recover  Western  Virginia  from  the  Federals,  but  the  force  at  hand 

to  1800  men,  on  December  13.  After  a  fierce  struggle,  lasting  the  greater  part 
of  the  day,  the  Federals  were  repulsed  at  every  point,  and  retreated  to  their 
camp  on  Cheat  mountain.     ("  Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  iii.,  Doc.  226.) 

^  Jackson's  letter,  dated  December  23,  and  sent  both  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  and 
Adjt.-Gen.  Cooper,  is  as  follows :  "  I  respectfully  recommend  that  such  of  Brig.- 
Gen.  Loring's  forces  as  are  on  or  near  the  Alleghany  mountains  be  ordered  to 
march  forthwith  to  Moorefield,  in  Hardy  county,  with  a  view  to  forming  a 
junction  with  the  troops  now  at  or  near  this  point  (Winchester).  If  it  is  the 
design  of  the  government  to  commence  oflFensive  operations  against  Romney 
soon,  the  troops  asked  for  should  move  to  my  aid  at  once.  Recent  intelligence 
fi'om  Romney  gives  reason  to  believe  that  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  Hampshire 
county  is  about  10,000,  and  that  reinforcements  are  continuing  to  arrive.  I 
regret  to  say  that  the  occupation  of  Hampshire  county  by  the  enemy  is  exor- 
cising a  demoralizing  influence  upon  our  people,  who  are  gradually  yielding  to 
outward  pressure  and  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States.  There 
are  noble  spirits  in  and  about  Romney  who  have  given  up  their  earthly  all,  and 
are  now,  for  our  cause  and  institutions,  exiles  from  their  homes.  I  have  en- 
deavored to  cheer  them,  and  to  deter  those  who  remained  behind  from  taking 
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  enemy,  by  holding  out  to  them  the  prospect  of  a 
speedy  deliverance-,  but  this,  I  fear,  will  prove  a  delusion,  unless  the  asked  for 
-Jbrces,  or  their  equivalent,  come  soon.  I  fear  that  the  forces  that  were  recently 
defeated  on  the  Alleghany  will  be  in  Romney  before  Gen.  Johnson  leaves  his 
position." 

*  Loring  arrived  December  26.  The  same  day  the  Hon.  C.  J.  Faulkner,  but 
recently  released  from  a  northern  prison,  offered  his  services  to  Gen.  Jackson, 
and  was  appointed  aide-de-camp. 

^  Jackson  reports  his  strength  on  January  10  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  as  10,178 
infantry  and  648  cavalry.     He  had  also  26  pieces  of  artillery. 


ROMNEY.  19 

was  felt  to  be  inadequate  to  so  large  an  undertaking.  The  season, 
too,  was  so  far  advanced  that  a  mountain  campaign  would  be  attended 
with  very  great  difficulties.  He,  nevertheless,  decided  to  persevere. 
An  immediate  movement  was  determined  upon  against  the  forces 
stationed  within  the  limits  of  his  military  district.  This  district  ex- 
tended over  the  region  bounded  on  the  southeast  by  the  Blue  Ridge, 
on  the  north  and  northeast  by  the  Potomac,  from  Harper's  Ferry  to 
its  source,  and  on  the  northwest  by  the  crest  of  the  Alleghanies,  until 
it  joins  the  district  recently  commanded  by  Gen.  Lee,  and  still  held 
by  the  troops  left  there  under  Gen.  Edward  Johnson.  He  would 
first  clear  his  own  district  of  the  foe,  do  all  possible  damage  to  the 
railroad  and  canal,  and  then  be  guided  by  circumstances.  The  prepa- 
rations were  hurried  forward,  and  by  the  last  day  of  the  year  all  was 
in  readiness  to  move.     (Map  No.  I.) 

The  forces  and  positions  of  the  enemy  opposed  to  Jackson  at  the 
beginning  of  1862  were  as  follows :  Gen.  Banks,  commanding  the 
Fifth  corps  of  McClellan's  army,  with  headquarters  at  Frederick, 
Maryland,  had  sixteen  thousand  (16,000)  effective  men,^  the  greater 
part  of  whom  were  in  winter  quarters  near  that  city,  while  the  re- 
mainder guarded  the  Potomac  from  Harper's  Ferry  to  Williamsport. 
Gen.  Rosecrans,  still  holding  command  of  the  Department  of  Western 
Virginia,  had  twenty-two  thousand  (22,000)  men  scattered  over  that 
region,^  but  was  concentrating  them  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  rail- 
road. He  says  in  his  report :  ^  "  On  the  6th  of  December,  satisfied 
that  the  condition  of  the  roads  over  the  Alleghanies  into  Western 
Virginia,  as  well  as  the  scarcity  of  subsistence  and  horse-feed,  would 
preclude  any  serious  operations  of  the  enemy  against  us  until  the 
opening  of  spring,  I  began  quietly  and  secretly  to  assemble  all  the 
spare  troops  of  the  department  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  railroad,  under  cover  of  about  five  thousand  men  I  had 
posted  at  Roimiey,  with  the  design  of  obtaining  Gen.  McClellan's 
permission  to  take  nearly  all  these  troops  and  suddenly  seize,  fortify, 
and  hold  Wmchester,  whereby  I  should  at  once  more  effectually  cover 
the  northeastern  and  central  parts  of  Western  Virginia,  and  at  the 
same  time  threatening  the  left  of  the  enemy's  position  at  Manassas, 

^  See  Federal  Congressional  Report  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  1863,  Part  II. 
p.  414,  Gen.  Banks's  testimony. 

^  See  same  Report,  Part  I.  p.  202,  Rosecrans's  testimony,  given  December  31, 
ISGl. 

^  See  Report  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  1865,  vol.  iii.  p.  14,  of  Rosecrans's 
campaigns. 


20  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

compel  him  to  lengthen  his  line  of  defence  in  front  of  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac,  and  throw  it  farther  south.  That  I  might  more  fully 
lay  my  views  before  the  general  commanding,  I  requested  his  permis- 
sion to  visit  him  at  Wa><hington,  whither  I  proceeded  about  tlie  28th 
of  December,  and  found  Gen.  McClellan  sick  of  typhoid  fever.  Be- 
fore an  interview  could  be  had  with  him  on  the  subject,  Stonewall 
Jackson,  with  a  column  of  ten  thousand  men,  began  an  advance  in 
the  direction  of  Cumberland,  which  threatened  such  serious  conse- 
quences that,  although  ordered  to  send  all  my  troops  to  Gen.  Lander 
and  to  remain  jiersonally  idle,  I  was  obliged  to  return  to  AVheeling 
for  the  purpose  of  seeing  this  order  executed,  and  supplies  and  sub- 
sistence sent  to  Gen.  Lander." 

The  same  plan  of  Federal  operations  was  urged  by  Gen.  Lander, 
who,  in  his  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the 
War,  December  27,  1861,  says:  "I  have  also  stated  to  gentlemen 
high  in  authority  that  if  I  could  be  furnished  with  three  hundred  pack- 
mules  and  with  five  thousand  men,  with  liberty  in  the  quartermaster's 
department  to  purchase  beef  cattle,  and  to  employ  some  of  my  old 
mountaineers,  so  that  I  could  move  with  celerity — such  men  now 
being  in  this  city — I  would  engage  to  penetrate  the  Blue  Ridge 
mountains,  and  endeavor  to  take  the  town  of  Winchester,  and  break 

/  the  northern  branch  of  the  Manassas  Gap  railway.  In  all  these 
matters  I  rely  fully  and  completely  on  the  co-operation  of  Gen. 
Kelly,  now  at  Romney."  ^     A  few  days  after  this  Gen.  Lander  was 

J  ordered  to  duty  on  the  line  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  and 
the  troops  at  Hancock,  Cumberland,  and  Romney,  and  the  inter- 
mediate points,  were  placed  under  his  command. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs,  and  such  the  plans  of  his  enemy, 
when,  on  January  1,  1862,  Jackson  set  out  from  Winchester  in  the  di- 
rection of  Bath.  With  him  were  Garnett's  (the  "  Stonewall")  brigade,^ 
the  three  brigatles  under  Gen.  Loring,^  a  part  of  the  militia,  five  bat- 
teries, and  Ashby's  regiment  of  cavalry,  the  whole  numbering  some 
eight  or  nine  thousand  (8000  or  9000)  men.  His  movement  discon- 
certed all  plans  for  an  aggressive  campaign  against  Winchester,  and 
threw  his  opponents  on  the  defensive.  By  moving  against  Bath,  and 
dispei'sing  the  force  there  and  at  Hancock,  he  hoped  to  destroy  com- 
munications between  Banks  and  Kelly,  threaten  the  latter's  rear,  and 

1  Report  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War,  1863,  Part  I.  p.  160. 
'  Brig.-Gen.  Richard  B.  Garnett  had  been  assigned  to  the  command  of  Jackson's 
old  brigade. 
^  The  troops  brought  by  Loring  were  known  as  the  "  Army  of  the  Northwest." 


ROMNEY.  21 

force  him  to  evacuate  Romncy  or  fight  single-handed.  The  weather 
during  December  had  been  fine,  and  the  roads  were  in  good  condition. 
The  morning  of  New  Year's  day  was  bright  and  pleasant,  and  the 
army  set  forth  in  fine  spirits.  But  the  fine  weather  was,  unfortunately, 
of  short  duration.  Before  the  evening  of  the  first  day  a  cold  storm 
arrived  from  the  northwest.  This  was  the  beginning  of  a  violent 
and  protracted  spell  of  bad  weather,  which  continued  for  the  next 
three  weeks,  and  interfered  most  seriously  with  the  expedition.  The 
second  day  was  cold  and  stormy,  and  the  wagons  being  delayed  by 
difficult  roads, — by-ways  being  selected  to  conceal  the  movement, — 
the  troops  passed  the  night  without  anything  to  eat,^  and,  in  many 
cases,  without  covering.  Next  morning,  when  the  wagons  had  caught 
up,  a  short  time  was  allowed  for  cooking  and  eating,  and  the  march 
was  renewed.  Snow  and  sleet  during  the  latter  part  of  the  day  added 
much  to  the  discomfort  of  the  soldiers,  and  rendered  the  roads  so 
slippery  that  the  wagons  were  again  unable  to  keep  up  with  the 
troops.  The  night  of  January  3  was  passed  in  the  midst  of  the 
storm,  about  four  miles  from  Bath.  A  scouting  party  of  the  enemy 
had  been  dispersed  and  partly  captured  during  the  afternoon.  Next 
morning,  Saturday,  January  4,  as  soon  as  it  was  possible.  Gen.  Jack- 
son made  his  dispositions  to  surround  the  town.  A  detachment  was 
sent  over  the  mountain  to  the  left,  with  orders  to  approach  the  place 
from  the  west.  The  main  body  pushed  along  the  road,  while  a  regi- 
ment was  thrown  forward  on  the  right  and  another  on  the  left  of  the 
village.  But  the  troops  moved  slowly.  They  were  exhausted  by  the 
cold  and  suffering  of  the  preceding  night,  the  ground  was  covered 
with  ice,  and  a  large  part  of  the  day  was  consumed  before  the  Con- 
federates, headed  by  Col.  Baylor  of  the  general's  staff,  dashed  into 
the  town.  The  enemy,  after  skirmishing  for  some  hours,  had  retired 
hastily.  The  village  had  been  held  by  a  part  of  the  Thirty-ninth 
Illinois  regiment,  with  a  squadron  of  cavalry  and  a  section  of  ar- 
tillery. These  troops  had  been  reinforced  on  the  morning  of  the  4th 
by  the  Eighty-fourth  Pennsylvania  regiment  from  Hancock,  and  at 
mid-day  the  Thirteenth  Indiana  had  arrived  at  Sir  John's  Run,  on 
the  cars,  and  had  marched  towards  Bath.  But  in  the  presence  of 
a  large  hostile  force,  Col.  Murray,  of  the  Eightj'^-fourth  Pennsyl- 
vania, who  was  in  command,  decided  not  to  M'ait  for  an  attack. 
Under  his  orders  the  Thirteenth  Indiana  was  turned  back,  and  the 
Eight^'-fourth  Pennsylvania  and  the  Illinois  troops  both  retreated 

^  The  first  night  the  army  camped  near  Pughtown,  the  second  at  Unger's. 


22  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE   VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  ISGl-CS. 

to  Hancock,  leaving  the  stores  and  camp  equipage  of  the  force  tliat 
had  been  stationed  at  Bath  to  be  captured.  From  Batli  two  principal 
roa<Is  lead  to  the  Potomac,  one  in  the  direction  of  Ilancocjk,  which  is 
about  six  miles  distant,  on  the  Maryland  side  of  tiie  river ;  the  other, 
farther  west,  to  Sir  John's  Run,  a  station  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
railroad,  which  is  only  three  miles  away.  A  road,  still  farther  to 
the  west,  leads  to  the  Great  Cacapon  river,  at  the  railroad  bridge 
over  that  stream. 

Finding  the  enemy  gone,  Jackson  ordered  an  immediate  pursuit. 
With  the  main  body  of  his  command  he  pushed  on  towards  Hancock, 
driving  the  rear  of  the  retreating  enemy  over  the  river.  Gilliam's 
brigade  was  sent  towards  Sir  John's  Run,  but  did  not  succeed  in  in- 
flicting any  damage  on  the  forces  retreating  by  that  route.  The  road 
led  along  the  narrow  and  precipitous  defile  of  Sir  John's  Run,  where 
a  few  men  were  easily  able  to  check  Gilham's  advance  until  dark,  and 
after  nightfall  the  Federals  retreated  over  the  river.  Col.  Rust,  with 
the  Third  Arkansas  and  the  Thirty-seventh  Virginia  regiments,  and 
two  guns,  was  sent  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Great 
Cacapon.  The  guard  made  a  stout  resistance,  but  the  next  morning 
were  driven  off,  and  the  bridge,  railroad  station,  and  telegraph  were 
destroyed. 

The  main  Confederate  force  bivouacked  on  the  night  of  the  4th 
opposite  Hancock.  Next  morning  Jackson  sent  Col.  Ash  by  to 
demand  the  surrender  of  that  town,  and  in  the  event  of  a  refusal,  to 
give  notice  that  two  hours  would  be  allowed  for  the  removal  of  non- 
combatants  before  the  Confederate  batteries  would  open  upon  it. 
Gen.  Lander  had  just  arrived  and  assumed  command  at  Hancock, 
and  he  refused  to  surrender,  and  prepared  to  resist  until  reinforce- 
ments could  reach  him.  Jackson  placed  several  pieces  of  artillery  in 
position,  and  kept  up  a  brisk  cannonade  during  the  remainder  of  the 
day,  which  he  renewed  on  the  morrow.  jMeantime,  an  eifort  was 
made  to  construct  a  bridge  at  a  point  two  miles  above,  wath  the  view 
of  crossing  to  the  Maryland  side.  But  it  was  found  that  this  work 
would  consume  several  days,  in  which  time  Gen.  Lander  might  be 
reinforced  to  such  an  extent  as  to  render  the  movement  impracticable.^ 

^  Troops  were  indeed  being  hastened  to  Lander  as  Jackson  foresaw.  Gen. 
Williams  (of  Banks's  corps)  left  Frederick,  Maryland,  with  his  brigade  for  Han- 
cock at  5  A.M.  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  and  camped  at  Ilagerstown  the  same 
night,  and  the  remainder  of  Banks's  foi'ces  were  ready  to  march.  Williams  con- 
tinued to  Hancock,  and  on  the  8th  of  January  assumed  command  at  that  point. 
Gen.  Lander  having  gone  to  Romney  the  day  before.     Rosecrans  had  also 


ROMNEY.  23 

Hence  the  Confederate  leader,  having  freed  this  part  of  his  district 
from  the  enemy,  after  destroying  such  of  the  captured  stores  as  he 
could  not  carry  off,  left  the  vicinity  of  Hancock  on  the  morning  of 
the  7th  and  marched  in  the  direction  of  Romuey,  the  head  of  his 
column  reaching  Unger's  Store  the  same  evening. 

This  march  was  a  trying  one.  The  severity  of  the  weather  con- 
tinued without  abatement.  The  snow  and  sleet,  under  the  tramp  of 
the  soldiers,  soon  became  as  smooth  as  glass,  so  that  marching  was 
painful  and  difficult,  while  the  road  was  filled  with  the  falling  horses 
of  the  wagons  and  artillery,  that  were  unable  to  stand  on  their  smooth- 
shod  feet.  Numbers  of  horses  were  disabled  and  some  killed  by  this 
day's  march.  The  intense  cold  added  to  the  suffering  of  the  troops, 
and  caused  the  bivouac  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  January,  1862, 
to  be  long  remembered  by  many  of  them.  The  privations  endured 
began  to  cause  discontent  and  murmuring,  especially  among  the  troops 
which  had  recently  joined  Jackson.  It  was  impossible  to  continue 
the  march  until  the  horses  had  been  rough-shod,  and  Jackson,  though 
reluctant,  was  obliged  to  remain  some  days  at  Unger's  for  this 
purpose. 

On  the  day  that  the  Confederates  retired  from  Hancock,  January  7, 
a  portion  of  the  Federal  force  at  Romney  made  a  successful  recon- 
noissance  on  the  Winchester  road.  Just  east  of  the  North  river,  a 
branch  of  the  Great  Cacapon,  runs  a  high  ridge,  through  which,  at 
a  narrow  and  precipitous  gap  called  Hanging  Rock,  passes  the  main 
road  from  Winchester  to  Romney.  This  point,  distant  about  fifteen 
miles  from  the  latter  place,  was  held  by  about  seven  hundred  militia 
and  a  section  of  artillery,  under  Col.  Munroe.^  On  the  night  of  the 
6th,  Col.  Dunning,  of  the  Fifth  Ohio,  under  orders  from  Gen.  Kelly, 
set  out  from  Romney  with  a  portion  of  the  Fourth,  Fifth,  Seventh, 
and  Eighth  Ohio,  Fourteenth  Indiana,  and  First  Virginia  regiments, 

hurried  troops  to  Hancock,  and  Williams  found  there  when  he  arrived  "  the 
Eighty-fourth  and  One  Hundred  and  Tenth  Pennsylvania,  Thirty-ninth  Illinois, 
four  companies  of  the  Thirteenth  Massachusetts,  two  companies  of  the  First 
Virginia,  a  company  of  sharpshooters,  a  detachment  of  261  cavalry,  and  8  guns, 
with  92  men  from  Best's,  Hampton's,  Knapp's,  and  Mathews's  batteries." 
There  were  also  six  companies  of  the  First  Maryland  regiment  of  infontry  at 
Milestone  Point,  five  miles  below  Hancock.  To  these  forces  he  added  his 
brigade  of  four  regiments.  (See  "  Record  of  Events"  on  return  of  Williams's 
brigade,  assistant  adjutant-general's  oflBce.) 

^  The  force  consisted  of  650  militia  infantry,  Capt.  Sheets's  company  of  cavalry 
of  56  men,  and  2  pieces  of  artillery  and  30  men  under  Lieut.  Cutshaw.  (Jack- 
son's letter  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston,  January  10.) 


24  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV   OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-G-2. 

five  companies  of  cavalry,  and  six  pieces  of  artillery,  in  all  about 
two  thousand  (2000)  men.'  They  reached  the  vicinity  of  Hanging 
Rock  about  daylight,  and,  having  captured  the  Confederate  pickets, 
took  the  main  body  by  surprise.  Col.  Munroe's  main  force  wjis  on 
the  bluff  to  the  north  of  the  road.  The  hill  on  the  south  was  deemed 
inaccessible,  and  so  was  left  comparatively  undefended.  INIunroe's 
artillery,  under  Lieut.  Cutshaw,  commanded  the  road,  and  the  advance 
was  instructed  to  burn  the  bridge  over  North  river  upon  retiring. 
Col.  Dunning,  however,  pressed  forward  so  quickly  and  with  such 
overwhelming  force,  that  he  drove  the  Confederates  away  from  the 
bridge  and  seized  it  before  it  was  materially  injured.  Having  crossed 
the  stream,  he  deployed*  his  force,  and  while  he  sent  one  regiment 
over  the  hill  south  of  the  road  by  an  unfrequented  path,  and  another 
along  the  road  itself,  he  led  another  to  attack  Munroe's  force  on  the 
north  hill.  The  Confederates  were  soon  overpowered,  and,  seeing 
themselves  flanked,  fled,  to  escape  capture.^  The  two  guns  fell  into 
the  enemy's  hands,  with  a  part  of  the  baggage  of  the  troops,  and  seven 
prisoners.'  The  Federal  troops  set  fire  to  the  private  houses,  mills, 
etc.,  in  the  vicinity,  and  then  returned  to  Romney,  burning  many 

^  Col.  Dunning,  in  his  report,  says  he  had  six  companies  each  of  the  Fourth, 
Fifth,  Seventh,  and  Eighth  Ohio,  First  Virginia,  and  Fourteenth  Indiana  in- 
fantry ;  Daura's  battery  and  one  section  of  Baker's,  three  companies  of  the 
First  Virginia  cavalry,  and  the  Ringgold  and  Washington  cavalry,  in  all  "  not 
over  2000  men."  He  and  Gen.  Kelly  report  the  movement  as  made  on  the  night 
of  the  7th,  though  all  other  authorities  place  it  on  the  night  of  the  6th.  (See 
also  Doc.  8,  vol.  iv.,  "Rebellion  Record.") 

*  Col.  (then  Lieut.)  Cutshaw  says,  in  a  letter  to  the  author:  "On  the  7th 
of  January,  1862,  a  force  from  Romney  surprised  our  camp  at  daylight,  their 
advance  coming  in  with  part  of  our  pickets.  Instead  of  attempting  a  passage 
of  the  gap  the  enemy  hurried  immediately  to  the  more  accessible  ridge  on  our 
right,  and  were  there  as  soon  as  our  militia,  and  with  a  volley  scattered  them." 
Cutshaw's  guns  were  left  without  support,  the  gunners  shot  down  or  put  to 
flight,  and  the  pieces  captured. 

'  Jackson's  report  of  this  affair  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston,  dated  Unger's  Store, 
January  11,  1862,  says:  "Though  on  the  4th  instant  Bath  and  all  that  part  of 
Morgan  county  east  of  the  Big  Capon  river  was  recovered  from  the  enemy,  .  .  . 
yet  on  the  7th  the  enemy  surprised  our  militia  at  Hanging  Rock  pass,  distant 
fifteen  miles  from  Romney,  drove  back  our  troops  from  their  fortifications, 
burnt  their  huts,  captured  two  pieces  of  artillery  (one  a  four-pounder  rifle,  the 
other  a  four-pounder  smooth-bore)  ...  As  soon  as  they  had  accomplished  this 
and  burnt  the  buildings  of  Col.  Charles  Blue,  near  by,  and  killed  his  live-stock, 
leaving  it  on  the  ground,  they  returned  to  Romney." 

Col.  Dunning,  in  his  report,  says :  "  Seven  prisoners  were  taken  and  seven 
dead  were  found." 


ROMNEY.  25 

houses  and  killing  much  cattle  on  the  way.  Of  this  conduct  a  north- 
ern correspondent,  writing  from  Romney  at  the  time,  says :  "  The 
burning  of  dwellings  along  the  road  was  a  piece  of  vandalism  which 
should  be  punished  with  the  death,  not  only  of  the  men  who  did  it, 
but  of  the  officers  who  countenanced  and  encouraged  it."  ^ 

Jackson  got  his  troops  all  up  and  into  camp  at  Unger's  on  Wed- 
nesday, the  8th.  Here,  while  he  rested,  the  teams  were  prepared  for 
better  service  on  the  ice.  He  was  not  ready  to  move  the  main  body 
until  the  morning  of  Monday,  the  13th,  when  the  march  to  Romney 
was  resumed.  While  waiting,  however.  Gen.  Meem,  with  part  of  his 
militia,  was  sent  on  the  10th  towards  Moorefield,  and  Gen.  Carson 
towards  Bath,  for  the  purpose  of  distracting  the  enemy ;  while  Ashby, 
with  a  small  force  of  cavalry,  watched  the  movements  of  the  Federal 
forces  in  Romney.^     Meantime,  Gen.  Lander,  who  had  been  placed 

^  Jackson  says  in  his  official  report :  "  I  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  close  this 
report  without  alluding  to  the  conduct  of  the  reprobate  Federal  commanders, 
who,  in  Hampshire  county,  have  not  only  burned  valuable  mill-property,  but 
also  many  private  houses.  Their  track  from  Ilomney  to  Hangiflg  Rock,  a  dis- 
tance of  fifteen  miles,  was  one  of  desolation.  The  number  of  dead  animals 
lying  along  the  roadside,  where  they  had  been  shot  by  the  enemy,  exemplified 
the  spirit  of  that  part  of  the  northern  army."     (Dabney's  Life,  p.  271.) 

Col.  Dunning  says  in  his  report  that  he  ordered  the  mill  and  hotel  (Col.  Blue's 
house)  to  be  burned,  and  adds :  "  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  some  straggling  soldiers 
burnt  other  unoccupied  houses  on  their  return  march."  (Federal  official  reports, 
adjutant-general's  office.) 

*  Jackson,  on  January  10,  reported  the  distribution  of  his  forces  as  follows  : 


183] 

nfantry 

. 

.     at  Winchester. 

650 

"          56 

cavalry  . 

.     at  Hanging  Rock. 

50 

u 

.     at  North  River  Mills. 

100 

"          56 

(( 

.     at  Martinsburg. 

60 

a 

.     at  Shepherdstown. 

100 

"          26 

(( 

.     at  Duffield's  Depot  (Baltimore  and 
Ohio  railroad). 

400 

(( 

. 

.     at  Moorefield. 

8000 

"        375 

cavalry    . 

.     at  Unger's  Store. 

And  adds  that  "  Brig.-Gen.  Meem  left  here  this  morning  for  Moorefield  with 
545  infantry,  and  Brig.-Gen.  Carson  for  Bath,  sixteen  miles  ofi",  with  200  infantry 
and  25  mounted  militia." 
Jackson's  artillery  consisted  at  this  time  of 

McLaughlin's  (Rockbridge)  battery 6  guns. 

Waters' s  battery 4 

Carpenter's  battery 4 

Shumaker's  battery        . 4 

Marye's  battery 4 

Cutshaw's  section  (lost  January  7) 2 

3 


26  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

in  comnumd  of  all  the  Federal  forces  in  this  vicinity,  evacuated 
Romney  on  the  10th,  and  fell  back  to  the  railroad  at  Patterson's 
creek.  At  this  point  he  concentrated  the  troops  from  Hancock  and 
Cumberland,  as  well  as  those  from  Romney  and  S])ringfield.  The 
advance  of  the  Confederates  camped  for  the  night  of  the  13th  near 
Slancsville,  headquarters  being  at  Sherrard's,  at  Bloomery  gap.  Next 
day  the  march  was  continued  through  a  cold  and  driving  sleet.  Jack- 
son and  the  advance  entered  Romney  in  the  evening.  The  retreating 
enemy  had  left  some  stores  and  equipage,  which  fell  into  his  hands. 
(Map  No.  1.) 

On  the  15th,  the  troops  being  all  up,  Jackson  began  to  prepare  for 
another  forward  movement.  At  Cumberland^  the  Potomac,  which 
approaches  that  town  from  the  southwest,  makes  a  sharp  bend,  and, 
though  tortuous,  pursues,  after  leaving  it,  a  direction  but  little  east  of 
south  until  it  receives  the  waters  of  Patterson's  creek.  At  the  latter 
point  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  crosses  the  creek  going  west- 
ward on  an  extensive  bridge,  and  a  short  distance  up  the  river  crosses 
the  Potomac  itself  to  the  north  bank,  on  which  side  it  continues  past 
Cumberland  to  New  creek,  where  it  recrosses  to  the  Virginia  side. 
The  bridges  over  the  Potomac  were  important  and  valuable  struc- 

and  a  section  of  heavy  guns  (twenty- four-pounder  Parrotts)  sent  out  to  Bath 
under  Capt.  Wood  McDonald,  but  afterwards  returned  to  Winchester  because 
of  the  difficulty  of  transporting  them  over  the  bad  roads. 

The  organization  of  the  regular  infantry  under  Jackson  (which  was  all  at 
Unger's  Store)  was  as  follows : 

Loring's  troops: 

Garnett's  brigade:  Taliaferro's  brigade :  Gilham's  brigade ;  Anderson's  brigtide. 

2d  Virginia  regt.     23d  Virginia  regt.       2lst  Virginia  regt.     1st  Tennessee  regt. 
4th       "        "        37th      "  "  42d         "        "        7th         "  " 

5th      "        "  3d  Arkansas  "         48th        "        "       14th         "  ** 

27th       '•         "  Irish  battalion. 

33d        "         " 
'  Gen.  Jackson  had  written  on  the  14th  to  Secretary  Benjamin  as  follows : 

*'  Bloomery  Gap,  January  14,  1862. 
"  Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin  : 

"  Sir  : — Through  the  blessing  of  God  I  regard  this  district  as  essentially  in 
our  possession. 

"  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  there  are  medical  and  other  stores  in  Cum- 
berland which  would,  if  in  our  possession,  be  of  great  value  to  our  government. 
If  you  desire  them  to  be  secured,  in  addition  to  the  other  advantages  resulting 
from  the  occupation  of  Cumberland  and  the  dispersion  or  capture  of  their  army 
near  there,  please  send  me  at  once  4000  infantry  and  350  cavalry.  An  engineer 
officer  is  much  needed. 

"T.  J.  Jackson, 
"  Major-General." 


ROMNEY.  27 

tures,  and  the  demolition  of  them  would  render  the  railroad  useless 
from  New  creek  (now  called  Keyser)  eastward.  This  Jackson  desired 
to  accomplish,  and  at  the  same  time  to  do  such  damage  as  he  could  to 
the  forces  guarding  them.  As  a  first  step  he  determined  to  destroy 
the  bridge  at  New  creek,  so  as  to  break  Lander's  western  communi- 
cations and  threaten  his  flank  and  rear.  The  "Stonewall"  brigade 
and  that  of  Col.  Taliaferro  were  selected  for  this  undertaking. 

Now  it  was  that  a  new  difficulty  confronted  the  Confederate  leader, 
and  forced  him  to  relinquish  for  the  time  all  further  movements. 
The  severe  privations  of  the  soldiers  at  Bath  and  Hancock  had  not 
been  endured  without  murmuring;  the  painful  march  to  Unger's 
Store  had  not  allayed  the  dissatisfaction,  and  that  to  Romney,  in  still 
more  severe  weather,  had  caused  the  discontent,  especially  in  Gen. 
Loring's  command,  to  become  open  and  outspoken.  Many  men  were 
in  hospital  from  the  effects  of  the  exposure.  It  was  commonly  de- 
clared that  the  cold  was  more  fatal  than  the  enemy.  A  campaign  at 
such  a  season,  among  inhospitable  mountains,  was  pronounced  mad- 
ness. This  feeling  was  not  confined  to  the  men.  Many  of  the 
officers,  under  Jackson  for  the  first  time,  sympathized  with  it,  or  did 
nothing  to  repress  it.  Rain  and  a  partial  thaw  were  converting  the 
ice-bound  roads  into  slush  and  mire.  The  sufferings  of  the  march, 
now  proposed,  promised  to  be  greater  than  those  already  endured. 
The  result  was  that  Avhen  Jackson  was  ready  to  set  out  he  found  the 
troops,  and  especially  Taliaferro's  brigade,  so  discontented,  and  op- 
position to  further  movements  with  the  present  roads  and  weather 
so  wide-spread,  as  to  render  his  proposed  undertaking  inexpedient. 
"  With  deep  mortification  and  reluctance,"  ^  says  his  biographer,  "  he 
therefore  relinquished  further  aggressive  movements,  and  prepared  to 
defend  what  he  had  already  won." 

In  two  weeks,  and  with  trifling  loss,  he  had  placed  the  troops  op- 
posed to  him,  while  preparing  for  an  aggressive  movement,  upon  the 
defensive ;  had  expelled  them  virtually  from  his  whole  district ;  had 
liberated  three  counties  from  their  rule,  and  secured  the  supplies  in 
them  for  the  subsistence  of  his  own  troops. 

He  now  proceeded  to  place  his  army  in  winter  quarters.  Gen. 
Loring's  three  brigades,  and  thirteen  pieces  of  artillery,  were  quartered 
around  Romney ;  Boggs's  brigade  of  militia  was  spread  along  the 
South  Branch  of  the  Potomac,  as  far  as  Moorefield,  and  his  pickets 
joined  those  of  Gen.  Edward  Johnson  on  the  Alleghany,  while  three 

^  Dr.  Dabney. 


28  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

companies  of  cavalry  were  left  with  Loring  for  outpost  duty.  Car- 
son's brigade  of  militia  was  stiitioned  at  Bath ;  Meem's  brigade  at  and 
beyond  JNIartinsburg;  and  Ashby  with  the  greater  part  of  his  cavalry 
regiment  on  the  line  of  the  Potomac.  Garnctt's  brigade  was  ordered 
to  Winchester  to  watch  and  oppose  Banks,  and  to  this  place  Gen. 
Jackson  removed  his  own  headquarters  on  the  24th  of  January. 
He  thus  left  the  larger  part  of  his  force  at  Romncy,  where  it  could 
subsist  from  the  rich  valley  of  the  South  Branch,  and  where  it  would 
be  in  position  to  meet  an  advance  of  the  enemy  from  the  northwest, 
or  be  ready  to  tidce  advantage  of  the  return  of  good  weather  to  re- 
sume the  offensive.  A  line  of  telegraph  from  Winchester  was  to  put 
Jackson  in  communication  with  Romney.  Garnett's  brigade  was 
stationed  at  the  former  place  that  it  might  be  at  hand  to  resist  any 
movement  of  Gen.  Banks,  who  menaced  liis  front  from  Harjier's 
Ferry  to  Williamsport,  or  might  go  to  the  assistance  of  Loring,  if 
circumstances  required.^ 

^  Gen.  Jackson's  views  are  thus  given  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War, 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  dated  January  20,  1862:  "Though  the  enemy  have  re- 
treated to  the  Potomac,  yet  they  continue  in  possession  of  the  frontiers  of  this 
district  from  seven  miles  below  Cumberland  to  the  Alleghany.  On  the  first  of 
this  month  there  was  not  a  single  loyal  citizen  of  Morgan  county  who,  in  my 
opinion,  could  with  safety  remain  at  home,  and  the  same  may  be  said  respecting 
the  most  valuable  portion  of  Hampshire  county.  A  kind  Providence  has  re- 
stored to  us  the  entire  county  of  Morgan,  and  nearly  the  entire  county  of  Hamp- 
shire, but  so  long  as  the  enemy  hold  possession  of  the  railroad  bridge,  five  miles 
below  Cumberland,  and  the  two  railroad  bridges  above  Cumberland,  they  can 
make  dangerous  inroads  upon  us.  On  last  Friday  night  I  designed  moving 
rapidly,  with  my  old  brigade  and  one  of  Loring's,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
one  of  the  railroad  bridges  across  the  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac  west  of 
Cumberland,  and  thus  cutting  off  their  supplies  from  the  west,  and  consequently 
forcing  tliem  to  reduce  their  army  in  front  of  me  ;  but  as  Gen.  Loring's  leading 
brigade,  commanded  by  Col.  Taliaferro,  was  not  in  a  condition  to  move,  the 
enterprise  had  to  be  abandoned.  Since  leaving  Winchester,  the  1st  instant,  the 
troops  have  suffered  greatly,  and  Gen.  Loring  has  not  a  single  brigade  in  a  con- 
dition for  active  operations,  though  in  a  few  days  I  expect  they  will  be  much 
improved,  and  will,  if  placed  in  winter  quarters,  be  able  to  hold  this  important 
portion  of  the  Valley ;  but  these  quarters  should  be  well  selected  and  the  position 
strengthened,  and  hence  the  great  importance  of  having  an  engineer  officer.  It 
will  not  do  for  me  to  remain  here  much  longer,  lest  Gen.  Banks  should  cross 
the  Potomac;  consequently,  in  a  few  days  I  expect  to  leave  this  place,  taking 
with  me  Garnett's  brigade.  I  have  written  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  that,  unless 
otherwise  directed,  Gen.  Loring's  command  will  go  into  winter  quarters  in  the 
South  Branch  valley,  Gen.  Carson's  at  Bath,  Gen.  Meem's  at  Martinsburg,  and 
Gen.  Garnett's  at  Winchester.  The  cavalry  will  be  distributed  at  various  points 
along  the  northern  frontier.   Gen.  Boggs's  brigade,  which  principally  belongs  to 


ROMNEY.  29 

"When  Jackson  returned  to  Winchester,  on  the  24th  of  January, 
everything  betokened  some  weeks  of  quiet,  undisturbed  by  any  im- 
portant military  movements.  He  was  not  aware,  however,  of  the 
extent  of  the  discontent  excited  among  Gen.  Loring's  troops,  and  did 
not  imagine  that  by  leaving  them  at  Romney  this  feeling  would  be 
increased.  Yet  such  was  the  case.  They  complained  bitterly  of  the 
campaign  which  had  been  conducted  at  the  expense  of  so  much  suf- 
fering; a  campaign  now  suspended,  they  said,  only  to  leave  them  in 
an  exposed  and  dangerous  position,  in  the  midst  of  an  inhospitable 
mountain  region,  out  of  reach  of  adequate  supplies  and  of  timely 
succor.  They  declared  their  position  untenable  in  case  of  an  attack, 
and  even  attributed  the  removal  of  the  "  Stonewall"  (Garnett's)  brigade 
to  Winchester,  to  favoritism.  Jackson,  silent  and  reserved  in  manner, 
never  taking  counsel  even  with  his  next  in  command  as  to  his  plans, 
most  rigid  and  exacting  as  a  commander,  had  not  yet  acquired  that 
wonderful  control  over  his  soldiers  which  a  few  months  later  would 
have  rendered  such  murmiu-ing  impossible.  Indeed,  it  is  difficult  to 
realize  the  feeling  of  distrust  then  manifested,  when  we  consider  the 
unbounded  enthusiasm  and  devotion  with  which  many  of  these  same 
men  afterwards  followed  Jackson  to  victory  and  death. 

As  soon  as  the  troops  had  gone  into  winter  quarters  furloughs  were 
freely  given,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  the  complaints  and 
criticisms  which  had  become  so  rife  at  Romney  wei:e  carried  to  Rich- 
mond, and  were  pressed  upon  the  attention  of  the  War  Department. 
The  Secretary  was  beset  with  accounts  of  what  was  termed  Jackson's 
rash  and  ill-advised  campaign,  and  his  interference  was  most  earnestly 
invoked  in  behalf  of  a  gallant  body  of  troops  now,  it  was  said,  in 
danger  of  being  overwhelmed  in  Romney  by  Gen.  Lander's  largely 
superior  forces,  whenever  the  latter  should  choose  to  make  a  dash 
at  them  from  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad.  The  Secretar}^,  far 
from  the  scene  of  operations,  with  no  information  as  to  the  real  state 
of  the  case,  except  such  as  reached  him  in  the  above  way,  and  with 
little  knowledge  of  Jackson's  character  and  capacity,  unfortunately 
yielded  to  the  pressure  brought  upon  him. 

On  the  31st  of  January,  just  one  week  after  his  return  to  Winches- 
ter, Gen.  Jackson  received  the  following  telegram  from  the  Secretary 
of  War :  "  Our  news  indicates  that  a  movement  is  making  to  cut  off 


the  South  Branch  valley,  will  be  distributed  over  the  section  of  country  to 
which  it  belongs.  It  is  very  desirable  that  the  troops  should  go  into  winter 
quarters  as  soon  as  possible,  so  I  trust  you  will  send  me  the  best  engineer  officer 
you  can,  though  it  be  for  only  ten  days." 


30  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1801-62. 

Gen.  L<)rlno;'s  command ;  order  liini  back  to  Windicstcr  immediately." 
This  order  wa.s  sent  without  (consultation  with  Gen.  J,  E.  Johnston, 
then  in  chief  command  in  Virginia,  or  with  Gen.  Jackson  himself, 
and  of  course  reflected  upon  the  latter's  judgment  and  caj)acity.  Gen. 
Jackson  at  once  complied  with  the  order,  at  the  same  time  ordering 
back  Carson's  militia  from  Bath  to  Bloomery  gap,  and  directing  the 
troops  on  the  left  of  Loring,  in  the  South  Branch  valley,  to  fiill  back  if 
the  enemy  should  advance.     He  then  wrote  to  the  Secretary  as  follows : 

"Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  etc. 

"Sir: — Your  order,  requiring  me  to  direct  Gen.  Loring  to  return 
with  his  command  to  Winchester  immediately,  has  been  received 
and  promptly  complied  with. 

"With  such  interference  in  my  command  I  cannot  expect  to  be  of 
much  service  in  the  field,  and,  accordingly,  res])ectfully  request  to  be 
ordered  to  report  for  duty  to  the  superintendent  of  the  Virginia 
Militiiry  Institute  at  Lexington,  as  has  been  done  in  the  case  of  other 
professors.  Should  this  application  not  be  granted,  I  respectfully 
request  that  the  President  will  accept  my  resignation  from  the  army. 
"  Respectfully,  etc.,  your  obed't  servant, 

"T.  J.  Jackson." 

This  letter  was  forwarded  through  Gen.  Johnston,  to  whose  adju- 
tant he  at  the  same  time  wrote :  "  The  Secretary  of  AYar  stated  in  the 
order  requiring  Gen.  Loring's  command  to  fall  back  to  this  place 
immediately  that  he  had  been  informed  the  command  was  in  danger 
of  being  cut  off.  Such  danger,  I  am  well  satisfied,  does  not  exist, 
nor  did  it,  in  my  opinion,  exist  at  the  time  the  order  was  given,  and  I 
therefore  respectfully  recommend  that  the  order  be  countermanded, 
and  that  Gen.  Loring  be  required  to  return  w'ith  his  command  to  the 
neighborhood  of  Roniney."  But  the  commander-in-chief,  though  con- 
curring in  Jackson's  opinion  of  the  campaign,  did  not  think  it  best 
to  assume  the  responsibility  of  giving  the  order,  and  all  of  Loring's 
troops  returned  to  the  vicinity  of  Winchester.^  In  regard  to  the 
resignation,  Gen.  Johnston  detained  it  for  a  time,  and  wrote  urging 
Jackson  to  reconsider  it.* 

^  Dabney's  Life  of  Jackson. 

^  Gen.  Johnston's  letter  is  as  follows: 

"My  dear  Friend: — I  have  just  read,  with  profound  re<jret,  your  letter  to 
the  Secretary  of  War,  askinj^  to  be  relieved  from  your  present  command,  either 
by  an  order  to  the  Virginia  Military  Institute  or  the  acceptance  of  your  resigna- 
tion. Let  me  beg  you  to  reconsider  this  matter.  Under  ordinary  circumstances, 
a  due  sense  of  one's  own  dignity,  as  well  as  care  for  professional  character  and 
official  rights,  would  demand  such  a  course  as  yours.  But  the  character  of  this 
war,  the  great  energy  exhibited  by  the  government  of  the  United  States,  the 
danger  in  which  our  veiy  existence  as  an  independent  people  lies,  require 
sacrifices  from  us  all  who  have  been  educated  as  soldiers.     I  receive  my  infor- 


ROMNEY.  31 

On  the  same  day  Jackson  wrote  to  Governor  Letcher  as  follows : 

"Winchester,  January  31,  1862. 

"  Governor  : — This  morning  I  received  an  order  from  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  to  order  Gen.  Loring  and  his  command  to  fall  back  from 
Romney  to  this  place  immediately.  The  order  was  promptly  com- 
plied with ;  but  as  the  order  was  given  without  consulting  me,  and  is 
abandoning  to  the  enemy  what  has  cost  much  preparation,  expense, 
and  exposure  to  secure,  and  is  in  direct  conflict  with  my  military 
plans,  and  implies  a  want  of'  confidence  in  my  capacity  to  judge  when 
Gen,  Loring's  troops  should  fall  back,  and  is  an  attempt  to  control 
militaiy  operations  in  detail  from  the  Secretary's  desk  at  a  distance,  I 
have,  for  the  reasons  set  forth  in  the  accompanying  paper,  reqviested 
to  be  ordered  back  to  the  Institute,  and  if  this  is  denied  me,  then  to 
have  my  resignation  accepted.  I  ask  as  a  special  favor  that  you  will 
have  me  ordered  back  to  the  Institute. 

"As  a  single  order  like  that  of  the  Secretary  may  destroy  the 
entire  fruits  of  a  campaign,  I  cannot  reasonably  expect,  if  my  opera- 
tions are  thus  to  be  interfered  with,  to  be  of  much  service  in  the  field. 
A  sense  of  duty  brought  me  into  the  field,  and  has  thus  far  kept  me. 
It  now  appears  to  be  my  duty  to  return  to  the  Institute,  and  I  hope 
that  you  will  leave  no  stone  unturned  to  get  me  there.  If  I  have 
ever  acquired,  through  the  blessing  of  Providence,  any  influence 
over  troops,  this  undoing  of  my  work  by  the  Secretary  may  greatly 
diminish  that  influence. 

"I  regard  this  recent  expedition  as  a  great  success.  Before  our 
troops  left  here  on  the  1st  instant,  there  was  not,  so  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  ascertain,  a  single  loyal  man  in  Morgan  comity  who  could 
remain  at  home  in  safety.  In  four  days  that  county  was  entirely 
evacuated  by  the  enemy.  Romney  and  the  most  valuable  portion  of 
Hampshire  county  was  recovered  without  firing  a  gun,  and  before  we 
had  even  entered  the  county. 

"  I  desire  to  say  nothing  against  the  Secretary  of  War.  I  take  it 
for  granted  that  he  has  done  what  he  believed  to  be  best,  but  I  regard 
such  a  policy  as  ruinous. 

"  Very  truly,  your  friend, 

"T.  J.  Jackson. 
"  His  Excellency  John  Letcher,  Gov.  of  Ya." 

mation  of  the  order  of  which  you  have  such  cause  to  complain  from  your  letter. 
Is  not  that  as  great  an  official  wrong  to  me  as  the  order  itself  to  you  ?  Let  us 
dispassionately  reason  with  the  government  on  this  subject  of  command,  and 
if  we  fail  to  influence  its  practice,  then  ask  to  be  relieved  from  positions  the 
authority  of  which  is  exercised  by  the  War  Department,  while  the  responsibilities 
are  left  to  us. 

"  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  detain  your  letter  to  make  this  appeal  to  your 
patriotism,  not  merely  from  warm  feelings  of  personal  regard,  but  from  the 
official  opinion,  which  makes  me  regard  you  as  necessary  to  the  service  of  your 
country  in  your  present  position."     (Johnston's  Narrative,  p.  88.) 

Many  soldiers  and  citizens  added  their  efforts  to  those  of  Gen.  Johnston  and 
Governor  Letcher. 


32  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-G3. 

Tlie  Governor  says :  "  The  Secretary  of  War  received  the  general's 
resignation  before  the  general's  letter  reached  me,  and  having  been 
informed  of  the  fact  by  one  of  my  aides,  to  whom  Mr.  Benjamin 
commnnicated  it,  I  at  once  went  to  the  War  Department,  and  after 
some  conversation  between  the  Secretar)^  and  myself,  it  was  agreed 
that  no  action  should  be  taken  until  I  should  have  an  opportunity  to 
write  to  Gen.  Jackson  and  receive  his  reply.  I  accordingly  went  to 
my  office  and  wrote  him  a  long  and  earnest  letter,  informing  him  of 
what  had  taken  place,  and  urging  such  reasons  as  I  thought  would 
induce  him  to  remain  in  the  field,  and  concluding  with  the  request 
that  he  would  sanction  what  I  had  done  and  permit  me  to  withdraw 
his  resignation.  This  letter  was  sent  by  my  aide.  Col.  Boteler,  and  I 
was  greatly  gratified,  on  his  return,  to  find  that  the  general  acceded 
to  my  wishes,  and  gave  me  his  full  consent  to  the  withdrawal  of  his 
letter  of  resignation  from  the  files  of  the  War  Department."  ^ 

^  From  a  communication  of  Governor  Letcher  to  the  "  Richmond  Whig." 
Jackson's  reply  referred  to  is  in  the  Archive  OflSce  in  Washington,  and  is  as 

follovrs : 

■  "February  6,  1862. 
"  Governor  : — Your  letter  of  the  4th  inst.  was  received  this  morning.  If  my 
retiring  from  the  army  vrould  produce  the  effect  upon  our  country  that  you  have 
named  in  your  letter,  I,  of  course,  vrould  not  desire  to  leave  the  service.  And 
if,  upon  the  receipt  of  this  note,  your  opinion  remains  unchanged,  you  are 
authorized  to  withdravir  my  resignation,  unless  the  Secretary  of  War  desires 
that  it  should  be  accepted.  My  reasons  for  resigning  were  set  forth  in  my 
letter  of  the  31st  ult.,  and  my  views  remain  unchanged ;  and  if  the  Secretary 
persists  in  the  ruinous  policy  complained  of,  I  feel  that  no  officer  can  serve  his 
country  better  than  by  making  his  strongest  possible  protest  against  it,  which, 
in  my  opinion,  is  done  by  tendering  his  resignation,  rather  than  be  a  willing 
instrument  in  prosecuting  the  war  upon  a  ruinous  principle.  I  am  much 
obliged  to  you  for  requesting  that  I  should  be  ordered  to  the  Institute. 

"  Yours,  etc.. 

"T.  J.  Jackson." 


CHAPTER    II. 

KERNSTOWN. 

The  withdrawal  of  the  Confederate  troops  from  Romney  was  a 
surrender  of  whatever  had  been  gained  by  the  expedition,  for  it  soon 
resulted  in  the  reoccupation  by  the  enemy  of  all  the  territory  that  had 
been  recovered  from  liim. 

Various  causes  combined  to  prevent  any  further  movement  on  the 
part  of  Gen.  Jackson  for  some  weeks.  After  the  events  narrated  in 
the  close  of  the  last  chapter  it  was  deemed  expedient  to  make  some 
changes.  Gren.  Loring  was  ordered  to  a  new  command  in  the  south- 
west, and  all  his  troops  that  were  not  Virginians  were  gradually 
removed  to  the  other  wing  of  Gen.  Johnston's  army.  This  took  away 
Anderson's  brigade,  composed  of  the  First,  Seventh,  and  Fourteenth 
Tennessee  regiments,  and  the  First  Georgia  and  Third  Arkansas  from 
Taliaferro's,  and  left  to  Gen.  Jaclvson,  besides  Garnett's  brigade,  Gil- 
ham's  brigade  (now  commanded  by  Col.  J.  S.  Burks),^  composed  of  the 
Twenty-first,  Forty-second,  and  Forty-eighth  Virginia  regiments,  and 
the  First  battalion  of  regulars  (commonly  known  as  the  Irish  battalion), 
and  the  Twenty-third  and  Thirty-seventh  Virginia  regiments,  under 
Col.  Taliaferro.  The  militia  commands  had  never  been  well  organ- 
ized, and  they  were  now  dwindling  rapidly  by  details  and  enlistments 
in  the  volunteer  forces.''     In  accordance  with  a  law  passed  by  the 

1  Col.  Gilham  and  Maj.  Ship  had  been  ordered  back  to  the  Virginia  Military 
Institute,  where  they  held  professorships,  and  Col.  J.  T.  L.  Preston,  who  had 
acted  as  adjutant-general  and  chief  of  staff  for  Jackson  during  the  past  few 
months,  was  ordered  away  for  the  same  reason  on  February  1. 

"^  The  ideas  of  military  efficiency  in  some  of  these  commands  were  droll,  and 
no  doubt  vexatious  enough  to  the  general.  In  the  absence  of  Gen.  Carson  the 
command  of  his  brigade  devolved  on  Col.  Sincindiver,  a  corpulent  and  good- 
humored  Dutchman,  whose  military  training  had  been  gained  entirely  at  the 
annual  militia  musters  which  before  the  war  constituted  a  feature  of  Virginia 
life.  We  find  Jackson  writing  to  him  on  February  11 :  "I  regret  to  hear  from 
an  officer  that  it  is  impossible  to  execute  an  order.  If  your  cavalry  will  not  obey 
your  orders  you  must  make  them  do  it,  and,  if  necessary,  go  out  with  them  your- 
self.    I  desire  you  to  go  out  and  post  your  cavalry  where  you  want  them  to 

33 


34  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV   OF    VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G3. 

Confederate  Congress  to  encourage  rc-enlistnients,  furloughs  for  thirty 
days  were  now  given  to  those  soldiers  who  re-enlisted,  and  a  large 
number  of  men  were  permitted  to  bo  absent  in  this  way.  On  the  7th 
of  February  orders  were  issued  to  authorize  the  giving  of  furloughs 
to  re-enlisted  men  to  the  extent  of  one-third  of  the  number  present 
for  duty.  The  diminution  of  his  force  from  these  causes  would  have 
kej)t  Jackson  inactive,  even  had  not  the  condition  of  the  roads,  which 
broke  up  iis  soon  as  the  weather  moderated,  put  a  stop  to  any  important 
movements.  The  opening  of  an  aggressive  campaign  by  the  Federal 
armies  in  Virginia,  involving  as  it  did  an  advance  of  the  greatly 
superior  force  in  his  front,  was  soon  to  throw  him  on  the  defensive. 

Gen.  Lander,  finding  that  the  Confederates  had  withdrawn  from 
Romney  and  the  South  Branch  valley,  reoccupied  the  former  place 
"without  opposition  on  the  7th  of  February,  and  a  few  days  later  sent 
an  expedition  as  far  south  as  Moorcfield.  This  party,  under  Col. 
Dunning,  of  the  Fifth  Ohio,  met  with  no  serious  resistance,  and 
brought  off  more  than  two  hundred  cattle.  Work  was  basily  resumed 
on  the  railroad.  Gen.  Carson  having  fallen  back  from  Bath  to  Bloom- 
ery  gap,  and  by  the  14tli  the  bridge  over  the  Great  Cacapon  was 
rebuilt,  and  the  railroad  open  once  more  from  the  west  to  Hancock. 
On  this  day  Lander  made  a  bold  dash,  with  four  hundred  cavalry 
and  several  regiments  of  infantry,  at  the  militia  forces  stationed  at 
Bloomery.  Leaving  Paw-Paw  on  the  evening  of  the  13th,  he  con- 
structed, during  the  night,  a  temporary  bridge  of  wagons  over  the 
Great  Cacapon  riv^er,  at  a  point  about  seven  miles  south  of  the 
railroad,  and,  crossing  over,  moved  rapidly  towards  Bloomery,  where 
he  took  Col.  Sincindiver'  by  surprise.  Leading  the  charge  of  his 
cavalry  himself.  Gen.  Lauder  dashed  in  among  the  Confederates  be- 
fore they  had  fully  formed,  and  captured  some  seventy-five  prisoners, 
of  whom  seventeen  were  officers.  The  Confederates,  rallying  after 
their  first  panic,  checked  the  Federals  until  the  trains  could  be  gotten 
away,  when  they  retreated.  The  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  was 
insignificant  on  both  sides.  On  the  same  day  a  reconnoissance  in 
force  was  made  by  Col.  Carroll  and  two  regiments  of  Federal  infantry 
to  Unger's  Store.     As  soon  as  Jackson  knew  of  this  affair  he  ordered 

stay,  and  arrest  any  man  who  leaves  his  post,  and  prefer  charges  and  specifica- 
tions against  him,  that  he  may  be  court-martialed.  It  will  not  do  to  say  that 
your  men  cannot  be  induced  to  perform  their  duty.  They  must  he  made  to  do  it. 
When  you  hear  of  marauding  parties,  send  out  and  bring  them  in  as  prisoners 
of  war."  The  afiiiir  of  the  14th  of  February  can  hardly  be  wondered  at. 
^  Commanding  in  the  absence  of  Gen.  Carson. 


KERNSTOWN.  35 

Ashby  from  INIartinsbnrg,  with  what  force  he  had  at  hand,  to  check 
the  enemy.  On  the  16th,  Col.  Ashby  drove  out  the  detachment  which 
Lander  had  left  at  Bloomery  gap,  but  the  territory  beyond  remained 
in  Federal  possession,  and  this  rendered  the  railroad  secure  from 
Hancock  westward.  Jackson  ceased  to  give  furloughs  for  the  time, 
and  took  steps,  by  sending  a  detachment  with  boats  to  Castleman's 
ferry,  on  the  Shenandoah,  to  make  good  his  communications  with 
Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  at  Leesburg,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Blue  Ridge. 
(Map  No.  1.)  These  precautions  were  taken  against  the  advance  of 
the  enemy  in  force,  but  no  fiuiher  movements  were  made  by  Gen. 
Lander.  That  gallant  officer  was  soon  disabled  by  the  effects  of  a 
wound  received  the  preceding  fall,  which  had  been  aggravated  by 
active  service.  He  sank  rapidly,  and  died  at  his  headquarters  at 
Paw-Paw  on  the  2d  of  ISIarch. 

The  month  of  February  wore  on, — a  month  filled  with  disasters  to 
the  Confederate  cause.  On  the  6th  of  that  mouth  Fort  Hemy,  on  the 
Tennessee  river,  was  captured ;  on  the  8th,  Roanoke  Island,  ISTorth 
Carolina,  fell;  on  the  12th,  the  Confederates  evacuated  Lexington, 
Missoiu-i;  and  on  the  15th,  Bowling  Green,  Kentucky.  Fort  Donel- 
son,  Tennessee,  fell  on  the  15th,  Nashville  on  the  26th,  and  the 
evacuation  of  Columbus,  Kentucky,  was  begun  on  the  27th.  It  was 
at  this  dark  hour  that  Mr.  Davis  was  inaugurated  at  Richmond,  on 
the  22d  of  February,  as  first  President  of  the  Confederate  States. 

Meantime,  the  Federal  administration  was  pushing  forward  its 
preparations  for  the  campaign  against  Richmond,  and  Gen.  Johnston 
was  making  his  dispositions  to  meet  them.  President  Lincoln  was 
anxious  to  attack  Johnston  in  his  position  at  Manassas,  and,  as  part  of 
a  general  advance  by  all  the  Federal  armies,  which  he  ordered  to  take 
place  on,  or  before,  February  22,  he  directed  McClellan  to  advance 
"with  all  the  disposable  force  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  after 
providing  safely  for  the  defence  of  Washington,"  and  seize  the  Orange 
and  Alexandria  railroad  in  Johnston's  rear.  This  plan  he  abandoned, 
on  the  urgent  representations  of  McClellan,  and  reluctantly  adopted 
that  general's  plan  of  operations,  by  way  of  the  lower  Chesapeake 
and  the  York  and  James  rivers.^  But  before  orders  were  issued  to 
carry  out  this  last  purpose,  it  was  determined  to  send  Banks's  and 
Lander's  commands  forward  to  cover  the  rebuildinsf  of  the  Baltimore    1/ 


'  This  plan  embraced  the  transfer  of  the  Federal  army  by  water  from  the 
vicinity  of  Washington  and  Alexandria  to  Fort  Monroe,  and  its  advance  thence 
up  the  peninsula  formed  by  the  York  and  James  rivers  against  Richmond. 


36  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV  OF    VIRGINIA,  1S61-G2. 

and  Ohio  railroad  from  Harper's  Ferry  to  Hancock,  and  to  take  and 
hokl  Winchester  and  Stnisburg.  Measures  were  taken  for  this  purpose 
about  the  20th  of  February.  On  the  24th,  the  advance  guard  of 
Gen.  Banks's  column'  occupied  Harper's  Ferry,  and  a  bateau  bridge 
was  soon  laid  across  the  Potomac  at  that  point.  Canal  boats  were 
collected  for  a  more  permanent  bridge,  and  on  the  26th  Gen.  McClellan 
went  himself  to  Harper's  Ferry  to  hasten  the  forward  movement. 
He  had  ordered  up  two  of  the  brigades  of  Sedgwick's  (late  Stone's) 
division  to  reinforce  Banks.  The  first  two  brigades  that  arrived  at 
Harper's  Ferry  were  thrown  over  on  the  26th,  and  orders  were  issued 
for  the  others  to  follow,  when  an  unforeseen  difficulty  caased  the 
Federal  commander-in-chief  to  delay  for  the  time  the  contemplated 
movement.  The  canal  boats  were  found  to  be  too  wide  to  pass 
through  the  lock  of  the  branch  canal,  which  at  this  point  was  the 
only  outlet  to  the  river.  The  permanent  bridge  could  not,  therefore, 
be  built  at  once,  and  a  violent  gale  threatened  the  safet)^  of  the  tem- 
porary one,  which  formed  the  only  means  of  communication.  "  It 
was  evident,"  says  Gen.  McClellan,  "that  the  troops  under  orders 
would  only  be  in  the  way  should  they  arrive,  and  that  it  would  not 
be  possible  to  subsist  them  for  a  rapid  march  on  Winchester.  It  was, 
therefore,  deemed  necessary  to  countermand  the  order,  content  our- 
selves with  covering  the  reopening  of  the  railroad  for  the  present, 
and  in  the  mean  time  use  every  exertion  to  establish,  as  promptly  as 
possible,  depots  of  forage  and  subsistence  on  the  Virginia  side,  to 
supply  the  troops  and  enable  them  to  move  on  to  Winchester, 
independently  of  the  bridge.  The  next  day  (Friday,  Februar)-  28) 
I  sent  a  strong  reconnoissance  to  Charlestown,  and  under  its  protection 
went  there  myself.  I  then  determined  to  hold  that  place,  and  to 
move  the  troops  composing  Lander's  and  AVilliams's  commands  at 
once  on  Martinsburg  and  Bunker  Hill,  thus  effectually  covering  the 
reconstruction  of  the  railroad." 

In  accordance  with  these  views  Banks  advanced  slowly.  ISIartins- 
biu-g  was  occupied  on  the  3d  of  March,  but  it  was  the  6th  before  all 
of  Lander's  division  (now  under  Gen.  Shields,  who  had  been  sent  to 
it  upon  Lander's  death)  were  up,  and  the  Federals  had  occupied 
Bunker  Hill  and  Smithfield.^ 

*  Banks  had  wintered  at  Frederick,  Maryland. 

*  Gen.  G.  II.  Gordon,  then  of  the  Second  Massachusetts  regiment,  of  Aber- 
crombie's  brigade,  says  the  Federal  troops  were  at  that  time  disposed  as  follows : 
"While  our  brigade  moved  on  and  to  Charlestown  from  Harper's  Ferry,  Gen. 
Williams  moved  from  Hancock  through  Martinsburg  to  Bunker  Ilill.    .     .     . 


KER^^STO  WN.  37 

Jackson  wrote  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  on  the  24th  of  February  as 
follows:  "General: — First  Lieut.  James  K.  Boswell,  of  the  Pro- 
visional Engineers,  is  directed  to  report  to  me  for  duty.  I  have 
plenty  of  work  for  him,  but  if  you  desire  additional  fortifications 
constructed  for  the  defence  of  Winchester,  please  state  what  shall  be 
their  character,  and  I  will  put  him  at  work  immediately  after  his 
arrival.  The  subject  of  fortifying  is  of  such  importance  as  to  induce 
me  to  consult  you  before  moving  in  the  matter.  If  you  think  that 
this  place  will  be  adequately  reinforced  if  attacked,  then  it  appears 
to  me  that  it  should  be  strongly  fortified.  I  have  reason  to  believe 
that  the  enemy  design  advancing  on  this  place  in  large  force.  The 
Seventh  and  Fom-teenth  Tennessee  regiments  left,  via  Snicker's  gap, 
for  Manassas  on  the  22d.  The  remaining  part  of  Gen.  Loring's 
command  can  move  at  any  time,  but  I  deem  it  prudent  to  detain  them 
until  other  troops  arrive,  or  until  something  further  is  heard  from 
you  respecting  their  marching.  The  Third  Arkansas  regiment  left 
here  on  the  22d,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  the  cars  at  7  a.m.  this 
morning  at  Strasburg,  en  route  for  Fredericksburg.  Gen.  Holmes 
requested  that  the  Seventh  and  Fourteenth  Tennessee  regiments 
should  move  to  Manassas,  where  they  should  halt  until  they  should 
receive  orders  to  go  to  Evansport.  I  am  making  arrangements  to 
construct,  if  possible,  a  raft  bridge  at  Castleman's,  so  the  troops  at 
Leesburg  and  this  place  can  co-operate  with  the  least  loss  of  time. 
If  the  two  places  were  connected  by  telegraph  several  hours  would 
be  saved."  ^ 

But  the  retreat  of  the  main  Confederate  army  from  the  positions  it 

Gen.  Hamilton,  passing  through  Charlestown,  stopped  at  Smithfield,  midway 
between  Charlestown  and  Bunker  Hill.  Gen.  Shields  halted  at  Martinsburg,  and 
Gen.  Sedgwick  at  Charlestown."  Abercrombie,  Williams,  and  Hamilton  then 
commanded  the  three  brigades  which  constituted  Banks's  division,  (History  of 
Second  Massachusetts  Regiment,  3d  Paper,  p.  15.) 

On  March  2,  Banks,  at  Charlestown,  was  informed  by  a  negro  scout  sent  out 
by  Col.  Strother  (of  his  staff)  of  the  preparations  for  the  evacuation  of  Win- 
chester, etc.  Strother  says  Banks  was  held  back  from  advancing  rapidly  by 
the  fear  of  a  concentration  from  Manassas  at  Winchester  against  him,  thus 
reversing  the  Manassas  campaign  of  July,  1861.  ("  Harper's  Magazine," 
January,  1867.) 

^  Jackson's  vigor  in  enforcing  discipline  is  illustrated  by  an  order  on  Febru- 
ary 25  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  liquors  into  his  command,  which  had 
been  done  by  means  of  boxes  sent  to  the  soldiers  by  their  friends.  He  directed 
"  that  every  wagon  that  came  into  camp  should  be  searched,  and  if  any  liquor 
were  found,  it  was  to  be  spilled  out,  and  the  wagon  and  horses  turned  over  to 
the  quartermaster."     (Hotchkiss's  Diary.) 


38         CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  ISO  1-63. 

luwl  held  since  July,  18G1,  was  about  to  bcf^in.  Gen.  Johnston,  after 
conference  with  President  Davis,  luitl  begun  the  removal  of  stores  and 
y  baggage  on  February  22.  With  the  limited  railroad  facilities  pos- 
sessed by  the  Confederates,  two  weeks  were  not  sufficient  for  the 
transportation  of  all  the  supplies  that  had  been  accumulated  at  and 
about  Manassas,  but  Gen.  Johnston  did  not  think  it  prudent  to  delay 
longer.  There  were  signs  of  activity  among  the  Federal  troops 
opposite  his  right,  w'hich  led  him  to  expect  a  movement  by  McClellan 
in  the  direction  of  Fredericksburg.  The  latter,  under  urgent  pressure 
from  President  Lincoln,  was  really  preparing  to  attack  the  Confederate 
batteries  which  partially  blockaded  the  Potomac  on  Gen.  Johnston's 
right.  Johnston  deemed  that  the  time  had  come  to  place  his  army 
behind  the  Rappahannock,  where  he  w^ould  be  in  position  to  meet  a 
direct  advance,  or  to  oppose  McClellan  at  Fredericksburg,  should  the 
Federal  army  choose  that  route,  or  to  reach  Richmond  quickly  in 
case  of  an  advance  by  the  York  or  James  rivers.  The  movement 
was  begun  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  of  ISIarch  by  the  withdrawal  of 
Whiting  from  the  low^er  Occoquan  to  Fredericksburg,  and  of  D.  H. 
Hill  from  Leesburg,  by  way  of  Warrenton,  to  the  Rappahannock. 
The  centre  fell  back  from  Centreville  and  Bull  Run  on  the  evening 
of  the  9  th,  and  on  the  11th  all  the  infantry  and  artillery  were  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Rappahannock. 

Jackson,  meanwhile,  remained  at  Winchester,  watching  closely  the 
advance  of  Banks,  and  doing  what  was  possible  to  impede  it.  Gen. 
Johnston  thus  describes  the  duty  assigned  to  him :  "  After  it  had 
become  evident  that  the  Valley  was  to  be  invaded  by  an  army  too 
strong  to  be  encountered  by  Jackson's  division,  that  officer  was 
instructed  to  endeavor  to  employ  the  invaders  in  the  Valley,  but 
without  exposmg  himself  to  the  danger  of  defeat,  by  keeping  so  near 
the  enemy  as  to  prevent  him  from  making  any  considerable  detach- 
ment to  reinforce  McClellan,  but  not  so  near  that  he  might  be  com- 
pelled to  fight." 

Jackson's  command  at  this  time  consisted  of  Garnett's  brigade 
("  Stonewall"),  containing  the  Second,  Fourth,  Fifth,  Twenty-seventh, 
and  Thirty-third  Virginia  regiments;  Burks's  brigade,  containing 
the  Twenty-first,  Forty-second,  and  Fortj^-eighth  A^irginia  regiments, 
and  First  battalion  of  regulars  (Irish) ;  and  Fulkerson's  brigade, 
containing  the  Twenty-third  and  Thirty-seventh  Virginia  regiments. 
These  brigades  were  now  numbered  in  order, — Fu-st,  Second,  and 
Third  brigades  of  the  Army  of  the  Valley.  There  were  five 
batteries  of  artillery  and  Ashby's  regiment  of  cavalry.   Jackson's  entire 


KERNSTOWN.  39 

force  amounted  to  about  four  thousand  six  hundred  (4600)  effective 
men,  exclusive  of  some  remnants  of  the  militia  brigades,  distributed 
at  various  points  in  his  district.^  Gen.  Banks  had  his  own  division, 
under  Williams,  and  Shields's  (late  Lander's)  troops  now  incorporated 
in  his  corps,  and  also  the  three  brigades  of  Sedgwick.  On  the  1st  of 
April  the  strength  of  Banlts's  corps  (Fifth),  embracing  Shields,  is  given 
by  Gen.  McClellan  as  twenty-three  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty- 
nine  (23,339),  including  three  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty-two 
(3652)  cavalry,  and  excluding  two  thousand  one  hundred  (2100)  rail- 
road guards.^     Sedgwick's  division,^  which  was  with  him  in  the 

1  In  J.  E.  Johnston's  field  return  of  February  28,  1862,  the  force  in  the 
"  Valley  District"  under  Jackson  is  as  follows  (after  correcting  some  mistakes  in 
the  addition) : 

Present  for  duty,  officers  and  men:  infantry,  4297;  artillery,  369;  cavalry, 
601 ;  total,  5267. 

An  examination  of  such  regimental  returns  as  are  on  file  among  the  Con- 
federate archives  in  Washington  shows  that  the  strength  (present  for  duty, 
officers  and  men),  on  the  Ist  of  March,  of  the  Twenty-third  and  Thirty-seventh 
Virginia  regiments  (Fulkerson's  brigade),  and  of  the  Twenty-first,  Forty- 
second,  and  Forty-eighth  Virginia  regiments  and  the  Irish  battalion  (Burks's 
brigade),  was  1837.  No  returns  of  Garnett's  brigade  of  that  date  are  to  be 
found  there;  but  the  returns  of  the  Fourth,  Fifth,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Thirty- 
third  Virginia  regiments  for  February  1  give  their  strength  as  1403.  These 
regiments,  with  the  Second  Virginia,  constituted  Garnett's  brigade.  Estimating 
the  Second  at  the  average  of  the  other  four,  the  brigade  numbered  at  that  date 
1754.  Adding  this  to  the  sum  given  above  for  the  other  brigades  on  March  1, 
we  have  3591 — say  3600 — as  the  infantry  under  Jackson  on  Mai'ch  1.  The  dif- 
ference (about  700)  between  this  and  the  infantry  strength  as  given  by  Gen. 
Johnston  is  to  be  accounted  for  either  by  supposing  that  some  of  the  fragments 
of  the  militia  commands  were  included  in  the  return  used  by  Johnston,  or  that 
some  of  the  non-Virginian  regiments  ordered  elsewhere  had  not  gone  at  the  date 
of  the  making  of  that  return.  The  last  of  these  regiments  did  not  leave  Jack- 
son's district  until  the  22d  or  23d  of  February.  Taking  the  artillery  and  cavalry 
from  Gen.  Johnston's  return,  Jackson's  effective  strength  (excluding  some  rem- 
nants of  militia)  was, — infantry,  3600;  artillery,  369;  cavalry,  601;  total,  4570 
— say  4600 — men. 

"^  McClellan's  report,  in  "  Rebellion  Record,"  p.  546,  vol.  i..  Supplement. 

'  McClellan  says,  "  The  whole  of  Banks's  division  and  two  brigades  of 
Sedgwick's  division  were  thrown  across  the  river  at  Harper's  Ferrj',  leaving  one 
brigade  of  Sedgwick's  division  to  observe  and  guard  the  Potomac  from  Great 
Falls  to  the  mouth  of  the  Monocacy."  This  last  brigade  of  Sedgwick's  (Gor- 
man's) was  subsequently  sent  forward,  March  11,  and  joined  those  in  advance 
at  Berryville  on  the  14th.  Jackson  having  retired  and  Winchester  having  been 
occupied,  the  whole  of  Sedgwick's  division  was  sent  back  to  Bolivar  on  March  15. 
Gen.  McClellan's  morning  report,  dated  March  2,  1862,  gives  Banks's  strength 
as  follows : 


40  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE   VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,   1S61-G2. 

advance  on  Winchester,  must  have  increased  his  force  to  more  than 
thirty  thousand  (30,000)  men. 

Jackson  sent  his  stores,  baggage,  and  sick  to  the  rear,  but  continued 
to  hold  his  position  at  AVinchester  to  the  last  moment.  This  town 
lies  in  the  midst  of  an  open  country,  and  is  easily  turned  on  every 
side.  Nevertheless,  the  Confederate  commander  ordered  the  fortifica- 
tions to  be  repaired  as  soon  as  the  movements  of  the  enemy  indicated 
an  advance  in  his  direction.  Banks,  as  stated,  occupied  Charlestown 
on  the  26th  of  February,  and  made  reconnoLssances  on  the  different 
roads  leading  to  and  around  Winchester.  But  it  was  not  until  March  7 
that  his  advance  reached  Stephenson's  depot,  four  miles  from  Win- 
chester. Jackson  awaited  him,  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  on  the 
plain  in  front  of  his  fortifications,  and  between  the  Berryville  and 
Martinsburg  roads.  The  Federals  did  not  attack,  but  withdrew  to 
Charlestown.  The  activity  of  Ashby's  cavalry,  and  the  boldness  with 
which  Jackson  maintained  his  position,  impressed  his  adversary  with 
the  conviction  that  the  Confederate  force  was  much  greater  than  it 
was  in  reality.  No  attack  was  made  by  the  wary  enemy,  and  no 
opportunity  afforded  of  making  a  dash  at  some  exposed  position  of 
his  advance.  The  Federal  left  was  pushed  gradually  forward,  as  if 
to  envelop  Jackson,  and  on  the  11th  occupied  Berryville.  Sedgwick's 
division  was  thrown  forward  to  this  point.     (Map  No.  1.) 

Excellent  roads  lead  from  Berryville  to  Winchester,  and  to  New- 
town and  other  points  in  rear  of  Winchester.  It  was  no  longer  safe  for 
the  Confederate  leader  to  hold  his  position.  The  enemy  at  Beriy  ville 
was  already  on  his  flank,  only  ten  miles  distant,  and  could  easily 
reach  his  rear.  He  again  drew  up  his  little  force,  however,  north  of 
the  town,  to  meet  the  advance  of  the  main  body  of  Banks's  force  from 
the  direction  of  Smithfield  and  Charlestown,  and  remained  imder 
arms  all  day ;  but,  though  the  enemy  came  on  to  within  four  miles 
of  Winchester,  they  did  not  attack.  Late  in  the  afternoon  Jackson 
reluctantly  withdrew,  and  after  night  followed  his  trains,  which  had 

Officers  and  men  present  for  duty  : 

Banks's  division 15,398 

Lander's      "      (Shields's) 11,869 

Sedgwick's  " 11,217 

Total 38,484 

This,  no  doubt,  included  railroad  guards  and  other  detachments  in  the  rear, 
but  his  movable  column  could  hardly  have  been  less  than  30,000  men,  and  was 
probably  more,  up  to  the  15th  of  March,  when  Sedgwick's  division  was  ordered 
to  the  rear. 


KERNSTOWN.  41 

already  been  sent  forward  to  Kernstown  and  Ne\\i;own.^  The  inde- 
fatigable Ashby  covered  the  rear,  and  Banks  occupied  the  town  on 
the  morning  of  the  12th.  The  same  day  the  main  body  of  the  Con- 
federates reached  Strasbiirg,  distant  eighteen  miles  from  Winchester, 
where  they  halted  until  the  15th.  Banks  sent  forAvard  Shields's 
division,  which,  on  the  19th,  entered  Strasburg,  and  Jackson  fell 
back  before  it  to  Woodstock  and  Mount  Jackson,  the  former  place 
being  twelve  and  the  latter  twenty-four  miles  southwest  of  Strasburg. 
(Map  No.  I.) 

The  antagonism  between  Gren.  McClellan  and  the  Federal  admin- 
istration, that  ultimately  resulted  in  the  removal  of  the  former  from 
command,  assumed  definite  shape  soon  after  the  entrance  of  Mr. 
Stanton  upon  his  duties  as  Secretary  of  War,  in  January,  1862.  As 
a  consequence,  there  was  much  vacillation  about  the  movements  of  the 
Federal  Army  of  the  Potomac.  McClellan  strongly  urged  the  plan 
of  campaign  by  way  of  the  Peninsula,  Math  Fortress  Monroe  as  a 
base.  President  Lincoln  refused  to  approve,  then  gave  his  consent, 
then  half  withdrew  it  by  loading  down  the  proposed  movement  with 
conditions  to  be  first  fulfilled.  Gen.  Johnston's  retirement  from 
Manassas  relieved  the  Federal  administration,  in  some  degree,  of  its 
apprehensions  in  regard  to  Washington,  and  induced  an  acquiescence 
for  the  time  in  McClellan's  plans.  The  follo^nng  extracts  from 
McClellan's  report  show  the  Federal  plans  at  this  time  -? 

^  Jackson  had  ordered  his  trains  into  camp  immediately  south  of  Winchester, 
but,  by  some  mistake  on  the  part  of  those  in  charge,  they  were  taken  between 
Kernstown  and  Newtown,  some  five  miles  or  more  from  Winchester,  and  the 
troops  had  to  march  that  distance  to  get  supper.  The  general,  who  had  re- 
mained behind  and  was  ignorant  of  this,  called  a  council,  consisting  of  Gen. 
Garnett  and  the  regimental  commanders  of  the  "Stonewall"  brigade,  to  meet  in 
Winchester  after  dark,  and  to  them  he  proposed  a  night  attack  upon  the  portion 
of  Banks's  troops  near  Stephenson's.  He  proposed,  after  the  troops  had  eaten 
supper  and  rested  for  some  hours,  that  they  should  march  to  the  neighborhood 
of  the  enemy  and  make  the  attack  before  daylight.  The  plan  was  not  approved 
by  the  council,  and  Jackson  learned  from  those  present  that  the  troops,  instead 
of  being  in  the  suburbs  of  Winchester,  were  already  five  or  six  miles  away.  A 
march  of  ten  miles  would  thus  be  needed  to  bring  them  into  contact  with  the 
enemy.  This  last  fact  and  the  disapproval  of  the  council  caused  him  to  abandon 
the  plan.  He  followed  the  troops  and  bivouacked  in  a  fence-corner.  The  fore- 
going is  understood  to  have  been  Jackson's  first  and  last  council  of  war.  (For 
the  above  account  I  am  indebted  to  Gen.  John  Echols,  of  Staunton,  Virginia, 
then  colonel  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Virginia  regiment,  who  was  present  at  the 
conference.) 

'  McClellan's  report,  pp.  531,  etc.,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  i.,  Supplement. 

4 


42  CAMPAIGN  JN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,   1SG1-6S. 

"  Headquarters  Army  of  Potomac. 
"Fairfax  Court-IIocse,  March  13,  1862. 

"  A  council  of  the  generals  commanding  army  corps,  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  were  of  the  opinion — 

*'  I.  That  the  enemy  having  retreated  from  Manassas  to  Gordons- 
ville,  behind  the  Rappahannock  and  Rapidan,  it  is  tlie  opinion  of  the 
generals  commanding  army  corps  that  the  operations  to  be  carried  on 
will  be  best  undertaken  from  Old  Point  Comfort,  between  the  York 
and  James  rivers.   Provided: 

"  1st.  That  the  enemy's  vessel  Merrimac  can  be  neutralized. 

"  2d.  That  the  means  of  transportation  sufficient  for  an  immediate 
transfer  of  the  force  to  its  new  base  can  be  ready  at  Washington  and 
Alexandria  to  move  doAvn  the  Potomac ;  and 

"3d.  That  a  naval  auxiliary  force  can  be  had  to  silence,  or  aid  in 
silencing,  the  enemy's  batteries  on  the  York  river. 

"4th.  That  the  force  to  be  left  to  cover  Washington  shall  be  such 
as  to  give  an  entire  feeling  of  security  for  its  safety  from  menace. 
(Unanimous.) 

"  II.  If  the  foregoing  cannot  be,  the  army  should  then  be  moved 
against  the  enemy  behind  the  Rappahannock  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment,  and  the  means  for  reconstructing  bridges,  repairing  railroads, 
and  stocking  them  with  materials  sufficient  for  supplying  the  army 
should  at  once  be  collected,  for  both  the  Orange  and  Alexandria  and 
the  Acquia  and  Richmond  railroads.     (Unanimous.) 

"N.B. — That  with  the  forts  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Potomac  fully 
garrisoned,  and  those  on  the  left  bank  occupied,  a  covering  force  in 
front  of  the  Virginia  line  of  twenty-five  thousand  men  would  suffice. 
(Sumner.) 

"  This  was  assented  to  by  myself,  and  immediately  communicated  to 
the  W  ar  Department.  The  following  reply  was  received  the  same 
day: 

'"War  Department,  March  13,  1S62. 

" '  The  President  having  considered  the  plan  of  operations  agreed 
upon  by  yourself  and  the  commanders  of  army  corps,  makes  no 
objection  to  the  same,  but  gives  the  following  directions  as  to  its 
execution : 

" '  1st.  Leave  such  forces  at  Manassas  Junction  as  shall  make  it 
entirely  certain  that  the  enemy  shall  not  repossess  himself  of  that 
position  and  line  of  communication. 

" '  2d.  Leave  Washington  entirely  secure. 

" '  3d.  Move  the  remainder  of  the  force  do^vTi  the  Potomac,  choosing 
a  new  base  at  Fortress  Monroe,  or  anywhere  between  here  and  there ; 
or,  at  all  eventSj  move  such  remainder  of  the  army  at  once  in  pursuit 
of  the  enemy  by  some  route. 

" '  Edwin  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 

"'Maj.-Gen.  George  B.  McClellan.'" 

For  the  purpose  of  leaving  Washington  secure,  the  defences  of  that 


KERNSTOWN.  43 

city  were  well  manned,  and  the  command  of  them  given  to  Gen. 
Wadswortli,  and  the  following  instructions  were  sent  to  Gen.  Banks  : 

"  Headquarters  Army  of  Potomac, 
March  16,  1862. 

"  Sir  : — You  will  post  your  command  in  the  vicinity  of  Manassas, 
intrench  yourself  strongly,  and  throw  cavalry  pickets  out  to  the  front. 

"  Your  first  care  will  be  the  rebuilding  of  the  railway  from  Wash- 
ington to  Manassas  and  to  Strasburg,  in  order  to  open  your  communi- 
cations to  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah.  As  soon  as  the  Manassas 
Gup  railway  is  in  running  order,  intrench  a  brigade  of  infantry,  say 
four  regiments,  with  two  batteries,  at  or  near  the  point  where  the 
railway,  crosses  the  Shenandoah.  Something  like  two  regiments  of 
cavalry  should  be  left  in  that  vicinity  to  occupy  Winchester,  and 
thoroughly  scour  the  country  south  of  the  railway  and  up  the  Shen- 
andoah valley,  as  well  as  through  Chester  gap,  which  might,  perhaps, 
be  advantageously  occupied  by  a  detachment  of  infantry ;  well-in- 
trenched block-houses  should  be  built  at  all  the  railway  bridges. 
Occupy,  by  grand  guards,  Warrenton  Junction  and  Warrenton  itself, 
and  also  some  little  more  advanced  point  on  the  Orange  and  Alexan- 
dria railroad,  as  soon  as  the  railway  bridge  is  repaired. 

"  Great  activity  should  be  observed  by  the  cavalry.  Besides  the 
two  regiments  at  Manassas,  another  regiment  of  cavalry  will  be  at 
your  disposal  to  scout  towards  the  Occoquan,  and  probably  a  fourth 
towards  Leesburg. 

"  To  recapitulate :  the  most  important  points  which  should  engage 
your  attention  are  as  follows : 

"  1st.  A  strong  force,  well  intrenched,  in  the  vicinity  of  Manassas, 
perhaps  even  Centreville,  and  another  force  (a  brigade),  also  well 
intrenched,  near  Strasburg. 

"  2d.  Block-houses  at  the  railway  bridges. 

"  3d.  Constant  employment  of  the  cavalry  well  to  the  front. 

"  4th.  Grand  guards  at  Warrenton  Junction,  and  in  advance  as  far 
as  the  Rappahannock,  if  possible. 

"  5th.  Great  care  to  be  exercised  to  obtain  full  and  early  informa- 
tion as  to  the  enemy. 

"  6th.  The  general  object  is  to  cover  the  line  of  the  Potomac  and 
Washington. 

"  The  above  is  communicated  bv  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan. 

"  S.  Williams,  A.  A.  G. 

"  Maj.-Gen.  N.  p.  Banks,  Cora.  Fifth  Corps,  Army  of  Potomac." 

In  compliance  with  these  instructions,  Shields's  division  was  recalled 
from  Strasburg,  and  Williams's  division  began  its  movement  towards 
Manassas  on  the  20th  of  March.  The  Confederate  force  in  front  was 
known  to  be  so  small  that  no  difficulty  was  anticipated  in  carrying 
out  McClellan's  instructions,  and  no  apprehensions  were  entertained 


44  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE   VALLEV  OF    VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

tliat  tlic  force  designated  by  him  would  not  be  sufficient  to  hold  the 
lower  Valley  and  "  cover  the  line  of  the  Potomac." 

On  the  evening  of  March  21,  Col.  Ashby,  who  for  several  days 
had  been  vigorously  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  between  Strasburg 
and  Woodstock,  reported  that  they  had  evacuated  the  former  place, 
and  Jackson,  apprehensive  that  this  indicated  their  withdrawal  from 
his  military  district  in  the  direction  of  Washington,  determined  at 
once  to  pursue  with  all  his  available  force.  Fulkerson's  brigade, 
which  was  at  Woodstock,  marched  at  dawn  on  the  22d,  and  at  the 
same  time  Garnett's  ("  Stonewall")  and  Burks's  brigades  left  Mount 
Jackson.  The  whole  camped  at  Strasburg  on  the  evening  of  the  22d. 
Ashby  had  followed  the  retreating  enemy  on  Friday  night,  21st,  and 
on  Saturday,  22d,  came  up  with  the  Federal  pickets  about  one  mile 
south  of  Winchester.  He  attacked  about  5  p.m.,  and  drove  them  in. 
Gen.  Banks  was  still  in  Winchester,  and,  though  the  last  of  Williams's 
division  had  left  early  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  on  the  way  to 
Manassas,  the  Second  division,  under  Shields,  was  still  in  the  place. 
This  command  was  ordered  under  arms,  and  an  infantry  brigade  and 
two  batteries  of  artillery  and  some  cavalry  were  sent  out  on  the 
Strasburg  road  to  meet  Ashby.  The  latter,  who  had  from  two  hun- 
dred to  three  hundred  cavalry  and  Chew's  battery  of  three  guns,  after 
a  brief  skirmish,  retired  to  Kernstown,  three  miles  south  of  Win- 
chester, Avhere  he  took  position  for  the  night.  The  enemy,  having 
repelled  the  Confederate  cavalry,  did  not  pursue.  In  the  skirmish 
Gen.  Shields  was  struck  by  a  piece  of  shell,  which  fractured  his  arm 
and  disabled  him  for  a  time  for  service  on  the  field.  Gen.  Shields 
says  that  in  this  aifair  he  concealed  his  troops  as  much  as  possible 
from  the  Confederates,^  and  the  impression  of  the  smallness  of  his 
force  thus  produced  was  confirmed  by  the  information  obtained  within 
his  lines  by  Col.  Ashby.  Report  was  brought  to  the  latter  not  only 
that  the  mass  of  the  northern  troops  had  left,  but  that  only  four  regi- 
ments of  infantry  remained,  and  that  these  were  under  orders  to  march 
to  Harper's  Ferry  in  the  morning.  This  information,  transmitted  to 
Gen.  Jackson,  induced  the  latter  to  hurry  forward  the  next  day. 

During  the  night  Gen.  Shields  made  his  dispositions  to  resist  any 
further  attack,  by  sending  forward  Kimball's  brigade  and  Daum's 
artillery  on  the  Strasburg  road,  nearly  to  Kernstown.  Sullivan's 
brigade  was  posted  in  rear  of  Kimball's,  within  supporting  distance 
of  it,  covering  all  the  approaches  to  Winchester  by  way  of  the  Cedar 

*  Gen.  Shields's  report. 


KERNSTOWN.  45 

Creek,  Front  Royal,  Berryville,  and  Eomney  roads.  Tyler's  brigade 
and  Broadhead's  cavalry  were  held  in  reserve.  The  effective  strength 
of  his  whole  force  Gen.  Shields  puts  at  seven  thousand  (7000).^ 

But  though  these  precautions  were  taken,  the  Federal  commanders 
did  not  expect  an  attack.  The  force  under  Jackson  was  known  to  be 
so  greatly  inferior  to  their  own  that  they  did  not  think  he  would  risk 
a  battle  so  far  from  support  as  was  Winchester  from  the  position 
occupied  by  Gen.  Johnston,  behind  the  Rappahannock  and  Rapidan. 
On  the  morning  of  the  23d  a  Federal  reconnoissance  was  made,  of 
which  Gen.  Shields  says :  "  Not  being  able  to  reconnoitre  the  front  in 
person,  I  despatched  an  experienced  officer,  Col.  J.  T.  Mason,  of  the 
Fom-th  Ohio  volunteers,  about  9  o'clock  a.m.,  to  the  front  to  perform 
that  duty,  and  to  report  to  me  as  promptly  as  possible  every  circum- 
stance that  might  indicate  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  About  an  hour 
after,  Col.  Mason  returned,  and  reported  to  me  that  he  had  carefully 
reconnoitred  the  country  in  front  and  on  both  flanks,  and  found  no 
indications  of  any  hostile  force,  except  that  of  Ashby.  I  communi- 
cated this  information  to  IVIaj.-Gen.  Banks,  who  was  then  with  me, 
and,  after  consulting  together,  we  both  concluded  that  Jackson  could 
not  be  tempted  to  hazard  himself  so  far  away  from  his  main  support. 
Having  both  come  to  this  conclusion,  Gen.  Banks  took  his  departm'e 
for  Washington,  being  already  under  orders  to  that  effect.  The  officers 
of  his  staff,  however,  remained  behind,  intending  to  leave  for  Centre- 
ville  in  the  afternoon."^ 

Jackson,  on  the  other  hand,  knowing  that  a  large  body  of  Federal 
troops  had  left  Winchester,  and  were  marching  in  the  direction  of 
Manassas  and  Centreville,  and  believing,  from  the  information  re- 
ceived through  Col.  Ashby,  that  the  force  remaining  in  Winchester 
was  much  smaller  than  was  actually  the  case,  determined  to  lose  no 
time  in  attacking  the  latter,  that  he  might  thereby  produce  a  recall  of 
the  troops  sent  off.  At  daylight  on  Sunday  morning  (23d)  he  sent 
forward  three  companies  of  the  Second  Virginia  regiment  and  one 
of  the  Twenty-seventh  Virginia,  under  Capt.  Nadenbousch,  as  an 
infantrj^  support  to  Col.  Ashby,  and  soon  after  moved  forward  with 
his  whole  force  in  the  direction  of  Kernsto^vn.  The  distance  to  be 
marched  was  fourteen  miles,  and  it  was  ten  o'clock  in  the  forenoon 

^  McClellan  says  (p.  546  of  his  report,  in  "Rebellion  Record"),  in  a  letter 
dated  April  1,  18G2,  to  the  adjutant-general  U.S.A.:  "If  Shields's  division, 
leaving  out  the  cavalry,  consisted  of  only  7000,  the  other  division,  under  Wil- 
liams, must  have  contained  over  12,000  men." 

^  Gen,  Shields's  report,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  iv. 


46         CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

before  the  advance  under  Nadenbousch  readied  Ashby,  and  1  p.m. 
when  tlie  main  Confetlerate  force  reached  the  vicinity  of  Kornstown. 
Col.  Mason's  report  to  Gen.  Shields  of  the  condition  of  affairs  at 
9  A.^r.  Avas  therefore  perfectly  correct,  for  at  that  time  Jackson  was 
still  miles  away. 

When  Jackson  reached  Kernsto^vn  his  troops  were  very  weary. 
Three-fourths  of  them  had  the  day  before  marched  from  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Mount  Jackson  to  Strasburg,  a  distance  of  twenty-two  miles, 
to  which  had  been  added  the  march  of  fourteen  miles  from  the  latter 
place  to  Kernstown.  He  therefore  gave  directions  for  bivouacking, 
and  says :  "  Though  it  was  very  desirable  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
leaving  the  Valley,  yet  I  deemed  it  best  not  to  attack  until  morning." 
He  continues :  "  But  subsequently,  ascertaining  that  the  Federals  had 
a  position  from  which  our  forces  could  be  seen,  I  concluded  that  it 
would  be  dangerous  to  postpone  the  attack  until  the  next  day,  as 
^reinforcements  might  be  brought  up  during  the  night."  ^ 

Meantime,  Ashby  had  been  actively  skirmishing  with  the  enemy. 
He  had  opened  on  them  near  the  Strasburg  turnpike  with  Chew's  bat- 
tery, and  when  Nadenbousch  arrived  he  pushed  forward  the  infantry 
companies  under  the  latter  to  drive  back  the  Federal  skirmishers  and 
protect  the  guns.  For  a  little  time  Ashby  advanced,  and  Naden- 
bousch drove  the  enemy's  skirmishers  before  him.  But  Col.  Kim- 
ball, who  commanded  the  First  brigade  of  Shields's  division,  and  as 
senior  Federal  officer  commanded  on  the  field  in  the  absence  of  Gen. 
Shields,  soon  made  his  dispositions  to  counteract  this  movement  of 
Ashby  by  sending  forward  the  Eighth  Ohio  and  two  companies  of 
the  Sixtj^-seventh  Ohio  as  skirmishers,  on  both  sides  of  the  turnpike. 
He  supported  them  on  the  right  by  Jenks's  battery,  posted  on  a  hill 
to  the  west  of  the  village  of  Kernstown,  and  on  the  left  by  the  whole 
of  Sullivan's  brigade  (the  Second  of  Shields's  division),  with  several 
batteries  so  disposed  as  to  protect  that  flank.  Of  course  this  force  soon 
checked  Ashby  and  compelled  him  to  retire.  When  he  had  fallen 
back  some  four  or  five  hundred  yards,  he  was  informed  of  the  arrival 
of  the  main  body  of  the  Confederates,  and  received  orders  to  prepare 
for  an  advance  upon  the  Federal  position,  the  special  duty  assigned 
him  being  to  "  threaten  the  front  and  right"  (Federal  left).  At  the 
same  time  a  part  of  his  cavalry  regiment,  under  Maj.  Funsteu,  was 
detached  to  operate  on  the  other  flank  (left)  of  the  Confederate  army. 
This  detachment  was  subsequently  increased  until  it  amounted  to  one 

^  Jackson's  report. 


KERNSTO  WN. 


47 


hundred  and  forty  men,  which  left  mth  Ashby  only  one  hundred  and 
fifty  cavalry.     (Map  No.  III.) 

■  Jackson's  infantry  force  consisted  of  the  First  ("Stonewall")  bri- 
gade, now  under  Gen.  Garnett,  comprising  five  regiments,  and  of  the 
Second,  now  under  Col.  Burks,  comprising  three  regiments  and  one 
battalion,  and  of  the  Third  brigade,  under  Col.  Fulkerson,  compris- 
ing only  two  regiments.  The  Forty-eighth  Virginia  regiment,  of 
Burks's  brigade,  was  acting  as  train-guard,  and  was  not  on  the  field 
during  the  battle.  All  these  regiments  were  much  reduced  by  the 
absence  of  re-enlisted  men  still  on  furlough,  and  of  those  who  had 
fallen  out  of  ranks  in  the  severe  two  days'  march.  The  number 
present;  on  the  afternoon  of  the  battle  was :  of  infantry,  three  thousand 
and  eighty-seven  (3087),  of  which  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
forty-two  (2742)  were  engaged;  of  artillery,  twenty-seven  (27)  pieces, 
of  which  eighteen  (18)  were  engaged;  and  of  cavalry,  two  hundred 
and  ninety  (290).^  Gen.  Shields,  as  above,  states  his  force  of  all  arms 
at  seven  thousand  (7000).^ 

^  The  forces  under  Gen.  Jackson  at  Kernstown  were  as  follows  (I  have  ap- 
pended strength  given  in  the  regimental  reports  of  the  battle  as  far  as  it  could 
be  found) : 

First  brigade,  under  Gen.  Garnett : 

Second  Virginia  regiment 

Fourth  Virginia  regiment 

Fifth  Virginia  regiment  .... 

Twenty-seventh  Virginia  regiment  . 

Thirty-third  Virginia  regiment 

McLaughlin's  battery       .... 

AVaters's  battery 

Carpenter's  battery 

Second  brigade,  under  Col.  Burks : 

Twenty-first  Virginia  regiment 

Forty-second  Virginia  regiment 

Forty-eighth  Virginia  regiment 

First  battalion  of  regulars  (Irish  battalion) 

Marye's  battery 

Third  brigade,  under  Col.  Fulkerson : 

Twenty-third  Virginia  regiment 

Thirty -seventh  Virginia  regiment    . 

Shumaker's  battery  .... 

Ashby's  regiment  of  cavalry 

Chew's  battery    ...... 

The  Forty-eighth  Virginia  regiment  and  the  batteries  of  Shumaker  and  Marye 
were  not  engaged. 

^  Gen.  Shields  says  he  "  had  6000  infantry  and  a  cavalry  force  of  750,  and  24 
pieces  of  artillery."     His  organization  was  as  follows : 


320  rank  and  file. 
203      "       "      " 
not  found. 
170  muskets. 
275  rank  and  file, 
not  found,  8  guns. 
90  men,    4     " 
48      "        4    " 

270. 

293. 

not  found. 

187. 

4  guns. 

177  officers  and  men. 

397       "        "      " 
4  guns. 
290. 
3  guns. 


48 


CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 


A  high  ridge  lies  just  beyond  the  western  limits  of  Winchester, 
and  extends  for  some  miles  in  both  a  northeast  and  a  south^vest  direc- 
tion from  the  town.  After  breaking  one  mile  from  the  town  to  let 
througli  Abram's  creek,  it  continues  in  the  southwest  direction  with- 
out serious  interruption  for  six  miles,  until  it  is  again  broken  by  the 
valley  of  the  Opcquon  creek,  at  J.  S.  McGill's.  The  Strasburg  or 
"  Valley"  turnpike  runs  not  far  from  the  eastern  foot  of  this  ridge  to 
a  toll-gate  about  two  miles  southwest  of  Winchester.  At  that  point 
the  Calar  Creek  turnpike  branches  off  to  the  right,  and,  pursuing  a 
more  westerly  direction,  soon  crosses  this  ridge  at  a  depression  on  J.  N. 
Bell's  farm.  The  main  or  Strasbiu-g  road,  gradually  separating  from 
the  ridge,  continues  nearly  due  south  to  Kernstown  and  some  distance 
beyond,  when  it  again  bends  to  the  southwest.  To  the  west  of  the 
last-named  village  a  considerable  elevation,  kno^ioi  as  Pritchard's 
hill,  intervenes  between  the  turnpike  and  ridge,  affording  a  good 
position  for  artillery.  A  short  distance  south  of  the  toll-gate,  where 
the  Cedar  Creek  road  leaves  the  Valley  turnpike,  a  common  dirt 
road  also  leaves  it,  on  the  same  side  but  at  a  less  angle.  This  road, 
know^n  as  the  Middle,  or  old  Cedar  Creek  road,  runs  along  the 
eastern  face  of  the  ridge  spoken  of,  crossing  the  little  spurs  that  jut 
out  from  it,  and  passes  between  Pritchard's  hill  and  the  ridge,  but 
does  not  cross  the  latter.     It  passes  through  the  ridge  at  the  gap 


First  (Kimball's)  brigade : 
8th  Ohio  regiment. 

67th     " 

14th  Indiana    " 

84th  Pennsylvania  reg't. 


Second  (Sullivan'B)  brigade : 
13th  Indiana  regiment. 

5th  Ohio  " 

62d      "  " 

39th  Illinois  " 


Third  (Tyler's)  brigade : 
7th  Ohio  regiment. 
29th     "  " 

'i/ist  Virginia  "  ' 
7th  Indiana    " 
110th  Pennsylvania  reg't. 


Daum's  artillery : 

Jenks's  battery  ("A,"  First  Virginia). 
Clark's         "      ("E,"  Fourth  artillery). 
Davis's         "      ("B,"  First  Virginia). 
Robinson's  "      ("  L,"  First  Ohio). 
Huntington's  battery  ("  H,"  First  Ohio). 


Broadhead's  cavalry : 

4  companies  First  Michigan  cavalry. 
Ohio  " 

Maryland  " 

First  Virginia       " 
Ringgold  and  Washing- 
ton cavalry. 
There  were  also  a  company  of  Massachusetts  sharpshooters,  and  Company  B, 
First  Maryland  infantry  (Federal),  present. 

Gen.  McClellan's  return  for  March  gives  Shields's  strength  (officers  and  men 
present  for  duty)  as  12,255,  and  enumerates  203  companies  as  composing  his 
division.  From  the  above  it  appears  that  about  152  or  153  of  these  companies 
were  present  at  Kernstown.  At  the  average  Gen.  Shields  would  have  had  over 
9000  men  present. 


KERNSTOWN.  49 

made  by  the  Opequon  valley.  Several  country  roads  or  lanes  con- 
nect the  "  Middle"  road  with  the  Valley  turnpike  on  the  one  hand, 
and  with  the  Cedar  Creek  turnpike  on  the  other.  The  most  important 
of  them  is  one  leading  from  Kernstown  over  the  very  crest  of  the 
ridge  into  the  valley  beyond,  and  thence  to  the  Cedar  Creek  turnpike. 
The  ridge  we  speak  of  commands  the  Strasburg  road  from  Kerns- 
town to  Winchester.  A  level  country  extends  eastward  from  this 
last-named  road  and  gradually  falls  away  towards  the  Opequon. 
(Map  No.  III.) 

Jackson,  upon  his  arrival,  found  the  enemy  in  full  force  of  artillery 
and  infantry  upon  both  sides  of  the  Strasbm^g  road,  with  guns  posted 
also  above  Kernstown,  on  Pritchard's  hill.  The  enemy's  position  in 
front  was  good,  and  Ashby's  operations  had  induced  him  to  guard  so 
heavily  his  left  flank,  east  of  the  turnpike,  that  no  favorable  oppor- 
tunity was  there  offered  for  attack.  Jackson  therefore  determined 
to  seize  the  main  ridge,  turn  the  enemy's  right  flank  resting  on  it,  and 
thus  render  his  whole  line  untenable.  He  left  Col.  Burks's  brigade 
with  Ashby  on  the  turnpike,  to  support  the  latter  and  to  act  as  reserve, 
while  he  led  Fulkerson's  brigade  and  part  of  Carpenter's  battery 
towards  the  left.  "When  near  Opequon  church,*  Carpenter  halted  and 
fired  a  few  rounds  at  the  enemy  on  Pritchard's  hill.  He  then 
followed  the  infantry  farther  to  the  left,  under  a  heavy  shelling  from 
the  Federal  batteries,^  until  the  high  ground  was  reached.  Garnett's 
brigade  was  made  to  follow.  Having  found  a  favorable  position  for 
artillery,  Jackson  sent  for  the  remainder  of  Carpenter's,  and  also  for 
IMcLaughlin's  and  Waters's  batteries,  supported  by  a  portion  of  Col. 
Burks's  brigade.  Jackson  directed  Ashby  to  keep  up  a  continuous 
demonstration  on  the  turnpike,  and  now  opened  vigorously  on  the  left 
with  his  batteries.  These  were  located  along  the  ridge,  parallel  to  its 
general  direction,  and  engaged  the  Federal  batteries  to  the  east  and 

^  This  church  carries  one  back  to  the  first  settlement  of  the  Valley  of  Vir- 
ginia. The  first  regular  settlement  in  this  Valley  was  made  in  1732  by  a  party 
of  colonists,  consisting  of  sixteen  families,  under  Joist  Hite,  from  Pennsylvania, 
who  settled  on  the  Opequon.  They  were  Scotch-Irish  Presbyterians.  In  1735, 
William  Hoge  joined  them,  and  having  settled  on  the  land  about  Kernstown, 
gave  the  lot  on  which  the  church  stands  for  the  use  of  the  first  Presbyterian 
congregation  ever  organized  in  Virginia  west  of  the  Blue  Ridge.  Mr.  Iloge  was 
the  ancestor  of  the  family  of  that  name  distinguished  in  church  and  state  in 
Virginia.     (Foote's  Sketches.) 

*  Col.  Fulkerson  speaks  of  this  shelling  as  very  heavy.  The  remaining  in- 
fantry were  ordered  to  the  ridge  by  a  route  more  to  the  rear  and  less  exposed 
to  the  Federal  guns.     (Map  No.  III.) 


50  CAMPAIGX  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

uortlioast  of  tlicm,  forcing  the  enemy  to  withdraw.  The  Twenty- 
seventh  A^irginia  (Col.  John  Ecliols)  and  the  Twenty-first  Virginia 
(Col.  J.  M.  Patton)  were  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers  in  advance 
of  the  artilleiy,  and  soon  became  hotly  engaged.  The  Thirty-seventh 
and  Twenty-third  Virginia  regiments,  under  Col.  Fulkersou,  then 
moved  forward  on  the  left  of  Echols,  and,  in  the  face  of  a  heavy 
musketry  fire,  occupied  a  stone  fence  which  ran  down  the  west  side 
of  the  ridge.  This  fence  ran  along  the  southern  edge  of  a  narrow, 
rocky  field,  on  the  northern  side  of  which  was  a  large  body  of  woods. 
The  position  of  Fulkersou,  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the 
ridge,  was  nearly  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  batteries  that  consti- 
tuted the  Confederate  right  wing.  Echols  and  Patton,  who  were 
quickly  supported  by  the  Thirty-third,  Second,  and  Fourth  Vir- 
ginia regiments,  of  Garnett's  brigade,  and  the  Irish  battalion,  held 
the  centre,  which  constituted  an  angle,  since  the  line  did  not  con- 
tinue down  the  east  side  of  the  ridge,  but  having  reached  the  crest 
was  turned  back  along  the  top.  The  Confederate  line  was  thus 
wedge-shaped :  the  artillery  constituting  the  right  arm,  Fulkerson's 
brigade  the  left,  and  four  of  Garnett's  with  two  of  Burks's  regiments 
occupying  the  centre,  to  the  northwest  of  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  and 
facing,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  same  direction  as  Fulkei*son's. 
(Map  No.  III.) 

The  movements  of  the  Confederates  and  the  fire  of  their  batteries 
had  revealed  to  Col.  Kimball  the  danger  to  which  his  right  wing  was 
exposed,  and  he  had  taken  prompt  steps  to  counteract  the  threatened 
onset.  Tyler's  brigade  had  reached  the  toll-gate  at  the  junction  of 
the  Cedar  Creek  and  Strasburg  roads  about  2  p.m.,  and  was  waiting 
there  in  reserve.  This  force  (composed  of  the  Seventh  and  Twentj^- 
ninth  Ohio,  First  Virginia,  Seventh  Indiana,  and  One  Hundred  and 
Tenth  Pennsylvania)  was  ordered  to  reinforce  the  Federal  right,  and 
to  throw  itself  upon  the  Confederate  left  flank.  The  movement  was 
promptly  executed.  On  its  success  depended  the  day,  for  it  was  justly 
feared  by  Col.  Kimball  that  his  right  would  not  be  able  to  sustain  the 
attack  of  Jackson.  Tyler  moved  out  on  the  Cedar  Creek  road  to  the 
point  where  that  road  crosses  the  ridge,  when  he  left  the  road  and 
moved  rapidly  along  the  crown  and  both  faces  of  the  ridge  itself  until 
he  reached  the  battle-field.  This  he  did  by  3.30  p.m.,  which  was  just 
when  Jackson  had  sent  forward  his  infantry  to  flank  the  Federal 
right.  Tyler  at  once  led  his  troops  to  the  attack,  his  right  opposite 
to  Fulkerson.  A  vigorous  onset  was  made  against  the  Confederate 
line,  but  it  was  everywhere  repulsed.     Fulkerson  had  just  occupied 


KERNSTOWN.  51 

the  position  behind  the  stone  fence,  already  mentioned,  when  he  was 
attacked  by  two  Federal  regiments  attempting  to  seize  the  same  cover. 
His  fire  at  close  quarters  was  so  severe  that  the  Federal  regiments 
broke,  and  one  of  them,  the  One  Hundred  and  Tenth  Pennsylvania, 
did  not  recover  during  the  day.  The  remainder  of  the  Federal  line, 
however,  soon  rallied  and  renewed  the  attack,  and  a  fierce  and  san- 
guinary conflict  raged,  especially  along  the  Confederate  centre.  A 
second  attempt  to  turn  Fulkerson's  left  flank  was  defeated,  and  the 
heat  of  the  battle  was  concentrated  on  Garnett's  part  of  the  line.  For 
two  hours  the  roar  of  the  musketry  and  artillery  was  incessant. 
"  Here  the  struggle  became  desperate,  and  for  a  short  time  doubtful," 
says  Gen.  Shields.  Keiuforcements  drawn  from  the  Federal  left,  now 
that  it  had  become  evident  that  the  main  attack  was  against  the  other 
flank,  were  rapidly  hurried  forward  to  Tyler.  The  Fifth  and  Sixty- 
second  Ohio  and  Thirteenth  Indiana,  of  Sullivan's  brigade.  Fourteenth 
Indiana  and  Eighty-fourth  Pennsylvania,  and  seven  companies  of 
the  Sixty-seventh  Ohio,  and  three  companies  of  the  Eighth  Ohio,  of 
Kimball's  brigade,  went  to  his  assistance,  and  with  these  fresh  troops 
a  new  and  more  vigorous  attack  was  made  on  the  Confederate 
position. 

Meantime,  Jackson  was  using  every  effort  to  make  headway  against 
this  force,  so  much  larger  than  he  had  believed  within  reach,  and  so 
much  greater  than  his  own.  His  thinned  and  tired  regiments  were 
incited  to  hold  on  stubbornly  to  the  advantage  gained.  The  places 
of  the  fallen  were  quickly  taken  by  others,  and  when  the  ammunition 
of  some  was  expended  they  borrowed  from  those  who  yet  had  it. 
The  Fifth  Virginia,  which  had  been  left  in  reserve,  and  the  Forty- 
second  Virginia  were  ordered  up,  and  a  messenger  was  sent  back  to 
the  train  to  hurry  forward  the  Forty-eighth,  that  the  last  man  might 
be  thrown  into  the  wavering  scale.  But  before  these  slight  reser^^es 
arrived  the  onset  of  Tyler,  strengthened  as  he  was  by  six  additional 
regiments,  had  stag-o-ered  the  Confederate  line  and  caused  it  to  waver. 
Gen.  Giirnett,  who  was  bearing  the  brunt  of  the  attack,  felt  that  his 
thinned  lines  could  not  longer  maintain  their  position  without  risk  of 
being  overwhelmed.  He  therefore  gave  the  order  to  fall  back.  This 
order  was  not  known  to  Jackson,  who  was  at  the  time  on  a  different 
part  of  the  field,  and  he  bitterly  regretted  it,  always  maintaining  that 
his  troops  could  have  held  their  positions  until  the  reserves  had  gotten 
up.  The  Confederate  left  wing  was  easily  able  from  its  position  be- 
hind the  stone  fence  to  maintain  itself,  but  the  retirement  of  Garnett 
involved  the  retreat  of  Fulkerson,  whose  right  and  rear  were  thus 


52  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VlIiOINfA,  JSCl-C.?. 

exposed.  Tlie  withdrawal  had  to  be  effected  in  the  face  of  a  com- 
paratively powerful  enemy,  and  was  an  operation  of  diificulty  and 
danger/  Gen.  Garnett  met  the  Fifth  Virginia  coming  to  his  as- 
sistance, but  ordered  it  back.  Jackson,  seeing  the  danger  now  im- 
pending, stopped  this  regiment  as  soon  as  he  saw  it  filing  to  the 
rear,  and  placed  it  in  position  in  a  piece  of  woods  behind  his  former 
position,  and  ordered  the  retreating  infantry  to  form  upon  it.  Soon 
Col.  Burks,  with  the  Forty-second  regiment,  came  up  on  the  right 
of  Col.  William  H.  Harman,  of  the  Fifth.  In  the  midst  of  the 
fight  some  guns  had  been  advanced  to  assist  the  infantry ;  these 
were  now  placed  near  the  right  of  the  Forty-second  regiment,  and 
these  two  regiments,  with  the  artillery,  made  for  a  time  a  vigorous 
resistance  to  the  advancing  enemy,  and  gave  the  retreating  troops 
time  to  rally  and  the  remainder  of  the  artillery  time  to  withdraw. 
Twice  were  the  attacks  on  their  position  repulsed ;  but  the  ad- 
vancing Federals,  spreading  out  on  both  flanlvs,  pressed  back  the 


^  Maj.  R.  M.  Copeland,  assistant  adjutant-general  to  Gen.  Banks,  says,  in  his 
report:  "  The  centre  and  right  wing  (Federal)  were  composed  of  three  batteries 
and  about  five  regiments  of  infantry,  with  a  considerable  force  of  cavalry.  A 
high  and  commanding  position  on  our  right  was  occupied  by  the  enemy  at  about 
3  o'clock  P.M.,  and  a  severe  fire  opened  on  our  centre,  which  compelled  the 
withdrawal  of  a  portion  of  our  force  into  a  more  secure  position. 

"  At  about  3.30  p.m.  Col.  Tyler  was  ordered  to  attack  the  enemy's  new  posi- 
tion on  our  right,  and  to  take  their  battery.  He  moved  immediately  for- 
ward, with  three  or  four  regiments,  a  battei-y,  and  about  400  cavalry,  through  a 
dense  wood,  which  covered  the  enemy's  centre  and  left  wing.  In  about  half  an 
hour  after  Col.  Tyler's  movement  his  skirmishers  exchanged  shots  with  the 
enemy,  who  were  posted  behind  high  stone  walls,  a  rocky  hill,  and  some  woods, 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  front  of  his  battery.  The  enemy  reserved  his  fire  until 
our  line  was  very  near.  They  then  rose  and  poured  a  very  heavy  volley.  The 
suddenness  and  strength  of  their  fire  caused  our  lines  to  falter,  and  the  extreme 
left,  composed  mainly  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Tenth  Pennsylvania  volunteers, 
broke  and  ran.  The  I'est  of  the  line  soon  rallied  and  maintained  a  steady  fight 
(falling  back  on  the  right  and  advancing  on  the  left)  for  at  least  half  an  hour, 
when  two  regiments  came  to  their  assistance  up  the  left  flank  and  through  a  very 
severe  fire.  They  advanced  steadily,  and  soon  gained  a  position  from  which  they 
could  flank  the  enemy  delivering  their  fire.  When  they  received  this  new  fire 
the  enemy  fell  back  rapidly,  but  still  fighting,  to  the  woods  nearest  the  hill, 
from  which  the  battery  had  been  in  the  mean  time  withdrawn. 

"  Having  in  vain  attempted  to  rally  the  One  Hundred  and  Tenth  Pennsylvania 
volunteers  (which,  with  such  company  officers  as  I  could  see,  was  in  a  shameful 
rout),  I  gained  the  advance  on  the  first  field  which  the  enemy  had  held,  where 
there  were  many  dead  and  wounded."  Maj.  Copeland  says  that  Tyler  then 
moved  slowly  forward,  supporting  Kimball  and  Sullivan. 


KERNSTOWN.  53 

Fifth  and  Forty-second  regiments,  and  finally  forced  them  from  the 
field.^ 

It  was  now  night,  and  the  Federals  had  full  possession  of  the  field 
of  battle.  They  picked  up  two  or  three  hundred  prisoners  from 
the  Confederates  as  the  latter  fell  back,  and  also  two  guns,  both 
of  which  had  been  disabled.  The  mass  of  the  Confederates  marched 
by  way  of  Shady  Elm  factory  to  Bartonsville,  on  the  turnpike. 
Maj.  Funsten  checked  the  Federal  cavalry,  and  soon  all  pursuit  was 
abandoned.  Jackson,  having  reached  the  Valley  turnpike,  fell  back 
five  or  six  miles  slowly  and  sullenly  to  his  trains,  which  had  been 
parked  a  short  distance  south  of  Ne^vtown. 

The  loss  of  the  Confederates  in  the  battle  of  Kernstown  was  eighty 
killed,  three  hundred  and  forty-two  wounded  (of  whom  about  seventy 
were  left  on  the  field),  and  two  hundred  and  sixty-nine  missing ;  total, 
six  hundred  and  ninety-one  (691).^  Two  pieces  of  artillery,  disabled 
and  left  on  the  field,  were  captured.  In  regard  to  the  Federal  loss, 
Gen.  Shields  says  in  his  report,  dated  six  days  after  the  battle :  "  The 
killed  and  wounded  in  this  engagement  cannot  even  yet  be  accurately 
ascertained.  Indeed,  my  command  has  been  so  overworked  that 
it  has  had  but  little  time  to  ascertain  anything.  The  killed,  as  re- 
ported, are  one  hundred  and  three,  and  among  them  we  have  to 
deplore  the  loss  of  the  brave  Col.  Murray,  of  the  Eighty-fourth 
Pennsylvania  volunteers,  who  fell  at  the  head  of  his  regiment  while 
gallantly  leading  it  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  The  wounded  are 
four  hundred  and  forty-one,  many  of  them  slightly,  and  the  missing 
are  twenty-four."  ^  This  gives  a  total  of  five  hundred  and  sixty-eight 
(568). 

^  Maj.  Copeland  says  of  this  second  stand:  "The  enemy  now  opened  on  our 
line  with  a  heavier  fire  than  before.  We  maintained  our  position  from  the  first, 
and  soon  drove  them  in  utter  confusion  down  the  hill ;  but  the  near  approach 
of  night  forbade  further, pursuit." 

See  reports  of  Cols.  Harman  and  Burks. 

'  Jackson's  report.  The  brigade  and  regimental  reports  of  the  losses  at  Kerns- 
town make  them  a  little  greater.     Thus : 

Garnett  reports  for  his  brigade 
Burks's  losses  by  regimental  reports 
Fulkerson's  losses  by  regimental  reports 

Ash  by' s  loss  was  not  reported,  but  it  was  slight 
may  have  reached  725. 
*  Shields's  report,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  iv.  p.  330. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

41 

162 

158 

361 

24 

114 

39 

177 

,     15 

76 

71 

162 
700 

ight. 

The  total  Confederate  loss 

54  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEV  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

Next  (lay  the  citizens  of  Winchester,  lieaded  by  Philip  AVilllams, 
Esq.,  asked  and  obtained  permission  to  bury  the  Confederate  dead. 
The  troops  from  that  town  were  mostly  in  Jackson's  command,  and 
its  people  began  a  long  series  of  noble  deeds,  destined  to  glorify  the 
great  struggle,  by  tenderly  laying  to  rest,  where  they  fell,  the  soldiers 
who  at  Kernstown  had  died  for  their  country.^ 

Jackson  firmly  believed  that  his  failure  was  needlessly  brought 
about  by  the  retirement  of  Gen.  Garnett.  The  retreat  of  the  latter  he 
considered  ill-timed,  and  a  fatal  mistake.  So  strong  was  his  convic- 
tion on  this  point  that,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  regimental 
officers  of  Garnett's  brigade  supported  their  brigade  commander,  he 
soon  after  removed  Garnett,  and  preferred  charges  against  him.^ 

Weary  and  dispirited  was  the  little  army  which  had  marched  four- 
teen miles  in  the  morning,  had  attacked  a  force  more  than  double  its 
own,  and  for  three  hours  had  wrestled  for  ^actory  in  a  most  vigorous 
fashion.  Baffled  and  overpowered,  it  slowly  retraced  its  path  for  six 
miles  and  sank  to  rest.  In  the  fence-corners,  under  the  trees,  and 
around  the  wagons  they  threw  themselves  down,  many  too  weary  to 
eat,  and  forgot,  in  profound  slumber,  the  trials,  dangers,  and  dis- 
appointments of  the  day.  Jackson  shared  the  open-air  bivouac  with 
his  men,  and  found  the  rest  that  nature  demanded  on  some  fence-rails 
near  the  road.^     Next  morning  he  crossed  to  the  south  side  of  Cedar 


^  After  the  war,  the  ladies  of  Winchester,  from  the  midst  of  saddened  and 
desolate  homes,  continued  their  self-denying  care  for  the  ashes  of  the  brave  men 
to  whose  comfort  and  encouragement  they  had  contributed  so  freely  in  life,  and 
by  whose  suffering  cots  they  had  often  watched  in  sorrow,  danger,  and  death. 
Under  the  leadership  of  Mrs.  Philip  Williams,  they  gathered  the  thousands  of 
Confederate  dead  from  the  surrounding  battle-fields  and  placed  them  in  the 
"  Stonewall  Cemetery," — a  monument  not  more  to  the  patriotism  of  man  than 
to  the  devotion  of  woman. 

^  Brig.-Gen.  Garnett  was  relieved  on  April  1,  and  Brig.-Gen.  C.  S.  Winder 
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  First  brigade.  Gen.  Garnett  was  subsequently 
assigned  to  one  of  Pickett's  brigades,  and  fell,  gallantly  leading  it,  in  the  famous 
charge  of  that  division  on  the  heights  of  Gettysburg,  July  3,  1863. 

Whether  Garnett's  judgment  at  Kernstown  was  correct  will  perhaps  always 
remain  a  question  ;  not  so  his  splendid  courage  and  unselfish  patriotism. 

'  Jackson  followed  his  troops,  and  when  near  Newtown  halted  at  a  camp-fire 
and  warmed  himself  for  some  time.  He  then  remounted  and  rode  back  towards 
the  Opequon,  followed  by  several  of  his  staff,  who,  overcome  by  weariness, 
dropped  away  one  by  one,  until  only  Maj.  W.  J.  Hawks  (chief  commissary)  re- 
mained with  the  general.  Then  turning  from  the  road  into  an  orchard,  he 
fastened  his  horse,  and  asked  the  major  if  he  could  make  a  fire,  adding,  "We 
shall  have  to  burn  rails  to-night."     The  majur  soon  had  a  roaring  fire,  and  was 


[II 


Battle  of 
KERNS  TOAVINr, 

S"unday,  March  23   ; 


''k^^ji^^ 


KERNSTO  WN.  55 

creek,  and  gradually  retired  before  the  advancing  enemy,  once  more, 
to  Mount  Jackson. 

The  bold  attack  of  Jackson  at  Kernstown,  though  unsuccessful,  led 
to  many  important  results.  Its  first  effect  was  the  accomplishment  of 
one  of  the  principal  objects  of  the  Confederates, — the  recall  of  the 
Federal  troops  then  marching  from  the  Valley  towards  Manassas. 
Gen.  Shields  says :  "  Though  the  battle  had  been  won,  still  I  could 
not  have  believed  that  Jackson  would  have  hazarded  a  decisive  en- 
gagement, so  far  from  the  main  body,  without  expecting  reinforce- 
ments; so,  to  be  prepared  for  such  a  contingency,  I  set  to  work 
during  the  night  (after  the  battle)  to  bring  together  all  the  troops 
within"  my  reach.  I  sent  an  express  after  Williams's  division,  re- 
questing the  rear  brigade,  about  twenty  miles  distant,  to  march  all 
night  and  join  me  in  the  morning.  I  swept  the  posts  and  routes  in 
my  rear  of  almost  all  their  guards,  hurrying  them  forward  by  forced 
marches,  to  be  with  me  at  daylight.  .  .  .  Gen.  Banks,  hearing  of  our 
engagement  on  his  way  to  Washington,  halted  at  Harper's  Ferry,  and, 
with  remarkable  promptitude  and  sagacity,  ordered  back  Williams's 
whole  division,  so  that  my  express  found  the  rear  brigade  already 
en  route  to  join  us.  The  general  himself  returned  here  forthwith, 
and,  after  making  me  a  hasty  visit,  assumed  command  of  the  forces  in 
pursuit  of  the  enemy.^  This  pursuit  was  kept  up  with  vigor,  energy, 
and  activity  until  they  reached  Woodstock."  Thus  the  design  of 
INIcClellan  to  put  Banks's  corps  at  Centreville  (see  letter  of  March  16) 
became  impracticable,  and  that  body  of  twenty  thousand  troops^  was 
thought  necessary  to  guard  against  the  further  movements  of  Jackson's 
three  thousand  and  the  reinforcements,  in  large  part  imaginary,  which 
they  attributed  to  him.  This  battle,  too,  no  doubt,  decided  the  ques- 
tion of  the  detachment  of  Blenker's  division  of  ten  thousand  men 
from  McClellan,  and  its  transfer  to  Fremont,  recently  placed  in  com- 
mand of  the  Mountain  Department.^   While  en  route  from  Alexandria 

making  a  bed  of  rails,  when  the  general  wished  to  know  what  he  was  doing. 
"Fixing  a  place  to  sleep,"'  was  the  reply.  "You  seem  determined  to  make 
yourself  and  those  around  you  comfortable,"  said  Jackson.  Knowing  the 
general  had  fasted  all  day,  the  major  soon  obtained  some  bread  and  meat  from 
the  nearest  squad  of  soldiers,  and  after  they  had  satisfied  their  hunger,  they 
slept  soundly  on  the  rail-bed  in  a  fence-corner. 

^  Gen.  Banks,  on  the  24th,  requested  Sedgwick,  who  was  leaving  the  Valley, 
to  remain  at  Harper's  Ferry  some  hours  longer  with  his  troops. 

^  McClellan's  report,  p.  546. 

'  The  "  Mountain  Department"  embraced  the  territory  between  Banks's  dis- 
tricts and  Halleck's.     It  had  the  Alleghanies  for  its  eastern  boundary,  and 


56         CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

to  Fremont,  Blcnkcr's  division  was  to  join  Banks,  and  remain  with 
liim  as  long  as  he  thought  any  attack  from  Jackson  impending.^ 
More  important  and  more  fraught  with  momentous  consequences  was 
the  next  step.  For  a  few  days  later  the  sensitiveness  of  the  Federal 
government  to  the  danger  of  Washington,  excited  by  Jackson,  led  to 
the  detachment  of  McDowell's  corps  from  McClellan,  and  its  reten- 
tion in  front  of  the  Federal  ca})itiil,  in  place  of  that  of  Banks. 
When  ^IcClellan  left,  on  April  1,  for  Fortress  Monroe,  to  take  com- 
mand of  his  army  on  its  advance  up  the  Peninsula  towards  Rich- 
mond, he  left  for  the  defence  of  Washington  and  its  approaches 
seventy-three  thousand  four  hundred  and  fifty-six  (73,456)  men  and 

embraced  the  present  State  of  West  Virginia.  A  few  days  before  the  end  of 
March,  President  Lincoln  informed  Gen.  McClellan  that  he  had  resisted  the 
pressure  brought  upon  him  to  detach  Blenker's  division;  yet,  on  March  3L,  the 
President  writes:  "This  morning  I  felt  constrained  to  order  Blenker's  division 
to  Fremont,  and  I  write  this  to  assure  you  that  I  did  it  with  great  pain,  under- 
standing that  you  would  wish  it  otherwise."  (McClellan's  report.) 
^  McClellan's  orders  to  Banks  on  April  1  were  as  follows: 

"  Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

"On  Board  the  Commodore,  April  1,  1862. 

"General: — The  change  in  affairs  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah  has 
rendered  necessary  a  corresponding  departure,  temporarily  at  least,  from  the 
plan  we  some  days  since  agreed  upon. 

"  In  my  arrangements  I  assume  that  you  have  with  you  a  force  amply  suflScient 
to  drive  Jackson  before  you,  provided  he  is  not  reinforced  largely.  I  also 
assume  that  you  may  find  it  impossible  to  detach  anything  towards  Manassas 
for  some  days,  probably  not  until  the  operations  of  the  main  army  have  drawn 
all  the  rebel  force  towards  Richmond.  ...  I  will  order  Blanker  to  march 
on  Strasburg,  and  to  report  to  you  for  temporary  duty,  so  that,  should  you  find 
a  large  force  in  your  front,  you  can  avail  yourself  of  his  aid  as  soon  as  possible. 
Please  direct  him  to  Winchester,  there  to  report  to  the  adjutant-general  of  the 
army  for  orders ;  but  keep  him  until  you  are  sure  what  you  have  in  front. 

"  In  regard  to  your  own  movements,  the  most  important  thing  at  present  is  to 
throw  Jackson  well  back,  and  then  to  assume  such  a  position  as  to  enable  you 
to  prevent  his  return.  As  soon  as  the  railway  communications  are  re-established, 
it  will  be  probably  important  and  advisa))le  to  move  on  Staunton ;  but  this 
would  require  secure  communications,  and  a  force  of  from  25,000  to  30,000 
for  active  operations.  It  should  also  be  nearly  coincident  with  my  own  move 
on  Richmond  ;  at  all  events,  not  so  long  before  it  as  to  enable  the  rebels  to 
concentrate  on  you  and  then  return  on  me.  I  fear  that  you  Ccinnot  be  ready 
in  time,  although  it  may  come  in  very  well  with  a  force  less  than  that  I  have 
mentioned  after  the  main  battle  near  Richmond.  When  Gen.  Sumner  leaves 
Warrenton  Junction,  Gen.  Abercrombie  will  be  placed  in  immediate  command 
of  Manassas  and  Warrenton  Junction,  under  your  general  orders.  Please  in- 
form me  frequently,  by  telegraph  and  otherwise,  as  to  the  state  of  things  in 
your  front. 

"  I  am  very  truly  yours, 

"  Geo.  B.  McClellan, 
"  Major-General  Commanding. 

"Maj.-Gen.  N.  P.  Banes,  Commanding  Fifth  Corps." 


KERNSTOWN.  57 

one  hundred  and  nine  (109)  field  guns.^      These  were  distributed 

as  follows :  ^ 

At  Warrenton,  Virginia 7,780 

At  Manassas 10,859 

In  the  Shenandoah  valley  (including  Blcnker)      .  35,467 

On  the  lower  Potomac         .....  1,350 

In  Washington  and  the  forts  around  it         .         .  18,000 

Yet  the  Federal  President,  after  Kernstown,  did  not  consider  his  capital 
secure,  and  on  April  3  countermanded  the  order  for  the  embarkation 
of  McDowell's  corps,  and  detained  it  in  front  of  Washington.  In  a 
letter  to  Gen.  McClellan  of  April  9,  President  Lincoln  says :  "  Gen. 
Banks's  corps,  once  designed  for  Manassas  Junction,  was  divided 
and  tied  up  on  the  line  of  Winchester  and  Strasburg,  and  could  not 
leave  it  without  again  exposing  the  upper  Potomac  and  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  railroad.  This  presented  (or  would  present,  when 
McDowell  and  Sumner  should  be  gone)  a  great  temptation  for  the 
enemy  to  turn  back  from  the  Rappahannock  and  sack  Washington. 
My  explicit  directions  that  Washington  should,  by  the  judgment 
of  all  the  commanders  of  corps,  be  left  entirely  secure,  had  been 
entirely  neglected.  It  was  precisely  this  that  drove  me  to  detain 
McDowell.  I  do  not  forget  that  I  was  satisfied  with  your  arrange- 
ment to  leave  Banks  at  Manassas  Junction,  but  when  that  arrange- 
ment was  broken  up,  and  nothing  was  substituted  for  it,  of  course 
I  was  not  satisfied ;  I  was  constrained  to  substitute  something  for  it 
myself."^ 

While  these  changes  were  taking  place  in  the  dispositions  of  the 

^  To  these  McClellan  adds  4000  new  troops  organizing  in  New  York,  and  whom 
he  recommends  should  be  brought  to  Washington  at  once. 

^  McClellan' s  report,  p.  546. 

'  McClellan  evidently  thought  that  with  Banks  occupying  Jackson,  and  with 
over  36,000  men  distributed  at  Warrenton  and  Manassas,  and  around  Wash- 
ington itself,  the  Federal  President  and  capital  were  reasonably  safe !  But 
Mr.  Lincoln  thought  otherwise.  On  April  4,  Gen.  Banks  was  placed  in  chief 
command  of  that  portion  of  Virginia  and  Maryland  lying  between  the  Moun- 
tain Department  (Fremont's)  and  the  Blue  Ridge.  This  region,  composed  prin- 
cipally of  the  valley  of  the  Shenandoah  river,  was  to  be  styled  the  "  Depart- 
ment of  the  Shenandoah."  Gen.  McDowell,  on  the  same  day,  was  put  in  chief 
command  of  the  portion  of  Virginia  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge  and  west  of  the 
Richmond,  Fredericksburg  and  Potomac  railroad,  including  the  District  of 
Columbia  and  the  country  between  the  Potomac  and  Patuxent.  Ilis  de- 
partment was  to  be  known  as  that  of  the  Rappahannock.  Henceforth  these 
officers  were  to  be  independent  of  Gen.  McClellan  and  of  each  other. 

5 


58  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  18G1-G2. 

Federal  forces,  Jackson  was  resting  and  recruiting  his  little  array. 
He  had  fallen  back  by  degrees  to  Mount  Jackson.  A  mile  to  the  south 
of  Mount  Jackson  the  north  fork  of  the  Shenandoah  river,  which 
drains  the  western  Valley  from  Harrisonburg  to  Strasljurg,  cro&ses 
over  from  the  northwest  side  of  the  Valley,  along  which  it  at  first 
runs,  to  the  southeast  side,  where  it  continues  to  keep  its  course  until 
it  makes  its  way  around  the  north  end  of  the  Massanutton  mountains, 
opposite  Strasburg,  in  order  to  unite  with  the  main  stream  near  Front 
Royal.  At  the  point  where  it  crosses  the  Valley,  the  meadows  which 
border  it  are  bounded  on  the  south  side  by  a  plateau,  the  front  of 
which,  on  the  Valley  turnpike,  is  known  as  Rude's  hill.  To  thLs 
position  Jackson  finally  (April  2)  moved  the  main  body  of  his  forces, 
while  Ashby  and  the  cavalry  were  posted  in  front  to  observe  the 
enemy.  The  latter  advanced  to  Woodstock  on  April  1,  driving 
Ashby's  pickets,  and  finally  forcing  him  back  as  far  as  Edenburg, 
five  miles  south  of  Woodstock.^  Here,  however,  the  line  of  Stony 
creek  afforded  Ashby  a  good  defensive  position,  and  Jackson  having 
reinforced  him  with  a  brigade  of  infantry,  he  effectually  checked  the 
advance  of  the  Federals.  This  support,  with  the  addition  of  a  sec- 
tion of  artillery,  was  continued  to  Ashby  for  the  next  two  weeks, 
while  he  held  this  line.^  The  Confederates  destroyed  the  bridges 
on  the  Manassas  railroad  as  they  retired.  During  the  next  fortnight 
no  further  advances  were  made,  though  frequent  skirmishes  occurred 
along  Ashby's  line  on  Stony  creek.  For  this  period  Jackson  re- 
mained at  Rude's  hill.  At  this  time  his  command  greatly  im- 
proved in  numbers  and  spirits.  The  militia  of  the  Valley  had 
been  called  out,  and  the  regiments  from  Augusta  county,  about  five 
hundred  men  in  all,  had  reached  Mount  Jackson  before  the  Con- 
federate advance  to  Kernstown.^    A  considerable  portion  of  the  men 

^  Jackson  made  his  headquarters  at  Woodstock  on  the  24th  of  March,  at 
Narrow  Passage  on  the  26th,  at  Ilawkinstown  on  the  29th,  and  at  Rev.  Mr. 
Rude's  on  April  2. 

"^  On  the  day  that  Ashby  first  took  position  along  Stony  creek  (April  1),  he 
was  at  one  time  riding  along  the  edge  of  the  woods  held  by  his  skirmishers,  re- 
connoitring the  enemy,  followed  by  a  little  boy  named  "  Dixie,"  a  sort  of  pet 
of  the  camp.  A  bullet  from  a  sharpshooter,  aimed  at  Ashby,  struck  Dixie's 
horse  in  the  head  and  killed  it.  The  boy  rolled  off,  and  was  jumping  up  to  run, 
when  Ashby  called  him  back  and  told  him  to  get  his  saddle  and  bridle,  coolly 
waiting  for  him,  though  a  mark  for  a  continual  fire. 

'  They  reached  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Jackson  on  March  20.  On  March  21 
we  find  Jackson  writing  to  Col.  S.  Bassett  French,  aide-de-camp  to  Governor 
Letcher,  as  follows  : 


KERNSTOWN.  59 

enlisted  within  a  few  days  in  the  regular  army,  and  the  remainder 
were  soon  absorbed  in  the  same  way,  under  the  operation  of  the  orders 
of  the  Governor  of  Virginia  and  the  stringent  measures  taken  by  the 
Confederate  States  Congress  to  fill  up  the  southern  armies.  Militia 
organizations  virtually  ceased  to  exist  after  this  time. 

The  evils  growing  out  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Confederate 
troops  had  been  everywhere  organized,  and  the  short  terms  for  which 
the  greater  part  had  enlisted,  had  been  severely  felt.  The  Confederate 
regiments  were  all  volunteer  organizations  which  had  rushed  into 
service  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  in  most  cases  for  twelve  months. 
As  the  end  of  this  time  approached,  efforts  had  been  made  to  induce 
re-enlistment  by  appeals  to  the  men  and  by  bounties,  and  furloughs 
of  thirty  or  sixty  days  had  been  granted  to  those  re-enlisting,  the 
result  of  which  was  to  deplete  to  an  extreme  point  all  the  armies  in 
the  field.  These  efforts  were  only  partially  successful,  and  the  uncer- 
tainty thus  existing,  with  the  fact  that  all  officers  were  to  be  elected 

"  Colonel  : — Please  request  the  Governor  to  order  three  thousand  muskets  to 
Staunton  at  his  earliest  convenience  for  the  militia  of  this  district.  None  of 
the  militia  beyond  this  county,  except  five  hundred  from  Augusta,  have  yet 
arrived,  but  they  are  turning  out  encouragingly.  There  are  three  religious 
denominations  in  this  military  district  who  are  opposed  to  vear.  Eighteen 
were  recently  arrested  in  endeavoring  to  make  their  escape  through  Pendleton 
county  to  the  enemy.  Those  who  do  not  desert  will,  to  some  extent,  hire  sub- 
stitutes, others  will  turn  out  in  obedience  to  the  Governor's  call,  V)ut  I  under- 
stand some  of  them  say  they  will  not  '  shoot.'  They  can  be  made  to  fire,  but 
can  very  easily  take  bad  aim.  So,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  to  this  command 
the  highest  degree  of  efficiency,  and  securing  loyal  feelings  and  co-operation,  I 
have,  as  these  non-combatants  are  said  to  be  good  teamsters  and  faithful  to  their 
promises,  determined  to  organize  them  into  companies  of  one  hundred  men 
each,  rank  and  file,  and  after  mustering  them,  with  the  legal  number  of  company 
officers,  into  service,  assign  them  to  the  various  staff  departments  without 
issuing  arms  to  them  ;  but  if  at  any  time  they  have  insufficient  labor,  to  have 
them  drilled,  so  that,  in  case  circumstances  should  justify  it,  arms  may  be  given 
them.  If  these  men  are,  as  represented  to  me,  faithful  laborers  and  careful  of 
property,  this  arrangement  will  not  only  enable  many  volunteers  to  return  to 
the  ranks,  but  will  also  save  many  valuable  horses  and  other  public  property  in 
addition  to  arms.  .  .  .  All  I  have  pledged  myself  is  that,  as  far  as  practicable, 
I  will  employ  them  in  other  ways  than  fighting,  but  with  the  condition  that 
they  shall  act  in  good  faith  with  me,  and  not  permit  persons  to  use  their  names 
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  out  of  service.  .  .  ." 

On  March  29  the  Governor  ordered  all  the  militia  to  be  drafted  into  existing 
organizations  until  these  were  full.  The  execution  of  this  order  was  begun  on 
April  4.  On  April  14,  Gen.  Jackson  writes  to  Gen.  W.  B.  Richardson,  adjutant- 
general  of  Virginia,  that  "the  militia  have  not  turned  out  as  well  as  I  was  in- 
duced to  believe,  but  those  who  are  here  are  a  fine  body  of  men,  and  bid  fair  to 
render  good  service.  ...  I  fear  there  will  not  be  enough  militia  to  fill  up  the 
old  companies.  .  .  ."  He  advised  stringent  measures  to  bring  them  out,  but 
the  conscription  bill,  passed  two  days  later,  made  all  further  action  on  the  part 
of  the  State  unnecessary. 


60  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY   OF   VIRGINIA,  1361.03. 

upon  the  new  orj^anization,  rendered  discij)line  lax.  The  oldest 
regiments  had  entered  the  service  in  April,  1861,  so  that  their  terra 
of  service  had  nearly  expired,  and  a  partial  disintegration  of  the  army 
was  threatened  at  the  opening  of  the  spring  campaign.  Fortunately, 
the  Confederate  Congress,  seeing  the  impending  danger,  and  stimu- 
lated, no  doubt,  by  the  misfortunes  which  had  everywhere,  in  Feb- 
ruary and  March,  befallen  the  Confederate  arms,  solved  the  difficulty 
by  passing,  on  the  16th  of  April,  a  general  conscription  bill,  placing  all 
the  able-bodied  men  of  the  country,  between  eighteen  and  thirty-five 
years  of  age,  in  the  military  service.  The  discussion  of  this  bill,  and 
the  prospect  of  its  passage,  had  stimulated  re-enlistment  and  volun- 
teering, and  the  Confederate  armies  everywhere  began  to  fill  up.  Jack- 
son found  his  skeleton  regiments  much  enlarged  from  these  causes, 
as  well  as  by  the  return  of  furloughed  men.  The  cavalry  grew 
rapidly,  and  Ashby  soon  found  himself  at  the  head  of  a  large  regi- 
ment. This  gallant  cavalryman,  however,  was  more  at  home  in  lead- 
ing a  dashing  charge,  or  in  a  hand-to-hand  conflict,  than  in  drilling 
and  organizing  a  mass  of  raw  recruits.  As  a  consequence,  while  his 
career  was  filled  with  daring  and  brilliant  exploits,  the  achievements 
of  his  cavalry,  acting  as  a  mass,  did  not  do  justice  to  the  material  of 
which  it  was  composed,  nor  to  his  bold  leadership. 

On  the  2d  of  April,  Jackson  was  informed  that  a  number  of  dis- 
loyal men  belonging  to  the  Rockingham  militia,  and  residing  in  a 
remote  part  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  had  banded  together  to  resist  the  law 
calling  them  into  military  service.  He  immediately  despatched  Lieut.- 
Col.  J.  R.  Jones,  of  the  Thirty-third  Virginia  regiment,  with  four 
companies  of  infantry,  part  of  Capt.  Harry  Gilmor's  company  of 
cavalry,  and  two  guns  under  Capt.  Cutshaw,  to  quell  the  disturbance. 
This  was  soon  effected,^  and  without  bloodshed. 

Brig.-Gen.  C.  S.  Winder  having  reported  to  Gen.  Jackson,  was 
assigned,  April  1,  to  the  command  of  the  "  StoncM-all"  brigade,  and 
Col.  W.  B.  Taliaferro,  having  been  promoted  to  brigadier-general, 
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  brigade  consisting  of  the  Thirty- 
seventh  and  Twenty -third  Virginia  regiments.^ 

^  Col.  (then  Capt.)  Cutshaw  says  this  force  marched  into  the  mountain  recesses, 
but  the  people  fled  or  hid  themselves.  From  high  points  the  woods  were  shelled, 
and  this  greatly  increased  the  panic  among  the  simple  mountaineers.  Many 
came  in  and  surrendered,  and  no  further  trouble  was  Imd. 

*  General  Order  No.  36,  April  4,  from  Jackson's  headquarters,  announced  the 
organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Valley.  Brig.-Gen.  C.  S.  AVinder  Avas  assigned 
to  the  First  brigade  ("  Stonewall").     The  Second  brigade  remained  under  Col. 


KERASTOWN.  61 

The  first  half  of  April  was  cold  and  raw,  with  much  snow  and 
rain,  and  the  roads,  except  the  turnpikes,  were  ver}^  deep.  But  by 
the  middle  of  the  month  it  had  grown  milder,  and  better  weather 
was  now  to  be  expected.  The  Federal  commander  determined  to 
move  forward,  and  on  the  17th  his  forces  were  put  in  motion.  A 
company  of  Ashby's  cavalry,  on  outpost  duty  between  Moimt  Jackson 
and  Columbia  Furnace,  was  surprised  by  the  advance  and  captured.^ 
Shields's  division  soon  pressed  back  the  whole  of  Ashby's  force 
through  Mount  Jaclcson,  and  the  Federal  army  occupied  that  place. 
At  the  same  time  Carroll's  brigade,  of  Shields's  division,  was  sent  for- 
ward on  the  back  road  which  runs  parallel  to  the  main  turnpike  and 
west  of  it,  thus  turning  the  Confederate  flank.  Ashby  destroyed  the 
greater  part  of  the  railroad  property  and  bridges  as  he  retired,  but 
failed  in  his  attempt  to  burn  the  turnpike  bridge  over  the  north  fork 
of  the  Shenandoah.  Here  the  Federals  pressed  him  closely,  seized 
the  bridge  and  extinguished  the  fire  before  it  had  made  any  headway. 
Ashby's  horse  was  badly  wounded,  but  bore  him  safely  from  the  field 
before  it  fell  dead.  On  the  same  day  Jackson  broke  up  his  camp  at 
Rude's  hill  and  retreated  before  the  advancing  enemy  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Harrisonburg.  This  town,  which  is  twenty-five  miles  south  of 
Mount  Jackson,  he  reached  during  the  morning  of  the  18th.  Here, 
instead  of  continuing  towards  Staunton,  he  turned  off  to  the  left,  at 
right  angles,  in  the  direction  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  on  the  night  of 
the  18th  camped  at  Peale's,  six  miles  from  Harrisonburg,  at  the  north- 
ern end  of  the  Massanutton  mountains.^  (Map  No.  I.)  Next  day, 
moving  by  the  village  of  McGaheysville,  he  crossed  the  main  Shenan- 
doah river  at  Conrad's  Store,  and  went  into  camp  in  Elk  Run  valley, 
between  the  Shenandoah  and  Swift  Run  gap,  in  the  Blue  Ridge.^ 

John  Campbell,  and  the  Third  bri;!;ade  under  Col.  Fulkerson  (Gen.  Taliaferro 
not  having  yet  reported),  McLaughlin's  and  Carpenter's  batteries  were  assigned 
to  the  First  brigade,  Marye's  and  Waters' s  to  the  Second  brigade,  and  Shu- 
maker's  to  the  Third.     All  the  cavalry  was  placed  under  Ashby. 

^  This  was  Capt.  Harper's  company  of  cavalry.  They  were  captured  by  four 
companies  of  infantry  from  Donelly's  brigade  in  conjunction  with  the  Ringgold 
and  Washington  cavalry. 

^  Gen.  Edward  Johnson,  whose  force  was  on  Shenandoah  mountain,  came  to 
confer  with  Gen.  Jackson  while  he  was  at  Peale's.  In  his  absence  Gen.  John- 
eon's  troops  fell  back  towards  Staunton,  in  consequence  of  information  having 
reached  them  of  Jackson's  movement  towards  Swift  Run  gap. 

^  This  "  gap"  is  that  by  which  Governor  Spotswood  and  his  Golden  Horse- 
shoe Knights  obtained,  in  1716,  the  first  view  had  by  white  men  of  the  Valley 
of  the  Shenandoah. 


62  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1861-G2. 

Over  this  gap  led  a  gocxl  road  to  Stanard.sville  and  Gordoasville, 
by  means  of  which  he  was  placed  in  communication  with  Gen.  Ewell, 
who  then  held  the  line  of  the  Rapidan  river. 

On  the  day  that  Jatikson  crossed  the  river  he  sent  some  cavalry  with 
Capt.  Hotchkiss  to  burn  the  bridges  on  the  south  fork  of  the  Shen- 
andoah, between  Conrad's  Store  and  Luray.  The  southernmost  one 
was  burned,  but  the  enemy  had  seized  the  Columbia  and  AVhite- 
House  bridges  near  Luray,  and  they  drove  off  the  Confederates,  who 
attempted  to  retake  them.  The  movements  of  Jackson  led  Banks  to 
believe  for  a  time  that  he  had  left  the  Valley.^ 

Meantime,  the  transfer  of  McClellan's  army  to  the  Peninsula  had 
caused  the  withdrawal  of  all  the  Confederate  army,  except  Jackson's 
and  Ewell's  divisions,  from  Northern  Virginia,  and  its  concentration 
in  front  of  the  Federal  forces.  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  says  :  "  When 
it  was  ascertained,  about  the  5th  of  April,  that  the  Federal  army  was 
marching  from  Fort  Monroe  towards  Yorktown,  D.  H.  Hill's,  D.  R. 
Jones's,  and  Early's  divisions  were  transferred  from  the  Army  of 
Northern  Virginia  to  that  of  the  Peninsula.  The  former  was  thus 
reduced  to  four  divisions :  Jackson's,  at  Mount  Jackson ;  Ewell's,  on 
the  Rappahannock ;  Longstreet's,  at  Orange  Court-House ;  and  G.  W. 
Smith's,  at  Fredericksburg. 

"Before  the  10th,  the  President  was  convinced  by  Maj.-Gen. 
Magruder's  reports  that  the  entire  army  just  brought  down  the  Poto- 
mac from  Alexandria,  by  Gen.  McClellau,  was  then  on  the  Peninsula, 
to  move  upon  Richmond  by  that  route.  He  therefore  directed  me 
to  make  such  defensive  arrangements  as  might  be  necessary  in  the 
Department  of  Northern  Virginia,  and  put  my  remaining  troops  in 
march  for  Richmond,  and  then  to  report  to  him  for  further  instruc- 
tions. In  obedience  to  these  orders,  Maj.-Gen.  Ewell  was  left  with 
his  division  and  a  regiment  of  cavalry  in  observation  on  the  upper 
Rappahannock,  and  Maj.-Gen.  Longstreet  was  directed  to  march  with 
his  to  Richmond.      Maj.-Gen.  Jackson  was  left  in  the  Valley  to 

^  Gen.  Banks,  in  a  despatch  to  the  Federal  War  Department,  April  19,  says : 
"To-day  I  have  been  to  the  bridges  on  the  south  fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  in 
the  Massanutton  valley,  with  a  force  of  cavalry,  infantry,  and  artillery,  to  pro- 
tect the  two  important  bridges  that  cross  the  river.  We  were  within  sight  of 
Luray  at  tlie  south  bridge.  A  sharp  skirmish  occurred  with  the  rebels,  in 
which  they  lost  several  men  taken  prisoners.  Their  object  was  the  destruction 
of  the  bridges.  .  .  .  I  believe  Jackson  left  this  Valley  yesterday.  lie  is  reported 
to  have  left  Harrisonburg  yesterday  for  Gordonsville  by  the  mountain  road, 
lie  encamped  last  night  at  McGaheysville,  eleven  miles  from  Harrisonburg." 
("  Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  iv.  p.  93.) 


KERNSTOWN.  63 

oppose  greatly  superior  Federal  forces,  and  authorized  to  call  Swell's 
division  to  his  assistance  in  case  of  necessity,  and  Gen.  Ewell  was 
instructed  to  comply  with  such  a  call.  ]\Iaj.-Gen.  G.  W.  Smith  was 
instructed  to  leave  a  mixed  force,  equal  to  a  brigade,  in  front  of  Fred- 
ericksburg, and  move  towards  Richmond  with  all  his  remaining 
troops."^  Gen.  Johnston  was  called  to  Richmond,  and  on  April  17 
was  placed  in  command  of  all  the  forces  opposing  McClellan. 

Jackson,  conscious  of  his  inability  with  five  or  six  thousand  men 
to  resist  in  the  open  coimtry  the  advance  of  Banks,  had  availed  him- 
self of  the  nature  of  the  country  to  take  a  position  where  he  could 
be  attacked  only  at  great  disadvantage,  and  yet  might  threaten  the 
flank  and  rear  of  the  advancing  column  if  it  attempted  to  pass  him. 
Such  was  his  position  in  Elk  Run  valley,  at  the  foot  of  the  Blue 
Ridge.  The  main  Shenandoah  river  covered  his  front, — a  stream 
not  easily  fordable  at  any  time,  and  now  swollen  by  the  spring  rains. 
The  spurs  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  as  they  run  out  towards  this  river,  aiford 
almost  impregnable  positions  for  defence ;  his  flanks  could  only  be 
turned  by  toilsome  and  exposed  marches,  while  good  roads  led  from 
his  rear  over  the  mountains  into  the  country  about  Gordons ville,  and 
placed  him  within  easy  reach  of  the  support  he  might  call  for  from 
Gen.  Ewell.  Thus  secure  in  his  position,  Jackson  at  the  same  time 
more  effectually  prevented  the  farther  advance  of  the  Federal  column 
than  if  he  had  remained  in  its  front;  for  he  held  the  bridge  nearest  him 
over  the  Shenandoah,  and  was  but  a  day's  march  from  Harrisonburg, 
and  should  Banks  venture  to  move  forward  towards  Staunton,  he  was 
ready  to  hurl  the  Confederate  forces  against  the  enemy's  flank  and 
rear.^     Gen.  Banks,  at  Harrisonburg,  was  in  the  midst  of  a  hostile 

^  Johnston's  Narrative,  p.  109. 

*  Jackson  writes  to  Gen.  Lee  on  April  23  :  "  Banks's  main  force  is  still  in  the 
vicinity  of  Nevr  Market,  extending  from  one  mile  belovF  to  three  above  the  town. 
Yesterday  he  had  near  one  hundred  wagons  twelve  miles  above  New  Market, 
and  a  part  of  his  force  even  entered  Harrisonburg,  seventeen  miles  from  New 
Market.  My  object  has  been  to  get  in  his  rear  at  New  Market  or  Harrisonburg 
if  he  gives  me  an  opportunity,  and  this  would  be  the  case  if  he  should  advance 
on  Staunton  with  his  main  body.  It  appears  to  me  that  if  I  remain  quiet  a  few 
days  more  he  will  probably  make  a  move  in  some  direction,  or  send  a  larger 
force  towards  Harrisonburg,  and  thus  enable  me,  with  the  blessing  of  Provi- 
dence, to  successfully  attack  his  advance ;  and  if  I  am  unsuccessful  in  driving 
back  his  entire  force,  he  may  be  induced  to  move  forward  his  command  from 
New  Market  and  attempt  to  follow  me  through  this  gap,  when  our  forces  would 
have  greatly  the  advantage. 

"Without  Gen.  Ewell's  division,  Banks  can  march  on  to  Staunton,  though,  if 
he  attempts  it,  I  design  threatening  his  flank  and  rear,  and  this  may  prevent  his 


64  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

country,  already  one  Imndred  miles  from  the  Potomac  at  Harper's 
Ferry,  with  which  a  long  line  of  wagon  communication  had  to  be 
maintained.  To  push  on  to  Staunton,  with  Jackson  on  his  flank  and 
rear,  was  virtually  to  sacrifice  his  present  line  of  communication  with 
no  practicable  substitute  in  view ;  to  attack  the  Confederates  on  the 
slopes  of  the  mountains,  with  even  a  greatly  superior  force,  was  to 
risk  defeat.  He  therefore  determined  to  rest  satisfied  for  the  present 
with  the  advantages  already  gained.  The  greater  part  of  the  Shen- 
andoah valley  was  now  in  his  possession.  Jackson  had  been  "  thrown 
well  back,"  and  had  been  forced  to  leave  the  main  highway  passing 
along  that  Valley,  and  to  seek  refuge  in  the  fastnesses  of  the  moun- 
tains. Staunton  was  but  twenty-five  miles  away ;  another  column 
from  the  west  was  threatening  it.  In  a  short  time,  by  co-operation 
with  this  column,  the  place  might  be  taken  ;  or,  to  take  a  wider  view, 
operations  in  front  of  Richmond  might  soon  force  Jackson  from  the 
Valley  altogether. 

Jackson  rested  a  few  days  in  Elk  Rmi  valley,  at  the  foot  of  Swift 
Run  gap,  in  the  Blue  Ridge  mountains.  Here  the  reorganization  of 
his  regiments  was  completed,  and  some  further  additions  were  made 
to  his  numbers  by  enlistments.  His  strength  now  approached  six 
thousand  (6000).' 

reaching  Staunton ;  but  without  doing  this  he  could  advance  so  far  as  to 
threaten  Gen.  Edward  Johnson's  rear  so  seriously  as  to  make  him  fall  back,  and 
thus  let  Staunton  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Federal  force  in  his  front.  .  .  ." 

Later  on  the  same  day  Jackson  writes  that  the  news  from  Fredericksburg 
induces  him  to  believe  that  Ewell's  division  may  be  more  needed  there  than  with 
him,  and  says  he  will  "  make  arrangements  so  as  not  to  be  disappointed  should 
he  (Ewell)  be  ordered  to  Fredericksburg." 

A  few  days  later  the  news  from  Fredericksburg  was  more  reassuring,  and  this 
led  Jackson  to  apply  for  troops  from  that  point.     (See  next  chapter.) 

The  letters  from  which  the  above  extracts  are  taken  are  in  the  Confederate 
archives  in  Washington. 

^  The  Tenth  Virginia  regiment  of  infantry  was  transferred  at  this  time  from 
Ewell's  division  to  Jackson's.  It  reached  Swift  Run  gap  on  April  21,  and  was 
assigned  to  the  Third  (Taliaferro's)  brigade. 


CHAPTER    III. 

MCDOWELL, 

On  the  28th  of  April  Jackson  applied  to  Gen.  Lee,  then  ax^ting  as 
conimander-in-chief  under  President  Davis,  for  a  reinforcement  of 
five  thousand  men,  which  addition  to  his  and  Ewell's  forces  he 
deemed  necessary  to  justify  him  in  marching  out  and  attacking 
Banks,  and  asked  if  the  troops  oould  not  be  spared  from  the  force 
covering  Fredericksburg.  On  the  next  day  Gen.  Lee  replied  as 
follows : 

"Headquarters,  Richmond,  Virginia,  April  29,  18C2. 
"Maj.-Gen.  T.  J.  Jackson,  Commanding,  etc.,  Swift  Run  Gap, 

Virginia. 

"  General  : — I  have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  yester- 
day's date.  From  the  reports  that  reach  me,  that  are  entitled  to 
credit,  the  force  of  the  enemy  opposite  Fredericksburg  is  represented 
as  too  large  to  admit  of  any  diminution  whatever  of  our  army  in  that 
vicinity  at  present,  as  it  might  not  only  invite  an  attack  on  Richmond, 
but  jeopard  the  safety  of  the  army  in  the  Peninsula.  I  regret,  there- 
fore, that  your  request  to  have  five  thousand  men  sent  from  that  army 
to  reinforce  you  cannot  be  complied  with.  Can  you  draw  enough 
from  the  command  of  Gen.  Edward  Johnson  to  warrant  you  in 
attacking  Banks  ?  The  last  return  received  from  that  army  shows  a 
present  force  of  upwards  of  three  thousand  five  hundred,  which,  it  is 
hoped,  has  been  since  increased  by  recruits  and  returned  furloughs. 
As  he  does  not  appear  to  be  pressed,  it  is  suggested  that  a  portion  of 
his  force  might  be  temporarily  removed  from  its  present  position  and 
made  available  for  the  movement  in  question.  A  decisive  and  suc- 
cessful blow  at  Banks's  column  would  be  fraught  with  the  happiest 
results,  and  I  deeply  regret  my  inability  to  send  you  the  reinforce- 
ments you  ask.  If,  however,  you  think  the  combined  forces  of  Gens. 
Ewell  and  Johnson,  with  youi'  own,  inadequate  for  the  move.  Gen. 
Ewell  might,  with  the  assistance  of  Gen.  Anderson's  army,  near  Fred- 
ericksburg, strike  at  McDowell's  army,  between  that  city  and  Aquia, 
with  much  promise  of  success ;  provided  you  feel  sufficiently  strong 
alone  to  hold  Banks  in  check. 

"  Very  truly  yours, 

"R.  E.  Lee."^ 

^  Taylor's  "  Four  Years  with  General  Lee,"  p.  38. 

65 


66  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

At  this  time  Gcu.  Ewell's  division  was  in  the  vicinity  of  Stanards- 
villc,  and  tliere  was  no  Federal  force  south  of  the  Rajjpahannock  in 
his  front,  McDowell  having  drawn  his  forces  to  the  neighborhood  of 
Fredericksburg.  Gen.  Edward  Johnson/  who  had  so  successfully 
repulsed  tlie  attack  made  on  his  camp  at  Alleghany,^  on  December  13, 
had  fallen  back  to  the  Shenandoah  mountain,  where  it  is  crossed  by 
the  Staunton  and  Parkersburg  turnpike,  to  prevent  a  flank  movement 
from  the  direction  of  Moorefield.  The  retreat  of  Jackson  from 
Harrisonburg  to  Swift  Run  gap  had  uncovered  the  roads  to  the  rear 
of  this  force,  and  on  April  20  it  had  fallen  back  still  farther,  to  West 
View,  only  seven  miles  west  of  Staunton.  (Map  No.  I.)  It  consisted 
of  six  regiments  of  infantry,  three  batteries,  and  a  small  force  of 
cavalry,  and  numbered,  according  to  the  inspector-general.  Col.  A. 
Smead,  at  McDowell,  a  week  after  this  time,  about  three  thousand 
(3000)  effective  men.' 

The  force  opposing  Johnson  consisted  of  a  brigade  under  Milroy, 
supported  by  another  under  Schenck,  the  two  containing  some  six 
thousand  (6000)  men.*  This  formed  a  part  of  the  command  of  Gen. 
Fremont,  who  was  preparing  to  move  forward  with  other  troops  to 
strengthen  it.*     Schenck  was  at  Franklin,  Pendleton  county,  while 

^  Now  placed  under  Jackson's  command. 

*  Camp  Alleghany  is  fifteen  miles  west  of  Monterey,  on  the  Staunton  and 
Parkersburg  turnpike. 

^  Gen.  Edward  Johnson,  in  a  letter  dated  March  18,  reports  his  strength  as : 

Aggregate  present  for  duty 2425 

Aggregate  present 2784 

This  is  the  latest  report  (giving  his  strength)  I  could  find  among  the  Confed- 
erate archives. 

*  Fremont  puts  Schenck's  force  at  "about  3000,"  and  Milroy's  at  "3500 
eflfective  men."     (Fremont's  report.) 

*  Gen.  Fremont  says  that  he  relieved  Rosecrans  on  March  29,  1862,  that  the 
total  troops  then  turned  over  to  him  consisted  of  thirty-five  and  two-tenths 
regiments  of  infantry,  thirty-six  companies  of  cavalry,  and  nine  batteries  of  ar- 
tillery •,  total  number  of  men,  34,271.  A  few  days  after,  the  troops  in  South- 
west Virginia  and  Eastern  Kentucky,  amounting  to  9195,  were  detached  from 
his  command.  He  adds  to  this  6269  as  the  usual  percentage  "  for  sick,  etc., 
and  not  available  for  duty,"  and  states  18,807 — "say  in  round  numbers 
19,000  men" — as  his  effective  force  left.  "A  small  but  not  appreciable 
increase  of  this  was  made  by  enlistments  in  the  department,  but  the  policy 
of  the  War  Department  did  not  foster  this."  He  continues:  "When  sent  to 
the  department  I  was  promised  17,000  men  as  reinforcements.  On  April  1 
was  despatched  that  Blenker's  division  was  en  route  to  join  me  ;  as  it  had  not 
reached  Harper's  Ferry  by  the  12th  of  April,  I  asked  what  had  become  of  it, 
and  that  it  be  sent  to  Moorefield  by  the  shortest  route."     Rosecrans  was  tern- 


MCDOWELL.  67 

Milroy  was  at  McDowell,  and  had — after  the  retreat  of  Gen.  John- 
son— pushed  his  advance  over  the  Shenandoah  mountain  to  the 
neighborhood  of  the  Harrisonburg  and  Warm  Springs  turnpike. 
This  road  would  afford  an  easy  and  direct  means  of  communication 
with  Banks  at  Harrisonburg,  and  Jackson  feared  a  union  of  the  two 
armies  and  a  movement  on  Staunton,  which  might  result  in  sepa- 
rating him  from  Edward  Johnson  and  in  the  capture  of  that  town. 
Jackson  says :  "  At  this  time  Brig.-Gen.  Edward  Johnson,  with  his 
troops,  was  near  West  View,  west  of  Staunton,  so  that  if  the  enemy 
was  allowed  to  effect  a  junction  it  would  probably  be  followed  not 
only  by  the  seizure  of  a  point  so  important  as  Staunton,  but  must 
compel  Gen.  Johnson  to  abandon  his  position,  and  they  might  succeed 
in  getting  between  us.  To  avoid  these  results  I  determined,  if  practi- 
cable, after  strengthening  my  own  division  by  a  union  with  Johnson's, 
first  to  strike  at  Milroy,  and  then  to  concentrate  the  forces  of  Ewell, 

porarily  conducting  it.  It  was  dreadfully  in  want  of  horses  and  transportation. 
On  April  21,  Fremont  was  informed  it  could  not  move  for  want  of  shoes.  It 
was  thus  greatly  delayed,  but  finally  joined  him  at  Petersburg,  Hardy  county, 
May  11.  Fremont's  plan  of  campaign,  submitted  to  President  Lincoln  on 
April  21,  was  as  follows:  "The  first  base  of  operations  being  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  railroad,  the  division  of  Gen.  Blenker,  which,  from  the  best  informa- 
tion I  can  obtain,  numbers  about  9000  men,  will  take  position  at  Moorefield.  At 
this  point,  or  at  Franklin,  it  will  unite  with  the  troops  now  under  command 
of  Gen.  Schenck,  numbering  about  3000  men.  With  these,  acting  in  conjunction 
with  Gen.  Banks,  I  propose  to  move  up  the  Valley  of  Virginia  by  a  course 
which  you  will  see  on  the  accompanying  map,  over  roads  which  are  as  dry 
and  as  good  at  all  seasons  of  the  year  as  any  in  Virginia,  and  through  a  country 
where  forage  is  easily  obtained.  At  Monterey  I  shall  be  joined  by  the  troops 
under  Gen.  Milroy,  numbering  3500  effective  men,  and  can  then  strike  the  rail- 
road at  or  near  Salem,  while  Gen.  Cox  (in  command  along  the  Kanawha), 
with  his  7000  men,  takes  possession  of  Newburn  ;  or  can  first  effect  a  junction 
with  Gen.  Cox  and  seize  the  railroad  with  a  force  thus  increased  to  about 
22,000  men. 

"  The  base  of  operations  will  then  be  changed  to  Gauley.  To  this  place,  by 
the  Ohio  and  Kanawha  rivers,  abundant  supplies  for  the  army  can  be  trans- 
ported with  the  means  now  at  hand  and  being  prepared.  Having  thus  destroyed 
the  connection  between  Knoxville  and  the  army  in  Eastern  Virginia,  and  per- 
haps seized  some  rolling-stock,  we  can  advance  rapidly  along  the  railroad 
towards  Knoxville,  turning  the  position  at  Cumberland  gap.  The  forces  now 
under  Gen.  Kelly,  and  the  Virginia  troops  will  be  left,  as  we  proceed,  to  guard 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  and  to  protect  the  loyal  inhabitants  of  the  State 
from  guerrillas." 

This  plan  was  approved  by  President  Lincoln,  but  with  the  "view  of  the 
ultimate  closing  in  of  my  (Gen.  Fremont's)  column  towards  Richmond  rather 
than  Knoxville." 


68  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV  OF   VIRGINIA,  18G1-G2. 

Jolinson  and  my  own  afi;ain.st  Banks.  To  carry  ont  my  design 
against  Milroy,  Gen.  Ewell  was  directed  to  march  his  division  to  the 
position  which  I  then  occupied  in  Elk  Run  valley,  with  a  view  to 
holding  Banks  in  check,  whilst  I  pushed  on  with  my  division  to 
Staunton."  ^ 

Jackson's  plans  were  matured,  and  the  execution  of  them  was 
begun  at  once  upon  the  rece})tion  of  the  information  that  no  other 
troops  besides  those  of  Ewell  and  Johnson  could  be  placed  at  his  dis- 
posal at  present.  This  gave  him  about  seventeen  thousand  (17,000) 
men,  of  which  about  six  thousand  (6000)  were  at  Swift  Run  gap, 
eight  thousand  (8000),  under  Ewell,  one  day's  march  in  his  rear, 
east  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  three  thousand  (3000)  with  Edward 
Johnson  at  West  View,  seven  miles  west  of  Staunton,  and  over  forty- 
miles  from  Swift  Run  gap.  On  the  other  hand.  Banks  was  at 
Harrisonburg,  twelve  or  fifteen  miles  in  Jackson's  front,  with  nine- 

^  Jackson's  report.  On  April  29,  Jackson  wrote  to  Gen.  Lee  as  follows  :  "As 
I  do  not  believe  that  Banks  will  advance  on  me  in  my  present  position,  I  am 
disposed,  unless  you  send  nie  large  reinforcements,  to  adopt  one  of  three  plans, 
viz. :  either  to  leave  Gen.  Ewell  here  to  threaten  Banks's  rear  in  the  event  of 
his  advancing  on  Staunton,  and  move  with  my  command  rapidly  on  the  force  in 
front  of  Gen.  Edward  Johnson  ;  or  else,  co-operating  with  Gen.  Ewell,  to  attack 
the  enemy's  detached  force  between  New  Market  and  the  Shenandoah,  and  if 
successful  in  this,  then  to  press  forward  and  get  in  Banks's  rear  at  Newmarket, 
and  thus  induce  him  to  fall  back.  The  third  is,  to  pass  down  the  Shenandoah 
to  Sperryville,  and  thus  threaten  Winchester  via  Front  Royal.  I  believe  that 
this  would  cause  the  enemy  to  fall  back.  From  Sperryville  I  could  move  either 
in  the  direction  of  Front  Royal,  or  Warrenton,  or,  if  my  command  should  be 
opposed  by  too  large  a  Federal  force,  it  could  turn  off  towai-ds  Culpeper  Court- 
Ilouse. 

"  To  get  in  Banks's  rear  with  my  present  force  would  be  rather  a  dangerous 
undertaking,  as  I  would  have  to  cross  the  river  and  immediately  cross  the  Mas- 
sanutton  mountains,  during  which  the  enemy  would  have  decidedly  the  advan- 
tage of  position.  Of  the  three  plans  I  give  the  preference  to  attacking  the  force 
west  of  Staunton,  for  if  successful  I  would  afterwards  only  have  Banks  to  con- 
tend with,  and  in  doing  this  would  be  reinforced  by  Gen.  Edward  Johnson,  and 
by  that  time  you  might  be  able  to  give  me  reinforcements,  which,  united  with  the 
troops  now  under  my  control,  would  enable  me  to  defeat  Banks  ;  and  if  he  should 
be  routed  and  his  command  destroyed,  nearly  all  our  forces  here  could,  if  neces- 
sary, cross  the  Blue  Ridge  to  Warrenton,  Fredericksburg,  or  any  other  threatened 
point.  I  have  written  to  Gen.  Edward  Johnson  to  know  what  force,  in  addition 
to  his  command,  would  be  required  for  a  successful  blow  in  his  vicinity.  If  I 
receive  an  answer  justifying  a  move  in  that  direction,  I  may  leave  here  to-morrow 
via  Port  Republic."  Gen.  Lee  replies.  May  1 :  "  I  have  carefully  considered  the 
three  plans  of  operations  proposed  by  you.  I  must  leave  the  selection  of  the 
one  to  be  adopted,  to  your  judgment." 


Mf^DOWELL.  69 

teen  thousand  (19,000)  men.^  Milroy  and  Schenck,  commanding 
Fremont's  advance  of  six  thousand  (6000)  men,  were  in  front  of  Ed- 
ward Johnson,  and  Fremont  Avas  preparing  to  join  them  with  a  force 
sufficient  to  give  him  a  movable  column  of  fifteen  thousand  (15,000). 
McDowell  having  drawn  away  from  the  upper  Rappahannock 
towards  Fredericksburg,  was  out  of  the  question.  It  was  necessary 
to  strike  before  Banks  and  Fremont  could  unite,  and  thus  oppose 
Jackson  with  double  numbers.  Banks  was  nearest  at  hand,  but  his 
forces  M'cre  concentrated,  while  Fremont's  column  was  yet  widely 
separated.  A  quick  and  well-concealed  junction  of  his  own  division 
with  Edward  Johnson's  forces  might  enable  Jackson  to  fall  upon 
Fremont's  advance  before  the  main  body  could  join  it. 

The  route  for  this  movement  was  selected  with  reference  to  mis- 
leading the  enemy,  as  well  as  with  regard  to  security  from  attack. 
Gen.  Jackson  determined  to  march  up  the  east  side  of  the  Shenandoah 
river  to  Port  Republic,  a  distance  of  sixteen  miles,  and  then  to  cross 
the  Blue  Ridge  mountains,  by  way  of  Brown's  gap,  to  Mechum's 
River  station,  on  the  Virginia  Central  railroad.  (Map  No.  I.)  He 
designed  to  reach  Staunton  from  this  point  by  railroad.  The  first 
part  of  his  route  would  be  protected  by  the  Shenandoah  river,  and 
the  crossing  of  the  mountains  would  leave  a  doubt  as  to  his  destina- 
tion, and  suggest  the  notion  that  he  was  en  route  for  Richmond.  He 
was  never  in  the  habit  of  informing  his  subordinates,  even  those  of 
the  highest  rank,  of  his  plans,  and  his  staif  were  more  frequently 
ignorant  of  them  than  otherwise.  On  this  occasion  only  one  or  two, 
whose  duties  made  it  necessary,  knew  the  general's  designs,  so  that 
friends  as  well  as  foes  were  mystified. 

On  the  29th  of  April,  Ashby  made  demonstrations  in  force  in  the 
direction  of  Harrisonburg,  and  this  was  repeated  on  the  30th.  On 
the  latter  day  a  scouting  party  was  sent  to  the  top  of  the  Peaked 
mountain,  the  southwest  end  of  the  Massanutton  mountains,  to  ob- 
serve the  enemy,  who  appeared  to  be  quietly  camped  about  Harrison- 
burg.^ In  the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  Jackson  left  his  camp,  which 
was  occupied  in  a  few  hours  by  Ewell's  division,  and  began  his 
march.  The  route  to  Port  Republic  was  over  an  unpaved  country 
road,  which  runs  along  the  narrow  plain  that  intervenes  between  the 
eastern  bank  of  the  Shenandoah  and  the  foot  of  the  Blue  Ridge. 

^  See  Banks's  return  for  May  1,  There  were  about  8000  men  for  duty  in 
Banks's  own  division  (including  cavalry),  and  11,000  in  Shielda's. 

*  Capt.  Hotchkiss,  who  had  charge  of  this  party,  says  that  Ashby  drove  the 
enemy's  pickets  into  Peale's,  six  miles  from  Harrisonburg. 


70  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

The  soil  of  this  plain,  formed  by  the  washings  from  the  sandstone 
foot-hills  of  the  Bhie  Ridge,  was  in  many  places  deep  quicksands, 
and  under  the  excessive  rains  of  this  season  had  become  miry.  The 
past  ten  days  had  been  marked  by  very  heavy  rains,  and  the  streams 
were  everywhere  swollen.  The  Confederates  left  their  camp  in  the 
midst  of  a  rain,  and  proceeded  but  a  few  miles.*  Next  day  (May  1) 
was  wet,  and  the  miry  earth  soon  became,  under  the  movement  of 
artillery  and  wagons,  a  perfect  quagmire.  Men  and  horses  floun- 
dered on  through  the  mud,  which  was  hourly  becoming  worse. 
Those  who  tried  to  find  more  solid  paths  through  the  fields  sank 
deeper  into  the  mire,  and  were  glad  to  get  back  into  the  road.  The 
utmost  exertions  were  able  to  carry  the  army  forward  but  five  miles 
more  this  day.  The  troops  bivouacked  in  the  woods  along  the  road, 
while  Gen.  Jackson  continued  his  headquarters  at  Gen.  Lewis's.* 
The  whole  of  this  day  was  spent  m  helping  the  trains  through  the 
mud.  Large  details  were  made  to  mend  the  road  and  to  keep  it  in 
a  passable  condition  as  train  after  train  moved  along.  The  general 
himself  took  part  in  the  work.  He  urged  on  the  laborers,  encour- 
aged the  soldiers,  and,  having  dismounted,  assisted  in  carrying  rails 
and  stones.  Next  day  (May  2)  the  same  struggle  with  the  mud  con- 
tinued, and  by  nightfall  the  army  had  passed  Lewiston,  and  bivou- 
acked, again  in  the  rain,  betAveen  that  place  and  the  foot  of  Brown's 
gap.  The  following  day  (May  3)  the  march  was  resumed  by  way 
of  Brown's  gap  and  Whitehall  to  Mechum's  River  station,  on  the 
Virginia  Central  railroad.  On  this  morning  the  clouds  broke  away 
and  the  sun  brought  a  glorious  May  day.  The  hard  mountain  road 
was  an  infinite  relief  after  the  toil  of  the  past  two  days.  With  quick 
and  cheerful  step  the  army  wound  its  way  through  the  pass  of  the 
Blue  Ridge,  and  poured  down  into  the  beautiful  Piedmont  country 
that  rolls  away  from  the  eastern  base  of  the  mountains.  Saturday 
night  (May  3)  found  the  advance  of  the  Confederates  pleasantly  en- 
camped on  the  hills  and  in  the  meadows  about  the  railroad  station. 
While  struggling  forward  against  the  elements,  Jackson  had  taken 
precaution  to  close  his  lines,  so  as  to  prevent  the  knowledge  of  his 
movements  from  reaching  the  enemy. 

Next  day,  Sunday,  IVIay  4,  the  movement  was  continued,  the  artil- 
lery and  trains  taking  the  road  to  Staunton,  and  recrossing  the  moun- 

^  Gen.  Jackson  made  his  headquarters  on  the  30th  at  Lewiston  (Gen.  Lewis's 
home),  thirteen  miles  from  Conrad's  Store,  but  the  troops  only  made  five  miles, 
and  bivouacked  along  the  roadside. 

'  Afterwards  the  scene  of  the  battle  of  Port  Republic,  June  9,  1862. 


MCDOWELL.  71 

tains  at  Rockfish  gap,  while  the  troops  were  sent  by  railroad.  Gen. 
Jackson  reached  Staunton  on  Simday  afternoon,  and  by  the  close  of 
the  next  day  all  the  troops  and  trains  had  arrived  at  the  same  point 
and  were  put  into  camp,  the  "Stonewall"  brigade  two  miles  east  of  the 
town,  and  the  remainder  of  the  division  west  of  it,  and  between  the 
town  and  Gen.  Johnson's  position  at  West  View.^  So  secret  had 
been  kept  his  design  that  the  people  of  Staimton  were  taken  entirely 
by  surprise,  and  when  they  had  convinced  themselves  that  Jackson  was 
on  the  way  to  Richmond  were  astonished  by  his  appearance  in  their 
midst.  A  day  was  spent  in  resting  the  troops,  in  making  the  arrange- 
ments for  the  march,  and  in  getting  information ;  and  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  7th  the  array  set  out  against  the  enemy.  Gen.  Ed- 
ward Johnson's  brigade,  which  had  started  the  preceding  afternoon,^ 
led  the  column,  followed  by  Jackson's  three  brigades  in  inverse  order, 
Taliaferro's  (the  Third)  being  next  to  Johnson,  the  Second,  under 
Col.  Campbell,  coming  next,  and  the  First,  or  "  Stonewall"  brigade, 
under  Brig.-Gen.  C.  S.  Winder,  bringing  up  the  rear.  "  The  corps 
of  cadets  of  the  Virginia  Military  Institute  (where  Jackson  had  for- 
merly been  a  professor),  under  their  superintendent.  Gen.  F.  H.  Smith, 
was  also  attached  to  the  expedition.  The  spruce  equipments  and  exact 
drill  of  these  youths,  as  they  stepped  out  full  of  enthusiasm  to  take 
their  first  actual  look  upon  the  horrid  visage  of  war,  under  their 
renowned  professor,  formed  a  strong  contrast  with  the  war-worn  and 
nonchalant  veterans  who  composed  the  army."' 

The  army  moved  on  the  Staunton  and  Parkersburg  turnpike. 
Eighteen  miles  west  of  Staunton  this  road  crosses  the  Big  Calf- 
Pasture  river,  and  at  the  same  point  intersects  the  Warm  Springs 
and  Harrisonburg  turnpike.  Soon  after  passing  this  point  the  Con- 
federate advance  came  up  with  the  first  outposts  of  Gen.  Milroy. 
The  Federal  picket  was  dispersed  and  in  part  captured,  and  Gen. 
Johnson  continued  his  march. 

^  West  View  is  six  or  seven  miles  west  of  Staunton,  on  the  Parkersburg 
turnpike,  and  four  miles  from  Buffalo  gap,  a  water-way  in  the  Little  North 
mountain,  through  which  passes  this  turnpike,  as  well  as  the  Chesapeake  and 
Ohio  railroad. 

^  Johnson,  in  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  May  6,  marched  through  Buffalo  gap 
and  up  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Great  North  mountain,  resting  his  advance  in  the 
notch  known  as  Dry  Branch  gap,  fifteen  miles  from  Staunton,  Here,  between 
Crawford's  mountain  and  Elliot's  knob,  he  bivouacked  part  of  his  troops  in  line 
on  the  crest  of  the  mountain,  Milroy's  advance  was  at  the  eastern  base  of  the 
Shenandoah  mountain,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Big  Calf-Pasture  valley. 

'  Dabney's  Life  of  Jackson,  p,  341. 


72  CAMPAIGN  JN  THE    VALLEV  OF   VIRGINIA,  18G1-G2. 

^leantinic,  Milroy  liad  on  tliis  day  learned  for  the  first  time  from 
his  scouts  and  spies  that  a  junction  had  been  made  between  the  forces 
of  Jackson  and  Johnson,  and  that  they  were  advancing  to  attack  him 
at  McDowell.  He  says :  "  Having  the  day  previous  (May  6)  sent 
out  a  large  portion  of  the  Third  A'^irginia,  Seventy-fifth  Ohio,  and 
Thirty-second  Ohio  to^  Shaw's  ridge,  upon  the  Shenandoah  moun- 
tain, for  the  purpose  of  protecting  my  foraging  and  reconnoitring 
parties,  I  immediately  ordered  my  whole  force  to  concentrate  at 
McDowell,  and,  expecting  reinforcements,  prepared  for  defence  there. 
In  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  a  laro:e  force  of  the  rebels  was  discovered 
descending  the  west  side  of  the  Shenandoah  mountain,  along  the 
Staunton  and  Parkersburg  turnpike.  I  ordered  a  section  of  the 
Ninth  Ohio  battery  (Capt.  Hyman)  on  Shaw's  ridge  to  shell  them, 
and  endeavor  to  retard  their  progress.'"'  The  reinforcements  he 
expected  consisted  of  Schenck's  brigade,  then  on  the  way  from  Frank- 
lin, and  which,  by  a  forced  march,  reached  McDowell  before  mid- 
day on  the  8th.^ 

In  consequence  of  the  withdrawal  of  Milroy's  advance  on  the  7th, 
Gen.  Johnson  found  only  the  hastily-evacuated  camps  of  the  Federals 
in  his  ascent  of  Shenandoah  mountain.  The  greater  part  of  the 
transportation  of  this  Federal  force  was  not  with  it  at  the  time,  and 
hence  the  troops  abandoned  their  stores  and  camp  equipage  to  the 
Confederates.  Nor  was  Johnson's  descent  on  the  western  side  ob- 
structed by  Capt.  Hyman's  battery.  The  latter  fired  a  few  shots 
without  effect  and  then  withdrew.  Johnson  bivouacked  for  the 
night  on  Shaw's  Fork,*  and  the  other  Confederate  brigades  at  dif- 
ferent points  in  the  rear.  The  mountains  of  this  region  aiford  good 
camping-grounds  only  at  considerable  intervals,  and,  as  the  army 
moved  upon  a  single  road,  it  was  eight  or  ten  miles  between  the 
front  and  rear.^     (Map  No.  I.) 

"On  Thursday  morning  (May  8)  the  march  was  resumed  early, 

^  This  should  be  "beyond,"  as  Shaw's  ridge  is  west  of  the  Shenandoah 
mountain. 

"^  Milroy's  report,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.  p.  34. 

'  Gen.  Schenck  says :  "  By  leaving  my  baggage-train  under  a  guard  in  my  last 
camp  on  the  road,  fourteen  miles  from  McDowell,  I  was  able  to  push  forward 
so  as  to  make  the  whole  distance,  thirty-four  miles,  in  twenty-three  hours."  As 
he  reached  McDowell  at  10  a.m.  on  May  8,  he  must  have  left  Franklin  at  11  a.m. 
on  the  preceding  day,     (Schenck's  report,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.  p.  35,) 

*  Twenty-nine  miles  from  Staunton. 

^  Jackson's  headquarters  were  at  Rogers's  toll-gate,  at  the  eastern  foot  of  the 
Shenandoah  mountain,  twenty-three  miles  from  Staunton. 


r 


M<^DOWELL.  73 

with  Gen.  Johnson's  regiments  still  in  advance,  and  the  ascent  of  the 
Bull-Pasture  mountain  was  commenced.  This  ridge,  unlike  its 
neighbors,  has  a  breadth  of  a  couple  of  miles  upon  its  top,  which 
might  be  correctly  termed  a  table-land,  were  it  not  occupied  by- 
clusters  of  precipitous  hills  which  are  themselves  almost  mountainous 
in  their  dimensions  and  ruggedness.  The  Parkersburg  turnpike, 
proceeding  westward,  ascends  to  this  table-land,  passes  across  it,  and 
descends  to  the  Bull-Pasture  river  by  a  sinuous  course  along  the 
ravines  which  seam  the  sides  and  top  of  the  mountain  alike,  so  that 
it  is  almost  everywhere  commanded,  on  one  or  both  sides,  by  the 
steep  and  wooded  banks  of  the  valleys  which  it  threads.  On  the  right 
and  left  of  the  road  the  western  portions  of  the  rough  plateau  which 
has  been  described  were  occupied  by  pasture-lands,  covered  with  the 
richest  greensward,  with  here  and  there  the  prostrate  trunk  of  a  forest- 
tree  long  since  girdled  and  killed.  The  chasm  which  separates  the 
higher  reaches  of  these  lofty  pastures  is  a  mile  in  width,  and  far 
down  in  its  bottom  the  turnpike  descends  toward  the  river,  until  it 
debouches,  through  a  straight  gorge  of  a  few  hundred  yards  in  length, 
upon  the  bridge.  Artillery  planted  upon  a  hillock  beyond  the  river 
commanded  this  reach  of  the  road  with  a  murderous  fire. 

"  Gens.  Jackson  and  Johnson,  having  cautiously  ascended  the  moun- 
tain, and  driven  away  a  picket  of  the  enemy  which  quartered  on  its 
top,  proceeded  to  the  western  ridge  of  the  pasture-lands  on  the  left  of 
the  road,  and  occupied  the  forenoon  in  examining  the  position  of  the 
enemy."  ^ 

The  open  ground  here  is  known  as  Sitlington's  hill,  and  the  high 
pasture-land  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  turnpike,  and  in  a  north- 
easterly direction,  is  called  Hull's  hill.  The  open  field  on  top  of 
Sitlington's  hill  is  a  mile  in  length,  while  the  foot  of  the  hill  is  on 
all  sides  steep  and  heavily  wooded.  The  Confederates  reached  the 
open  top  by  way  of  a  ravine  which  meets  the  turnpike  about  one 
and  a  half  miles  east  of  McDowell,  at  a  point  where  the  turnpike 
turns  sharply  to  the  north,  to  find  its  way  around  the  base  of  the  hill. 
This  ravine  is  narrow  and  very  steep,  and,  besides  being  wooded,  is 
filled  with  boulders  washed  down  from  above.  From  the  open  field 
on  top  it  was  easy  to  look  down  upon  the  village  of  McDowell  and 
the  Federal  camps  in  the  valley  of  the  Bull-Pasture.  The  open 
ground  on  the  top  of  Hull's  hill  was  a  mile  away.  It  was  occupied 
by  Federal  riflemen,  but  their  fire  was  harmless  at  that  distance. 
(Map  No.  IV.) 

^  Dabney's  Life  of  Jackson,  p.  342. 
6 


74  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-63. 

The  small  escort  accompanying  the  Confederate  generals  in  their 
reconnoissance  having  attracted  his  notice,  Gen.  Milroy  sent  out 
parties  of  skirmishers  through  tlie  forest  which  covered  the  western 
side  and  base  of  Sitlington's  hill,  and  also  opened  witli  a  section  of 
artillery  from  the  farther  side  of  the  McDowell  valley.  The  eleva- 
tion was  too  great,  however,  for  the  guns  to  effect  anything,  and  the 
escort  kept  the  skirmishers  at  bay.  The  hill  would  have  afforded  the 
Confederates  a  plunging  fire  upon  the  Federal  camps,  but  Jackson 
declined  to  order  up  artillery.  Two  reasons  prevented  him.  The 
mode  of  access  to  the  hill  was  so  rugged  and  difficult  as  to  forbid  the 
use  of  horses,  and  the  guns  could  only  have  been  gotten  up  by  hand 
with  great  exertion.  In  case  of  a  successful  advance  by  the  enemy, 
there  would  have  been  no  possibility  of  withdrawing  them.  Another 
and  a  controlling  motive  was  found  in  his  determination  not  to  attack 
the  enemy  at  once  from  the  commanding  position  of  Sitlington's  hill, 
but  merely  to  occupy  him  until  a  flanking  column  could  find  its  way, 
by  a  considerable  detour,  to  a  point  beyond  ]\IcDowell,  seize  the  turn- 
pike between  that  village  and  Monterey,  and  thus  block  Milroy's 
direct  line  of  retreat.  The  Confederate  engineers  had  discovered  that 
a  route  practicable  for  artillery  passed  to  the  right  of  Hull's  hill, 
and,  making  a  circuit,  re-entered  the  turnpike  five  miles  west  of 
McDowell.  Jackson  decided  to  move  a  considerable  force  of  artiller}'-, 
with  adequate  infantry  supports,  by  this  road  during  the  night,  with 
the  hope  of  crushing  his  foe  when  hemmed  in  on  the  morrow.  Gen. 
Johnson's  brigade,  though  out  of  sight,  was  close  at  hand,  in  case  the 
enemy  should  make  any  effort  in  force  to  occupy  Sitlington's  hill, 
and  Taliaferro's  and  Campbell's  were  within  supporting  distance, 
while  the  "  Stonewall"  brigade  was  ordered  to  encamp  some  distance 
in  the  rear. 

While  the  Confederates  were  thus  employed,  IVIilroy  had  been 
reinforced  by  the  arrival  of  Schenck's  brigade,  which,  omitting  "  sev- 
eral companies  then  on  detached  and  other  duty,  brought  into  the  field 
an  aggregate  of  only  about  thirteen  hundred  (1300)  infantry,  besides 
De  Beck's  battery  of  the  First  Ohio  artillery,  and  about  two  hundred 
and  fifty  (250)  cavalry."  ^  His  skirmishers  had  reported  that  the  Con- 
federate force  was  increasing,  and  that  there  were  indications  of  the 
planting  of  artillery  on  Sitlington's  hill.  In  such  an  event  the  Fed- 
eral position  at  McDowell  was  entirely  untenable.  Gen.  ]\Iilroy,  there- 
fore, with  the  approval  of  Gen.  Schenck,  who,  as  senior,  now  com- 

^  Gen.  Schenck's  report. 


I 


MCDOWELL.  75 

manded,  moved  forward  with  portions  of  his  own  brigade  and  one 
regiment  of  Schenck's  brigade  to  seize  the  hill.  Milroy's  brigade 
consisted  of  the  Twenty-fifth,  Seventj'-fifth,  and  Thirty-second  Ohio, 
and  Third  Virginia  regiments.  Numerous  detachments  of  these  regi- 
ments were  absent  on  other  duty,  and  several  companies  were  already 
engaged  as  sku-mishers,  and  Gen.  Milroy  reports  that  the  force  he 
carried  forward  to  this  main  attack,  including  the  Eighty-second  Ohio, 
of  Schenck's  brigade,  was  between  two  thousand  two  hundred  (2200) 
and  two  thoasand  three  hundred  (2300)  men.  It  was  now  after 
three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  As  soon  as  Jackson  perceived  the 
advance  of  the  Federals  in  force,  he  ordered  up  four  regiments  of 
Johnson's  brigade.  The  Fifty-second  Virginia  came  first,  and  was 
placed  on  the  left.  It  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  sent  forward 
to  engage  the  enemy.  The  Twelfth  Georgia  was  posted  in  the  centre 
of  the  Confederate  position,  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  and  the  Forty- 
fourth  Virginia  on  the  right,  near  a  ravine.  The  Fifty-eighth 
Virginia  was  sent  to  the  left  to  support  the  Fifty-second.  The  Con- 
federate line  was  a  curve,  with  the  convexity  towards  the  enemy,  so 
that  the  right  of  it  was  in  a  direction  nearly  perpendicular  to  the 
left.  The  advance  of  the  Federals  was  protected  for  some  distance 
by  the  convexity  of  the  hill,  and  in  part  by  the  wood  that  covered  its 
base  and  lower  sides.  As  the  Federals  emerged  from  the  wood  and 
attained  the  face  of  the  hill,  they  became  engaged  with  the  skirmishers 
of  the  Fifty-second  Virginia,  Col.  M.  G.  Harman.  It  was  the 
Twenty-fifth  and  Seventy-fifth  Ohio,  under  Col.  McLean,  of  the 
Seventy-fifth,  that  led  the  attack  on  the  Confederate  left.  Resolutely 
climbing  the  hill,  they  pushed  back  the  skirmish  line  opposed  to 
them,  until  they  came  upon  the  Confederate  line  of  battle  on  the 
brow  of  the  hill.  Here  the  struggle  became  fierce  and  sanguinary. 
Meantime,  Milroy  had  sent  the  Thirty-second  and  Eightj^-second 
Ohio  and  Third  Virginia  (Federal)  farther  to  his  left,  that  they  might 
attack  the  right  of  the  Confederates,  and,  if  possible,  turn  it.  The 
two  Ohio  regiments  pressed  up  the  face  of  the  hill,  and  vigorously 
attacked  Johnson's  right,  while  the  Third  Virginia  (Federal)  pushed 
along  the  turnpike  and  tlireatened  to  turn  his  flank.  Anticipating  the 
latter  movement,  Jackson  had  placed  the  Thirty-first  Virginia  to  hold 
the  turnpike  in  advance  of  the  point  at  which  the  Confederates  had 
diverged  from  it  to  ascend  the  hill.  The  attack  which  was  made  on 
Johnson's  right,  on  the  hill  where  only  the  Forty-fourth  Virginia  was 
posted,  caused  Jackson  to  withdraw  the  Thirty-first  from  the  turnpike, 
and  to  send  it  and  the  Twenty-fifth  Virginia  to  Gen.  Johnson,  who 


76  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-G2. 

placed  them  in  support  of  the  Forty-fourth.  The  guarding  of  the 
turnpike  was  then  committed  to  the  Twent}'-first  Virginia  (Col. 
Cumiingham),  of  Campbell's  brigade,  which  was  directed  to  hold  it 
at  all  hazards.  But  the  Federals  did  not  press  in  this  direction,  and 
Col.  Cunningham  was  not  seriously  attacked.  Gen.  Milroy  states 
that  he  ordered  two  twelve-pounders  to  be  placed  on  the  turnpike, 
but  did  not  get  them  into  position  "  until  after  twilight."  The  attack 
upon  the  Confederate  right  was  vigorous  and  well  sastained,  and  now, 
by  the  junction  of  the  two  attacking  Federal  columns,  the  battle 
became  general.  Repeated  efforts  were  made  to  carry  the  crest  of  the 
hill,  but  these  were  repulsed.  The  firing  was  incessant  and  at  close 
quarters.  •  The  Confederates  had  the  advantage  of  position,  and  in 
some  parts  the  undulations  of  the  ground  gave  them  some  cover ;  but, 
for  the  most  part,  their  line  showing  plainly  against  the  evening  sky, 
afforded  an  excellent  mark  for  the  Federal  soldiers.  On  the  other 
hand,  though  the  Federal  troops  had  to  push  up  the  steep  acclivity  of 
the  hill,  they  reaped  the  usual  advantage  in  such  cases,  resulting  from 
the  high  firing  of  the  Confederates.  The  most  advanced  portion 
of  the  Confederate  line  was  the  centre,  where,  without  any  protection 
from  the  nature  of  the  ground,  the  Twelfth  Georgia  regiment  bore 
the  brunt  of  numerous  attacks  and  gallantly  held  its  position.  It 
was  suffering  heavily,  but  refused  to  yield,  or  even  to  take  advantage 
of  such  cover  as  the  place  afforded. 

Gen.  Jackson  says :  "  The  engagement  had  now  not  only  become 
general  along  the  whole  line,  but  so  intense  that  I  ordered  Gen. 
Taliaferro  to  the  support  of  Gen.  Johnson.^  Accordingly,  the  Twenty- 
third  and  Thirty-seventh  Virginia  regiments  were  advanced  to  the 
centre  of  the  line,  which  was  then  held  by  the  Twelfth  Georgia  with 
heroic  gallantry.  ...  At  this  time  the  Federals  were  pressing 
forward  on  our  right,  with  a  view  of  flanking  that  position.  This 
movement  of  the  enemy  was  speedily  detected,  and  met  by  Gen. 
Taliaferro's  brigade  and  the  Twelfth  Georgia  with  great  promptitude. 
Further  to  check  it,  portions  of  the  Twenty-fifth  and  Thirtj'-first 
Virginia  regiments  were  sent  to  occupy  an  elevated  piece  of  wood- 
land on  our  right  and  rear,  so  situated  as  to  fully  command  the 
position  of  the  enemy.  The  brigade  commanded  by  Col.  Campbell 
coming  up  about  this  time,  was,  together  with  the  Tenth  Virginia 
(the  rear  regiment  of  Taliaferro's  brigade),  ordered  down  the  ridge 
into  the  woods,  to  guard  against  movements  against  our  right  flank, 

'  To  Gen.  Johnson  had  been  intrusted  the  command  of  the  troops  engaged. 


M<^ DO  WELL.  77 

which  they,  in  connection  with  the  other  force,  eifectiially  prevented. 
The  battle  lasted  four  hours, — from  half-past  four  in  the  afternoon 
until  half-past  eight.  Every  attempt,  by  front  or  flank  movement,  to 
attain  the  crest  of  the  hill,  where  our  line  was  formed,  was  signally 
and  effectually  repulsed.  Finally,  after  dark,  their  force  ceased  firing, 
and  the  enemy  retreated.  The  enemy's  artillery,  posted  on  a  hill  in 
our  front,  was  active  in  throwing  shot  and  shell  up,  to  the  period  when 
the  infantry  fight  commenced ;  but,  in  consequence  of  the  great  angle 
of  elevation  at  which  they  fired  and  our  sheltered  position,  inflicted 
no  loss  upon  our  troops."  ^  This  artillery  consisted  of  a  section  which 
had  been  firing  all  the  day  from  the  western  side  of  the  McDowell 
valley.  There  was  also  a  gun  in  action  from  the  Twelfth  Ohio 
battery,  which.  Gen.  Milroy  says,  "was  placed  in  position  on  the 
mountain  on  the  left  of  the  turnpike  (Hull's  hill)  with  the  greatest 
difficulty,"  whilst  his  troops  were  advancing  against  the  Confederate 
right. 

The  Confederate  forces  actually  in  the  battle  consisted  of  Johnson's 
brigade  (six  regiments)  and  of  Taliaferro's  brigade  (three  regiments) ; 
Col.  Campbell's  brigade  arrived  in  time  to  be  used  in  protecting  the 
right  flank,  but  was  not  engaged,  and  the  "  Stonewall"  brigade  was 
some  miles  in  the  rear.  The  nine  regiments  engaged  numbered  about 
four  thousand  five  hundred  (4500)  men,  and  Col.  Campbell's  brigade 
contained  about  fifteen  hundred  (1500)  more.  The  Federal  strength, 
under  Schenck  and  Milroy,  was  over  six  thousand  (6000)  men,^  but, 
according  to  the  reports  of  those  officers,  not  more  than  two  thousand 
five  hundred  (2500)  of  these  were  in  the  battle.  The  Confederate 
official  report  gives  Jackson's  loss  as  seventy-one  killed  and  three 
hundred  and  ninety  wounded, — total,  four  hundred  and  sixty-one 
(461).  Among  the  Confederate  killed  was  Col.  Gibbons,  of  the 
Tenth  Virginia,  who  fell  while  gallantly  leading  his  regiment.  Gen. 
Edward  Johnson,  who  commanded  the  troops  engaged,  was  seriously 
wounded  in  the  foot,  near  the  close  of  the  fight.     Col.  M.  G.  Harman, 

^  Jackson's  report  of  the  battle  of  McDowell. 

"^  Fremont,  in  his  official  report,  already  quoted,  says  that  Milroy  and  Schenck 
had  together  6500  men.  His  official  return  for  May  10  gives  as  the  present  for 
duty,  officers  and  men  : 

Under  Milroy 3694 

"       Schenck 2335 

Total 6029 

On  April  30  the  return  gives  the  strength  of  the  two  as  6422. 


78 


CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-G2. 


of  tlie  Fifty-second  Virginia,  Col.  Smith  and  Maj.  Higginbotham, 
of  the  Twenty-fifth  Virginia,  and  Maj.  Campbell,  of  the  Forty- 
second  Virginia,  were  also  wounded.  Gen.  Schenck  reports  twenty- 
eight  killed,  and  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  wounded,  and  three 
missing, — total,  two  hundred  and  fiftj-^-six  (256),  as  the  Federal  loss.^ 
Though  Gen.  Milroy  failed  altogether  to  obtain  possession  of 
Sitlington's  hill,  or  to  effect  any  lodgment  from  which  he  might 
renew  the  attack  on  the  morrow,  he  maintained  the  fight  in  the  most 
spirited  manner  until  dark,  and  in  this  way  saved  himself  from 
disaster ;  for,  under  cover  of  the  darkness  and  fog,  he  quietly  with- 

^  The  troops  actually  engaged  at  McDowell,  with  the  losses  in  detail,  so  far  as 
the  regimental  reports  give  them,  are  as  follows : 


CONFEDERATE. 

Edward  Johnson's  brigade : 

Strength. 

Killed. 

Wounded.    Missing.    Total  Los* 

Twenty-fifth  Virginia 

1 

Thirty-first           " 

Twelfth  Georgia 

.      540 

40 

140 

180 

Forty-fourth  Virginia 

Fifty-second          " 

6 

47 

53 

Fifty-eighth          " 

Taliaferro's  brigade : 

Tenth  Virginia 

. 

1 

20 

21 

Twenty-third  Virginia 

. 

6 

35 

41 

Thirty-seventh       " 

5 

34 

39 

Campbell's  brigade : 

Forty-second  Virginia 

3 

3 

Forty-eighth        " 

. 

4 

4 

Twenty-first       " 

. 

Irish  battalion  . 

1 

1 

Total  strength,  about  600C 

).     Total  loss,  461 

FEDERAL 

Of  Milroy's  brigade,  parts  of  the 
Twenty-fifth  Ohio 
Seventy-fifth     " 
Thirty-second 


Strength. 

.  469 
.  444 
.    416 


Third  Virginia 439 

Of  Schenck's  brigade,  part  of  the 

Eighty-second  Ohio 500 

Also,  some  of  Second  Virginia,  as  skirmishers. 

Part  of  Ilyman's  battery,  and  part  of  Johnson's  (Twelfth  Ohio) 

battery. 
Strength,  about  2500.     Loss,  256. 


M<^DOWELL.  79 

drew  from  the  field,  unmolested  by  the  Confederates,  the  country 
being  too  broken  and  difficult  to  admit  of  pursuit  at  night.  McDowell 
was  entirely  untenable  with  the  Confederates  holding  Sitlington's 
hill,  and  so  Gen.  Schenck,  as  soon  as  the  Federal  troops  had  been 
safely  withdrawn  from  the  battle-field,  having  lighted  his  camp-fires, 
evacuated  the  place,  and  fell  back  during  the  night  in  the  direction  of 
Franklin.  He  says :  "  The  withdrawal  was  effected  without  the  loss 
of  a  man,  and  without  loss  or  destruction  of  any  article  of  public 
propert}',  except  of  some  stores  for  which  Gen.  Milroy  was  entirely 
without  the  means  of  transportation."  ^ 

Meanwhile,  the  Confederates,  having  collected  the  wounded  and  left 
.  a  guard  on  the  field,  sought  needed  rest  in  their  bivouac.  This  rest 
was  short,  for  it  was  late  in  the  night  before  all  was  quiet,  and  with 
the  early  morning  the  army  was  astir.  At  dawn  Jackson  was  in 
the  saddle,  but  when  he  had  ascended  again  to  the  battle-field,  it  was 
only  to  look  down  on  the  deserted  camps  and  smouldering  camp- 
fires  of  the  foe.  He  occupied  McDowell  without  delay,  and,  having 
provided  for  the  captured  stores,  prepared  to  follow  the  retreating 
army. 

The  following  was  Jackson's  laconic  despatch  announcing  his 
victory  to  the  adjutant-general : 

"  Valley  District,  May  9,  1862. 

"  To  Gen.  S.  Cooper  : 

"  God  blessed  our  arms  with  victory  at  McDowell  yesterday. 

"  T.  J.  Jackson,  Major-General." 

Gen.  Schenck  fell  back  by  gradual  stages  to  Franklin,  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  rugged  country  to  hold  the  pursuers  in  check.  On 
Friday  (9th)  he  halted  for  some  hours  at  the  intersection  of  the 
Monterey  and  Franklin  roads,  but,  before  any  considerable  portion 
of  Jackson's  force  was  up,  he  moved  on.^  Next  day  the  Confederates 
pursued  closely,  but  were  easily  prevented  in  these  mountains  from 
doing  any  serious  damage. 

The  plan  of  the  Confederate  leader  was  to  beat  the  armies  opposed 
to  him  in  detail.  The  force  under  Gen.  Schenck  had  been  repulsed, 
but  it  was  still  formidable.      If  reinforced  from  Gen.  Banks,  the 

^  Schenck's  report.  A  considerable  quantity  of  camp  equipage  was  left,  and 
many  tents,  the  latter  standing. 

^  Jackson  was  compelled  to  spend  some  hours  at  McDowell,  in  order  that  his 
troops  might  be  fed. 


80         CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

strengtlicnetl  force  might  be  able  in  this  mountainous  country  to 
withstiind  him.^  He  therefore  took  steps  to  prevent  reinforcements 
from  being  sent  from  Banks  to  Schenck,  or  a  union  of  the  two  com- 
mands. For  this  purpose  he  sent  a  party  of  cavalry,  under  Capt. 
Hotohkiss,  topographical  engineer,  to  blockade  the  roads  loading 
from  the  direction  of  McDowell  and  Franklin  through  North  River 
and  Dry  River  gaps.  These  roads  lead  to  Harrisonburg,  and  at  the 
points  named  pass  through  narrow  defiles,  where,  by  felling  trees, 
they  could  be  made  impassable  long  enough  to  give  time  for  the 
making  of  dispositions  to  defeat  the  movement.  Another  part}''  was 
sent  to  do  the  same  on  the  road  leading  through  Brock's  gap,  directly 
west  of  Harrisonburg,  and  the  citizens  were  requested  to  aid  by 
obstructing  every  available  point.^  These  detachments  having  been 
sent  off,  the  army  continued  its  march  in  the  wake  of  the  retreating 
Federals. 

On  the  succeeding  day  (Hth),  as  Jackson  again  closed  up  to  the 
rear  of  the  Federal  army,  the  latter  adopted  the  expedient  of  setting 
fire  to  the  forests  along  the  road.  "  Soon  the  sky  was  overcast  wth 
volumes  of  smoke  which  almost  hid  the  scene,  and  wrapped  every 
distant  object  in  a  veil  impenetrable  to  the  eyes  and  the  telescopes 
of  the  officers  alike.  Through  this  sultry  fog  the  pursuing  army  felt 
its  way  very  cautiously  along,  cannonaded  by  the  enemy  from  every 
advantageous  position,  while  it  was  protected  from  ambuscades  only 
by  detachments  of  skirmishers  who  scoured  the  burning  M'oods  on 
each  side  of  the  highway.  As  fast  as  these  could  scramble  over  the 
precipitous  hills  and  the  blazing  thickets,  the  great  column  crept 
along  the  main  road  like  a  lazy  serpent,  the  general  often  far  in 
advance  of  its  head,  in  his  eagerness  to  overtake  the  foe.  He  declared 
that  this  smoke  was  the  most  adroit  expedient  to  which  a  retreating 
army  could  resort  to  embarrass  pursuit,  and  that  it  entailed  upon  him 
all  the  disadvantages  of  a  night  attack.  By  slow  approaches  and 
constant  skirmishing  the  enemy  were  driven  to  the  village  of  Frank- 
lin, when  the  double  darkness  of  the  night  and  the  fog  again  arrested 
his  progress."'  Gen.  Schenck  says:  "From  McDowell  I  fell  back 
by  easy  marches  on  the  9th,  10th,  and  11th  to  this  place  (Franklin), 

^  He  was  not  aware  how  large  a  portion  of  Banks's  troops  were  about  to  go 
to  reinforce  Gen.  McDowell  at  Fredericksburg. 

'^  The  blockading  of  these  roads  was  one  of  the  causes  which  subsequently 
prevented  Fremont  from  marching  on  Harrisonburg  when  ordered  to  go  to  the 
relief  of  Banks,  and  induced  him  to  go  by  a  circuit  to  Strasburg. 

'  Dabney's  Life  of  Jackson,  p.  351. 


M<^DO  WELL.  81 

the  enemy  cautiously  pursuing.  .  .  .  While  awaiting  the  arrival  of 
the  general  commanding  (Fremont),  with  reinforcements  at  this  point, 
on  the  11th,  12th,  and  13th,  the  rebel  army  having  advanced  within 
two  miles  of  our  position,  we  were  kept  constantly  engaged  in  watch- 
ful preparations  for  an  expected  attack."^ 

On  Monday  morning,  May  12,  Jackson,  finding  Schenck  strongly 
posted,  and  knowing  that  affairs  in  the  east  would  not  admit  of  his 
protracted  stay  in  the  mountains,  determined  to  withdraw  from  the 
Federal  front  without  further  battle.  He  had  found  it  impossible  to 
do  any  considerable  injury  to  an  army  retreating  in  such  a  country. 
Now  the  Federals  were  within  reach  of  Fremont's  main  body,  and 
having  taken  a  stand  at  Franklin  in  a  strong  position,  might  either 
hold  him  in  check  until  the  reinforcements  arrived  or  continue  their 
retreat  until  a  junction  with  Fremont  was  effected.  Such  a  junction 
once  made,  the  Confederate  general  might  be  forced  to  fight  a  superior 
force  ^  without  the  aid  of  Ewell's  division,  which  had  been  left  in  Elk 
Run  valley  to  watch  Banks.  Again,  time  was  all-important.  The 
enemy  could  make  a  campaign  in  the  mountains  tedious.  An  emer- 
gency at  Fredericksburg  or  Richmond  might  cause  the  recall  of 
Ewell's  division,  which  had  been  ordered  to  co-operate  with  Jackson 
for  making  some  movement  against  Banks  which  would  relieve  Fred- 
ericksburg and  prevent  troops  from  that  point  or  the  Valley  going 
to  reinforce  McClellan.  He  decided  to  unite  his  whole  force  without 
more  delay  and  strike  at  Banks,  who  in  the  open  country  of  the  Val- 
ley could  be  more  readily  assailed.  Milroy  and  Schenck  had  been 
driven  away  from  the  position  that  enabled  them  to  threaten  Staun- 
ton; had  been  pushed  away,  too,  from  Banks,  so  that  there  was  no 
longer  any  danger  of  a  junction  of  the  two  commands.  Jackson 
believed  that  by  a  prompt  movement  against  the  latter  officer,  he 
might  defeat  him  before  Fremont  would  sufficiently  recover  from 
the  disarrangement  of  his  plans,  produced  by  the  defeat  and  retreat 
of  Schenck,  to  interfere  actively  with  the  operations  of  the  Confed- 
erates. 

Having  so  decided,  Jackson  sent  a  courier  to  Gen.  Ewell  to 
announce  his  coming,  and  prepared  for  the  return.  He  granted  the 
soldiers  the  half  of  Monday  (12th)  as  a  season  of  rest,  in  lieu  of  the 
Sabbath  which  had  been  devoted  to  warfare,  and  issued  the  following 
order  to  them : 


^  Schenck's  report. 

*  Jackson  had  with  him  near  9000  men ;  Fremont  15,000. 


82  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,   1S61-G2. 

"Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Valley  and  Northwest: 

"  I  congratulate  you  on  your  recent  victory  at  McDowell.  I  request 
you  to  unite  with  me  this  morning  in  thanksgiving  to  Almighty  God 
ior  thus  having  crowned  your  arms  with  success,  and  in  praying  that 
he  will  continue  to  lead  you  on  from  victory  to  victory  until  our 
independence  shall  be  established,  and  make  us  that  people  whose 
God  is  the  Lord.  The  chaplains  will  hold  Divine  Service  at  10 
o'clock  A.M.  this  day,  in  their  respective  regiments."  ^ 

'  Dabney's  Life  of  Jackson,  p.  353. 


CHAPTER    ly. 


WINCHESTER. 


In  the  afternoon  of  May  12  the  Confederate  army  began  to  return, 
and  on  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  14th,  reached  McDowell.  On 
the  latter  day,  Fremont  arrived  at  Franklin  with  the  troops  he  was 
bringing  to  the  assistance  of  Schenck.  Here  he  remained  quietly  for 
the  following  ten  days  repairing  his  losses,  and,  as  Jackson  had  an- 
ticipated, made  no  attempt  to  interfere  with  his  operations.^  Jackson 
continued  his  march  in  the  direction  of  Staunton.  On  the  night  of 
the  15th  he  camped  at  Lebanon  Springs,  where  the  road  forks,  the 

^  Fremont  had  been  joined  by  Blenker's  division  at  Petersburg,  in  Hardy 
county,  May  11.  Next  day  he  set  out  for  Franklin,  which  place  he  reached  on 
the  14th.  On  the  16th,  Secretary  Stanton  telegr.iphs  to  know  if  he  still  designs 
to  move  on  the  Virginia  and  Tennessee  railroad,  and  how  long  it  will  take  him 
to  reach  it.  Fremont  says  he  was  then  busy  trying  to  equip  his  destitute  men, 
and  he  did  not  move  until  the  news  of  the  overthrow  of  Banks  was  sent  to  him. 
Fremont  seems  to  have  been  very  largely  occupied  in  "  equipping  his  destitute 
men,"  and  from  his  and  Rosecrans's  reports,  this  division  of  Blenker  must  have 
been  the  most  improvident  or  unfortunate  set  of  poor  devils  that  ever  took  up 
arms.  They  were  detached  from  McClellan  about  April  1,  and  ordered  to  Fre- 
mont. Their  route  lay  through  one  of  the  finest  countries  in  the  world.  They 
were  probably  never  more  than  thirty  miles  from  a  railroad  which  put  them 
within  from  two  to  five  hours  of  Washington.  They  were  not  at  any  time 
within  fifty  miles  of  an  enemy,  and  yet  it  took  them  until  May  11  to  reach  their 
destination, — a  distance  not  more  than  one  hundred  and  sixty  or  one  hundred 
and  seventy  miles.  At  one  time  they  seem  to  have  lost  themselves,  for  Gen. 
Rosecrans  was  sent  by  the  Federal  Secretary  of  War  about  the  middle  of  April 
to  hunt  them  up  and  lead  them  to  Fremont.  He  says  he  went  to  Winchester 
via  Harper's  Ferry,  "despatching  messengers  from  two  or  three  points  in  my 
route  in  search  of  Gen.  Blenker's  division-,"  found  that  a  boat-load  had  drowned 
themselves  in  crossing  the  Shenandoah  at  Berry's  ferry,  and  ordered  the 
division  to  Snicker's  ferry,  where  there  was  a  "flying  bridge."  He  says  they 
were  "  unfed,  unclothed,  and  unpaid,  between  8000  and  10,000  men,  bare- 
footed," etc.  He  had  them  supplied,  and  finally  delivered  them  to  Gen.  Fre- 
mont. The  latter  says  that  Blenker  reported  his  efiective  force  when  they 
reached  him  at  8000,  but  that  "subsequent  investigation  placed  the  number  of 
men  and  ofiicers  actually  present  and  fit  for  duty  at  considerably  below  7000." 
They  had  left  Alexandria  10,000  strong. 

83 


84  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

one  branch  leading  to  Staunton  and  the  otlier  to  Harrisonburg.  The 
next  day  was  spent  in  camp,  in  deference  to  the  proclamation  of  the 
Confederate  President  appointing  May  16  as  a  day  of  fasting  and 
prayer.  On  Saturday,  17th,  the  troops  turned  towards  Harrisonburg, 
and  moved  on  over  roatls  made  heavy  by  the  rain  of  the  preceding 
day.  They  camjaed  for  the  night  at  Moasy  creek  and  Bridgewater, 
and  here  they  rested  during  Sunday,  the  18th. 

We  must  now  glance  at  affairs  in  the  Valley.  During  the  nine- 
teen days  that  had  clasped  since  Jackson  left  his  camp  at  Elk  run, 
important  changes  had  taken  place  in  the  disposition  of  the  Federal 
troops  in  Northern  Virginia.  President  Lincoln,  as  heretofore  stated, 
had  given  a  reluctant  assent  to  Gen.  McClellan's  plan  of  campaign, 
which  involved  the  transfer  of  the  main  Federal  army  to  the  penin- 
sula between  the  York  and  James  rivers,  and  the  movement  by  that 
route  upon  Richmond.  To  the  apprehensions  of  the  Federal  Presi- 
dent and  his  cabinet  this  movement  seemed  to  uncover  AVashington. 
They  feared  an  irruption  of  the  Confederates,  which  might  place  the 
Federal  capital  in  hostile  hands  before  an  adequate  force  could  be 
recalled  for  its  defence.  Hence  the  most  stringent  orders  were  given 
McClellan  to  leave  a  force  so  disposed  as  to  cover  Washington,  and 
amply  sufficient  to  protect  it  in  any  emergency.  The  latter  officer 
thought  he  had  complied  fully  with  this  order  when  he  left  over 
sixty-three  thousand  (63,000)  men  and  eighty-five  (85)  pieces  of 
artillery  in  the  various  commands  that  were  located  in  the  Shen- 
andoah valley,  at  Warrenton,  at  Manassas,  and  in  and  around  Wash- 
ington.^ In  addition  to  this  force,  ten  thousand  (10,000)  men  and 
twenty-four  (24)  guns,  under  Blenker,  had  been  detached  and  ordered 
to  Fremont,  whose  movable  column  was  thus  increased  to  twelve 
or  fifteen  thousand  (12,000  or  15,000)  men,  even  after  deducting 
Blenker's  mass  of  stragglers.  This  aggregate  of  over  seventy-five 
thousand  (75,000)  men  was  really  equal  to  the  entire  Confederate 
strength  available  for  oifence  in  Virginia  at  this  time.  But  with 
fears  greatly  aroused  by  Jackson's  attack  at  Kernstown,  and  no  doubt 

*  McClellan  says,  in  his  report,  p.  546 :  "  From  the  following  letter  to  the 
adjutant-general,  dated  April  1,  1862,  it  will  be  seen  that  I  left  for  the  defence 
of  the  national  capital  and  its  approaches,  when  I  sailed  for  the  Peninsula, 
73,456  men,  with  109  pieces  of  light  artillery,  including  the  32  pieces  in  Wash- 
ington, alluded  to,  but  not  enumerated  in  my  letter  to  the  adjutant-general." 
(This  includes  Blenker's  division,  10,028  strong,  with  24  guns.)  "It  will  also 
be  seen  that  I  recommended  other  available  troops  in  New  York  (more  than 
4000)  to  be  at  once  ordered  forward  to  reinforce  them."     (See  p.  57,  ante.) 


WINCHESTER.  85 

Stimulated  by  want  of  confidence  in  Gen.  McClellan,  the  Washington 
authorities  deemed  it  inadequate,  and  so  the  Federal  commander  had 
hardly  reached  Fortress  Monroe  (April  2),  to  assume  the  personal 
direction  of  the  operations  there,  before  the  President  ordered  (April 
3)  McDowell's  corps  to  remain  in  front  of  Washington.^  On  the  4th 
of  April,  Gen.  McDowell  was  detached  altogether  from  McClellan's 
command  and  placed  in  charge  of  the  Department  of  the  Rappahan- 
nock, and  Gen.  Banks  was  given  independent  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  the  Shenandoah.^  To  McDowell  was  assigned  the  duty  of 
protecting  the  capital,  by  the  following  order : 

"War  Department,  April  11,  1862. 
"  Sir  : — For  the  present,  and  until  further  orders  from  this  Depart- 
ment, you  will  consider  the  national  capital  as  especially  under  your 
protection,  and  make  no  movement  throwing  your  force  out  of  position 
for  the  discharge  of  this  primary  duty. 

"  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 
"  Maj.-Gen.  McDowell." 

McDowell  at  first  moved  out  towards  Catlett's  station,  rebuilding 
the  Orange  and  Alexandria  railroad,  and  pushed  his  advance  in  the 
direction  of  the  Rappahannock  and  Culpeper.  Subsequently  he  asked 
and  obtained  permission  to  move  down  to  Fredericksburg,  but  was 
prohibited  from  crossing  the  river  there,  or  making  any  advance  be- 
yond occupying  the  town  with  a  small  force.  The  early  days  of  May 
foimd  him  opposite  Fredericksburg,  where  he  remained  inactive  for 
three  weeks.  When  McDowell's  corps  had  been  detached  from  Mc- 
Clellan's  army,  one  division  (Franklin's)  had  been  allowed  to  go  to 
the  Peninsula,  and  this  deficiency  was  to  be  made  up  from  the  com- 
mands about  Washington  and  in  Northern  Virginia.  Thus  a  new 
division  was  organized  under  Gen.  Ord,  partly  of  troops  drawn  from 
Banks's  and  Abercrombie's^  commands,  and  partly  of  troops  from 
Washington.  This  new  division,  added  to  those  left  with  him  (Mc- 
Call's  and  King's),  gave  McDowell  a  force  of  thirty  thousand  (30,000) 
men.*  To  increase  his  strength  still  farther,  with  reference  to  opera- 
tions against  Richmond,  President  Lincoln  ordered  Shields's  division 
to  be  detached  from  Banks's  corps  and  sent  to  McDowell.' 

^  See  page  57,  ante.  ^  See  page  57,  note. 

'  Abercrombie  was  in  command  at  Warrenton. 

*  McDowell's  "return"  for  May  17  (excluding  Shields)  shows  his  strength, 
ofiBcers  and  men  present  for  duty,  to  have  been  29,652. 

*  See  McDowell's  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War, 
Part  I.,  1863. 


86  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

-^Whcn  Gen.  Banks  learned,  on  the  1st  of  May,  that  Ewcll's  division 
had  entered  the  Valley,  and  that  Jackson  was  moving,  fearing  an 
attack  from  their  combined  forces,  he  evacuated  Harrisonburg  and 
gradually  withdrew  to  New  Market,  and  thence,  after  the  detachment 
of  Shields's  division,  to  Strasburg.  He  thus  drew  nearer  to  his  base 
and  the  forces  on  which  he  might  call  for  succor  in  case  of  need. 
Ashby  followed  the  retreating  army  with  his  cavalry,  and  frequent 
skirmishes  occurred  between  his  forces  and  the  Federal  rear  guard. 

On  the  7th  of  May  an  affair  of  outposts  occurred  between  the 
Seventh  Louisiana  infantry  and  a  part  of  the  Sixth  Virginia  cavalry, 
of  Ewell's  division,  and  a  company  of  Federal  cavalry,  supported  by 
the  Thirteenth  Indiana  regiment,  at  a  little  place  called  Summersville, 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  main  Shenandoah  river,  in  the  Luray  val- 
ley. The  Federal  cavalry  were  partly  surrounded,  and  compelled  to 
swim  the  river  for  safety,  while  the  infontry  was  driven  from  the 
field.^  A  few  days  after,  Shields's  division  left  the  Valley  by  w^ay  of 
Luray  and  Front  Royal,  and  thence  over  the  Blue  Bidge  towards 
Fredericksburg.^  This  transfer  deprived  Banks  of  more  than  one- 
half  his  forces,  for  Shields  took  with  him  eleven  thousand  (11,000) 
men,  and  left  about  eight  thousand  (8000).'  Gen.  Banks  now  retired 
from  the  upper  Valley  entirely,  posting  the  main  body  of  his  forces 
at  Strasburg,*  and  sending  Col.  Kenly,  with  the  First  Maryland  regi- 
ment and  some  cavalry  and  artillery, — in  all  about  one  thousand  (1000) 
men, — to  Front  Royal  (May  16)  to  protect  the  railroad  and  the  bridges 
at  that  place  over  the  north  and  south  forks  of  the  Shenandoah. 

Thus  it  was  that  the  middle  of  May  found  Fremont,  who  had 
hurried  forward  with  Blenker's  division  to  the  assistance  of  Schenck, 
resting  from  the  fatigues  of  the  march  at  Franklin,  while  Shields  was 
in  full  march  to  join  McDowell  at  Fredericksburg,  and  Banks  had 
assumed  a  strictly  defensive  attitude  at  Strasburg  to  hold  the  lower 
valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  especially  to  cover  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  railroad. 

McClellan's  urgent  and  repeated  calls  for  reinforcements,  and 
earnest  representations  that  the  holding  of  such  a  mass  of  troops  idle 

^  See  report  of  Col.  Foster,  of  Thirteenth  Indiana,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v. 
p.  27. 

2  Shields  left  New  Market  May  12. 

^  The  returns  of  Gens.  Williams  and  Hatch  for  May  1  show  that  Banks  then 
had  in  these  commands  "present  for  duty"  at  Harrisonburg  6032  infantry  and 
artillery  (under  Williams),  and  about  2000  cavalry  (under  Hatch).  McDowell 
states  that  Shields's  strength  (effective)  was  at  this  time  11,000  men. 

*  Here  he  constructed  earthworks,  and  prepared  to  hold  his  position. 


WINCHESTER.  87 

in  front  of  Washington  was  endangering  his  success,  had  at  last 
induced  the  Federal  administration  to  agree  to  an  advance  on  the 
part  of  McDowell  from  Fredericksburg.  The  quiet  which  had 
existed  for  some  weeks  in  the  Shenandoah  valley  and  on  the  line  of 
the  Eappahannock,  and  the  absence  of  Jackson  in  the  mountains  of 
Western  Virginia,  where  he  was  still  supposed  to  be,  seem  to  have 
reassured  the  Federal  cabinet.^  On  May  17  the  following  order  was 
sent  to  McDowell : 

"  General  : — Upon  being  joined  by  Shields's  division  you  will 
move  upon  Richmond  by  the  general  route  of  the  Richmond  and 
Fredericksburg  railroad,  co-operating  with  the  forces  under  Gen. 
McClellan,  now  threatening  Richmond  from  the  line  of  the  Pamunkey 
and  York  rivers.  While  seeking  to  establish  as  soon  as  possible  a 
communication  between  your  left  wing  and  the  right  wing  of  Gen. 
McClellan,  you  will  hold  yourself  always  in  such  a  position  as  to 
cover  the  capital  of  the  nation  against  a  sudden  dash  by  any  large 
body  of  the  rebel  forces."^ 

The  transfer  of  Shields's  forces  from  Banks  to  McDowell  at 
Fredericksburg,  and  the  indications  of  an  advance  on  Richmond  from 
that  direction,  convinced  the  Confederate  authorities  that  no  time  was 
to  be  lost  in  meeting  this  new  danger.  For  weeks  they  had  watched 
with  anxiety  the  army  gathering  at  Fredericksburg,  as  well  as  the 
movements  of  Gen.  Banks.  The  forces  of  McDowell,  moving  down 
from  the  north  on  Richmond,  cutting  the  railroads  that  united  that 
city  with  the  great  Valley  and  Western  Virginia,  and  joining  the 
splendid  army  under  McClellan,  which  was  advancing  from  the  east 
upon  it,  threatened  the  most  serious  consequences,  and  was  to  be  pre- 
vented if  possible.  The  burden  of  Gen.  Lee's'  despatches  to  Gens. 
Jackson  and  Ewell  for  some  time  past  had  been  to  strike  Banks,  and 

^  This  confidence  was  no  doubt  increased  by  the  falling  back  of  the  Con- 
federate army  from  Yorktown  on  the  3d  of  May,  the  battle  of  Williamsburg 
on  the  5th,  and  the  subsequent  advance  of  McClellan  to  the  line  of  the  Chick- 
ahominy. 

^  President  Lincoln  would  not  allow  McDowell  to  join  McClellan  by  way  of 
the  Peninsula,  but  adopted  the  middle  course  by  ordering  the  former  to  advance 
on  Richmond  by  way  of  the  Fredericksburg  and  Richmond  railroad.  By  this 
route  McDowell  would  still  be  between  Washington  and  the  enemy,  and  it  was 
thought  could  unite  with  McClellan's  right  wing  in  four  days.  (See  McClellan's 
report,  p.  565.) 

^  Gen.  Lee  was  acting  as  commander-in-chief  under  President  Davis  at  this 
time. 


gg  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

thus  prevent  his  reinforcing  McDowell  or  McClellan,  and  possibly 
caase  the  recall  of  troops  to  his  aid.  If  no  chance  offered  for  this, 
and  he  moved  towards  Fredericksburg,  Ewell  was  to  go  to  the  assist- 
ance of  the  Confederate  troops  before  that  town.  Thus,  on  JMay  8, 
while  Jackson  was  fighting  at  McDowell,  Gen.  Lee  writes  Ewell  that 
there  is  no  necessity  for  his  remaining  at  Swift  Run  gap  if  Banks  is 
retreating,  and  if  the  latter  is  making  towards  Fredericksburg,  Ewell 
is  to  try  to  strike  him  while  en  route.  On  the  12th,  Gen.  Lee  ap- 
proves of  Ewell  remaining  at  Swift  Kun  gap  "  so  long  as,  the  enemy 
remains  stationary  in  the  Valley,  or  while  it  is  necessary  to  the  move- 
ments of  Gen.  Jackson."  On  the  14th,  Gen.  Lee's  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, Col.  Taylor,  -wTites  to  Jackson  congratulating  him  on 
his  victory  (at  McDowell),  and  says  Lee  is  "  of  opinion  that  Banks 
cannot  be  as  strong  as  he  has  been  represented ;  if  so,  his  course  is 
inexplicable.  He  thinks  that  if  you  can  form  a  junction  with  Gen. 
Ewell,  that  with  your  combined  forces  you  would  be  able  to  drive 
Banks  from  the  Valley."  On  the  14th,  Gen.  Lee  was  informed  by 
Ewell  of  the  movement  of  Shields's  division  towards  Front  Royal, 
and  on  the  16th  writes  to  Jackson:  "Whatever  may  be  Banks's  inten- 
tion, it  is  very  desirable  to  prevent  him  from  going  either  to  Freder- 
icksburg or  to  the  Peninsula,  and  also  to  destroy  the  Manassas  road. 
A  successful  blow  struck  at  him  would  delay,  if  it  did  not  prevent, 
his  moving  to  either  place,  and  might  also  lead  to  the  recall  of  the 
reinforcements  sent  to  Fremont  (Blenker's  division)  from  "Winchester, 
as  reported  by  you.  Gen.  Ewell  telegraphed  yesterday  that  in  pur- 
suance of  instructions  from  you  he  was  moving  down  the  Valley.  .  .  . 
But  you  will  not,  in  any  demonstration  you  may  make  in  that  direc- 
tion, lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  it  may  become  necessary  for  you  to 
come  to  the  support  of  Gen.  Johnston.  .  .  .  Whatever  movement  you 
make  against  Banks  do  it  speedily,  and  if  successful,  drive  him  back 
towards  the  Potomac,  and  create  the  impression,  as  far  as  practicable, 
that  you  design  threatening  that  line." 

Gen.  Ewell  rode  across  the  Valley  to  confer  in  person  with  Gen. 
Jackson.  He  reached  Mount  Solon,  where  Jackson  was  encamped, 
on  Sunday  morning,  May  18,  and  these  two  officers  decided  upon  the 
plan  for  a  most  energetic  pursuit  of  Banks.  It  was  agreed  that  one 
of  Ewell's  brigades  (Taylor's  Louisianians),  which  constituted,  too,  the 
bulk  of  his  command,  should  march  from  Elk  Run  valley,  by  way 
of  Keezletown,  and  unite  with  Jackson  on  the  Valley  turnpike  at 
Sparta,  a  few  miles  south  of  New  Market,  while  the  remainder  of  his 
force  followed  the  course  of  the  south  fork  of  the  Shenandoah  to 


WINCHESTER.  89 

Luray.     Ewcll  returned  on  the  afternoon  of  the  18th  to  direct  the 
movement  of  his  troops.^ 

That  portion  of  the  great  Valley  of  Virginia,  called  the  Valley 
of  the  Shenandoah,  extends  in  a  southwesterly  direction  from  Har- 
per's Ferry,  where  the  Shenandoah  empties  into  the  Potomac,  to 
the  head-waters  of  the  former,  a  distance  of  about  one  hundred  and 
forty  miles.  It  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  Blue  Ridge  mountains, 
to  the  base  of  which  finally  gather  all  the  waters  of  the  Valley,  and 
on  the  west  by  the  North  mountain  and  other  ridges  which  run 
parallel  to  the  principal  range  of  the  Alleghanies.  The  width  varies 
from  twelve  to  twenty -four  miles.  An  important  subdivision  of  this 
Valley  exists  for  a  part  of  its  length.  Near  Front  Royal,  thirty-six  air- 
line miles  from  its  mouth,  the  Shenandoah  divides  into  t^vo  branches 
or  "  forks."  A  mountain  chain  called  the  Massanutton  rises  abruptly 
between  these  two  branches,  and  runs  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the 
Blue  Ridge  for  fifty  miles  to  the  southwest,  when  it  sinks,  as  sud- 
denly, into  the  general  level  at  a  point  a  few  miles  east  of  Harrison- 
burg. This  chain,  being  much  nearer  to  the  Blue  Ridge  than  to  the 
North  mountain,  divides  the  Valley  very  unequally.  The  western 
side,  or  main  Valley,  is  known  as  the  "  Valley"  simply,  while  the 
narrow  portion,  betw^een  the  Massanuttons  and  the  Blue  Ridge,  is 
called  tlie  Page^  or  Luray  valley.  The  north  fork,  which  is  the 
smaller  branch  of  the  Shenandoah,  rising  in  the  North  mountain, 
west  of  Harrisonburg,  drains  the  main  Valley  between  the  North 
and  Massaiiutton  ranges.  It  runs  for  some  distance  on  the  north- 
western side,  but  at  Mount  Jackson  crosses  to  the  base  of  the  Mas- 
sanutton  mountains,  which    it   follows   with   a   tortuous   course  to 

^  Two  days  after,  instructions  received  from  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  seemed  to 
Jackson  to  seriously  restrict  his  operations.  "We  find  the  following  telegram  in 
the  Confederate  archives,  Washington  : 

"  Camp  near  New  Market,  May  20, 
"ma  Staunton,  May  21, 
"Gen,  R.  E.  Lee: — I  am  of  the  opinion  that  an  attempt  should  be  made  to 
defeat  Banks,  but  under  instructions  just  received  from  Gen.  Johnston  I  do  not 
feel  at  liberty  to  make  an  attack.     Please  answer  by  telegraph  at  once. 

"  T.  J.  Jackson." 

The  reply  to  this,  and  the  letter  of  Gen.  Johnston  giving  the  instructions,  have 
not  been  found.  Gen,  Johnston  (p,  129  of  his  Narrative)  says  his  instructions 
to  Gen,  Jackson  "  were  to  advance  and  attack  unless  he  found  the  enemy  too 
strongly  intrenched."  It  was  perhaps  some  emphasis  on  the  last  clause  that 
made  the  instructions  appear  to  Jackson  to  hamper  him, 

^  "  Page"  is  the  name  of  the  county  comprising  the  greater  part  of  this 
valley,  and  Luray  is  the  county-seat  of  Page. 

7 


90  CAMPAIGN  IN   TIIK    VALLFA'  OF    VIRGINIA,  18G1-G2. 

Strasburg,  where  it  finds  its  way  around  the  north  end  of  tliat  chain, 
and  finally  joins  the  south  fork  near  Front  lloyal.  The  south  fork, 
which  is  the  principal  river,  M'atei's  the  narnnv  Luray  valley.  As- 
cending this  stream  beyond  the  south  end  of  the  Massjunitton  moun- 
tains, we  find  that  it  again  branches  at  and  near  Port  Republic. 
Three  streams — the  North,  ISIiddle,  and  South  rimvH — constitute  the 
liead-waters  of  the  principal  fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  and,  spreading 
over  the  whole  width  of  the  Valley  from  the  Blue  Ridge  to  the 
North  mountain,  drain  the  upjxn-  part  of  Rockingham  and  nearly  the 
whole  of  Augusta  county.  The  two  first  named  unite  three  or  four 
miles  southwest  of  Port  Republic,  and  the  South  river,  having  found 
its  way  along  the  base  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  joins  the  others  at  that 
village. 

The  principal  means  of  communication  between  Staunton  and  Win- 
chester was,  then,  the  Valley  turnpike,  an  excellent  macadamized 
road,  which  passes  through  Harrisonburg,  New  Market,  Blount 
Jackson,  and  Strasburg.  Leaving  Staunton,  it  crosses,  by  wooden 
bridges,  the  ]\Iiddle  and  North  rivers  before  reaching  Harrisonburg, 
and  the  north  fork  of  the  Shenandoah  at  INlount  Jackson.  Common 
dirt  roads  run  jiarallel  to  it  for  the  greater  jjart  of  its  length.  From 
New  INIarket  a  turnpike  leads  at  right  angles  over  the  Massanuttou 
mountains,  crosses  the  south  or  main  Jork  of  the  Shenandoah  at 
White-House  bridge,  passes  Luray,  and  crosses  the  Blue  Ridge  by 
Thornton's  gap,  to  Sperryville  and  Culpeper.  An  unpaved  road 
runs  down  the  Luray  valley  from  Port  Republic  to  Front  Royal, 
and  from  the  latter  point  a  good  turnpike  leads  to  Winchester,  and 
ungraded  country  roads  to  Strasburg,  IMiddletown,  and  other  places 
on  the  Valley  turnpike.  From  AVinchester  excellent  macadamized 
roads  leatl  to  Harper's  Ferry,  and  through  Martinsburg  to  AA^illiams- 
port,  on  the  Potomac.  (Maps  Nos.  1.  and  VI.) 

At  Strasburg,  going  northward,  just  before  the  principal  and  Luray 
valleys  unite,  the  principal  valley  contracts  in  width,  in  consequence 
of  the  approach  of  the  North  and  ISIassanutton  mountains.  The  latter 
is  here  three  parallel  ranges,  containing  between  them  two  small  val- 
leys known  as  Powell's  Big  Fort  valley  and  Powell's  Little  Fort 
valley.  At  this  part  of  the  principal  valley  the  country  is  broken 
and  cut  up  by  deep  ravines,  and  the  heights  around  aiford  good 
defensive  positions.  Here  it  Avas  that  Gen.  Banks  had  taken  posi- 
tion, his  pickets  being  thrown  out  a  few  miles  towards  AVoodstock. 
He  deemed  his  force  sufficient  to  resist  any  attack  in  front  that  was 
likely  to  be  made,  and,  besides,  believed  Jaclcson  to  be  fully  occupied 


WINCHESTER.  91 

with  Fremont,  whose  forces  were  now  concentrated  in  the  mountains  ^ 
about  Franklin.      He  had  sent  Col.  Kenly  with  about  a  thousand 
men  to  hold  Front  Royal,  but  this  was  not  so  much  to  guard  against 
a  flank  attack  as  to  protect  the  stores  at  that  point,  and  the  railroad  y 
and  the  bridges  over  the  Shenandoah,  from  a  dash  of  cavalry  or  the 
depredations  of  guerrillas.     He  saw  no  indications  of  a  serious  attack  ^ 
upon  his  position. 

Jackson  left  Mossy  creek  on  Monday  morning,  the  19th,  and  moved 
forward  rapidly  towards  New  Market.  He  reached  this  point  next 
day,  having  been  joined  en  route  by  Taylor's  brigade  of  Ewell's 
division.  Ashby  had  already  occupied  the  Valley  below  this  point 
upon  the  withdrawal  of  Shields  and  the  retreat  of  Banks  to  Stras- 
burg.  Gen.  Jackson  says:  "To  conceal  my  movements  as  far  as  pos-  a 
sible  from  the  enemy,  Brig.-Gen.  Ashby,  who  had  remained  in  front 
of  Banks  during  the  march  against  Milroy,  was  directed  to  continue 
to  hold  that  position  until  the  following  day,  when  he  was  to  join  the 
main  body,  leaving,  however,  a  covering  force  sufficient  to  prevent 
information  of  our  movements  crossing;  our  lines."  Having:  taken 
these  steps  to  keep  the  enemy  in  ignorance,  Jackson,  on  the  21st, 
turned  off  at  New  Market  to  the  right,  on  the  way  to  Luray.  He 
crossed  the  Massanutton  mountains,  and  the  south  fork  of  the  Shen- 
andoah at  White-House  bridge.  Here  he  met  Gen.  Ewell  -svith  the 
other  brigades  of  his  division,  which  had  marched  down  the  Luray 
valley,  and  encamped  at  the  eastern  entrance  of  the  New  Market  gap 
of  the  Massanuttons.  (Map  No.  V.) 

Ewell's  division  consisted  of  the  brigades  of  Taylor  (Sixth,  Seventh, 
Eighth,  and  Ninth  Louisiana  regiments,  and  Wheat's  battalion),  Trim- 
ble (Twenty-first  North  Carolina,  Twenty-first  Georgia,  Fifteenth 
Alabama,  and  Sixteenth  ISIississippi),  and  Elzey  (Thirteenth  Virginia 
and  First  Maryland),^  of  Courtenay's  (six-gun)  and  Brockenbrough's 
(four-gun)  batteries-,  and  of  the  Second  and  Sixth  Virginia  cavalry, 

^  On  the  21st  of  May  the  First  Maryland  and  Brockenbrough's  battery  were 
constituted  the  "  Maryland  Line,"  intended  as  the  nucleus  of  a  brigade  to  be 
commanded  by  Gen.  George  II.  Steuart,  who  had  been  recently  commissioned 
by  the  Confederate  government  to  collect  the  Maryland  troops  into  one  body. 
Elzey  was  put  in  command  of  a  brigade  composed  of  the  Thirteenth  Virginia 
regiment  and  three  of  Gen.  Edward  Johnson's  regiments  (Twelfth  Georgia 
and  Thirty-first  and  Twenty-fifth  Virginia  regiments).  The  remaining  three 
regiments  of  Johnson  (Forty-fourth,  Fifty-second,  and  Fifty-eighth  Virginia) 
continued  under  command  of  Col.  Scott,  of  the  Forty-fourth  Virginia,  until 
early  in  June,  when,  on  the  retreat  from  Strasburg,  they  were  united  with  the 
other  troops  under  Steuart,  and  were  commanded  by  him  at  Cross  Keys. 


92  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV  OF    VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

under  Cols.  Munford  and  Flournoy.  This  division  numbered,  in- 
cluding the  cavalry,  about  eight  thousand  (8000),  and  increased 
Jackson's  effective  force  to  some  sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand  (16,000 
or  17,000)  men,  with  eleven  batteries,  containing  forty-eight  (48) 
guns.^ 

^  I  have  been  able  to  6nd  no  complete  returns  of  Ewell's,  Jackson's,  or  John- 
son's forces  for  the  period  between  March  and  July,  1862,  in  the  Confeder- 
ate archives ;  hence  the  Confederate  strength  has  been  deduced  from  various 
data. 

I.  Gen.  Ewell  writes  to  Gen.  Lee,  April  16  (see  letter  on  file  among  Confed- 
erate archives):  "This  division  numbered,  on  the  12th,  6500  men  aggregate. 
Large  accessions  have  been  and  are  coming  in,  and  the  strength  is  now  some- 
what over  8000,  exclusive  of  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  mounting  over  500  men. 
I  have  14  pieces  of  artillery." 

In  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston's  return  for  February  28,  Ewell's  division  (the  Third) 
is  given  as:  effective,  4918;  total,  5251  ;  aggregate,  5598. 

"Effective"'  means  all  the  privates  and  non-commissioned  officers  present  for 
duty;  "total,"  all  the  privates  and  non-commissioned  officers  jjrese?!^,  including 
those  sick,  in  arrest,  and  on  extra  duty ;  "  aggregate,"  all  the  officers  and  men 
present.  The  difference  between  the  "  total"  and  the  "  aggregate"  equals  all  the 
officers  present,  both  for  duty  and  sick,  etc.  The  real  strength  for  action  is  to 
be  gotten  by  adding  to  the  "  effective"  strength  the  officers  "  present  for  duty." 
The  above  return  does  not  give  this  last,  but  it  was  of  course  less  than  347 
(the  difference  between  "total"  and  "aggregate").  The  difference  between 
"  effective"  and  "  total"  (equal  333  above)  represents  the  men  sick,  on  extra  duty, 
or  in  arrest,  and  was  equal  to  about  six  per  cent,  of  the  aggregate.  Now  de- 
ducting from  Ewell's  aggregate  (8000)  for  April  16,  six  per  cent,  for  sick,  etc., 
we  have,  say  7500,  for  his  effective  strength,  including  all  officers  present  at  that 
time.  Add  the  cavalry,  and  we  get  the  8000  estimated  in  the  text.  Between 
the  16th  of  April  and  the  middle  of  May,  Ewell  lost  Bowyer's  battery,  ordered 
elsewhere,  and  the  Tenth  Virginia  regiment,  transferred  to  Taliaferro's  brigade, 
of  Jackson's  division ;  but  I  suppose  these  losses  to  have  been  made  up  by  men 
joining.  (This  estimate  of  the  strength  of  Ewell's  division  agrees  with  that  fur- 
nished me  by  Maj.  G.  Campbell  Brown,  of  Spring  Hill,  Tennessee,  then  assistant 
adjutant-general  on  Gen.  Ewell's  staff.) 

II.  Gen.  Edward  Johnson's  return  for  February,  1862,  shows  his  officers  and 
men  then  present  for  duty  to  have  been  2418,  and  a  letter  of  his,  dated  March 
18,  reports  his  "  present  for  duty"  at  that  time  as  2425. 

In  a  letter  of  Gen.  Lee  to  Jackson,  April  29,  he  speaks  of  Gen.  Edward  John- 
son as  having  a  "  present  force  of  upwards  of  3500,"  and  Col.  A.  Smead,  assistant 
adjutant-general  to  Gen.  Johnson,  says  that  the  latter  had  an  effective  strength 
of  3000  at  McDowell.  Deducting  the  losses  at  that  Vjattle,  the  total  strength 
of  this  brigade  may  have  been  about  3000  at  the  middle  of  May. 

III.  Jackson's  division  consisted  of  three  brigades,  containing  eleven  and  a 
half  regiments  of  infantry,  five  batteries  of  artillery,  and  Ashby's  cavalry.  Five 
of  these  regiments  were  in  the  "  Stonewall"  (Winder's)  brigade.  The  strength 
of  this  brigade  at  Winchester,  on  May  25,  was  1529,  rank  and  file,  and  adding  in 


WINCHESTER.  93 

On  Thursday,  tlie  22cl,  the  Confederates  moved  quietly  down  the 
Luray  valley  in  the  direction  of  Front  Royal,  and  Ewell's  division, 
which  was  in  advance,  bivouacked  at  night  ten  miles  from  the  latter 
place.  Next  morning  Jackson  made  his  dispositions  to  attack  and 
capture  the  force  stationed  at  Front  Royal.  In  order  to  get  as  close 
as  possible  without  being  discovered,  he  diverted  the  head  of  his 
column  from  the  main  road^  to  the  right  until  it  reached  the  Gooney 
Manor  road,  at  Mrs.  King's,  by  which  he  approached  the  town  from 
the  south  instead  of  the  southwest,  and  was  in  a  better  position  to 
prevent  the  enemy's  retreat  by  way  of  Manassas  gap.  At  the  same 
time  the  cavalry  under  Ashby  and  Flom-noy,  leaving  the  main  col- 
umn at  Spangler's  cross-roads,  were  sent  across  the  south  fork  of  the 
Shenandoah,  at  McCoy's  ford,  to  destroy  railroad  and  telegraphic  ^_ 
communication  between  Front  Royal  and  Strasburg,  and  to  prevent 
reinforcements  being  sent  from  the  latter  place.  This  done,  Flour- 
noy,  with  the  Second  and  Sixth  regiments  of  Virginia  cavalry,  was 
to  move  down  between  the  rivers  to  take  the  enemy  in  flank  and 
rear  if  they  should  retreat  towards  Winchester  or  Strasburg.^ 

officers,  it  could  not  have  exceeded  1700  in  all,  or  an  average  of  340  per  regiment. 
Col.  Campbell's  brigade  of  three  and  a  half  regiments  in  the  same  division 
numbered,  officers  and  men  present  for  duty,  April  1,  1391,  an  average  strength 
of  nearly  400  per  regiment.  Taking  the  larger  average,  the  division  may  have 
contained  say  4600  infantry,  and  adding  from  300  to  400  for  artillery,  and  say 
700  for  cavalry  (Ashby  had  twenty-three  companies),  Jackson's  division,  in- 
cluding his  cavalry,  must  have  numbered  about  5500  or  6000.  The  sum  of  his 
forces  then  did  not  exceed  17,000  men.  Dr.  Dabney  (then  adjutant-general  to  ^ 
Gen.  Jackson)  puts  his  force  at  16,000  men,  and  so  does  Gen.  Banks,  in  a  tele- 
gram to  his  government  dated  May  21.     (See  below.) 

^  At  Asbury  Chapel,  four  and  one-half  miles  from  Front  Royal.  At  this  point 
the  main  road  approaches  the  river  and  runs  along  under  the  river  bluffs  for 
some  three  miles.  At  the  Front  Royal  end  of  this  defile,  and  about  a  mile  from 
the  town,  was  stationed  the  principal  Federal  picket. 

^  Banks  telegraphed  his  government,  May  21 :  "  My  force  at  Strasburg  is  4476 
infantry  (two  brigades),  2600  cavalry,  10  Parrott  guns,  and  6  smooth-bore.  On 
the  Manassas  railroad,  between  Strasburg  and  Manassas,  2500  infantry,  6  com-  1 
panics  of  cavalry,  and  6  guns.  There  are  five  companies  cavalry  of  First 
Maine  near  Strasburg,  belonging  to  Col.  Miles's  command.  Jackson  is  within 
eight  miles  of  Harrisonburg.  He  and  Ewell  have  16,000  men  together." 
(Federal  official  telegrams.) 

The  Federal  troops  concerned  in  Banks's  operations  were  distributed  as 
follows.  May  23 : 

At  Strasburg : 

2  brigades  of  infantry 4,476 

Hatch's  and  Broadhead's  cavalry 2,600 


94  CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,   1861-G2. 

The  First  Maryland  regiment,  Col.  Bradley  T.  Johnson,  and 
Wheat's  Louisiana  battalion  of  five  companies,  were  thrown  forward 
as  the  advance  of  the  infantry,  and  they  were  supported  by  the 
remainder  t)f  Taylor's  brigade.  No  o[)position  was  met  with,  and  no 
pickets  found,  until  about  2  p.m.,  when  the  Confederates,  under  John- 
son and  Wheat,  had  reached  the  innnediate  vicinity  of  the  town. 
Here,  about  one  and  a  half  miles  from  the  village,  Col.  Kenly's 
infantry  pickets  were  placed.  They  w^ere  driven  in  and  rapidly 
followed  up.  Two  companies  of  Kenly's  regiment  were  supporting 
the  pickets,  and  one  company  occupied  the  town.  Another  company 
was  on  detached  service,  guarding  the  Manassas  railroad  at  Linden 
station,  some  distance  off.  The  remaining  six  were  in  camp  on  a  hill 
on  the  Front  Royal  side  of  the  river,  near  the  bridge.  Col.  Kenly 
had  also  a  section  of  Knapp's  battery, — two  ten-pounder  Parrotts, — 
in  camp,  while  two  companies  of  the  Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania 
infantry  were  stationed  between  the  rivers  to  protect  the  railroad 


5  companies  First  Maine  cavalry 300^- 

3  companies  artillery,  16  guns 280^ 

At  bridge  near  Strasburg : 

1  company  of  Second  Massachusetts  regiment         .        .        .         60' 

At  Buckton : 

1  company  of  Twenty-seventh  Indiana  and  1  company  Third 
Wisconsin 100* 

At  Front  Royal : 

9  companies  First  Maryland  infantry  >. 

2  companies  Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania      I  qqqs 
Mapes's  pioneers  (56  men)                                ( 

2  guns  Knapp's  battery  (38  men)  J 

At  Linden  Station  : 

1  company  of  First  Maryland  infantry 80 

At  Winchester: 

Tenth  Maine  infantry       ........        856* 

5  companies  Maryland  cavalry  (estimated)       ....        300  ' 

5  companies  Eighth  New  York  cavalry  (estimated)  .         .        300'' 

10,252 

The  troops  at  Winchester  and  the  First  Maine  cavalry  belonged  to  Col.  Miles's 
command.     Col.  Miles  was  at  Harper's  Ferry. 


1  Estimated.  *  Banks's  return,  May  1. 

3  Estimated  from  Gen.  Gordon's  report.  *  Estimated  from  Gen.  Gordon's  report. 

*  Camper  and  Kirkley. 

6  This  regiment  lost  83  on  the  25th,  and  had  773  at  Williamsport  on  May  31. 

■f  Arrived  at  Winchester  on  May  24. 


WINCHESTER.  95 

bridges.  The  two  companies  supporting  the  picket  and  the  one  in 
the  town  were  soon  driven  back,  and  a  charge  by  the  Confederates 
sent  them  through  the  town  in  haste  to  join  their  main  body.  This 
they  did,  witli  the  loss  of  eighteen  or  twenty  killed,  wounded  and 
captured. 

Col.  Kenly  quickly  posted  his  guns  and  the  main  body  of  his 
regiment  on  a  "  commanding  height"  ^  to  the  right  of  the  turnpike 
which  leads  from  Front  Royal  to  Winchester,  and  near  his  camp,  and 
disposed  a  portion  of  his  force  to  protect  his  flanks.  During  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  fight  at  this  point  he  was  joined  by  two  companies  of 
the  Fifth  New  York  cavalry,  which  had  just  arrived  from  Strasburg. 
Here  he  made  a  spirited  resistance  for  a  time.  His  artillery  was  well 
served,  and  his  infantry  kept  up  a  steady  fire.  The  Confederates  had 
in  the  advance  no  rifled  artillery,  and  it  was  some  time  before  an 
effective  fire  could  be  made  upon  the  Federal  position.  At  length 
Col.  Crutchfield,  chief  of  artillery  for  Jaclvson,  got  three  guns — one 
of  them  rifled — into  position,  and  replied  to  the  Federal  battery.  But 
the  Confederate  infantry  had  not  waited  for  this.  The  Sixth  Louisiana 
was  sent  to  the  Confederate  left,  through  some  woods,  to  flank  the 
enemy's  battery,  while  Maj.  Wheat  and  Col.  Johnson  (the  latter's 
troops  all  excitement  when  they  found  their  opponents  to  be  from 
the  same  State)  pressed  forward  in  front  with  the  greatest  ardor. 
Meantime,  Col.  Flournoy,  with  his  cavalry,  was  moving  down  between 
the  rivers,  and  threatening  the  Federal  rear.  Col.  Kenly,  seeing  him- 
self about  to  be  surrounded,  did  not  await  the  infantry  attacks  in 
front,  but  retreated  rapidly  across  the  two  rivers,  having  set  fire  to  his 
camp  and  attempted  to  burn  the  bridges.  Though  he  failed  in  this 
last  attempt,  he  succeeded  in  doing  sufficient  damage  to  the  bridge 
over  the  North  Fork  to  impede  the  Confederates.  The  Federal  com- 
mander made  a  further  attempt  to  check  his  pursuers  on  the  hill — 
known  as  Guard  hill — overlooking  the  North  Fork,  but  a  few  shells 
from  Lusk's  battery,  and  the  approach  of  the  forces  in  pursuit,  caused 
him  speedily  to  retreat.^  Leaving  the  two  New  York  cavaliy  com- 
panies to  cover  the  rear,  he  hurried  the  artillery  and  infantry  forward 
on  the  Winchester  road.     The  damage  to  the  bridge  detained  the 

^  Jackson's  report.  This  is  a  cherty  ridge,  some  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet 
above  the  river,  that  extends  to  the  northeast  of  the  turnpike.  It  lies  between 
the  south  fork  of  the  Shenandoah  and  Happy  creek. 

*  Mr.  Kirkley  says  that  "the  river  below  was  alive  with  (Confederate)  horse- 
men crossing  in  two  different  places  by  fording."  (History  of  First  Maryland 
Infantry,  Federal.) 


96  CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV  OF    VIRGINIA,  1801-03. 

Confedcnitcs  for  a  little  while,  but  Col.  Floiirnoy  at  last  suooceded  in 
getting  four  companies  of  his  cavalry  regiment  over,  and  Gen.  Jack- 
son, without  waiting  for  more,  dashed  with  this  force  up  the  turnpike 
after  the  retreating  enemy.  They  were  soon  overtaken.  Flournoy 
was  at  once  ordered  to  charge  the  New  York  cavalrj^,  which  constituted 
the  rear  guard.  These  last  make  but  a  feeble  resistance,  are  soon 
thrown  into  confusion  and  routed,  and  now  demoralized,  take  to 
flight.  Col.  Kenly,  learning  that  the  cavalry  are  being  hard  pressed, 
has  meantime  halted  his  infantry  and  artillery,  ordering  the  latter  to 
hold  the  road,  and  forming  his  infantry  in  the  fields  on  each  side. 
But  the  Confederates,  under  Jackson's  own  guidance,  and  inspired  by 
his  enthusiasm,  do  not  stop.  Company  B,  Capt.  Grimsby,  charges 
directly  up  the  turnpike,  supported  by  Company  E,  Capt.  Flournoy, 
on  the  left,  and  Companies  A  and  K,  Capts.  Dulaney  and  Baxter,  on 
the  right.  The  Federal  lines  do  not  stand  the  charge.  They  are 
broken  and  thrown  into  confusion.  Col.  Kenly  makes  another  gallant 
effort  to  stay  the  disaster.  He  reforms  a  portion  of  his  command  a 
little  to  the  rear,  in  an  orchard,  on  the  east  side  of  the  turnpike,  and 
makes  a  last  desperate  struggle  to  check  defeat.  But  it  is  in  vain. 
His  troops  are  thoroughly  demoralized  by  the  events  of  the  day. 
The  cavalry  is  flying  in  confusion  to  the  rear, — the  artillery  is  trying 
to  get  away.  The  panic-struck  Federal  soldiers  magnify  Col.  Flour- 
noy's  four  companies  of  cavalry  into  an  army.  The  latter  dash  among 
them  with  the  boldness  of  assured  victory.  Col.  Kenly's  personal 
efforts  to  restore  order  only  result  in  his  falling  desperately  wounded. 
The  rout  quickly  becomes  hopeless  and  complete.  The  Confederates 
ride  around  the  broken  infantry  on  every  side.  The  mass,  seeing  no 
chance  of  escape,  throw  down  their  arms  and  surrender.  By  this 
time  two  more  of  Flournoy's  companies  (D  and  I)  have  reached  the 
field,  and  they  join  in  pursuit  of  the  Federal  cavalry,  wagons,  and 
artillery.  One  gun  is  overhauled  near  the  field.  The  wagon-train 
soon  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  victors.  Scattered  cavalrymen  are 
picked  up  along  the  road.  The  Confederates  continue  to  chase  the 
fugitives  until  within  four  miles  of  AYinchester.  There  they  find 
the  other  Parrott  gun  abandoned  in  the  road,  and  two  of  the  Con- 
federates take  some  plough-horses  from  a  field  and  bring  it  back  with 
them. 

The  victory  is  complete.  The  Federal  loss  is  thirty-two  (32)  killed, 
one  hundred  and  twenty-two  (122)  wounded,  and  seven  hundred  and 
fifty  (750)  prisoners;  total,  nine  hundred  and  four  (904),  by  the  report 
of  the  Federal  surgeon-general.     The  historians  of  the  First  Mary- 


WINCHESTER.  97 

land  regiment^  (Federal)  make  it  nineteen  (19)  killed,  sixty-three 
(63)  wounded,  and  six  hundred  and  ninety-one  (691)  prisoners;  total, 
seven  hundred  and  seventy-three  (773).  The  Confederate  loss  is 
thirty-six  (36)  killed  and  wounded.^  Gen.  Banks  reports  Kenly's 
force  present  for  duty  as  about  nine  hiuidred  (900)  men,  though  Capt. 
Smith  and  other  officers  present  of  the  First  Maryland  regiment 
(Federal)  put  the  force  at  one  thousand  and  sixty-three  (1063).^  Not 
over  one  hundred  and  thirty  (130)  have  escaped  under  cover  of  the 
woods,  for  on  the  28th,  Capt.  Smith  reports  but  eight  (8)  officers  and 
one  hundred  and  twenty  (120)  men  present.  The  scene  of  this  en- 
gagement is  near  Cedarville,  a  small  village  about  five  miles  from 
Front  Royal,  where  an  ungraded  road  leaves  the  Winchester  turnpike 
and  leads  to  Middletown  on  the  Valley  turnpike.  (Map  No.  VT.) 
The  credit  of  the  final  overthrow  of  Col.  Kenly's  command  lies 
entirely  \n\h.  Flournoy's  cavalry.  The  advance  of  the  Confederate 
infantry  and  artillery,  jaded  by  the  day's  long  march,  was  not  able  to 
come  up  with  the  enemy  until  the  fight  was  over,  while  the  mass  of 
the  Confederate  forces  only  reached  Front  Royal  at  nightfall.^ 

"  While  these  occurrences  were  in  progress,  Gen.  Ashby,  who,  after 
crossing  at  McCoy's  ford,  had  moved  with  his  command  farther  to 

^  "Historical  Record  of  First  Maryland  Regiment  of  Infantry,"  Camper  and 
Kirkley.     Some  of  the  wounded  are  included  also  among  the  prisoners. 

^  Jackson's  report. 

'  Company  E,  of  Kenly's  regiment,  on  guard  duty  at  Linden  station,  was  not 
present.  Capt.  Smith  and  other  officers  of  the  First  Maryland  regiment,  who 
escaped,  report  officially  on  May  28  that  the  troops  at  Front  Royal  were  as  fol- 
lows :  nine  companies  First  Maryland,  containing  775  available  rank  and  file ; 
two  companies  Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania,  containing  about  120  men ;  Mapes's 
pioneers,  40  men ;  the  New  York  cavalry  detachment,  90  men ;  artillery,  38 
men ;  total,  10G3.  Of  these,  as  above  stated,  but  8  officers  and  120  men  had 
reported  up  to  the  date  of  the  report. 

*  Dabney  says:  "At  the  time  of  the  combat  of  Front  Royal  the  duty  of 
couriers  was  performed  for  Gen.  Jackson  by  a  detachment  from  one  of  Ashby's 
undisciplined  companies,  of  whom  many  were  raw  youths  just  recruited,  and 
never  under  fire.  As  soon  as  the  first  Federal  picket  was  driven  in,  and  free 
access  to  the  village  won,  orders  were  despatched  to  the  rear  "brigades  to  avoid 
the  laborious  and  circuitous  route  taken  by  the  advance,  and  to  pursue  the  direct 
highway  to  the  town,  a  level  tract  of  three  miles,  in  place  of  a  precipitous  one 
of  seven  or  eight.  The  panic-struck  boy,  by  whom  the  orders  were  sent,  thought 
of  notliing  but  to  hide  himself  from  the  dreadful  sound  of  the  cannon,  and  was 
seen  no  more."  As  a  consequence,  the  whole  of  Ewell's  division  followed  the 
advance  and  made  the  long  circuit,  only  reaching  Cedarville  at  dark.  Jackson's 
division,  however,  followed  the  main  road,  but,  after  a  march  of  twenty-four 
miles  from  Luray,  camped  at  Front  Royal. 


98_         CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    V ALL  FA'  OF    VIRGINIA,   1S61-G.?. 

tlie  west,  so  as  to  skirt  the  hiise  of  the  Massunutton  inountiiins,  ctime 
suddenly  upon  the  infantry  guard,  consisting  of  two  comjianies 
(Davis's,  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Indiana,  and  IIubl)ard's,  of  the  Third 
Wiseonsin)  that  had  l)een  posted  at  and  near  liuckton  for  the  ]n'o- 
tection  of  tlie  raih'oad.  This  force,  liowever,  quickly  threw  them- 
selves into  the  depot  building,  and  Mr.  Jenkins's  hoase  and  stable, 
and  from  this  cover  maintained  a  very  spirited  contest  Avith  the  Con- 
federate cavalry,  in  which  fell  Capts.  Sheets  and  Fletcher,  two  of  the 
best  of  Ashby's  officers.  The  Federals  were  finally  overpowered  and 
dispersed,  and  the  railroad  track  was  torn  u[).' 

"  The  result  of  this  first  day's  operations  was  the  capture  of  about 
seven  hundred  (700)  prisoners,  among  them  about  twenty  officers,  a 
complete  section  of  rifled  artillery  (ten-pounder  Parrotts),  and  a  very 
large  amount  of  quartermaster  and  commissary  stores.^  The  fruits 
of  the  movement  were  not  restricted  to  the  stores  and  prisoners  cap- 
tured :  the  enemy's  flank  was  turned,  and  the  road  opened  to  AViu- 
chester."' 

^  Jackson's  movements  took  Gen.  Banks,  who  was  at  Strasburg, 
entirely  by  surprise.  The  first  information  he  received  of  the  appear- 
ance of  this  strong  force  on  his  flank  was  from  Col.  Kenlv,  who, 
finding  the  telegraph  cut,  had  sent  a  courier  in  the  earlier  stages  of 
the  fight,  before  he  had  fallen  back  over  the  Shenandoah,  to  report 
to  Banks  the  overwhelming  attack  that  was  being  made  upon  him.* 

^  See  Gordon's  "History  of  the  Second  Massachusetts  Regiment,"  Third 
Paper,  pp.  79-81. 

^  The  quartermaster  and  commissary  supplies  referred  to  (except  the  train  of 
Kenly's  command)  were  chiefly  stored  in  the  railroad  depot  and  an  adjoining 
store-house  at  Front  Royal.  They  were  so  great  in  amount  and  value  as  to  be 
estimated  by  the  Confederate  quartermasters  as  worth  three  hundred  tliousand 
dollars.  They  were  only  partially  removed  before  the  recapture  of  the  town,  a 
week  later,  by  the  advance  of  Gen.  Shields's  division,  when  the  remainder  were 
burned  by  the  retiring  Confederates.  (See  Maj.  John  A.  Ilarman's  official  re- 
port.    Maj.  Ilarman  was  chief  quartermaster  for  Gen.  Jackson.) 

'  Jackson's  report. 

*  The  following  account  by  Col.  Kenly's  courier  is  found  in  "  Rebellion 
Record,"  vol.  v..  Incidents,  p.  22: 

"WiLLiAMSPORT,  Md.,  May  26,  1862. 

"Dear  Father  and  Mother: — You  have  probably  heard  by  this  time  of  the 
three  days'  fighting  from  Strasburg  and  Front  Royal  to  Martinsburg.  Our  com- 
pany and  Company  B  were  ordered  to  Front  Royal,  in  the  mountains,  twelve 
miles  from  Strasburg,  last  Friday,  and  when  we  got  within  two  miles  of  our 
destination  we  heard  cannonading.  The  major  ordered  the  baggage  to  stop,  and 
our  two  companies  dashed  on,  and  found  several  companies  of  our  infantry  and 
two  pieces  of  artillery  engaged  with  several  thousand  of  the  enemy.  Just  as 
we  arrived  on  the  field,  Col.  Parem,  who  had  command  of  our  forces,  rode  up  to 


WINCHESTER.  99 

Gen.  Banks  says :  "  Information  was  received  on  the  evening  of  May 
23  that  the  enemy  in  very  large  force  had  descended  on  the  guard 
at  Front  Royal  (Col.  Kenly,  First  Maryland  regiment,  commanding), 
burning  the  bridges  and  driving  our  troops  towards  Strasburg  with 
great  loss.  Owing;  to  Avhat  was  deemed  an  extravagant  statement  of 
the  enemy's  strength,  these  reports  were  received  with  some  distrust ; 
but  a  regiment  of  infantry,  with  a  strong  detachment  of  cavalry  and 
a  section  of  artillery,  were  immediately  sent  to  reinforce  Col.  Kenly."* 

The  statement  that  a  large  force  was  at  Front  Royal  evidently 
seemed  incredible  to  the  Federal  commander,  who  took  steps  to 
reinforce  Col.  Kenly  as  if  against  a  dash  of  cavalry  or  a  raid  of 
guerrillas. 

Gen.  Banks  continues :  "  Later  in  the  evening  despatches  from  fugi- 
tives who  had  escaped  to  Winchester  informed  us  that  Col.  Kenly's 
force  had  been  destroyed,  with  but  few  exceptions,  and  the  enemy, 
fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  (15,000  or  20,000)  strong,  were  advancing 
by  rapid  marches  on  Winchester. 

"  Orders  were  immediately  given  to  halt  the  reinforcements  sent  to 
Front  Royal,  which  had  moved  by  different  routes,  and  detachments 
of  troops  under  experienced  officers  were  sent  in  every  direction  to 
explore  the  roads  leading  from  Front  Royal  to  Strasburg,  Middle- 
town,  Newtown,  and  Winchester,  and  ascertain  the  force,  position, 
and  purpose  of  this  sudden  movement  of  the  enemy.  It  was  soon 
found  that  his  pickets  were  in  possession  of  every  road,  and  rumors 

me  and  ordered  me  to  take  one  man  and  the  two  fastest  horses  in  our  company, 
and  ride  for  dear  life  to  Gen.  Banks's  headquarters,  in  Strasburg,  for  reinforce- 
ments. The  direct  road  to  Strasburg  was  occupied  by  the  enemy,  so  I  was 
obliged  to  ride  round  by  another,  seventeen  miles.  I  rode  the  seventeen  miles  in 
fifty-five  minutes.  Gen.  Banks  didn't  seem  to  think  it  very  serious,  but  ordered 
one  regiment  of  infantry  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  off.  I  asked  Gen.  Banks  for  a 
fresh  horse  to  rejoin  my  company,  and  he  gave  me  the  best  horse  that  I  ever  rode, 
and  I  started  back.  I  came  out  on  the  Front  Royal  turnpike,  about  two  miles 
this  side  of  where  I  left  our  men.  Saw  two  men  standing  in  the  road  and  their 
horses  standing  by  the  fence.  I  supposed  they  were  our  pickets.  They  didn't 
halt  me,  so  I  asked  them  if  they  were  pickets.  They  said  no.  '  Who  are  you?' 
'  We  are  part  of  Gen.  Jackson's  staff.'  I  supposed  they  were  only  joking.  .  .  . 
I  left  them  and  rode  towards  Front  Royal,  till  I  overtook  a  soldier  and  asked 
him  what  regiment  he  belonged  to.  He  said  he  belonged  to  the  Eighth  Louisi- 
ana. ...  I  turned  back.  .  .  .  The  officers  in  the  road  did  not  stop  me,  and  I 
was  lucky  enough  not  to  meet  any  of  their  pickets.  .  .  .  When  I  got  out  of  the 
enemy's  lines  I  rode  as  fast  as  the  horse  could  carry  me  to  Gen.  Banks,  and  re- 
ported what  I  had  seen  and  heard.     He  said  I  had  saved  the  army,  etc. 

"Charles  H.  Greenleaf, 
"  Company  D,  Fifth  New  York  Cavalry." 

^  Gen.  Gordon  says  he  was  instructed  to  send  the  Third  Wisconsin  regiment 
and  a  section  of  his  battery  to  Kenly's  assistance. 


^ 


100       CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

from  every  quarter  represented  him  in  movement  in  rear  of  his 
pickets  in  the  direction  of  our  camp. 

"  Tlic  extraordinary  forc^e  of  the  enemy  could  no  longer  be  doubted. 
It  was  apparent  also  that  they  had  a  more  extended  purpose  than  the 
capture  of  the  brave  little  band  at  Front  Royal. 

"  This  purpose  could  be  nothing  less  than  the  defeat  of  my  own 
command  or  its  possible  capture,  by  occupying  Winchester,  and  by 
this  movement  intercepting  supplies  and  reinforcements,  and  cutting 
off  all  possibility  of  retreat.  .  .  . 

"  Under  this  interpretation  of  the  enemy's  plans,  our  position 
demanded  instant  decision  and  action.  Three  courses  were  open  to 
us :  first,  a  retreat  across  Little  North  mountain  to  the  Potomac 
river  on  the  west;  second,  an  attack  on  the  enemy's  flank  on  the 
Front  Royal  road  ;  third,  a  rapid  movement  direct  upon  AVinchester, 
with  a  view  to  anticipate  his  occupation  of  the  town  by  seizing  it 
ourselves,  and  thus  placing  my  command  in  communication  with  its 
original  base  of  operations,  and  in  the  line  of  reinforcements  by  Har- 
per's Ferry  and  Martinsburg,  and  securing  a  safe  retreat  in  case  of 
disaster.  To  remain  at  Strasburg  was  to  be  surrounded;  to  move 
over  the  mountain  was  to  abandon  our  train  at  the  outset,  and  to  sub- 
ject my  command  to  flank  attacks  without  possibility  of  succor ;  and 
to  attack,  the  enemy  being  in  such  overwhelming  force,  could  only 
result  in  certain  destruction.  It  was  therefore  determined  to  enter 
the  lists  with  the  enemy  in  a  race  or  a  battle,  as  he  should  choose,  for 
the  possession  of  Winchester,  the  key  of  the  Valley,  and  for  us  the 
position  of  safety. 

"At  three  o'clock  a.m.,  the  24th  of  May,  the  reinforcements — 
infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry — sent  to  Col.  Kenly  were  recalled ; 
the  advance  guard.  Col.  Donelly's  brigade,  were  ordered  to  return  to 
Strasburg;  several  hundred  disabled  men,  left  in  our  charge  by 
Shields's  division,  were  put  upon  the  march,  and  our  wagon-train 
ordered  forward  to  Winchester,  under  escort  of  cavalry  and  infantry. 
Gen.  Hatch,  with  nearly  our  whole  force  of  cavalry  and  six  pieces  of 
artillery,  was  charged  with  the  protection  of  the  rear  of  the  column 
and  the  destruction  of  army  stores  for  which  transportation  was  not 
provided,  with  instructions  to  remain  in  front ^  of  the  town  as  long 
as  possible,  and  hold  the  enemy  in  check,  our  expectations  of  attack 
being  in  that  direction.  All  these  orders  were  executed  with  incred- 
ible alacrity,  and  soon  after  nine  o'clock  the  column  was  on  the  march, 

^  That  is,  on  the  south  or  Staunton  side. 


WINCHESTER.  JOl 

Col.  Donelly  in  front,  Col.  Gordon  in  the  centre,  and  Gen.  Hatch  in 
the  rear."^ 

TIius  Banks,  having  partly  realized  his  danger,  was  taking  steps  to 
avert  it.  He  did  not  yet  realize,  however,  that  Jackson's  whole  force 
was  on  his  flank  at  Front  Royal,  but  expected  the  principal  attack  to 
be  made  from  the  direction  of  Woodstock.  Gen.  Hatch,  with  a  con- 
siderable cavalry  force,  was  sent  to  reconnoitre  in  that  direction,  but, 
finding  no  enemy,  he  returned  to  follow  the  main  column,  which, 
meantime,  had  moved  out  from  Strasburg  towards  Winchester.^ 

^  Banks's  report,  "Rebellion  Record."  Donelly  and  Gordon  commanded  the 
two  infantry  brigades,  which,  with  Broadhead's  First  Michigan  cavalry,  con- 
stituted Williams's  division.  Hatch  commanded  all  the  cavalry  except  Broad- 
head's. 

*  Gen.  Gordon  (commanding  one  of  the  Federal  brigades)  criticises  Banks's 
hesitation  and  delay  with  great  severity.  He  says  he  twice  urged  Gen.  Banks, 
early  in  the  night  of  the  23d,  to  retreat  to  AVinchester,  but  without  effect.  He 
left  Banks  to  put  his  own  brigade  in  readiness  to  move  at  a  moment's  notice, 
and  continues :  "  It  was  eleven  o'clock  at  night  when  I  left  him.  As  I  returned 
through  the  town  I  could  not  perceive  that  anybody  was  troubled  with  anticipa- 
tions for  the  morrow.  The  sutlers  were  driving  sharp  bargains  with  those  who 
had  escaped  from,  or  were  not  amenable  to,  military  discipline ;  the  strolling 
players  were  moving  crowds  to  noisy  laughter  in  their  canvas  booth,  through 
which  the  lights  gleamed  and  the  music  sounded  with  startling  shrillness.  I 
thought,  as  I  turned  towards  my  camp,  how  unconscious  all  are  of  the  drama 
Jackson  is  preparing  for  us,  and  what  merriment  the  morning  will  reveal !  As 
my  troops  were  aroused  from  their  slumbers,  a  low  murmur  ran  through  camp, 
followed  by  the  louder  noise  of  packing  camp  equipage  and  baggage,  the 
liarnessing  of  artillery  horses,  and  hitching-up  of  trains.  AVe  were  ready  for 
action.  But  the  night  sped  on  ;  silence  fell  upon  the  town,  and  slumber  was  as 
deep  that  night  in  Strasburg  as  if  without  there  was  no  cause  for  watchfulness. 
My  brigade,  however,  found  little  comfort  sitting  around  dismal  camp-fires, 
reduced  to  expiring  embers  by  the  falling  rain.  Unsheltered  and  unprotected, 
in  a  damp  clover-field,  the  morning  dawned  upon  a  cheerless  group.  Some 
unimportant  steps  had  been  taken  for  the  security  of  the  sick  and  for  the  safety 
of  public  property.  I  had  ordered  my  brigade  and  regimental  trains  forward 
to  Winchester,  and  they  were  saved.  After  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  Banks 
had  sent  off  some  ambulances  with  sick  and  disabled,  and  this  was  all. 

"  After  daylight  of  the  24th  we  remained  inactive  until  between  ten  and 
eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  at  which  time  I  received  the  following  note  from 
Gen.  Banks : 

"  '  Headquarters  Department  of  Shenandoah. 
"  '  Strasburg,  Va.,  May  24,  1862. 

*' '  Col.  Geo.  II.  Gordon,  Commanding  Brigade. 

" '  Sir  : — Our  information  this  morning  shows  that  the  enemy  returned  to  Front 


102        CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

Jackson's  conception  of  the  situation  and  his  plan  of  operations 
for  Saturday,  May  24,  are  given  in  liis  report  as  follows:  "In  the 
event  of  Banks  loavinj;  .Stra.sl)urt^,  he  might  escape  towards  the 
Potomac;  or  if  we  moved  directly  to  AVinchester,  he  might  move 
via  Front  Royal  towards  Washington  city.  In  order  to  watch  both 
directions,  and  at  the  same  time  advance  upon  him  if  he  remained  at 
Strasburg,  I  determined,  with  the  main  body  of  the  army,  to  strike 
the  Valley  turnpike  near  Middletown,  a  village  five  miles  north 
of  Strasburg,  and  thirteen  south  of  AVinchcster.  Accordingly,  the 
following  morning.  Gen.  Ashby  advanced  from  Ccdarville  towards 
Middletown,  supported  by  skirmishers  from  Taylor's  brigade,  with 
Chew's  battery  and  two  Parrott  guns  from  the  Rockbridge  artillery 
(Capt.  Poague),  followed  by  the  whole  command,  except  the  troops  left 
under  command  of  Gen.  Ewell  near  Cedarville.  Gen.  Ewell,  with 
Trimble's  brigade,  the  First  Maryland  regiment,  and  the  batteries 
of  Brockenbrough  and  Courtenay,  had  instructions  to  move  towards 
Winchester.  Ashby  was  directed  to  keep  scouts  on  his  left,  to  prevent 
Banks  from  passing  unobserved  to  Front  Royal.  Brig.-Gen.  George 
H.  Steuart,  who  was  now  temporarily  in  command  of  the  Second  and 
Sixth  Virginia  cavalry,  had  been  previously  despatched  to  Newtown, 
a  point  farther  north  than  Middletown,  and  eight  miles  from  Win- 
chester, with  instructions  to  observe  the  movements  of  the  enemy  at 
that  point.  He  there  succeeded  in  capturing  some  prisoners,  and 
several  wagons  and  ambulances  with  arms  and  medical  stores.  He 
also  advised  me  of  movements  which  indicated  that  Banks  was 
preparing  to  leave  Strasbiu"g." 

Jackson  moved  toAvards  Middletown  as  fast  as  his  troops,  weary 
from  severe  marches,  could  go.  The  cavalry,  under  Steuart,  was  in 
advance,  and  struck  the  Valley  turnpike  near  Newtown,  while  the 
main  body  was  still  some  distance  in  the  rear.  They  found  the 
Federal  wagon-train  passing,  and,  dashing  into  it  and  up  the  road 
towards  Middletown,  with  a  few  shots  threw  ever}i:hing  into  confu- 
sion.    A  part  of  Broadhead's  First  Micliigan  cavalry,  supported  by 

-^  Royal  last  night,  and  will  not,  now  at  least,  attempt  our  rear.     Our  force  will 
remain  in  Strasburg,  therefore,  until  further  orders. 

********** 

"  *  Respectfully  yours, 

"  '  N.  P.  Banks, 
"  '  Major-General  Commanding,  etc'  " 

Immediately  after,  however  (says  Gen.  Gordon),  information  was  received  of 
the  attack  on  the  Federal  train  beyond  Middletown,  and  orders  were  at  once 
issued  for  the  movement  of  all  the  Federal  forces  towards  Winchester. 


WINCHESTER.  103 

the  Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania  regiment,  had  been  reconnoitring 
from  jSIiddletown  towards  Front  Royal,  and  having  discovered  Jack- 
son's advance,  was  at  this  moment  returning  to  the  former  place. 
The  head  of  the  main  Federal  infantry  column  (Donelly's  brigade) 
had  just  crossed  Cedar  creek,  and  was  also  approaching  the  town. 
Information  soon  reached  Gen.  Banks  "  that  the  enemy  had  attacked 
the  train,  and  was  in  full  possession  of  the  road  at  JVIiddletown. 
This  rejjort  was  confirmed  by  the  return  of  fugitives,  refugees,  and 
wagons,  which  came  tumbling  to  the  rear  in  fearful  confusion.^  The 
train  was  halted,  and  Donelly's  infantry  ordered  to  the  front  to  clear 
the  way,  while  orders  were  sent  to  Gen.  Hatch  to  follow  from  Stras- 
burg."with  all  his  available  cavalry,  leaving  Col.  De  Forrest  to  cover 
the  rear  and  destroy  stores  not  provided  with  transportation."  At 
the  same  time  a  company  of  infantry  was  stationed  at  the  Cedar 
creek  bridge,  to  prepare  it  for  the  flames  in  case  Banks  should  be 
forced  to  recross  it  and  return  to  Strasbura;. 

Broadhead  and  Donelly  hastened  forward  through  Middletown, 
and  speedily  drove  back  the  Confederate  cavalry  which  had  caused 
such  a  commotion.  The  Michigan  cavalry  went  on  to  Newtown  and 
held  the  road,  while  the  Forty-sixth  Pennsylvania  infantry  and  a 
section  of  artillery  pushed  back  the  Confederate  cavalry  on  the  right 
of  the  turnpike  for  some  distance.  When  this  had  been  done,  the 
Federals  tm-ned  back  to  the  main  road,  and  their  column  resumed  its 
march,  after  only  an  hour's  loss  of  time.  Col.  Broadhead,  with  the 
First  ]\Iichigan  cavalry,  was  ordered  "  to  advance,  if  possible,  cut  his 
way  through,  and  occupy  Winchester.  It  was  the  report  of  this 
energetic  officer  that  gave  us  the  first  assurance  that  our  course  was 
yet  clear,  and  he  was  the  first  of  our  column  to  enter  the  town."  ^  No 
time  was  lost  by  the  Federal  commander  in  hurrying  forward  his 
column.  The  knapsacks  of  the  soldiers  were  left  where  they  had 
been  put,  along  the  roadside,  when  Donelly's  brigade  had  gone  for- 
ward to  clear  the  turnpike.  There  was  no  time  to  return  or  send  for 
them.  The  Confederate  cavalry,  under  Gen.  Steuart,  at  Newtown, 
was  not  strong  enough  to  impede  the  march  seriously,  so  that  the 
Federal  advance  reached  Winchester  without  further  molestation. 

So  rapid  was  his  enemy's  progress,  that  when  Jackson  reached  the 
vicinity  of  ^Middletown,  two  or  three  hours  afterwards,  with  his  main 
body,  the  whole  of  the  Federal  infantry  had  already  passed  that 
point,  and  the  cavalry,  under  Gen.  Hatch,  were  beginning  to  go 

^  Banks's  report.  ^  Banks's  report. 


104        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF  VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

through.  Driving  back  the  cavalry  guard  sent  to  observe  his  move- 
ments/ by  a  few  shots  from  Poague's  battery,  Jackson  pressed  eagerly 
forward.  "  Wlicn  the  little  village  of  Middletown  came  in  view, 
across  the  broad  and  level  lields,  tiie  highway,  passing  through  it  at 
right  angles  to  the  direction  of  Gen.  Jackson's  approach,  was  seen, 
canopied  with  a  viust  cloud  of  gray  dust,  and  crowded  beneath,  so  far 
as  the  eye  could  reach,  with  a  column  of  troops.  At  the  sight  the 
artillery  dashed  forward  in  a  gallop  for  a  rising  ground,  whence  to 
tear  their  ranks  with  shell ;  Ashby  swooped  down  on  their  right  like 
an  eagle,  cut  through  their  path,  and  arrested  their  escape  on  that  side; 
while  Gen.  Taylor,  throwing  his  front  regiment  into  line,  advanced  at 
a  double-quick  to  the  centre  of  the  village,  his  men  cheering,  and 
pouring  a  terrific  volley  into  the  confused  mass  which  filled  the  street."^ 

Gen.  Jackson  says :  "  The  road  was  literally  obstructed  with  the 
mingled  and  confused  mass  of  struggling  and  dying  horses  and  riders. 
The  Federal  column  was  pierced,  but  what  proportion  of  its  strength 
had  passed  north  towards  Winchester  I  had  then  no  means  of  know- 
ing. Among  the  surviving  cavalry  the  wildest  confusion  ensued, 
and  they  scattered  in  disorder  in  various  directions,  leaving,  however, 
some  two  hundred  prisoners  with  their  equipments  in  our  hands.  A 
train  of  wagons  was  seen  disappearing  in  the  distance  towards  Win- 
chester, and  Ashby,  Mdth  his  cavalry,  some  artillery,  and  a  supporting 
infantry  force  from  Taylor's  brigade,  was  sent  in  pursuit."^ 

The  Confederates  had  struck  the  head  of  Banks's  cavalrj^  under 
Hatch.  When  these  last  had  recovered  a  little  from  the  confusion 
and  disorder  into  which  they  were  thrown.  Hatch,  with  the  main 
body,*  turned  to  his  left  and  attempted,  by  a  circuit  through  roads 
northwest  of  the  turnpike  and  in  its  general  direction,  to  rejoin  the 
main  body  of  the  Federal  army.  So  hurried  was  the  march  of  the 
latter  that  for  a  time  his  efforts  were  unavailing.     Several  times  he 

1  Gen.  Hatch  had  under  his  command  this  day  the  Fifth  New  York  cavalry 
(Col.  De  Forrest),  First  Vermont  (Col.  Tompkins),  five  companies  of  the  First 
Maine  (Lieut.-Col.  Douty),  Hampton's  battery,  and  a  section  of  Best's  battery. 
The  half  regiment  of  the  First  Maine  and  two  companies  of  the  First  Vermont 
had  accompanied  the  infantry  column,  and  at  Middletown  were  sent  towards 
Front  Royal  to  observe  Jackson's  advance.  They  were  driven  back  to  Middle- 
town  just  as  Hatch,  at  the  head  of  the  remainder  of  his  force,  was  coming  into 
it  from  Strasburg. 

"^  Dabney,  p.  371.  '  Jackson's  report. 

*  Maj.  Collins  with  three  companies,  blinded  by  the  dust,  charged,  unknow- 
ingly, into  the  Confederate  lines,  and  his  command  was  nearly  all  killed  or 
captured. 


WINCHESTER.  105 

tried  to  regain  the  turnpike,  hoping  to  find  the  rear  of  the  Federal 
infantry,  but  was  driven  oif.  Finally,  at  Newtown,  fivx  miles  north 
of  Middleto^vn,  he  came  up  with  Gordon's  brigade,  which  had 
there  made  a  stand  to  check  the  pursuit  and  save  the  trains  and 
artillery. 

While  Gen.  Hatch  with  the  advance  of  the  Federal  cavalry  was 
making  efforts  to  pass  round  the  Confederates  and  rejoin  Banks,  the 
rear  of  his  command  was  attempting  to  open  the  way  along  the  turn- 
pike. "But  a  few  moments  elajised  before  the  Federal  artillery,^ 
whicli  had  been  cut  off  with  the  rear  of  the  column,  opened  upon  us, 
with  the  evident  intention  to  cut  its  way  through  to  Winchester. 
Our  batteries  were  soon  placed  in  position  to  return  the  fire,  and  Gen. 
Taylor  was  ordered  with  his  command  to  the  attack.  After  a  spirited 
resistance  this  fragment  of  the  Federal  army  retreated  to  Strasburg."  ^ 
Gen.  Banks  says :  "  Six  companies  of  the  Fifth  New  York,  Col. 
De  Forrest,  and  six  companies  of  the  First  Vermont  cavalry.  Col. 
Tompkins,  after  repeated  and  desperate  efforts  to  form  a  junction 
with  the  main  body, — the  road  being  now  filled  with  (Confederate) 
infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry, — fell  back  to  Strasburg,  where  they 
found  the  Zouaves  d'Afrique.^  The  Fifth  New  York,  failing  to  effect 
a  junction  at  Winchester,  and  also  at  Martinsburg,  came  in  at  Clear 
Spring  *  with  a  train  of  thirty-two  wagons  and  many  stragglers.  The 
First  Vermont,  Col.  Tompkins,  joined  us  at  Winchester  with  six 
pieces  of  artillery,  and  participated  in  the  fight  of  the  next  morn- 
ing."^ The  latter  body  took  a  country  road  leading  from  Strasburg 
to  Winchester,  considerably  west  of  the  turnpike.  The  other,  having 
followed  the  same  road  for  a  time,  bore  still  more  to  the  west,  leaving 
Winchester  and  Martinsburg  some  distance  to  the  right. 

Wliile  Jackson  was  engaged  in  disposing  of  the  Federal  rear  guard, 
Ashby  had  been  sent  forward,  as  above  stated,  towards  Winchester. 
The  main  body  of  the  Confederates  had  been  halted  at  Middleto^\Ti 
until  the  Confederate  commander  could  ascertain  whether  or  not 
the  whole  of  Banks's  infantry  had  passed  him.     The  overthrow  of 

^  This  was  Hampton's  battery  and  a  howitzer  of  Best's. 

^  Jackson's  report. 

^  These  had  been  stationed  at  Cedar  Creek  bridge  early  in  the  day. 

*  In  Maryland,  north  of  the  Potomac. 

^  Banks's  report.  De  Forrest  was  behind  Tompkins,  and  found  the  way  into 
"Winchester  blocked  when  he  approached  the  town.  He  then  made  a  circuit 
and  attempted  to  enter  it  next  morning  by  the  Romney  road,  only  to  find  Banks 
retreating  and  the  Confederates  in  possession.  He  then  marched  in  the  direction 
of  Hancock,  and  crossed  the  Potomac  at  Cherry  Run  ford. 


106       CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

the  Federal  ea vain' soon  satisfied  him  that  the  main  bmly  was  already 
between  him  and  AN'^iucliester,  and  witliout  further  delay  Jackson,  with 
the  mass  of  his  forces,  followed  Ashby  in  that  direction.  In  regard 
to  this  pui'suit,  Jackson  says :  "  The  large  number  of  wagons  loaded 
with  stores  and  abandoned  by  the  enemy  between  Middletown  and 
Newtown  plainly  indicated  his  hurried  retreat.^  From  the  attack 
upon  Front  Royal  up  to  the  present  moment  eveiy  opposition  had 
been  borne  down,  and  there  was  reason  to  believe  if  Banks  reached 
Winchester  it  would  be  without  a  train,  if  not  without  an  army ;  but 
in  the  midst  of  these  hopes  I  Avas  pained  to  see,  as  I  am  now  to 
record,  the  fact  that  so  many  of  Ashby's  command,  both  cavalry  and 
infantry,  forgetful  of  their  high  trust  as  tlie  advance  of  a  pursuing 
army,  deserted  their  colors  and  abandoned  themselves  to  pillage  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  make  it  necessarj'  for  that  gallant  officer  to  dis- 
continue further  pursuit.^  The  artillery,  which  had  pushed  on  with 
energy  to  the  vicinity  of  Newtown,  found  itself,  from  this  discredita- 
ble conduct,  without  a  proper  support  from  either  infantry  or  cavalry. 
This  relaxation  of  the  pursuit  "vvas  unfortunate,  as  the  enemy  was 
encouraged  by  it  to  bring  up,  about  two  hours  later,  four  pieces  of 
artilleiy,  which  were  planted  upon  the  northern  skirt  of  NeA\i:own, 
and  opened  upon  our  batteries.  This  fire  was  replied  to  by  Capt. 
Poague's  two  rifled  guns  with  skill  and  accuracy.  When  I  overtook 
the  advance  it  was  thus  held  in  check  by  the  enemy's  artiller)\"^ 

Banks  had  hurried  on  to  Ne^vtown  and  beyond.  Here  the  train 
was  threatened  by  the  cavalry  under  Gen.  Steuart,  which  had  been 
watching  the  passing  army  all  day,  and  harassing  it  as  opportunity 
offered  on  the  march.  Some  confusion  was  produced  by  this  force  in 
the  train  following  the  Federal  infantry,  and  the  Twenty-seventh 
Indiana  and  a  section  of  artillery  were  ordered  to  remain  and  do 
what  was  possible  to  protect  the  rear.  This  was  sufficient  for  a  time 
to  check  Steuart's  cavalry,  while  Ashby's  pursuit,  as  above  stated,  was 
not  pressed  with  vigor.  As  the  Confederates  continued  to  push  for- 
ward, this  rear  guard  was  strengthened,  and  a  strong  effort  made  to 

^  The  road  was  lined  with  captured  wagons  from  Cedar  creek  to  Newtown. 
Nearly  all  the  transportation  of  Hatch's  cavalry,  besides  a  large  number  of 
other  wagons,  were  captured  at  this  time.  (See  Gen.  Gordon's  "History  of 
Second  Massachusetts  Regiment,"  Third  Paper.  lie  speaks  of  "  six  miles  of 
wagons"  as  captured  on  this  occasion.) 

^  Among  the  abandoned  wagons  that  lined  the  road  were  many  loaded  with 
sutler  stores.     These  were  especially  attractive  to  the  Confederate  troops. 

^  Jackson's  report. 


WINCHESTER.  107 

save  the  trains  from  further  loss.  The  head  of  Gordon's  brigade  was 
already  beyond  Bartonsville,  and  only  five  miles  from  Winchester. 
Col.  Gordon  was  ordered  to  take  two  regiments  (Twenty-eighth  New 
York  and  Second  Massachusetts)  and  two  sections  of  artillery,  and 
return  to  Newtown,  there  to  hold  the  Confederates  in  check.  He 
countermarched  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  joined  the  regiment  already 
there.  He  checked  the  confusion  into  which  the  rear  Avas  being 
thrown,  and  boldly  drove  the  Confederate  advance  back  through  the 
town.  Gen.  Hatch  soon  joined  him  with  the  cavalry  he  had  suc- 
ceeded in  bringing  round  the  Confederate  flank,  and  this  united  force 
prevented  the  fiirther  advance  of  the  Confederates,  until  Jackson's 
infantry  had  in  part  closed  up.  The  display  of  increasing  force,  the 
advance  of  Ewell  along  the  Front  Royal  road  on  his  flank,  as  well  as 
the  information  brought  by  Gen.  Hatch  of  the  dispersion  of  all  the 
Federal  troops  in  the  rear,  induced  Col.  Gordon  to  retreat  at  dusk. 
His  skill  and  determination  had  eifected  the  object  in  view.  The 
trains  and  artillery  that  had  passed  Ne^vtown  were  enabled  to  reach 
Winchester.  A  number  of  wagons,  in  the  haste  and  confusion  that 
existed  before  Gordon's  stand,  had  been  overturned,  or  had  been  left 
without  horses  in  the  road.  These,  including  a  pontoon-train,  he 
fired.  Leaving  the  Second  Massachusetts  (Lieut.-Col.  Andrews)  and 
a  section  of  artillery  to  cover  the  rear,  he  retreated  with  great  expedi- 
tion to  Winchester,  which  he  reached  at  midnight. 

It  was  now  dark,  but  Jackson  continued  to  press  forward  after  the 
retreating  enemy.  His  march  was  skilfully  impeded  by  Lieut.-Col. 
Andrews,  who,  taking  advantage  of  the  darkness,  contested  stub- 
bornly the  Confederate  advance  at  every  favorable  point.  The  ability 
and  courage  with  which  Col.  Andrews  managed  his  regiment  (Second 
Massachusetts)  on  this  night  march  were  admirable.  Jackson,  with 
various  regiments  in  turn  of  the  "  Stonewall"  brigade,  which  was  in 
front,  drove  back  this  rear  guard  from  point  to  point ;  but  all  the 
impatient  energy  of  the  Confederate  leader  could  not  make  his  prog- 
ress other  than  slow.  Anxious  to  occupy  the  heights  overlooking 
Winchester  before  daAvn,  he  continued  the  pursuit  all  night.  The 
troops  in  advance  (Fifth  Virginia  regiment.  Col.  Baylor)  were  not 
allowed  to  lie  down  at  all;  to  the  others  was  given  only  an  hour's 
rest. 

Meantime,  Gen.  Ewell  had  advanced  during  the  day  Avith  Trimble's 
brigade,  the  First  Maryland  regiment,  and  Brockenbrough's  and 
Courtenay's  batteries,  on  the  direct  road  from  Front  Royal  to  W^in- 
chester.     After  halting,  when  eight  miles  from  Front  Royal,  for 


108        CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

some  hours,  to  await  the  results  of  Gen.  Jackson's  attacrk,  he  moved 
on  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  it  became  apparent  that  the  enemy- 
were  retreating  towards  Winchester.  As  he  approached  the  latter 
town  he  Avas  joined  by  Steuart's  cavalry  from  Newt(^)wn.  When 
between  two  and  three  miles  from  Winchester,  Col.  Kirkland,  with 
the  Twenty-first  North  Carolina  regiment,  drove  in  the  enemy's 
pickets.  He  held  the  position  thas  gained  during  the  night.  The 
remainder  of  this  command  "slept  on  their  arms"  one  mile  in  the 
rear.^ 

The  results  of  the  day's  operations  were  altogether  faA'orable  to  the 
Confederates.  Forced  to  a  precipitate  evacuation  of  his  position  at 
Strasburg,  the  Federal  commander  had  made  a  retreat  of  eighteen 
miles  upon  Winchester,  so  hurried,  and  marked  by  so  considerable  a 
loss  of  stores  and  wagons,  as  to  give  it  the  aspect  of  a  flight.  His 
cavalry  had  been  attacked,  and  for  the  time  dispersed,  the  fragments 
of  it  rejoining  him  at  intervals  afterwards.  Many  prisoners  had  been 
taken  from  him,  and  only  the  prompt  haste  of  his  movement,  the 
fatigue  of  the  march-worn  Confederates,  and  the  inefficiency  of  Ashby's 
command  at  a  critical  moment,  had  saved  his  whole  army  from  a 
complete  rout.  At  best,  it  was  but  a  broken  and  dispirited  force 
which  rested  at  Winchester  during  the  night,  and  prepared  to  resist 
the  advance  of  the  Confederates  on  the  morrow. 

The  movement  of  Jackson  had  been  so  sudden  and  unexpected  that 
Gen.  Banks  was  slow  in  realizing  the  true  state  of  the  case.  The 
latter  says:  "The  strength  and  purpose  of  the  enemy  were  to  us 
unknown  when  we  reached  Winchester,  except  upon  surmise  and  vague 
rumors  from  Front  Royal.  These  rumors  were  strengthened  by  the 
vigor  with  which  the  enemy  had  pressed  our  main  column,  and  defeated 
at  every  point  the  efforts  of  detachments  to  effect  a  junction  with  the 
main  column.  At  Winchester,  however,  all  suspicion  was  relieved  on 
that  subject.  All  classes — secessionists,  unionists,  refugees,  fugitives, 
and  prisoners — agreed  that  the  enemy's  force  at  or  near  Winchester 
was  overwhelming,  ranging  from  twenty-five  to  thirty  thousand.  .  .  . 
I  determined  to  test  the  substance  and  strength  of  the  enemy  by 

^  Gen.  Ewell's  report.  Gen.  Ti'imble  informs  the  author  that  Ewell's  division 
was  ordered  to  halt  at  the  point  mentioned  (near  Nineveh)  until  Jackson,  after 
having  struck  the  enemy  and  discovered  his  intentions,  should  send  orders  for 
Ewell's  further  movements.  These  orders  (to  move  on  Winchester),  Gen. 
Trimble  says,  were  sent  by  Jackson  early  in  the  afternoon,  but,  in  consequence 
of  the  courier's  losing  his  way  and  not  finding  Gen.  Ewell  promptly,  they  did 
not  reach  the  latter  for  several  hours. 


WINCHESTER. 


109 


actual  collision,  and  measnres  were  promptly  taken  to  prepare  our 
troops  to  meet  them."^ 

^  Banks's  report,  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v. 

Gen.  Banks  states  his  force  at  AVinchester  as  follows:  "My  own  command 
consisted  of  two  brigades  of  infantry  of  less  than  4000  men,  all  told,  with  900 
cavalry,  10  Parrott  guns,  and  one  battery  of  sis-pounders,  smooth-bore  cannon. 
To  this  should  be  added  the  Tenth  Maine  regiment  of  infantry  and  five  com- 
panies of  Maryland  cavalry,  stationed  at  Winchester,  which  were  engaged  in 
the  action."  To  this  should  be  added  also  five  companies  of  the  Eighth  New 
York  cavalry,  which  arrived  in  Winchester  from  Harper's  Ferry  on  the  evening 
of  the  24th,  and  which  were  involved,  if  not  in  the  action,  at  least  in  the  rout 
of  the  next  day.  (See  report  of  Lieut.-Col.  Babbitt.)  Banks's  force  at  Win- 
chester, from  the  above,  must  have  been  about  6400.  Jackson's  was  about 
15,000. 

The  organization  of  the  Federals  was  as  follows  (the  strength  and  losses  being 
given  in  detail  so  far  as  they  have  been  found) : 


Williams's  division. 


Infantry. 
Donelly's  (First)  brigade : 
Forty-sixth  Pennsylvania 
Twenty-eighth  New  York 
Fifth  Connecticut     . 

Gordon's  (Third)  brigade: 
Second  Massachusetts 
Third  Wisconsin 
Twenty-seventh  Indiana  . 
Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania 
Tenth  Maine  regiment     . 


strength.    Killed.    Wounded.    Missing.    Total  Loss. 

1700         3  47        251  301 

(7)         (51)  Medical  report. 

7  28        133  168 

■2102      (25)  (71)  Medical  report. 

856  6  77  83 


Cavalry. 
Broadhead : 

Part  of  First  Michigan    . 
Hatch  : 

Part  of  First  Vermont 

Part  of  Fifth  New  York  . 

5  companies  First  Maryland     . 

5  companies  Eighth  New  York 


900 


10 


10 


600  (Estimated). 


34 


24 


54 


26 


Artillery. 
Best's  battery,  6  guns 

Cothran's  battery,     6     " 
Hampton's  battery,  4     " 


250     (Estimated.) 


6408 


110       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE   VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 


For  this  purpose  Gordon's  (Federal)  brigade  was  stationed  south 
of  tlie  town,  on  the  Valley  turnpike.     The  right  of  his  command  was 

The  Confederate  organization  was  as  follows : 

Jackson's  division. 


Infantry. 
Winder's  (First)  brigade : 
Second  Virginia 
Fourth        "  .         . 

Fifth  " 

Twenty-seventh  Virginia 
Thirty-third  " 

Campbell's  (Second)  brigade : 
Twenty-first  Virginia 
Forty-second        " 
Forty-eighth        " 
Irish  battalion     " 

Taliaferro's  (Third)  brigade: 
Tenth  Vii'ginia 
Twenty-third  Virginia 
Thirty-seventh        " 


Strength.    Killed.    Wounded.    Missing.    Total  Loss. 


1529 

(r.&f.) 


f  4 

1 
1 

I  1 


300  1 


ewell's  division. 


Taylor's  brigade : 
Sixth  Louisiana 
Seventh     " 
Eighth       " 
Ninth        " 
Wheat's  battalion 

Trimble's  brigade : 

Twenty-first  North  Carolina 
Twenty-first  Georgia 
Fifteenth  Alabama  . 
Sixteenth  Mississippi 

Elzey's  brigade: 
Thirteenth  Virginia 
Thirty-first        '' 
Twenty-fifth      " 
Twelfth  Georgia 

Scott's  brigade : 

Forty-fourth  Virginia 
Fifty-second         " 
Fifty-eighth  " 

Maryland  line : 
First  Maryland 


14 

3 
3 

7 


7 
19 


22 
1 


65 
18 


18 

4 
4 
8 


3 
9 
4 

9 

7 

20 


15  90  105 

(Whole  brigade.) 


87 
19 


WINCHESTER.  HI 

posted  on  the  ridge  ruuniug  southwest  from  the  town  and  west  of  the 
turnpike,  about  half  a  mile  from  the  suburbs.^  The  left  rested  on 
the  turnpike  itself,  to  which  the  line  was  perpendicular.  Pickets 
were  thrown  out  on  the  hills  that  continue  the  ridge  in  front.  The 
Second  Massachusetts  regiment  was  on  Gordon's  right,  the  Third 
Wisconsin  on  his  left,  near  the  turnpike,  and  the  Twenty-seventh 
Indiana  and  Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania  were  in  reserve,  ready  to 
take  position  wherever  needed.  Six  guns,  placed  on  the  crest  of  the 
ridge,  strengthened  Gordon's  right,  beyond  which,  under  cover  of  the 
hill,  was  Broadhead's  cavalry.  Near  the  turnpike,  and  constituting 
the  centre  of  the  line,  were  two  guns,  supported  by  Hatch's  cavalry. 
On  the  left  was  Donelly's  brigade,  extending  across  the  Front  Royal 
and  Millwood  roads,  thus  covering  the  approaches  to  the  town  from 
the  southeast.  Here,  too,  in  commanding  positions,  were  placed 
eight  pieces  of  artillery.  The  two  last-mentioned  roads,  as  they 
approach  Winchester,  unite  about  a  mile  from  the  town.  In  front 
of  this  junction  a  short  distance,  on  a  ridge  running  in  the  direction 
of  the  Front  Royal  road,  was  Donelly's  crescent-shaped  line.  Here 
the  battle  opened.  Gen.  Ewell  had  bivouacked  not  far  in  front  of 
the  Federal  line,  and,  moving  his  troops  at  dawn,  he  soon  came  up  to 


Cavalry. 

Under  Geo.  H, 

,  Steuart: 

Mun ford's  Second  Vir 

ginia 

Flournoy's  Sixth 

a 

Ashby's  Seventh  Virginia 

■ 

Ar\ 

tillery. 

Strength.        Killed.    Wounded. 

Missing.    Total  Loss. 

Poague's 

Carpenter's 

Cutshaw's 

battery,  6  j 
"        4 
4 

guns. 

89(r.&f.)   2            16 
52                1               5 

18 

6 

Wooding's 
Caskie's 

4 
4 

Raine's 

(( 

4 

(( 

Rice's 

(i 

4 

u 

Lusk's 

u 

4 

a 

Courtenay's 
Brockenbrou 
Chew's 

(1 

igh's  " 

6 
4 
4 

(with  Maryland  line.) 
(with  cavalry.) 

48 
Total  strength,  about  15,000  or  16,000. 
'  This  is  the  same  ridge  which  two  miles  farther  to  the  southwest  was  the 
scene  of  the  battle  of  Kernstown. 


112        CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1801-G2. 

the  enemy,  drove  in  liis  outposts,  and  attiiekcd  liiin.  The  Twenty- 
first  North  Carolina  regiment,  Col.  Kirkland,  was  in  advance,  and 
at  5  A.M.  boldly  made  a  dash  at  the  position  held  by  Donelly  across 
the  roatl.  The  North  Carolinians  met  with  a  bloody  reception.  The 
Federals,  taking  advantage  of  the  stone  fences  with  which  that 
country  is  everywhere  interscctctl,  had  posted  their  line  behind  some 
of  these  fences,  and  poured  a  well-directed  front  and  flank  fire  into 
the  Confederates  as  they  advanced  across  the  open  field.  In  a  few 
moments  the  TAventy-first  North  Carolina,  having  lost  botli  the  field 
officers  present,  and  a  large  number  of  men  killed  and  wounded,  fell 
back.'  This  check  was,  however,  but  brief  in  its  duration.  AVhen 
Kirkland  advanced  in  the  centre.  Col.  Johnson,  with  the  First  Mary- 
land regiment,  moved  forward  on  his  left,  nearer  the  Valley  tiu-n- 
pike,  and,  meeting  with  little  opposition,  reached  the  suburbs  of  the 
town.  On  the  right  of  the  Twenty-first  North  Carolina,  Col.  Mer- 
cer, with  the  Twenty-first  Georgia,  advanced,  turned  the  flank  of 
the  enemy  on  that  side,  and,  by  means  of  an  enfilading  fire,  quickly 
drove  them  from  the  position  unsuccessfully  attacked  by  Col.  Kirk- 
land. Latin\er  (in  command  of  Courtenay's  guns)  and  Brocken- 
brough  contributed  to  this  result  with  their  batteries.  The  Federals 
took  a  new  position  nearer  the  town.  The  remainder  of  Trimble's 
brigade  (Sixteenth  Mississippi  and  Fifteenth  Alabama  regiments) 
now  joined  the  Twenty-first  Georgia ;  but  instead  of  attacking  in  front 
again,  Gen.  Ewell  adopted  the  suggestion  of  Trimble,  and  moved 
farther  to  the  right,  so  as  to  threaten  the  Federal  flank  and  rear. 
This  manoeuvre,  combined  with  Jackson's  success  on  the  other  flank, 
caused  the  whole  to  give  way. 

It  is  time  to  return  to  the  main  Confederate  attack.  All  night 
had  Jackson  pressed  forward  at  the  head  of  the  "  StoncAvall"  brigade. 
Soon  after  dawn,  as  he  approached  Winchester,  he  saw  the  Federal 
skirmishers  on  a  hill  belonging  to  the  ridge  on  his  left,  and  ordered 
Gen.  AYinder  to  "  seize  the  hill  as  speedily  as  possible.  The  Fifth 
Virginia   regiment.   Col.   Baylor,  was    accordingly    thrown    out   in 

^  Donelly's  regiments  were  placed,  the  Twenty-eighth  New  York  on  the  left, 
Fifth  Connecticut  in  the  centre,  and  Forty-sixth  Pennsylvania  on  his  right,  the 
wings  thrown  forward  crescent-like.  As  the  Twenty-first  North  Carolina  ad- 
vanced against  the  centre, — not  seeing  the  position  of  the  Forty-sixth  Pennsyl- 
vania in  the  mist, — they  received  a  raking  flank  fire  at  close  quarters  from 
that  regiment  as  well  as  the  front  fire  from  the  Fifth  Connecticut,  to  which  was 
added  as  they  retired  that  of  the  Twenty-eighth  New  York.  The  Twenty-first 
North  Carolina  lost  87  men  killed  and  wounded.  (See  Donelly's  and  Trimble's 
reports.) 


WINCHESTER.  113 

advance  as  skirmishers,  and  the  Second,  Fourth,  Twenty-seventh, 
and  Thirty-third  Virginia  regiments  being  placed  in  order  of  battle, 
the  whole  line  was  ordered  to  advance,  which  was  done  in  handsome 
style,  and  the  position  on  the  crest  secured,  although  the  enemy  made 
a  resolute  but  unsuccessful  effort  to  dislodge  our  troops  from  so  com- 
manding a  position.  Two  Parrott  guns  from  the  Rockbridge  artil- 
lery, and  the  batteries  of  Carpenter  and  Cutshaw,  were  promptly 
posted  on  the  height  to  dislodge  a  battery  of  the  enemy,  which  was 
playing  from  the  front  with  great  animation  and  effect  upon  the  hill."^ 
The  Second  brigade,  Col.  Campbell,  was  sent  to  support  the  batteries, 
while  Taliaferro's  brigade,  under  Col.  Fulkerson,  was  placed  on  the 
left  in  support  of  Winder,  and  to  extend  his  line. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Gordon  moved  the  Second  Massachusetts 
farther  up  on  the  ridge,  where  he  already  had  the  six  guns  that  had 
opened  upon  Winder  when  the  latter  was  driving  back  the  Federal 
outposts.  As  the  regiment  moved  to  the  Federal  right  it  had  to  bear 
a  heavy  fire  from  the  Confederate  batteries  already  in  position,  but 
the  movement  was  completed  in  good  order.  Some  of  the  Federal 
guns  were  now  moved  more  to  the  right,  and  took  a  position  which 
enabled  them  to  enfilade  the  section  of  Poague's  (Rockbridge)  battery. 
A  company  of  the  Second  Massachasetts  was  thrown  out  before  these 
guns  as  sharpshooters,  and,  sheltering  themselves  behind  a  stone  fence, 
they  poured  a  destructive  fire  into  the  midst  of  Poague's  horses  and 
men.  Turning  his  guns,  Poague  directs  his  fire  upon  these  assail- 
ants ;  but  the  fire  of  artillery  is  not  effective  against  sharpshooters. 
Another  company  of  the  Second  Massachusetts  reinforces  the  first 
behind  the  stone  wall,  and  Poague  sees  his  men  and  horses  falling 
fast.  Withdrawing  and  placing  his  guns  to  the  left  and  rear,  he 
opens  vigorously  from  the  new  position  upon  the  battery  that  has 
enfiladed  and  the  sharpshooters  that  have  so  seriously  annoyed  him. 
At  this  point  he  is  joined  by  the  remaining  four  guns  of  his  battery. 
He  disconcerts  the  Federal  sharpshooters  by  firing  solid  shot  at  the 
stone  fence  which  protects  them.  Meantime,  Cutsliaw  and  Carpenter 
hold  their  positions  to  the  right  of  Poague,  and  pour  an  effective 
artillery  fire  upon  the  enemy.  The  Federal  commander  now  moves 
up  the  Twenty-seventh  Indiana  and  Twenty-ninth  Pennsylvania 
regiments  from  the  turnpike,  and  places  them  on  the  right  of  the 
Second  Massachusetts,  with  the  design  of  holding  the  crest  of  the 
ridge,  and,  if  possible,  turning  the  Confederate  left.     Jackson,  seeing 

^  Jackson's  report. 


114       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLFA'  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

this  strengthening  and  extending  of  his  enemy's  right,  orders  up  Tay- 
lor's Louisianians,  who,  passing  behind  Winder,  form  on  his  left  and 
overlap  the  Federal  flank.  The  Tenth  and  Twenty-third  Virginia, 
of  Taliaferro's  brigade,  extend  Taylor's  line,  the  former  regiment  on 
his  left,  and  the  other  on  his  right.  Regardless  of  the  artillery  fire 
and  the  masketry  of  the  sharpshooters,  this  strong  body  formed  in 
line,  and,  moving  to  the  crest  of  the  hill,  "  swept  magnificently  down 
the  declivity  and  across  the  field,  driving  back  the  Federal  troops  and 
bearing  down  all  opposition  before  it.  In  this  gallant  advance  all  the 
troops  of  Gen.  AViuder  joined  except  those  left  as  supports  to  the 
batteries."  ^ 

Col.  Gordon  says  of  this  charge  of  the  Confederates :  "  They  were 
received  with  a  destructive  fire  of  musketry  poured  in  from  all  parts 
of  my  brigade  that  could  reach  them.  Confident  in  their  numbers, 
and  relying  upon  large  sustaining  bodies,  .  .  .  the  enemy's  lines 
moved  on  but  little  shaken  by  our  fire.  At  the  same  time  in  our 
front  a  long  line  of  infantry  showed  themselves,  rising  the  crest  of  the 
hills  just  beyond  our  position.  My  little  brigade,  numbering  in  all 
two  thousand  one  hundred  and  two  (2102),  in  another  moment  would 
have  been  overwhelmed.  On  the  right,  left,  and  centre  immensely 
superior  columns  were  pressing;  not  another  man  was  available, — 
not  a  support  to  be  found  in  the  remnant  of  the  army  corps  left  Gen. 
Banks.  To  withdraw  was  now  possible ;  in  another  moment  it  would 
have  been  too  late.  At  this  moment  I  should  have  assumed  the  re- 
sponsibility of  requesting  permission  to  withdraw,  but  the  right  fell 
back  under  great  pressure,  and  compelled  the  line  to  yield."  ^ 

Jackson  now  ordered  Elzey's  brigade  forward  on  the  Valley  turn- 
pike, while  Taylor  and  Winder  swept  back  the  enemy  rapidly  over 
the  hills  into  the  town.  It  was  at  the  time  of  Taylor's  successful  charge, 
between  8  and  9  a.m.,  that  Ewell,  having  pushed  back  Donelly  on  the 
Front  Royal  road  into  the  suburbs  of  the  toAvn,  was  moving  to  the  Con- 
federate right  and  threatening  the  Federal  rear.  Ashby  took  possession 
of  the  Berryville  road,  which  leaves  Winchester  on  the  east  side,  and 
thus  cut  off  a  retreat  by  that  route  to  Harper's  Ferry.  Finding  him- 
self beaten  on  both  flanks  and  his  line  of  retreat  endangered.  Banks 
made  no  further  attempt  to  hold  the  town  or  check  the  progress  of 
the  Confederates.  Passing  quickly  through  Winchester,  and  in  such 
order  as  was  possible,  he  fled  northward  with  great  haste  by  the  Mar- 
tinsburg  road,  leaving  many  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  his  antagonist. 

'  Jackson's  report.  ^  Gordon's  report. 


WINCHESTER.  115 

Jackson  followed  through  the  town,  and  without  delay  continued 
the  pursuit.  He  says :  "  Notwithstanding  the  fatiguing  marches  and 
almost  sleepless  night  to  which  the  mass  of  our  troops  had  been  sub- 
jected, they  continued  to  press  forward  with  alacrity.  The  Federal 
forces  upon  falling  back  into  the  town  preserved  their  organization 
remarkably  well.  In  passing  through  its  streets  they  were  thrown 
into  confusion,  and  shortly  after  debouching  upon  the  plain  and  turn- 
pike to  Martinsburg,  and  after  being  fired  upon  by  our  artillery,  they 
presented  the  aspect  of  a  mass  of  disordered  fugitives.  Never  have  I 
seen  an  opportunity  when  it  was  in  the  power  of  cavalry  to  reap  a 
richer  harvest  of  the  fruits  of  victory.  Hoping  that  the  cavalry  would 
soon -come  up,  the  artillery,  followed  by  infantry,  was  pressed  forward 
for  about  two  hours  for  the  purpose  of  preventing,  by  artillery  fire, 
a  reforming  of  the  enemy ;  but  as  nothing  was  heard  of  the  cavalry, 
and  as  but  little  or  nothing  could  be  accomplished  without  it  in  the 
exhausted  condition  of  our  infantry,  between  whom  and  the  enemy  the 
distance  was  continually  increasing,  I  ordered  a  halt,  and  issued  orders 
for  going  into  camp  and  refreshing  the  men."^ 

Two  causes  prevented  an  efficient  pursuit  by  the  Confederate  cav- 
alry. Ashby's  command  had  become  scattered  in  the  pillage  of  the 
day  before,  and  during  the  night  march  and  fight  of  the  morning  he 
had  had  but  little  opportunity  to  collect  them.  With  such  as  were  at 
hand  he  had  moved  to  the  enemy's  left  to  prevent  a  retreat  by  way 
of  Berryville  to  Harper's  Ferry,  and  with  the  hope  of  "  cutting  off  a 
portion  of  his  force."  From  this  cause  he  only  entered  the  Martins- 
burg road  and  joined  the  cavalry  under  Steuart  some  ten  or  twelve 
miles  from  Winchester,  and  after  Banks  had  passed.  Gen.  George  H. 
Steuart,  of  the  Maryland  line,  now  in  command  of  the  Second  and 
Sixth  Virginia  cavalry  regiments,  was  with  Ewell  during  the  morn- 
ing, and  when  Lieut.  Pendleton,  of  Jackson's  staff,  found  him,  with 
an  urgent  order  to  follow  the  enemy,  he  wasted  valuable  time  on  a 
point  of  military  etiquette,^  and  consequently  did  not  overtake  the 
advance  of  the  Confederate  infantry  until  an  hour  after  it  hatl  halted. 
Gen.  Steuart  then  pushed  on  with  vigor  and  picked  up  a  good  many 
prisoners,  but  the  delay  had  enabled  the  Federal  army  to  make  such 
headway  that  it  was  "  beyond  the  reach  of  successful  pursuit." ' 
Banks  halted  in  his  rapid  course  at  Martinsburg  for  an  hour  or  two, 
and  then  continued  his  retreat  to  Williamsport,  which  he  reached  at 

^  Jackson's  report. 

^  lie  declined  to  obey  the  order  until  it  came  through  Gen,  Ewell. 

*  Jackson's  report. 


116        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY   OF    VIRGINIA,  1S01-C2. 

sundown.  Here,  during  the  night  and  next  morning,  he  crossed  to 
the  north  side  of  the  river.  The  Federal  army,  after  the  defeat  of 
the  morning,  tluis  marched  the  distiince  from  Wincliestcr  to  the  Poto- 
mac (thirty-four  miles)  in  one  day.  Steuart  witli  his  cavalry  followed 
it  to  Martinsburg,  where  lie  ca[)tured  a  large  amount  of  stores.  "  There 
is  gootl  reason  for  believing  that,  had  the  cavalry  played  its  part  in 
this  j)ursuit  as  well  as  the  four  companies  had  done  under  Col.  Flour- 
ncy  two  days  before,  in  the  pursuit  from  Front  Royal,  but  a  small 
portion  of  Banks's  army  would  have  made  its  escape  to  the  Potomac."  ^ 
But  the  victory  was  complete  and  glorious,  even  if  Jackson's  weary 
and  march-worn  command  had  not  achieved  all  that  their  tireless  and 
indomitable  leader  thought  possible.  In  forty-eight  hours  the  enemy 
had  been  driven  between  fifty  and  sixty  miles  from  Front  Royal  and 
Strasburg  to  the  Potomac,  with  the  loss  of  more  than  one-third 
of  his  entire  strength.  His  army  had  crossed  the  latter  river  a  dis- 
organized mass.  Hundreds  of  wagons  had  been  abandoned  or  burnt. 
Two  pieces  of  artillery  and  an  immense  quantity  of  quartermaster,  com- 
missary, medical,  and  ordnance  stores  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the 
victor.^     "  Some  two  thousand  three  hundred  (2300)  prisoners"  were 


'  Jackson's  report. 

^  Gen.  Jackson  says  in  his  report:  "The  public  property  captured  in  this 
expedition  at  Front  Royal,  Winchester,  Martinsburg,  and  Charlestown  was  of 
great  value,  and  so  large  in  quantity  that  much  of  it  had  to  be  abandoned  for 
want  of  necessary  means  of  transportation.  Maj.  Ilarman,  my  chief  quarter- 
master, had  but  one  week  within  which  to  remove  it;  and,  although  his  efiForts 
were  characterized  by  his  usual  energy,  promptitude,  and  judgment,  all  the 
conveyances  that  within  that  short  period  could  be  hired  or  impressed  were 
inadequate  to  the  work.  The  medical  stores,  which  filled  one  of  the  largest 
storehouses  in  Winchester,  were  fortunately  saved.  Most  of  the  instruments 
and  some  of  the  medicines,  urgently  needed  at  that  time  by  the  command,  were 
issued  to  the  surgeons.  The  residue  were  sent  to  Charlottesville  and  turned 
over  to  a  medical  purveyor.  Two  large  and  well-furnished  hospitals,  capable  of 
accommodating  some  700  patients,  were  found  in  the  town,  and  left  undisturbed, 
with  all  their  stores,  for  the  use  of  the  sick  and  wounded  of  the  enemy. 

"  Commissary  supplies,  consisting  of  upwards  of  100  head  of  cattle,  34,000 
pounds  of  bacon,  flour,  salt,  sugar,  coffee,  hard  bread,  and  cheese,  were  turned 
over  to  the  proper  authorities,  besides  large  amounts  taken  by  the  troops  and 
not  accounted  for.  Sutlers'  stores  valued  at  $25,000,  and  for  want  of  transpor- 
tation abandoned  to  the  troops,  were  captured.  Quartermasters'  stores  to  the 
value  of  $125,185  were  secured"  (at  Winchester),  "besides  an  immense  amount 
destroyed.     Many  horses  were  taken  by  the  cavalry. 

"  Among  the  ordnance  stores  taken  and  removed  in  safety  were  9354  small 
arms,  and  2  pieces  of  artillery  and  their  caissons."  A  large  amount  of  ammu- 
nition was  also  among  the  ordnance  captures. 


WINCHESTER.  117 

taken  to  the  rear  when  Jackson  fell  back,  besides  seven  hundred  and 
fifty  (750)  wounded  and  sick  paroled  and  left  in  the  hospitals  at  Win- 
chester and  Strasburg,  making  a  total  of  about  three  thousand  and 
fifty  (3050).^     The  Federal  surgeons  captured  in  attendance  at  their 

^  Jackson's  report. 

Gen.  Banks's  report  of  his  losses  is  apt  to  mislead,  and  has  done  so,  at  least 
in  the  case  of  the  Comte  de  Paris,  the  distinguished  French  histoi-ian  of  the  war. 
Banks  says  (see  his  report,  vol.  v.,  "  Rebellion  Record") :  "  Our  loss  is  stated  in 
detail,  with  the  names  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  in  the  full  report  of 
Brig.-Gen.  A.  S.  Williams,  commanding  division,  to  which  reference  is  made. 

''  The  whole  number  of  killed  is  38  ;  wounded,  155  ;  missing,  711 ;  total  loss, 
904. 

"  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  many  of  the  missing  will  yet  return,  and  the 
entire  loss  may  be  assumed  as  not  exceeding  700.  It  is  also  probable  that  the 
number  of  killed  and  wounded  may  be  larger  than  that  above  stated,  but  the 
aggregate  loss  will  not  be  changed  thereby.     All  our  guns  were  saved. 

"Our  wagon-train  consisted  of  nearly  500  wagons.  Of  this  number,  55  were 
lost.  They  were  not,  with  but  few  exceptions,  abandoned  to  the  enemy,  but 
were  burned  upon  the  road.  Nearly  all  of  our  supplies  were  thus  saved.  The 
stores  at  Front  Royal,  of  which  I  had  no  knowledge  until  my  visit  to  that  post 
on  the  21st  instant,  and  those  at  Winchester,  of  which  a  considerable  portion 
was  destroyed  by  our  troops,  are  not  embraced  in  this  statement." 

In  this  statement  Gen.  Banks  confines  himself  to  the  losses  reported  by  Gen. 
Williams.  Gen.  Williams  says  that  his  report  embraced  a  "  complete  list  of 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing  of  the  troops  under  my  (his)  command,  except 
that  of  the  First  Maryland  (infantry),  detached  on  duty  at  Front  Royal."  I 
could  not  find  this  list,  but  from  subordinate  reports  it  appears  that  the  losses 
of  his  troops  in  killed  and  wounded  were  : 

Killed.  Wounded.  Killed.  Wounded. 

Donelly's  brigade  (official  report)  .     3         47   (Med.  report)  7  51 

Gordon's         "  "  "  .  "         "       25  71 

Broadhead's  cavalry  "  "  .  10         10 

Artillery — no  report  found. 

Killed.     Wounded. 

The  least  sum  of  the  above  is 38         128 

Banks  reports .         .         .38         155 

The  troops  just  enumerated  constituted  Gen.  Williams's  command.  That 
command  did  not  include  Hatch's  cavalry  brigade,  nor  the  parts  of  the  First 
Maryland  cavalry  and  Eighth  New  York  cavalry  present,  nor  the  Tenth  Maine 
infantry.  The  last-named  regiment  lost  in  all  83  men,  and  the  five  companies 
of  the  First  Maine  cavalry  lost  127.  The  other  cavalry,  under  Hatch,  no  doubt 
lost  in  proportion.  Again,  Gen.  Banks  says  there  were  nearly  1000  sick  and 
disabled  soldiers  of  Shields's  division  left  behind  at  Strasburg.  Several  hun- 
dreds of  these  were  "put  upon  the  march"  towards  Winchester  early  on  the 
24th.  A  number  of  them  were  captured.  If  the  losses  of  prisoners  at  Front 
Royal  (expressly  omitted  by  Gen.  Williams),  and  those  of  the  troops  not  under 


118       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

hosjiitals  were  at  first  paroled,  but  next  day,  at  the  su<;gcstion  of 
Medical  Director  Hunter  McGuirc,  of  Jackson's  staff,  they  were  un- 
conditionally released.'  Jackson's  loss  during  the  entire  expedition 
was  four  hundred  (400)  nien.^ 

But  the  most  imjiortant  result  of  Jackson's  victory  did  not  consist 
in  the  overthrow  of  the  small  army  under  Gen.  Banks  and  the  capture 
of  the  large  stores  accunudated  in  the  lower  Valley.  It  disorganized 
the  plan  of  campaign  against  Richmond,  and,  for  a  time,  paralyzed 
McClellan's  movements.  President  Lincoln  had  yielded,  as  hereto- 
fore stated,  to  Gen.  McClellan's  urgent  ai)peal  for  reinforcements, 
so  fiiras  to  order  McDowell,  on  the  17th  of  May,  to  prepare  to  move 
/  down  the  Fredericksbiu-g  and  Richmond  railroad,  in  order  to  unite 
with  the  main  Federal  army  in  front  of  Richmond.  Shields's  division 
was  sent  from  the  A^alley  to  swell  his  force  to  forty  thousand  (40,000) 
men  for  this  purpose.  On  Friday,  May  23,  President  Lincoln  and  Sec^ 
retary  Stanton  went  to  Fredericksburg  to  confer  with  Gen.  McDowell, 
found  that  Shields  had  already  reached  that  point,  and  determined, 
after  consultation,  that  the  advance  should  begin  on  the  following 
Monday,  26th  of  May.  McClellan  was  informed  of  the  contemplated 
movement,  and  instructed  to  assume  command  of  JMcDowell's  corps 
when  it  joined  liim.^    This  fine  body  of  troops,  moving  from  the  north 

Gen.  "Williams's  command,  and  those  of  Gen.  Shields's  convalescents,  were 
added  to  Gen.  Banks's  report,  it  would,  no  doubt,  agree  with  Jackson's.  In 
the  same  way,  the  artillery  lost  at  Front  Royal  is  not  reported  by  Banks,  and 
the  wagons  he  reports  as  lost,  and  which,  no  doubt,  represents  the  loss  in  Wil- 
liams's division,  constituted  but  a  small  part  of  those  that  actually  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  victors.  Hatch,  for  instance,  according  to  Gen.  G.  H.  Gordon,  lost 
all  his  baggage.  (See  History  Second  Massachusetts,  Third  Paper,  pp.  100,  etc.) 

^  For  the  terms  of  this  parole,  see  Appendix  to  "Medical  and  Surgical  History 
of  the  War,"  p.  118. 

^  Jackson's  rejiort.  He  reports  his  loss  as  68  killed,  329  wounded,  and  3 
missing.  This,  probably,  does  not  include  Ashby's  loss  at  Buckton,  or  the 
infantry  loss  at  Front  Royal.  No  report  of  Ashby's  loss  has  been  found.  It 
may  have  been  20  or  30.  The  loss  in  the  Louisiana  troops  at  Front  Royal  was 
10  (Gen.  Taylor's  report).  That  in  the  First  Maryland  not  reported.  It  was 
slight,  if  any.  Hence,  possibly,  about  40  should  be  added  to  the  number  in 
Gen.  Jackson's  report. 

^  President  Lincoln  telegraphed  McClellan  on  May  24 :  "I  left  Gen.  Mc- 
Dowell's camp  at  dark  last  evening.  Shields's  command  is  there,  but  it  is  so 
worn  that  he  cannot  move  before  Monday  morning,  the  26th.  .  .  .  McDowell 
and  Shields  both  say  they  can  and  positively  will  move  Monday  morning.  I 
wish  you  to  move  cautiously  and  safely.  You  will  have  command  of  McDowell 
after  he  joins  you,  precisely  as  you  indicated  in  your  long  despatch  to  us  of  the 
21st."     (McClellan's  report.) 


WINCHESTER.  119 

against  the  Confederate  capital,  would  have  seized  all  the  roads  enter- 
ing the  city  from  that  direction,  and  would  have  increased  McClellan's 
available  force  by  forty  or  fifty  per  cent.  There  was  strong  reason 
to  expect  that  this  combined  movement  would  effect  the  downfall  of 
Richmond. 

The  Federal  President  returned  to  Washington  on  the  night  of  the 
23d  to  await  the  result.  He  there  received  the  first  news  of  Jackson's 
operations  at  Front  Royal  on  that  same  afternoon.  The  first  de- 
spatches indicated  only  an  unimportant  raid,  and  McDowell  was 
directed  to  leave  his  "  least  effective"  brigade  at  Fredericksburg,  in 
addition  to  the  force  agreed  upon  for  the  occupation  of  that  town.^ 
Later,  on  the  24th,  the  news  from  Banks  became  more  alarming,  and 
Gren.  McDowell  was  telegraphed  that  "  Gen.  Fremont  has  been  ordered 
by  telegraph  to  move  from  Franklin  on  Harrisonburg,  to  relieve  Gen. 
Banks  and  capture  or  destroy  Jackson's  and  Ewell's  forces.  You  are 
instructed,  laying  aside  for  the  present  the  movement  on  Richmond, 
to  put  twenty  thousand  (20,000)  men  in  motion  at  once  for  the 
Shenandoah,  moving  on  the  line,  or  in  advance  of  the  line  of  the 
Manassas  Gap  railroad.  Your  object  will  be  to  capture  the  forces 
of  Jackson  and  Ewell,  either  in  co-operation  \\\i\\  Gen.  Fremont, 
or,  in  case  want  of  supj)lies  or  of  transportation  interferes  with  his 
movement,  it  is  believed  that  the  force  with  which  you  move  will  be 
sufiicient  to  accomplish  the  object  alone.^  .  .  ."     The  following  was 

sent  to  McClellan : 

"Washington  City,  May  24,  1862, 
"4  p.m. 

"In  consequence  of  Gen.  Banks's  critical  position,  I  have  been 
compelled  to  suspend  Gen.  McDowell's  movement  to  join  you.  The 
enemy  are  making  a  desperate  push  on  Harper's  Ferry,  and  we  are 
trying  to  throw  Fremont's  force  and  part  of  McDowell's  in  their 
rear. 

"A.  Lincoln." 

Next  day  the  news  from  Banks  seems  to  have  greatly  increased  the 
excitement  in  Washington.  The  follo"\ving  telegrams  were  sent  to 
Gen.  McClellan : 

'  Secretary  Stanton's  despatch  to  McDowell  is  as  follows :  "In  view  of  the  op- 
erations of  the  enemy  on  the  line  of  Gen.  Banks,  the  President  thinks  the  whole 
force  you  designed  to  move  from  Fredericksburg  should  not  be  taken  away,  and 
he  therefore  directs  that  one  brigade,  in  addition  to  what  you  designed  to  leave 
at  Fredericksburg,  should  be  left  there.  This  brigade  to  be  the  least  eflFective  of 
your  command."     (McDowell's  testimony.) 

^  Report  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  Part  I.  p.  274.     (McDowell's  testimony.) 


120       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

"  U.   S/MlMTAKV  TELEGRArn. 

"War  r>Ei'ARTMENT,  WASHINGTON,  D.  C,  May  25,  1862. 

"The  enemy  is  moviiii^  north  in  snfficient  force  to  drive  Banks  before 
liini,  in  i)recisely  what  force  we  cannot  tell.  He  is  also  threatening 
Leesburg,  and  Geary'  on  tlie  Manassas  Gap  railroad,  from  both  north 
and  south,  in  precisely  what  force  we  cannot  tell.^  I  think  the  move- 
ment is  a  general  and  concerted  one,  such  as  could  not  be  if  he  was 
acting  ujxm  the  ])urpose  of  a  very  desperate  defence  of  Richmond. 
I  think  the  time  is  near  wlien  you  nuist  either  attack  Richmond  or 
give  up  the  job  and  come  to  the  defence  of  Witshington.  Let  me  hear 
from  you  instantly. 

"A.  Lincoln. 

"  Gen.  McClellan." 

"  U.  S.  Military  Telegraph. 
"War  Department,  Washington,  D.  C,  May  25,  1862. 

"Your  despatch  received.  Banks  was  at  Strasburg  Avith  about  six 
thousand  (6000)  nien,^  Shields  having  been  taken  from  him  to  swell  a 
column  for  McDowell  to  aid  you  at  Richmond,  and  the  rest  of  liis  force 
scattered  at  various  places.  On  the  23d  a  rebel  force  of  seven  to  ten 
thousand  (7000  to  10,000)  men  fell  upon  one  regiment  and  two  com- 
panies, guarding  the  bridge  at  Front  Royal,  destroying  it  entirely, 
crossed  the  Shenandoah,  and  on  the  24th  (yesterday)  pushed  to  get 
north  of  Banks  on  the  road  to  Winchester.  Banks  ran  a  race  with 
them,  beating  them  into  Winchester  yesterday  evening.  This  morn- 
ing a  battle  ensued  between  the  two  forces,  in  which  Banks  was  beaten 

^  Gen.  Geary  commanded  a  force  guarding  this  railroad.  His  strength  present 
for  duty  May  17  was  about  1900. 

^  There  was  no  foi'ce  after  him  except  possibly  some  guerrillas.  Tenney,  in 
his  "Military  and  Naval  History  of  the  Rebellion,"  p.  235,  says:  "When  the 
news  of  the  attack  on  the  Maryland  regiment  at  Front  Royal  on  the  23d  reached 
Gen.  Geary,  who,  with  his  force,  was  charged  with  the  protection  of  the  Ma- 
nassas Gap  railroad,  he  immediately  began  to  move  to  Manassas  Junction.  His 
troops  hearing  the  most  extravagant  stories  of  the  fate  of  the  Maryland  regi- 
ment, and  supposing  that  they  were  about  to  be  swallowed  up,  burnt  their  tents 
and  destroyed  a  quantity  of  arms.  Gen.  Duryea,  at  Catlett's  Station,  became 
alarmed  on  learning  of  the  withdrawal  of  Gen.  Geary,  took  his  three  New  York 
regiments,  leaving  the  Pennsylvania  one  behind,  and  hastened  back  to  Centre- 
ville,  and  telegraphed  to  Washington  for  help.  He  left  a  large  quantity  of  army 
stores  behind,  and  also,  for  two  days,  his  camp  equipage.  A  panic  prevailed  at 
Catlett's  Station  and  Manassas  Junction  for  two  days.  At  night  the  camps  were 
kept  in  constant  alarm  by  the  sentinels  firing  at  stumps  or  bowing  bushes,  which 
they  mistook  for  Confederate  guerrillas.  The  alarm  spread  to  Washington,  and 
Secretary  Stanton  issued  orders  calling  for  the  militia  of  the  loyal  States  to 
defend  that  city." 

It  is  hard  to  see  how  any  "  stories"  as  to  the  A\te  of  the  Maryland  regiment 
could  have  been  "  extravagant."     It  was  very  nearly  "  swallowed  up." 

'  See  statement  of  Banks's  forces,  page  109. 


WINCHESTER.  121 

back  into  full  retreat  towards  Martinsburg,  and  probably  is  broken 
up  into  a  total  rout.  Geary,  on  the  Manassas  gap  railroad,  just  now 
reports  that  Jackson  is  now  near  Front  Royal  with  ten  thousand 
(10,000),  following  up  and  supporting,  as  I  understand,  the  force 
now  pursuing  Banks;  also  that  another  force  of  ten  thousand  (10,000) 
is  near  Orleans,  following  on  in  .the  same  direction/  Stripped  bare, 
as  we  are  here,  it  will  be  all  we  can  do  to  prevent  them  crossing  the 
Potomac  at  Harper's  Ferry,  or  above.  We  have  about  twenty 
thousand  (20,000)  of  McDowell's  force  moving  back  to  the  vicinity 
of  Front  Royal,  and  Fremont,  who  was  at  Franklin,  is  moving  to 
Harrisonburg.  Both  of  these  movements  are  intended  to  get  in  the 
enemy's  rear.  One  more  of  McDowell's  brigades  is  ordered  through 
here  to  Harper's  Feriy.  The  rest  of  his  forces  remain  for  the  present 
at  Fredericksburg.  We  are  sending  such  regiments  and  dribs  from 
here  and  Baltimore  as  we  can  spare  to  Haq^er's  Ferry,  supplying  their 
place  in  some  sort  by  calling  in  militia  from  the  adjacent  States.  We 
also  have  eighteen  cannon  on  the  road  to  Harper's  Ferrv,  of  which 
arm  there  is  not  a  single  one  yet  at  that  point.  This  is  now  our  situa- 
tion. If  McDowell's  force  was  now  beyond  our  reach  we  should  be 
utterly  helpless.  Apprehensions  of  something  like  this,  and  no  un- 
willingness to  sustain  you,  has  always  been  my  reason  for  withholding 
McDoAvell's  forces  from  you.  Please  understand  this,  and  do  the  best 
you  can  with  the  forces  you  have.  "  A.  Lincoln.^ 

"  Gen.  McClellan." 


^  These  were  of  course  entirely  imaginary  creations  of  Gen.  Geary's  inform-  / 
ant,  and  show  the  consternation  that  Jackson's  movement  had  inspired.  C 

'^  The  government  of  the  United  States,  on  the  same  day,  May  25,  called  for 
additional  troops,  and  issued  an  order  taking  "  military  possession  of  all  the 
railroads  in  the  United  States,"  for  the  transportation  of  troops  and  munitions 
of  war. 

"The  news  of  Gen.  Banks's  defeat  and  the  sudden  call  of  the  Secretary  of 
War  upon  the  State  militia  created  the  utmost  excitement  at  the  North,  not  only 
among  the  military  themselves,  but  among  the  thousands  connected  with  them." 
("Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v..  Diary,  p.  17.) 

The  following  is  Secretary  Stanton's  despatch,  dated  May  25,  to  the  Governor 
of  Massachusetts : 

"  Intelligence  from  various  quarters  leaves  no  doubt  that  the  enemy  in  great 
force  are  marching  on  Washington.  You  will  please  organize  and  forward 
immediately  all  the  militia  and  volunteer  force  in  your  State." 

Tenney  says :  "  This  alarm  at  Washington,  and  the  call  for  its  defence,  pro- 
duced a  most  indescribable  panic  in  the  cities  of  the  northern  States  on  Sunday 
the  25th,  and  two  or  three  days  afterwards.  .  .  . 

"  Governor  Curtin,  of  Pennsylvania,  issued  the  following  order  May  26 : 

"  '  On  pressing  requisition  of  the  President  of  the  United  States  in  the  present 
emergency,  it  is  ordered  that  the  several  major-generals,  brigadier-generals,  and 
colonels  of  regiments  throughout  the  Commonwealth  muster,  without  delay,  all 
military  organizations  within  their  respective  divisions  or  under  their  control 

9 


-^- 


122        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEV  OF    VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

The  operations  of  Jackson  thus  not  only  occupied  all  the  troops  in 
and  around  Washington,  together  with  Fremont's  forces,  but  for  the 
time  completely  neutralized  tlie  forty  thousand  men  under  McDowell, 
and  disconcerted  McClellan's  plans.  It  is  true  that  both  McDowell 
and  McClellan,  deeming  the  fears  of  the  Federal  administration  ex- 
aggerated, deprecated  tlie  interference  with  McDowell's  mlvanc^  on 
Richmond,  but  in  vain.  McDowell  says.  May  24,  in  reply  to  the 
order  sending  half  his  corps  after  Jackson :  "  I  beg  to  say  that  co- 
operation between  Gen.  Fremont  and  myself,  to  cut  off  Jackson  and 
Ewell,  is  not  to  be  counted  upon,  even  if  it  is  not  a  practical  impossi- 
bility; next,  tliiit  I  am  entirely  beyond  helping  distance  of  Gen. 
Banks,  and  no  celerity  or  vigor  Avill  avail,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned ; 
next,  that  by  a  glance  at  the  map  it  will  be  seen  that  the  line  of  re- 
treat of  the  enemy's  forces  up  the  Valley  is  shorter  than  mine  to  go 
against  him.  It  will  take  a  week  or  ten  days  for  the  force  to  get  to 
the  Valley  by  the  route  which  .will  give  it  food  and  forage,  and  by 

together  with  all  persons  willing  to  join  their  commands,  and  proceed  forthwith 
to  the  city  of  Washington,  or  such  other  points  as  may  be  indicated  by  future 
orders.' 

"  The  Governor  of  Massachusetts  issued  the  following  proclamation : 

"  '  Men  of  Massachusetts  !  The  wily  and  barbarous  Iiorde  of  traitors  to  the 
people,  to  the  government,  to  our  country,  and  to  liberty,  menace  again  the 
national  capital.  They  have  attacked  and  routed  Maj.-Gen.  Banks,  are  ad- 
vancing on  Harper's  Ferry,  and  are  marching  on  AVashington.  The  President 
calls  on  Massachusetts  to  rise  once  more  for  its  rescue  and  defence. 

"  '  The  whole  active  militia  will  be  summoned  by  a  general  order,  issued  from 
the  office  of  the  adjutant-general,  to  report  on  Boston  Common  to-morrow;  they 
will  mai'ch  to  relieve  and  avenge  their  brethren  and  friends,  and  to  oppose  with 
fierce  zeal  and  courageous  patriotism  the  progress  of  the  foe. 

" '  May  God  encourage  their  hearts  and  strengthen  their  arms,  and  may  he 
inspire  the  government  and  all  the  people! 

"  '  Given  at  headquarters,  Boston,  eleven  o'clock,  this  (Sunday)  evening.  May 
25,  1862. 

"  *  John  A.  Andrew.' 

"  The  Governor  of  Ohio  began  his  proclamation  as  follows  : 

"  '  To  the  Gallant  Men  of  Ohio :  I  have  the  astounding  intelligence  that  the 
seat  of  our  beloved  government  is  threatened  with  invasion,  and  am  called 
upon  by  the  Secretary  of  AVar  for  troops  to  repel  and  overwhelm  the  ruthless 
invaders.'  "... 

But  enough  of  gubernatorial  rhetoric.  The  effect  of  Jackson's  movement 
was  unmistakable.  "Almost  half  a  million  of  men  offered  themselves  for  the 
defence  of  Washington  within  twenty-four  hours  after  the  issue  of  the  procla- 
mation." 

Tenney  adds  that  this  "panic"  was  "extremely  disastrous  to  the  Federal 
cause." 


WINCHESTER.  123 

that  time  the  enemy  will  have  retired.'  I  shall  gain  nothing  for  you 
there,  and  shall  lose  much  for  you  here.  It  is  therefore  not  only  on 
personal  grounds  that  I  have  a  heavy  heart  in  the  matter,  but  that  I 
feel  it  throws  us  all  back ;  and  from  Richmond  north  we  shall  have 
all  om-  large  masses  paralyzed,  and  shall  have  to  iiepeat  what  we  have 
just  accomplished."  ^  McClellan  says :  "  It  will  be  remembered  that 
the  order  for  the  co-operation  of  Gen.  McDowell  was  simply  sus- 
pended, not  revoked,  and  therefore  I  was  not  at  liberty  to  abandon 
the  northern  approach  to  Richmond."^  This  fact,  together  with  the 
necessity  of  protecting  his  communications  with  the  York  river, 
caused  him  to  retain  a  part  of  his  army  on  the  north  side  of  the  Chick- 
ahominy,  while  the  remainder  was  separated  from  him  by  that  trouble- 
some stream, — a  circumstance  that  contributed  not  a  little  to  his 
subsequent  defeat. 

The  Federal  administration,  however,  adhered  to  its  plans,  and 
hastened  McDowell's  movement  to  the  Valley.  The  moral  effect  of 
a  Confederate  advance  to  the  neighborhood  of  Washington  was 
dreaded,  and  still  more,  perhaps,  the  irruption  of  a  victorious  south- 
ern force  into  the  State  of  Maryland.  The  mass  of  the  people  of  this 
State  sympathized  with  the  South.  They  were  kept  down  only  by 
the  presence  of  Federal  troops.  It  was  a  matter  of  grave  consequence 
that  Jackson  should  not  be  able  to  maintain  himself  north  of  the 
Potomac,  even  for  a  short  time.  Such  considerations  outweighed 
even  the  prosjiect  of  taking  Richmond. 

While  President  Lincoln  was  thus  "  taking  counsel  of  his  fears,"  * 
and  promptly  ordering  troops  from  all  directions  to  overwhelm  Jack- 
son, the  latter  was  resting  from  the  fatigues  of  his  forced  marches. 
Having  turned  over  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to  the  cavalry  at  mid- 
day on  Sunday  (25th),  he  placed  liLs  army  in  camp  at  Stephenson's, 
five  miles  north  of  Winchester,  and,  returning  himself  to  the  town, 
took  up  his  headquarters  there.  This  historic  town  and  its  beautiful 
environs  presented  on  that  glorious  May  afternoon  an  aspect  of  quiet 
and  repose  strangely  in  contrast  with  the  stormy  scenes  of  the  morn- 
ing. Several  warehouses  filled  with  stores  had  been  fired  by  the  flying 
Federals,  and  thLs  involved  the  burning  of  a  considerable  number  of 
other  buildings.     But  now  the  fire  was  over ;  the  citizens  were  busy 

^  He  little  appreciated  Jackson's  boldness,  who  remained  at  Harper's  Ferry 
until  McDowell's  advance  had  occupied  Front  Royal. 
^  McDowell's  testimony. 
'  McClellan' s  report. 
*  A  favorite  aphorism  of  Jackson's  was:  "  Never  take  counsel  of  your  fears." 


124       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-6S, 

looking  after  the  wounded,  or  paying  the  last  sad  rites  to  the  dead. 
Universal  joy,  even  when  mingled  with  sorrow  at  the  loss  of  loved 
ones,  was  manifested  at  Gen.  Jackson's  return. 

Next  morning  Jackson  issued  an  order  in  the  followinfj  terms : 
"  Within  four  weeks  this  army  has  made  long  and  rapid  marches, 
fought  six  combats  and  two  l)attles,  signally  defeating  the  enemy  in 
each  one,  cajjtured  several  stands  of  colors  and  pieces  of  artillery,  with 
numerous  prisoners,  and  vast  medical,  ordnance,  and  army  stores; 
and  finally  driven  the  boastful  host,  which  was  ravaging  our  beau- 
tiful country,  into  utter  rout.  The  general  commanding  would 
w'armly  express  to  the  oificers  and  men  under  his  command  liis  joy  in 
their  achievements,  and  his  thanks  for  their  brilliant  gallantry  in 
action  and  their  patient  obedience  imder  the  hardships  of  forced 
marches,  often  more  painful  to  the  brave  soldier  than  the  dangers 
of  battle.  The  explanation  of  the  severe  exertions  to  which  the 
commanding  general  called  the  army,  which  were  endured  by  them 
with  such  cheerful  confidence  in  him,  is  now  given  in  the  victory  of 
yesterday.  He  receives  this  proof  of  their  confidence  in  the  past 
with  pride  and  gratitude,  and  asks  only  a  similar  confidence  in  the 
future. 

"  But  his  chief  duty  to-day,  and  that  of  the  army,  is  to  recognize 
devoutly  the  hand  of  a  protecting  Providence  in  the  brilliant  suc- 
cesses of  the  last  three  days  (which  have  given  us  the  results  of  a 
great  victory  without  great  losses),  and  to  make  the  oblation  of  our 
thanks  to  God  for  his  mercies  to  us  and  our  country  in  heartfelt  acts 
of  religious  worship.  For  this  purpose  the  troops  will  remain  in  camp 
to-day,  suspending,  as  far  as  possible,  all  military  exercises ;  and  the 
chaplains  of  regiments  will  hold  divine  service  in  their  several 
charges  at  4  o'clock  p.m."  ^ 

Another  day  was  spent  in  resting,  and  then  the  Confederate  leader 
was  ready  for  action.  "  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Winchester 
he  had  sent  a  trusty  officer  to  the  capital  with  despatches  explaining 
his  views.  The  decision  of  the  government  was  that  he  should  press 
the  enemy  at  Harper's  Ferry,  threaten  an  invasion  of  Maryland  and 
an  assault  U2)on  the  Federal  capital,  and  thus  make  the  most  energetic 
diversion  possible  to  draw  a  portion  of  the  forces  of  McDowell  and 
McClellan  from  Richmond."^  Early  on  the  28th,  Gen.  A^^inder,' 
with  four  regiments  and  tw^o  batteries  of  his  brigade,  was  sent  for- 
ward towards  Charlestown  by  way  of  Summit  Point.     He  picked  up 

^  Dabney,  p.  384.  ^  Dabney,  p.  386. 


WINCHESTER.  125 

a  few  cavalry  scouts  on  tlic  way,  through  whom  he  learned,  when 
witliin  five  miles  of  Charlestown,  that  the  enemy  occupied  it  in  force. 
He  communicated  this  information  to  Jackson,  Avho  then  ordered 
Ewell  to  move  in  the  same  direction. 

The  troops  in  front  of  Winder  were  part  of  a  force  that  had  been 
rapidly  concentrated  at  Harper's  Ferry.  Col.  Miles  had  held  that 
post  for  some  time  with  a  small  force,  but  with  no  artillery.^  Upon 
the  reception  of  the  news  of  Banks's  defeat,  Gen.  R.  Saxton  had  been 
sent  to  take  command,  and  troops  and  artillery  were  hurried  forward. 
Saxton  arrived  on  the  26th,  and  by  the  evening  of  the  27th  a  force 
of  some  seven  thousand  (7000)  men^  and  eighteen  (18)  pieces  of  artil- 
lery^ had  been  gathered  there.  He  at  once  occupied  Bolivar  heights, 
the  high  plateau  in  the  fork  of  the  Shenandoah  and  the  Potomac,  with 
his  troops,  and  placed  a  naval  battery  of  Dahlgren  guns  on  the  point 
of  the  mountain  north  of  the  Potomac,  known  as  "  Maryland  Heights." 
This  last  position  completely  commands  the  town  and  the  Bolivar 
heights.  He  attempted,  on  the  evening  of  the  27th,  to  take  posses- 
sion of  the  point  of  the  mountain  opposite  the  Maryland  heights,  on 
the  Virginia  side,  and  known  as  the  Loudoun  heights,  but  the  two 
companies  sent  for  this  pm'pose  were  driven  off  by  some  guerrillas. 
Next  day  a  "  reconnoissance  in  force  was  made  towards  Charlestown 
by  the  One  Hundred  and  Eleventh  Pennsylvania  regiment,  the  First 
ISIaryland  cavalry,  and  a  section  of  Reynolds's  battery."  *  This  force 
drove  the  Confederate  cavalry  scouts  out  of  the  town,  and  took  up  a 
position  near  its  southern  limits.  It  was  soon  after  that  Gen.  Winder 
reached  the  vicinity  of  the  to^vn;  and,  forcing  back  the  Federal 
cavalry  pickets  through  a  piece  of  woodland,  he  found  the  main  body 
drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  beyond.  Seeing  that  the  Federal  force 
was  far  less  than  had  been  reported,  he  made  arrangements  to  attack 
at  once.  To  reply  to  the  two  Federal  guns  that  had  opened  on  him, 
he  placed  Carpenter's  four  pieces  in  position,  and  supported  them  by 
the  Thirty-third  Virginia  regiment.  "  This  battery  was  admirably 
worked,  and  in  tw^enty  minutes  the  enemy  retired  in  great  disorder, 
throwing  away  arms,  blankets,  haversacks,  etc.  TJje  pursuit  was  con- 
tinued rapidly  with  artillery  and  infantry.  Capt.  Poague  was  ordered 
up  with  a  gun  and  howitzer.     These,  with  Carpenter's  guns,  were 


^  See  President  Lincoln's  despatch,  p.  119. 
^  Saxton's  report,  "  Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.  p.  159. 
^  President  Lincoln's  despatch,  above  referred  to. 
*  Saxton's  report. 


126       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE   VALLEV  OF   VIRGINIA,   1S61-62. 

placed  in  position  wherever  ])ra('tic'al)le."^  Saxton,  hearing  of  the 
repulse  of  his  atlvan(«,  sent  forward  the  Seventy-eighth  New  York 
and  the  remainder  of  Reynolds's  battery  to  cover  the  retreat.  The 
Federals  reached  Bolivar  heights  with  the  loss  of  nine  jirisoners, 
and  Saxton  formed  his  main  body  "  in  line  of  battle  extending  along 
the  crest  of  Bolivar  heights  across  the  peninsula  from  the  Potomac 
to  the  Shenandoah."^  The  Confederates  continued  the  pursuit  to 
Halltown,  when,  finding  the  enemy  in  position  at  Bolivar,  and  tired 
from  a  march  of  over  twenty-one  miles,  they  were  content  to  return 
and  go  into  camp  in  the  vicinity  of  Charlestown.  Gen.  Ewell  arrived 
at  nightfall.     (Map  No.  VI.) 

Next  day  (29th)  the  main  body  of  the  Confederate  army  "  took 
position  near  Halltown,  and  the  Second  regiment  of  Virginia  in- 
fantry was  sent  to  the  Loudoun  heights,  with  the  hope  of  being  able 
to  drive  the  enemy  from  Harper's  Ferry  across  the  Potomac."  ^ 

These  movements  consumed  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  which  was 
not  marked  otherwise  on  the  Confederate  side,  save  by  the  driving 
in  of  the  Federal  pickets  and  the  repulse  of  the  reconnoitring  parties 
sent  out  by  Gen.  Saxton. 

The  latter  continued  throughout  the  day  to  hold  the  Federal  forces 
in  order  of  battle  on  Bolivar  heights.  In  the  afternoon,  the  fact 
that  no  attack  had  been  make  in  front,  the  appearance  of  a  Confederate 
force  on  Loudoun  heights,  and  a  report  that  Jackson  was  crossing  one 
division  over  the  Potomac,  above  Harper's  Ferry,  caused  him  to  fear 
an  attack  on  Maryland  heights  in  his  rear.  He  therefore  deter- 
mined to  move  part  of  his  infantry  to  the  north  side  of  the  Potomac, 
and  place  it  on  those  heights,  so  as  to  secure  his  battery,  already  there, 
and  to  withdraw  the  remainder  from  Bolivar  to  the  hill  immediately 
above  Harper's  Ferry,  where  his  line  would  be  shorter  and  his  troops 
more  completely  protected  by  the  guns  on  the  Maryland  heights. 
Thase  changes  he  effected  during  the  night  of  the  29th. 

These  precautions,  however,  were  unnecessary.  Jackson  had  no 
time  at  his  disposal  for  crossing  the  Potomac  and  investing  the  enemy 
on  all  sides.  He;^had  already  carried  his  instructions,  to  threaten  an 
invasion  of  Marjdand  and  a  movement  upon  Washington,  to  the 
extreme  point  consistent  with  safety.  The  movements  of  the  large 
bodies  of  troops  which  the  Federal  President  had  been  for  some  days 
urging  with  such  haste  towards  his  rear,  now  imperatively  demanded 
his   attention.     Jackson's   strength  was   not   over  fifteen  thousand 

^  Winder's  report.  ^  Saxton' s  report.  ^  Jackson's  report. 


hi-.. 


Hi 


WINCHESTER.  127 

(15,000)  men.*  All  the  energy  of  a  great  government  was  now 
being  expended  in  gathering  about  him  a  force  of  between  fifty-five 
and  sixty  thousand  (55,000  and  60,000)  men.^ 

The  despatch  of  President  Lincoln  to  Gen.  McDowell,  already 
given,  required  him  to  send  half  his  corps  after  Jackson.  Subsequent 
orders  du'ected  him  to  increase  still  further  this  force.  McDowell 
moved  King's  division  after  those  of  Shields  and  Ord.  The  front 
division  (Shields's)  was  pushed  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  by 
the  evening  of  the  29th  was  so  far  advanced  as  to  be  within  striking 
distance  of  Front  Royal  the  next  day.  Gen.  McDowell  was  himself 
directing  the  march  of  the  other  divisions  towards  the  same  point, 
and  reached  Rectortown  on  the  30th.^ 

On  the  other  hand,  Gen.  Fremont,  who  had  been  quietly  resting 
at  Franklin  for  ten  days,  Avhile  Jackson  was  making  forced  marches 
after  Banks,  was  startled  by  the  news  from  the  latter  on  the  24th,  and 
next  day  (Sunday,  25th)  took  up  his  march,  under  President  Lin- 
coln's orders,  for  Strasburg.*     The  route  he  chose  was  by  way  of 

'  Dabney.  Jackson's  force  has  been  greatly  exaggerated  in  many  of  the  ac- 
counts of  this  campaign. 

^  McDowell  was  moving  towards  Front  Royal  and  Strasburg  with  the  divisions 
of  Shields,  Ord,  and  King,  containing  30,000  men  (see  his  i-eturn  for  May  17, 
and  his  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  AYar).  Fremont 
was  marching  towards  the  same  points,  by  way  of  "Wardensville,  with  a  force 
of  14,672  (officers  and  men  for  duty,  by  return  of  May  30).  Saxton  had  at 
Harper's  Ferry  7000  troops  (Saxton's  report),  and  Banks  was  at  Williamsport, 
where  the  remains  of  his  army  had  grown  to  over  7000  men  (see  his  return  for 
May  31).     All  were  to  join  in  the  general  movement  against  Jackson. 

^  Shields's  division  entered  Front  Royal  first;  Ord's  (Rickett's)  division 
followed.  King,  who  was  in  the  rear,  sent  two  of  his  brigades  (Augur's  and 
Patrick's)  as  far  as  Front  Royal,  which  they  entered  June  1.  The  other 
brigade  (Gibbons' s)  stopped  at  Haymarket,  to  which  point  the  advance  brigades 
of  King  returned  on  June  2. 

*  Fremont  says :  "  With  the  intelligence  of  these  events"  (Jackson's  attack  on 
Banks),  "despatched  to  me  under  date  of  May  24,  came  also  an  order  from  the 
President  directing  me  to  break  camp  and  march  against  Jackson  at  Harrison- 
burg. 

"  Of  the  different  roads  leading  from  Franklin  to  Harrisonburg,  all  but  one 
had  been  obstructed  by  Jackson  in  his  retreat.  .  .  .  The  road  still  left  open  ran 
southwardly,  reaching  Harrisonburg  by  a  long  detour." 

Fremont  was  afraid  to  lengthen  his  line  of  supply,  and  especially  was  fearful, 
if  he  went  to  Harrisonburg,  that  Jackson  might  go  from  Strasburg  or  Winchester 
to  Romney  or  Moorefield.  A  despatch  from  Secretary  Stanton,  May  25,  left 
him  free  to  choose  his  route,  and  he  chose  to  go  back  from  Franklin  to  Peters- 
burg,  and   then  to  go  by  way  of  AVardensville  to  Strasburg.     He  reached 


128        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

Petersburg  (where  he  left  all  .surplus  baggage  and  tents)  and  Moore- 
flold.  His  progress  was  delayed  by  rain  and  bad  roads,  so  that  it  was 
Friday  night  (30th)  wlicn  he  reac-hed  Wardensville. 

Note. — Some  interesting  reminiscences  of  the  battle  of  Winchester  were 
received  from  Gen.  Trimble  after  the  foregoing  chapter  was  in  print.  It  seems 
that  Ewell's  division  moved  forward  early  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  May 
towards  Winchester,  Trimble's  brigade  in  front.  At  eight  o'clock  the  troops 
halted  to  rest,  when  Gen.  Trimble  descried  the  smoke  of  burning  stores  in  the 
direction  of  Strasburg,  and  suggested  a  march  directly  to  Newtown  to  cut  the 
main  road  from  Strasburg  to  Winchester.  Jackson,  however,  thinking  it  more 
probable  that  Banks  was  retreating  from  Strasburg  westwards  towards  the 
Potomac,  left  Ewell  with  Trimble's  brigade  and  some  other  troops  at  this  point, 
and,  taking  Taylor's  brigade  with  the  remainder  of  the  army,  moved  towards 
Middletown  that  he  might  the  sooner  strike  Banks  if  he  had  taken  the  route 
supposed.  Ewcll  remained  at  Nineveh  the  greater  part  of  the  day  waiting  for 
orders.  These  orders,  by  the  failure  of  the  courier  to  find  him,  instead  of  being 
delivered  by  mid-day,  did  not  reach  him  until  3.30  p.m.  They  directed  him  to 
move  on  Newtown,  but  when  received,  the  artillery  fire  indicated  that  Jackson 
with  the  main  body,  in  following  up  Banks,  had  already  advanced  to  that  point. 
Hence,  after  consultation.  Gens.  Ewell  and  Trimble  marched  towards  Win- 
chester, the  vicinity  of  which  they  reached  at  dusk. 

Next  morning  the  artillery  fire  on  Jackson's  wing  was  heard  by  seven  o'clock. 
Trimble's  brigade  was  then  moving  forward  on  the  other  flank.  "  Gen.  Ewell 
in  person  directed  the  Twenty-first  North  Carolina  regiment  to  enter  the  suburbs 
at  a  mill  on  the  southeast  part  of  the  town,  directing  the  other  regiments  of 
Trimble's  brigade  and  the  artillery  to  ascend  the  high  grounds  and  take  a  posi- 
tion on  the  east  of  Winchester,  a  half-mile  or  so  distant  from  that  place. 

"As  soon  as  the  North  Carolina  regiment  passed  the  mill-stream  they  were 
met  by  a  destructive  fire  from  behind  stone  fences,  and  could  not  advance.  Col. 
Mercer,  of  the  Twenty-first  Georgia,  skilfully  moved  farther  to  the  right,  charged 
the  enemy  in  flank  and  drove  them  off.  Gen.  Ewell  relinquished  the  attack  at 
that  point,  and  marched  his  whole  command  to  the  high  ground  before  named, 
ordering  his  artillery  to  open  fire  on  the  enemy's  batteries,  which  could  be  dis- 
covered on  the  south  edge  of  the  town.  After  a  cannonade  of  fifteen  minutes, 
a  dense  fog  obscured  the  Valley  completely  and  laid  over  the  town  for  perhaps 
half  an  hour,  during  which  the  firing  ceased  on  both  sides  entirely.  It  was 
about  nine  o'clock.  After  this,  the  fog  was  lifted  as  a  curtain,  displaying  every- 
thing, houses  and  the  enemy's  troops,  in  full  view.  Then  a  fierce  artillery  fire 
at  once  opened,  displaying  in  the  bright  sunshine  as  inspiring  a  battle-scene  as 
was  ever  witnessed.  .  .  . 

Petersburg  on  the  afternoon  of  May  26,  resumed  his  march  at  daybreak  on 
the  27th,  reached  Moorefield  at  night,  and  on  the  28th  went  to  Fabius,  ten 
miles  east  of  Moorefield,  on  Branch  mountain.  Here  he  halted  on  the  29th, 
because,  he  says,  of  the  urgent  representations  of  his  surgeon  and  others  that 
the  men  needed  rest,  and  could  not  properly  go  on.  On  the  30th  he  moved 
forward,  and  on  the  31st  reached  Cedar  creek. 


WINCHESTER.  129 

"  A  lialf-hour  after  the  fog  rose,  the  southern  yell  of  Taylor's  brigade  was 
heard  far  off  on  the  opposite  heights,  as  they  charged  down  on  the  flank  of  the 
enemy's  position.  Gen.  Jackson  had  ordered  Taylor  to  pass  in  the  rear,  out  of 
view,  gain  the  enemy's  right  flank  and  charge  down  on  him." 

Gen.  Trimble  now  desired  to  move  to  the  north  end  of  the  town  and  seize  the 
Martinsburg  road.  Gen.  Ewell,  after  some  delay,  directed  the  movement  to  be 
made,  but  when  Gen,  Trimble  reached  the  Martinsburg  road  the  mass  of  the 
Federal  troops  had  already  passed  the  point,  and  their  rapid  flight  soon  placed 
them  out  of  reach  of  the  Confederate  infantry.  The  severity  of  the  service 
undergone  by  Jackson's  troops  in  this  expedition  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact, 
stated  by  Gen.  Trimble,  that  at  Winchester  twenty  per  cent,  of  his  brigade  were 
barefooted.  The  abundant  stores  captured  were  a  God-send  to  the  ill-provided 
Confederates. 


CHAPTER    V. 

CROSS   KEYS   AND   PORT   REPUBLIC. 

~^  Jackson  had  been  watehing  the  approach  of  his  enemies,  and  con- 
cluded, on  Friday  morning  (30th),  that  it  was  time  for  him  to  with- 
draw if  he  would  pass  between  the  converging  armies  of  Fremont 
and  McDowell.^  Accordingly,  "  orders  were  issued  for  all  tlie  Con- 
federate troops,  except  AVinder's  brigade,  the  First  Maryland  regi- 
ment, and  the  cavalry,  to  return  to  Winchester  on  the  30th.  Directions 
were  given  to  Gen.  Winder  to  recall  the  Second  Virginia  regiment 
from  Loudoun  heights,  and,  so  soon  as  it  should  return  to  its  brigade, 
to  move  with  his  command,  including  the  cavalry,  and  rejoin  the  main 
body  of  the  army."  ^ 

While  Jackson,  with  the  main  body  of  his  forces,  was  thus  retiu-n- 
ing  to  Winchester  from  the  vicinity  of  Harper's  Ferry,  Shields,  with 
a  small  body  of  cavalry  and  the  advance  infantry  brigade  of  his 
division,  was  already  crossing  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  pom'ing  down 
from  the  mountain-pass  upon  Front  Royal.  The  Twelfth  Georgia 
regiment.  Col.  Conner,  and  a  section  of  Rice's  battery,  had  been  left 
by  the  Confederate  commander  to  hold  this  post  and  cover  the  removal 
of  the  very  large  amount  of  stores  there  captured.  These  last  were 
being  removed  as  fast  as  Maj.  John  A.  Harman,  chief  quartermaster, 
could  effect  it.  All  the  captured  wagons,  and  those  that  could  be 
spared  from  the  army,  as  well  as  all  that  could  be  hired  or  impr&ssed 
in  the  vicinity,  had  been  for  some  days  engaged  in  taking  the  stores 
from  Winchester  and  Front  Royal  to  the  rear.  Trains  of  wagons 
were  loading,  under  the  direction  of  Capt.  Cole,  assistant  quarter- 
master. Thirty-seventh  Virginia  regiment,  at  the  time  of  Shields's 
approach.  Col.  Conner  seems  not  to  have  been  aware  of  the  vicinity 
of  the  enemy  until  they  were  almost  upon  him.     He  then  hastily 

A      ^  On  Thursday  night  a  messenger  brought  him  information  of  the  movement 
of  Fremont  towards  Strasburg,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  30th  he  received 
definite  information  of  the  progress  of  Shields  and  McDovrell  towards  Front 
Royal,  and  of  the  condition  of  Banks's  troops  at  Williamsport. 
*  Jackson's  report. 
130 


CROSS  KEYS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  131 

abandoned  the  town,  and  with  his  small  force  fell  back  over  the 
Shenandoah  on  the  road  to  Winchester.  Capt.  Cole  was  with 
difficulty  able  to  send  his  wagons  beyond  the  reach  of  pursuit,  and 
had  barely  time  to  fire  the  depot  and  buildings  containing  the 
remainder  of  the  Federal  stores.  The  recapture  of  them  by  Shields 
was  thus  prevented.  The  latter  officer  pursued  the  retreating  Con- 
federates some  distance  on  the  road  to  Winchester,  Col.  Conner  making 
but  a  feeble  resistance,  and  losing  in  the  retreat  six  Federal  prisoners 
that  were  in  his  hands,  as  well  as  a  considerable  number  of  his  own 
men,  and  one  piece  of  artillery.^ 

The  condition  of  affiiirs  when  Jackson  reached  Winchester  on  the 
evening  of  that  day  (the  30th)  was  as  follows :  McDowell  was  in 
possession  of  Front  Royal,  which  is  but  twelve  miles  from  Strasburg, 
while  Winchester  is  eighteen.  Fremont  was  at  Wardensville,  distant 
twenty  miles  from  Strasburg,  and  had  telegraphed  the  Federal  Presi- 
dent that  he  would  enter  the  latter  place  by  5  p.m.  on  the  next  day.^ 
The  mass  of  Jackson's  forces  had  marched  twenty-five  miles  to  reach 
Winchester,  and  his  rear  guard,  under  Winder,  after  skirmishing  with 
the  enemy  at  Harper's  Ferry  for  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  had, 

^  A  Federal  account  in  the  "  Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.,  puts  the  number  of 
Cx>nfederates  captured  at  156,  and  so  does  the  report  of  the  surgeon-general  in 
the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the  War."  The  latter  puts  the  Federal 
loss  at  14.     I  have  found  no  official  reports  of  the  oflBcers  engaged. 

It  is  said  that  when  the  officer  in  command  reported  to  Gen.  Jackson,  at 
Winchester,  in  the  evening,  and  gave  a  rather  sensational  account  of  the  re- 
capture of  Front  Royal  and  the  repulse  of  his  own  regiment,  Gen.  Jackson 
looked  up,  and  in  his  quick,  nervous  way,  asked  :  "  Colonel,  how  many  men  had 
you  killed?"  "None,  I  am  glad  to  say,  general."  "  How  many  wounded ?" 
"  Few  or  none,  sir."  "  Do  you  call  that  fighting,  sir?"  said  Jackson,  and  a  few 
minutes  afterwards  the  colonel  was  put  under  arrest. 

^  The  following  despatches  are  from  Gen,  Fremont's  report: 

"Washington,  May  29. 
"  Maj.-Gen.  Fremont  : 

"Gen.  McDowell's  advance,  if  not  checked  by  the  enemy,  should,  and 
probably  will  be,  at  Front  Royal  by  12  noon  to-morrow.  His  force,  when  up, 
will  be  about  20,000. 

"  Please  have  your  force  at  Strasburg,  or,  if  the  route  you  are  moving  on  does 
not  lead  to  that  point,  as  near  Strasburg  as  the  enemy  may  be  by  that  time.  .  .  . 

"  A.  Lincoln." 

"  Washington,  May  30,  4  p.m. 
"Maj.-Gen.  Fremont: 

''  Yours  saying  you  will  reach  Strasburg  or  vicinity  by  5  p.m.,  Saturday,  has 
been  received  and  sent  to  Gen.  McDowell,  and  he  directed  to  act  in  view  of  it. 
You  must  be  up  to  time  of  your  promise  if  possible. 

"  A.  Lincoln." 


132       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

upon  the  reimion  of  the  Second  Virginia  regiment  with  it,  camped 
in  the  vicinity  of  Halltown,  which  Ls  about  forty-three  miles  distant 
from  Strasburg.  Thas,  while  the  head  of  Jackson's  column  was  still 
eighteen  miles  from  Strasburg,  and  the  rear  forty  miles  distant,  the 
head  of  McDowell's  army  was  but  twelve  miles  from  the  same 
point,  and  Fremont's  forces  were  but  twenty  miles  away.  The  com- 
bined forces  of  McDowell  and  Fremont  were  nearly  triple  the  Con- 
federate strength.  They  were  hastening  from  o})posite  directions  to 
cut  off  Jackson's  retreat,  and  once  at  Strasburg  the  way  would  be 
barred.  From  the  Potomac  side  the  combined  forces  of  Banks  and 
Saxton  amounted  to  fourteen  thousand  (14,000)  men,  and  were  ready 
to  close  in  on  the  rear  of  the  retreating  Confederates.  In  this  perilous 
situation  the  Confederate  leader  decided  to  occupy  Strasburg  in  ad- 
vance of  his  enemies,  and  to  pass  swiftly  between  the  two  principal 
armies  gathering  for  his  destruction.  It  was  a  case  in  which  supreme 
audacity  was  the  most  consummate  skill. 

No  time  was  to  be  lost  if  the  Confederates  Avere  to  escape  from  the 
dangers  that  threatened  them,  and  Jackson  lost  none.  Orders  were 
issued  for  everything  at  Winchester  to  move  early  the  next  morning 
(May  31).  The  two  thousand  three  hundred  (2300)  Federal  pris- 
oners were  first  sent  forward,  guarded  by  the  Twenty-first  Virginia 
regiment ;  next,  the  long  trains,  including  many  loaded  with  captured 
stores ;  then  followed  the  whole  of  the  army  except  the  rear  guard 
under  Winder.  Capt.  Hotchkiss  was  sent  with  orders  to  Winder  to 
hasten  on  to  Winchester  and  not  to  camp  until  he  had  made  some  part 
of  the  distance  between  that  place  and  Strasburg.^ 

The  march  was  made  without  molestation,  and  during  the  after- 
noon the  main  body  of  the  Confederates  reached  Strasbiu-g,  and 
camped  there  for  the  night.  Gen.  Winder,  late  in  the  day,  passed 
through  Winchester  to  the  neighborhood  of  Newtown,  where  he  went 
into  camp,  some  parts  of  his  command  having  marched  thirty-five, 
and  all  of  it  twenty-eight,  miles  ! 

Jackson  thiLS  in  a  single  day  put  thirty  miles  between  himself  and 
the  tardy  columns  of  Saxton  and  Banks,  and  took  position  directly 
between  the  two  armies  of  Fremont  and  McDowell,  which  had  been 
sent  to  crash  him.    But  the  latter  were  moving  with  too  great  caution 


*  Capt.  Hotchkiss  says  that  Gen.  Jackson  sent  him,  at  10  p.m.,  to  Winder, 
saying :  "  I  want  you  to  go  to  Charlestown  and  bring  up  the  First  brigade.  I 
will  stay  in  Winchester  until  you  get  here,  if  I  can ;  but  if  I  cannot,  and  the 
enemy  gets  here  first,  you  must  conduct  it  around  through  the  mountains." 


CROSS  KEYS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  133 

for  their  purpose  towards  the  appointed  rendezvous.  Gen.  Shields  con- 
sumed the  day  in  getting  the  whole  of  his  division  into  Front  Royal, 
and  in  posting  it  out  on  the  various  roads  leading  from  that  village. 
He  had  exaggerated  ideas  of  Jackson's  strength,  and  was  also  imposed 
upon  by  a  report  that  a  force  under  Longstreet  was  approaching  to 
the  relief  of  Jackson  by  the  Luray  valley.  ^\^hen  Gen.  McDowell, 
therefore,  who  had  during  the  day  urged  forward  Ord's  (now  Rickett's) 
division  towards  Front  Royal,  came  up  with  Shields  at  nightfall,  he 
found  that  one  of  the  latter's  brigades  had  been  posted  with  reference 
to  a  force  approaching  from  Luray,  while  another  was  at  the  fords  of 
the  Shenandoah,  a  third  in  the  direction  of  Strasburg,  and  the  fourth 
in  Front  Royal  itself.^  Shields  had  not  ventured,  however,  to  push 
out  to  any  coasiderable  distance  from  the  latter  place.  He  made 
no  attempt  to  occupy  Strasburg,  or  to  impede  and  harass  Jackson's 
retreat  by  striking  the  Valley  turnpike,  on  which  the  latter  was 
moving.  He  awaited  the  arrival  of  McDowell  and  the  remaining 
divisions. 

Fremont,  on  the  other  hand,  left  Wardensville  on  Saturday  morn- 
ing. He  was  to  have  entered  Strasbm-g  on  that  afternoon,  according 
to  his  despatches  to  Mr.  Lincoln,  but  he  stopped  several  miles  short 
of  the  town,  at  Cedar  creek.  The  heavy  roads,  and  a  violent  rain- 
storm in  the  afternoon,  may  have  induced  him  to  cut  short  his  march 
before  he  reached  the  Confederate  outposts ;  but,  whatever  the  cause, 
the  result  was  the  loss  of  all  opportunity  to  seriously  hinder  the 
retreat  of  Jackson. 

Saxton,  at  Harper's  Ferry,  had  moved  out,  and,  finding  that 
Winder  was  gone,  advanced  as  far  as  Charlestown,  but  there  went 
into  camp,  and  made  no  further  eifort  to  follow.  He  reports  his  men 
as  having  been  "completely  worn  out  by  fatigue  and  exposure" 
consequent  upon  the  skirmishes  and  movements  of  the  preceding 
days.  , 

Next  morning  (Sunday,  June  1)  the  clouds  broke  away,  and  a 
bright  day  succeeded  the  rain-storm  of  the  preceding  afternoon  and 
night, — a  welcome  change  to  the  weary  soldiers  of  both  armies  as  they 
rose  from  their  wet  bivouac. 

Jackson,  during  the  morning,  continued  the  movement  of  his 
prisoners  and  all  surplus  trains  to  the  rear,  while  he  retained  the 
bulk  of  his  force  at  Strasburg  to  keep  possession  of  the  road  until 
Winder  should  arrive.    Finding  that  Fremont  was  preparing  to  force 

^  McDowell's  testimony. 


134       CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

in  his  cavalry  outposts,  under  Ashby,  on  the  Wardensville  road,  he 
ordered  Gen.  Ewell,  with  his  division,  to  support  them,  and  sub- 
sequently strengthened  Ewell  by  other  troops,  so  as  to  make  a  display 
of  force.  Fremont's  effort  to  advance  was,  liowever,  veiy  feeble. 
Cluseret's  brigade  was  in  the  front  of  his  command,  and  engaged  the 
Confederate  advance,  but,  after  a  spirited  skirmish,  the  brigade  was 
withdi'awu,  because  of  the  advantageoas  })osition  of  the  Confederate 
artillery,  and  Fremont  took  position  a  short  distance  to  the  rear. 
Here  he  remained  the  greater  part  of  the  day,^  making  no  further 
attack  on  the  Confederate  lines,  evidently  hesitating  to  bring  down 

^-^  the   whole   of    Jackson's   force   on    himself,   while    uncertain    that 
McDowell  was  within  supporting  distance. 
_.    Meantime,  Jackson's  rapid  movements  seem  to  have  completely 

-^  bewildered  McDowell  and  Shields.  The  former  gives  the  following 
account  of  the  day's  operations :  "  The  next  morning  (June  1)1  en- 
deavored to  get  in  the  division  of  Gen.  Ord,  then  Gen.  Rickett's 
division.  They  were  wet,  had  no  tents,  and  were  very  much  exposed, 
but  they  got  along  the  best  way  they  could.  They  kept  coming  in 
in  driblets,  sometimes  in  considerable  bodies.  We  heard  firing,  and 
that  animated  them  somcAvhat,  and  they  began  to  come  in  pretty  fast. 
The  firins:  seemed  to  be  in  the  direction  of  Winchester.  I  saw  Gen. 
Shields,  and  it  was  arranged  that  he  should  take  the  road  at  once  with 
his  division,  as  he  knew  the  country  and  we  did  not.  He  said  if  he 
could  only  get  his  troops  in  from  the  diiferent  places  where  they  had 
been  posted,  he  could  accomplish  the  movement.  I  told  him  that  he 
could  give  orders  that  they  should  take  up  their  march,  and  I  would 
see  that  those  positions  they  then  occupied  were  cared  for.  He  was 
to  go  on  the  direct  road  to  Strasburg,  and  not  cross  the  North  Fork 
of  the  Shenandoah  until  near  Strasburg,  and  that  if  he  should  inter- 
pose between  Jackson's  advance,  Ord's  division  should  tlirow  itself 
upon  his  flank. 

"After  some  time  in  getting  Ord's,  or  rather  Rickett's,  division 
together,  I  started  out  to  the  front.  I  met  one  of  Gen.  Shields's 
aides-de-camp  coming  in  from  (to?)  Front  Royal,  and  asked  him  how 
far  out  he  had  met  Gen.  Shields.  He  said  he  had  not  met  him  at 
all.  I  told  him  he  had  started  to  go  out,  and  he  said  he  nuist  have  lost 
his  way.  Without  stopping  to  see  what  had  become  of  him,  I  took 
Bayard's  cavalry  brigade,  the  only  one  ready  to  move,  and  sent  it 


1  On  the  water-shed  between  Cedar  creek  and  the  Shenandoah,  about  three 
miles  from  Strasburg. 


CROSS  KEYS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  135 

forward  by  the  direct  road  to  Strasburg.^  I  then  went  to  see  where 
Gen.  Shields  was,  and  found  him  over  on  the  road  towards  Win- 
chester. He  had  sent  his  troops  on  that  road,  instead  of  on  the  one 
I  had  ordered  him  to  send  them  on.  He  said  that  he  had  received 
information  from  his  aide-de-camp  that  Jackson  had  fallen  back,  and 
he  had  sent  his  troops  this  way.  When  I  got  up  there  they  were 
coming  in. 

"  Well,  it  was  too  late  to  get  ahead  of  Jackson  then.  The  only 
way  then  was  this :  I  expected  Gen.  Fremont  would  be  coming  into 
Strasburg,  and  to  come  in  from  the  south,  instead  of  the  north.  But 
we  heard  the  firing  in  another  direction,  showing  that  the  force  was 
not  coming  the  way  we  expected.  So  Gen.  Shields  went  oif  with  my 
consent  to  Luray,  as  giving  the  only  chance  to  effect  anything.  He 
knew  the  country,  the  roads,  bridges,  etc.,  better  than  I  did,  and  I 
sent  forward  this  cavalry  brigade  of  Bayard's  to  hang  upon  the  rear 
of  the  enemy."  ^ 

Thus  Shields's  division  was  sent  forward  first  on  the  Strasburg 
road;^  then  had  its  line  of  march  changed,  under  information  entirely  ■ 
worthless,  to  the  Winchester  road ;  *  and  lastly,  in  despair  of  over- 
hauling Jackson  by  moving  directly  on  his  line  of  retreat,  it  was 
moved  over  to  the  Lm-ay  road.  The  day  was  thus  wasted,  and 
Shields  was  finally  sent  in  pursuit  by  a  longer  and  rougher  route, 
with  the  sanguine  expectation  of  "  heading  oif"  Jackson,  who  had 
gained  a  day's  start,  and  was  moving  by  the  shorter  and  better  road. 

Winder  reached  Strasburg  about  noon.  Jackson  in  the  afternoon 
withdi'ew  the  troops  that  had  been  holding  Fremont  in  check,  and  his 
whole  force,  now  reunited,  continued  to  retreat  in  the  direction  of 
Harrisonbm'g.  The  rear  of  the  Confederates  was  covered  by  the 
cavalry.  The  latter  camped  some  four  miles  south  of  Strasburg, 
while  Jackson,  with  the  mass  of  his  army,  rested  for  the  night  at 
Woodstock. 

^  Lieut.  Boswell,  of  Gen.  Jackson's  staflf,  scouting  with  five  men,  found  the 
Federal  cavalry  on  the  road  from  Strasburg  to  Front  Royal.  Jackson  sent  some 
cavalry  to  stop  their  advance,  but  no  serious  efiFort  was  made  to  force  a  way. 

^  Report  of  Committee  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  Part  I.  p.  265. 

^  Saturday  having  been  lost,  Shields  could  not  have  reached  Strasburg  in  time 
to  "  intercept"  any  portion  of  Jackson's  command,  as  Winder  was  only  nine  or 
ten  miles  from  that  place  on  Sunday  morning  with  the  Confederate  rear  guard, 
while  Shields  was  twelve  miles  off,  with  a  hilly  country  road  to  move  on  and  a 
river  to  cross. 

*  The  roads  to  Strasburg  and  Winchester  from  Front  Royal  are  the  same  for 
two  miles  out  from  the  latter  village,  and  separate  in  the  fork  of  the  rivers. 


136        CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

On  Friday  morning  Jackson  was  in  front  of  Harper's  Ferry,  which 
place  is  fifty  miles  from  Strasburg;  Fremont  was  at  Moorefield,  thirty- 
eight  miles  from  Strasbnrg,  with  his  advance  ten  miles  on  the  way  to 
the  latter  place ;  Shields  was  not  more  than  twenty  miles  from  Stras- 
burg, for  his  advance  entered  Front  Royal,  which  is  but  twelve  miles 
distant,  before  mid-day  on  Friday ;  while  McDowell  w^as  following 
with  two  divisions  Avithin  supporting  distance.  Yet  by  Sunday  night 
Jackson  had  marched  a  distance  of  between  fifty  and  sixty  miles, 
though  encumbered  with  prisoners  and  captured  stores,  had  reached 
Strasburg  before  either  of  his  adversaries,  and  had  passed  safely  between 
their  armies,  while  he  held  Fremont  at  bay  by  a  show  of  force,  and 
blinded  and  bewildered  McDo^vell  by  the  rapidity  of  hLs  movements. 

As  the  Confederates  withdrew  from  Strasburg,  Cluseret's  brigade, 
of  Fremont's  forces,  followed  them  and  occupied  the  town.  A  force, 
sent  forward  to  reconnoitre  the  Confederates,  came  up  with  the  rear, 
consisting  of  the  Second  and  Sixth  Virginia  cavalry  regiments, 
some  four  or  five  miles  south  of  Strasburg.  In  the  darkness  of  the 
night  a  small  party  of  Federal  cavalry,  being  mistaken  for  some  of 
Ashby's  men,  passed  the  Confederate  picket  and  produced  some  con- 
fusion in  the  Sixth  regiment.  They  were  soon  repulsed,  however, 
and  thus  ended  the  operations  of  the  day.  The  main  body  of  Fre- 
mont's army  bivouacked  for  the  night  in  the  position  it  had  occupied 
during  the  day.  It  was  only  next  morning  that  this  general  entered 
Strasburg  with  the  mass  of  his  troops,  at  about  the  same  time  as 
Bayard's  cavalry  brigade,  wdiich  had  been  sent  forward  by  McDowell 
the  day  before.  Ordering  Bayard  to  take  the  advance,  Fremont  now 
pressed  forward  in  pursuit  with  a  vigor  which  might  have  been  more 
effective  if  it  had  been  manifested  tw^o  or  three  days  sooner. 

Simultaneously,  Shields  was  advancing  from  Front  Royal  towards 
Luray.  McDowell  turned  over  to  this  officer  the  further  pursuit  of 
Jackson  by  that  route,  and  held  Ord's  division  for  the  time  at  Front 
Royal.  McDowell  says :  "  Just  as  Gen.  Shields  left,  he  seemed  to 
be  disturbed  about  the  question  of  supplies.  He  had  been  in  that 
country  before,  and  his  command  had  suffered  somewhat.  He  wrote 
me  a  letter  stating  his  apprehensions,  saying  that  if  troops  instead  of 
supplies  kept  coming  over,  the  troops  would  starve,  and  asking  why 
I  should  bring  so  many  there ;  that  he  had  enough  men  to  clear  the 
Valley  out,  and  for  God's  sake  not  to  send  him  any  more  men,  but 
to  send  him  supplies.     I  wrote  back  to  him  that  the  road^  had  been 

*  Manassas  Gap  railroad. 


CROSS  KEYS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  137 

finished,  and  that  there  were  supplies  in  abundance  at  Front  Royal, 
and  he  could  supply  himself  at  that  place  with  the  trains  that  he  had, 
and  that  I  was  willing  he  should  follow  up  Jackson  as  far  as  his 
better  knowledge  of  the  roads  of  that  country  would,  in  his  judgment, 
render  it  profitable  and  advisable,  with  the  single  direction  that  when 
he  moved  he  should  move  with  his  whole  division  together,  so  that  the 
different  parts  of  it  should  be  in  supporting  distance  of  each  other."  ^ 
The  fact  that  though  McDowell's  advance  had  entered  Front  Royal 
on  Friday  morning,  it  had  not  appeared  near  Strasburg  as  late  as 
Simday  afternoon,  caused  Jackson  to  suspect  the  movement  by  the 
Luray  valley.^  The  graded  road  up  this  valley  runs  on  the  east  side 
of  the  main  or  South  Fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  a  river  in  ordinary 
stages  fordable  at  but  few  points,  and  now  swollen  so  as  to  be  impass- 
able except  at  the  bridges.  It  was  now  crossed  by  but  three  bridges 
in  the  whole  distance  of  over  fifty  miles  from  Front  Royal  to  Conrad's 
Store,  where  the  Luray  valley  merges  into  the  great  Valley  by  the 
sinking  of  the  Massanutton  mountain  into  the  general  level.'  One  of 
these,  the  most  southerly,  was  at  Conrad's  Store;  two  were  on  the  road 
that  leads  from  New  Market  across  the  Massanutton  mountains.  This 
road  divides  at  the  eastern  base  of  the  Massanuttons,  the  one  branch 
going  northeast  via  Luray  and  Thornton's  gap  in  the  Blue  Ridge  to 
Culpeper,  the  other  east  by  Alma  and  Fischer's*  gap  to  Madison 
Com't-HoiLse.  The  first  of  these  roads  crosses  the  Shenandoah  by  the 
White-House,  the  other  by  the  Columbia  bridge.  It  was  by  the 
former  that  Jackson  had  crossed,  when  ten  days  before  he  had  moved 
down  to  turn  Banks's  flank  at  Front  Royal.  To  prevent  Shields 
from  crossing  at  these  two  bridges  w'as  to  prevent  his  junction  with 
Fremont,  and  to  keep  him  from  making  any  eifort  to  "  head  off" 
Jackson  short  of  Harrisonburg,  as  well  as  to  condemn  him  to  a  march 
of  sixty  miles  over  muddy  roads  to  reach  a  point  not  over  fifty  miles 
distant  now  from  the  Confederates,  and  which  they  were  approaching 
by  a  good  MacAdam  road.  The  Confederate  commander  despatched 
a  detachment  of  cavalry  to  burn  the  bridges,  which  was  effected  without 
opposition.' 

^  McDowell's  testimony,  Report  of  Committee  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  Part  I. 
p.  266. 

^  See  Jackson's  report.  Confederate  Official  Reports,  vol.  i.,  1862. 

^  The  Red  bridge,  the  first  one  north  of  Conrad's  Store,  had  been  destroyed  in 
April. 

*  Sometimes  erroneously  called  Milam's.     The  latter  is  farther  southwest. 

^  Gen.  Shields  says  he  was  ordered  up  the  Luray  valley,  June  1,  to  fall  on 

10 


138       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

Having  taken  this  measure  to  free  liimself  for  the  time  from  one  of 
his  pursuers,  Jackson  fell  back  more  leisurely  before  the  other.  On 
Monday  (June  2)  he  retreated  to  Mount  Jackson.  All  day  his  rear 
was  closely  followed  by  Fremont's  advance.  Ashby,  who  had  re- 
ceive<l  his  commission  a.s  brigadier-general  at  Winchester  a  few  days 
before,  wa.s  now  placed  in  command  of  all  the  cavalry,  and  to  him 
was  committed  the  duty  of  protecting  the  rear.  He  skirmished  con- 
stantly with  the  enemy,  checking  them  whenever  they  advanced  too 
close.  At  one  time  the  enemy,  securing  a  favorable  position  for  artil- 
lery, shelled  the  rear  guard  so  as  to  throw  it  into  confusion.  Bayard 
threw  his  cavalry  quickly  forward  to  take  advantage  of  this.  Ashby 
sees  the  coming  charge,  and  the  Confederate  cavalry  retreating  in 
confusion.  He  dismounts,  and  gathering  a  few  stragglers  of  the  in- 
fantiy,  who,  too  foot-sore  and  tired  to  keep  up,  are  at  hand,  posts 
them  in  a  wood  near  the  roadside,  and  pours  a  volley  at  close  quar- 
ters into  the  charging  column.  The  column  is  checked  and  partly 
thrown  into  disorder.  The  advance,  however,  keep  on,  and  ride 
through  the  rear  of  the  nearest  infantry  regiment.  The  brigade 
commander.  Col.  J.  M.  Patton,  files  another  regiment  to  the  roadside, 
and  a  volley  from  this  sends  all  who  are  not  killed  or  wounded  back 
in  confusion.^ 

Jackson  moved  his  trains  over  the  North  Fork  of  the  Shenandoah, 
near  Mount  Jackson,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  2d,  and  on  the  3d  fell 
back  to  New  Market.  Ashby  again  covered  his  rear,  burning  the 
bridge  over  the  Shenandoah  as  he  retired,  notwithstanding  the  enemy's 
efforts  to  prevent  it.  Here  this  gallant  officer  had  his  horse  killed, 
and  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life.  The  destruction  of  the  bridge 
checked  Fremont's  advance  for  a  day.^ 

Next  day  Jackson  continued  his  retreat,  and  on  the  5th  reached 
Harrisonburg,  which  he  entered  before  mid-day.     Here  he  changed 

Jackson's  flank  while  Fremont  attacked  him  in  rear.  He  continues:  "About 
5  P.M.  next  day  my  advance  reached  the  Shenandoah  at  Honeyville,  but  found 
the  Whitchouse  bridge  and  the  Columbia  bridge  both  burned,  thus  cutting  off 
all  hope  of  attacking  his  flank  at  New  Market.  ...  I  then  pushed  forward  the 
advance  as  rapidly  as  possible  in  hope  of  finding  the  bridge  at  Conrad's  Store 
still  standing,  but  that  bridge  was  also  found  burned.''     (Shields's  report.) 

^  Jackson's  report,  Dabney,  p.  397. 

'^  There  was  a  tremendous  rain  in  the  afternoon.  Fremont  replaced  the  burnt 
bridge  by  a  pontoon,  but  the  rapidly-rising  river  broke  it,  and  thus  delayed  him 
one  day.  On  the  night  of  the  2d,  Jackson  sent  Capt.  Ilotchkiss,  with  a  party 
of  signal-men,  to  the  south  end  of  the  Massanutton  mountain,  to  keep  him 
advised  of  the  movements  of  both  Shields  and  Fremont. 


CROSS  KEFS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  139 

his  line  of  inarch,  and  leaving  the  Valley  tnrnpike,  moved  in  the 
direction  of  Port  Republic  and  BroA^Ti's  gap. 

When  he  retired  before  Banks,  six  weeks  before,  he  had  gone  to 
Elk  Run  valley,  at  the  foot  of  Swift  Run  gap.  His  special  object  in 
selecting  that  route  had  been  that  it  placed  him  most  readily  in  com- 
munication with  Ewell  at  Madison  Court-House. 

Now  in  retiring  towards  Port  Republic  Jackson  secured  a  better 
and  shorter  route  to  the  Virginia  Central  railroad,  if  it  should  become 
necessary  to  lea^^e  the  Valley,  while  the  configuration  of  the  moun- 
tains at  Brown's  gap  gave  him  an  almost  impregnable  position, 
should  he  desire  to  hold  it.^  At  Port  Republic  there  was  no  danger 
that  Fremont  would  attempt  to  pass  him  towards  Staunton. 

To  leave  Harrisonburg,  however,  by  this  route  was  to  leave  open 
a  means  of  communication  between  Fremont  and  Shields  over  the 
road  Jackson  had  himself  formerly  used  from  Harrisonburg  to 
Conrad's  Store.  His  first  care  was  to  prevent  a  union  of  these  forces 
by  this  means  in  his  front.  The  only  bridge  over  the  Shenandoah 
between  Port  Republic  and  those  he  had  destroyed  was  at  Conrad's 
Store.  A  detachment  of  cavalry  was  sent  to  destroy  it.  Shields  had 
not  yet  advanced  to  this  point,  but  had  sent  some  cavalry  to  learn  the 
condition  of  the  bridge  and  to  guard  it.  While  this  party  was  absent 
on  a  scout  after  some  stores  reported  to  be  in  the  hands  of  a  small 
Confederate  guard  a  few  miles  off,  the  cavalry  sent  by  Jackson  reached 
the  place  and  burnt  the  bridge.  Jackson  now  held  the  only  ready 
means  of  communication  between  his  enemies, — the  bridge  at  Port 
Republic.  By  destroying  the  other  bridges  he  had  placed  a  very 
troublesome  barrier  between  his  two  pursuers,  and  now  he  occupied 
the  point  where  their  two  routes  converged.  No  farther  to  the  rear 
would  the  Shenandoah  serve  as  a  barrier  to  their  junction,  for  south 
of  Port  Republic  its  head-waters  are  easily  fordable. 

On  the  5th,  Jackson  sent  the  sick  and  wounded  to  Staunton,  cross- 
ing them  over  North  river  at  Mount  Crawford  by  means  of  a  ferry. 
The  bridge  at  this  place  had  been  destroyed  when  Banks  advanced 

^  "  Two  arms  of  the  mountain,  lofty  and  rugged  as  the  mother-ridge,  project 
from  it  on  the  right  and  left  hand,  embracing  a  deep  vale  of  many  miles'  circuit, 
watered  by  a  copious  mountain  stream  ;  and  while  the  mighty  rim  of  this  cup  is 
everywhere  impracticable  for  artillery  and  cavalry,  the  narrow  gorge  through 
which  the  road  enters  it  from  the  west  affords  scarcely  room  to  set  a  regiment 
in  battle  ai-ray  between  the  two  promontories  of  the  mountain.  Here  was  ob- 
viously the  place  for  a  small  army  to  stand  at  bay  against  superior  numbers." 
(Dabney,  p.  403.) 


140       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-G2. 

some  weeks  before,  and  the  river  was  now  so  much  swollen  as  to 
make  fording  and  even  ferrying  apparently  impossible.  But  Jackson 
would  not  be  balked  by  this  difficulty.  From  midnight  of  the  4th 
he  continued  to  send  officers  and  messengers  to  hurry  forward  the 
preparations.  Early  in  the  day  on  the  5th,  Capt.  C.  R.  Mason,  in 
charge  of  pioneers,  succeeded,  after  much  labor  and  some  risk,  in 
constructing  a  ferry  which  carried  over  the  ambulances  and  sick,  and 
thus  saved  them  the  long  and  muddy  detour  by  Port  Republic.  By 
means  of  the  signal  station  established  by  Capt.  Hotchkiss  a  day  or 
two  before  on  the  end  of  the  Massauutton  chain,  Jackson  kept  himself 
informed  of  the  movements  of  Shields.  He  continued  to  occupy 
Harrisonburg  with  his  rear  guard  until  Fremont's  advance  once  more 
came  up.  This  was  about  mid-day  on  the  6tli.  Ashby  allowed  the 
enemy  to  occupy  Harrisonburg  without  opposition,  and  retired  to 
a  position  about  two  miles  south,  on  the  Port  Republic  road.  Here 
he  was  attacked  an  hour  later  by  a  body  of  Fremont's  cavalry  under 
Col.  Sir  Percy  Wyudham.^  This  cavalry  fight  is  vividly  described 
by  a  Federal  officer  engaged  in  it,  in  a  letter  to  the  "  New  York  Tri- 
bune," dated  Fremont's  headquarters,  June  7.  He  says:  "When  all 
the  cavalry  had  come  up,  a  force  consisting  of  the  First  New  Jersey, 
First  Pennsylvania,  two  companies  of  the  Fourth  New  York,  and  two 
companies  of  Connecticut  cavalry,  in  all  about  eight  hundred  (800), 
under  command  of  Col.  Wyudham,  of  the  First  New  Jersey  regiment, 
was  ordered  forward  by  Gen.  Fremont  to  take  possession  of  the  town 
and  reconnoitre  a  short  distance  beyond.  Before  this  column  moved, 
a  report  was  brought  by  a  scout  that  there  were  three  hundred  rebel 
cavalry  within  a  mile  of  the  town,  who  were  prevented  from  retreat- 
ing by  the  destruction  of  a  bridge  a  short  distance  in  advance,  and 
that  they  were  rapidly  rebuilding  the  bridge,  and  would  be  able  to 
advance  in  an  hour.  This  information  was  communicated  to  Col. 
Wyndham.^ 

"  About  half-past  one  o'clock  Col.  Wyndham  moved  his  force,  and 
went  through  the  long  main  street  of  the  town  at  a  rapid  trot.  Ar- 
riving on  the  other  side,  the  column  turned  to  the  left  and  advanced 
through  two  or  three  fields  to  the  summit  of  a  hill  overlooking  an 
open  valley,  from  which  rose  another  hill  beyond,  covered  with 
woods.     No  enemy  was  in  sight.     The  cavalry  were  halted,  and 

^  This  was  an  English  officer  who  had  taken  service  in  the  Federal  cause,  and 
was  now  commander  of  the  First  New  Jersey  cavalry. 
^  This  information  was  unreliable. 


CROSS  KEFS   AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  141 

skirmishers  sent  ahead  and  on  the  flanks.  They  were  gone  some 
time,  and  returned  with  no  satisfactory  report.  Nevertheless,  Col. 
Wyndham,  though  he  had  reached  the  point  beyond  which  he  was 
ordered  not  to  piLsh  his  reconnoissance,  decided  to  advance.  With 
full  knowledge  that  the  enemy  was  somewhere  in  front  of  him,  whom 
he  might  have  to  charge  at  any  moment,  he  nevertheless  hurried  on 
his  tired  horses,  advancing  for  more  than  two  ^  miles  at  an  unbroken 
trot.  The  enemy's  cavalry  were  suddenly  discovered  in  front,  drawn 
up,  as  usual,  across  the  road,  and  extending  into  the  woods  on  either 
side.  It  was  impossible  to  determine  their  force,  and  there  was  no 
support  within  three  or  four  miles.  But  Col.  Wyndham  determined 
to  attack,  and,  without  any  attempt  to  discover  by  skirmishing  the 
strength  or  position  of  his  enemy,  or  whether  any  infantry  were 
opposed  to  him,  ordered  a  charge,  and  rashly  led  his  o\vn  regiment, 
the  Fu'st  New  Jersey  cavalry,  straight  up  the  hill. 

"  On  the  left  of  the  road  was  nothing  but  woods.  On  the  right, 
for  some  distance  before  the  rebel  line  was  reached,  was  a  field  of 
w^heat.  In  this  field  was  concealed  a  strong  body,  not  less  than  a 
regiment,  of  rebel  infantry.^  They  w^ere  not  completely  screened 
from  view  by  the  tall  grain,  but  were  visible  at  least  to  the  officers 
and  men  of  the  second  squadron.  Utterly  unsuspicious  of  such  a 
force  on  his  flank.  Col.  Wyndham  charged  with  speed  up  the  hill. 
When  the  first  squadron  was  fairly  within  the  line  of  flanking  fire 
the  rebels  poured  in  a  volley,  which,  coming  so  close  at  hand  and  on 
the  flank,  threw  the  whole  squadron  into  confusion.  Col.  Wynd- 
ham's  horse  was  shot  under  him,  and  he  was  taken  prisoner.  Capt. 
Shellmere,  Company  A,  bravely  striving  to  rally  his  men,  was  killed 
by  a  rifle-shot.  All  the  officers  bravely  but  vainly  endeavored  to 
rally  their  men,  and  after  one  or  two  feeble  effi)rts  to  hold  their 
ground  the  first  battalion  was  driven  down  the  hill.  Capt.  Janeway, 
Company  L,  who  was  leading  the  second  squadron,  perceiving  as  he 
advanced  up  the  hill  that  the  wheat-field  covered  a  force  of  infantry, 
as  soon  as  the  first  squadron  was  thrown  into  disorder  by  the  unex- 
pected fire  on  the  flank,  endeavored  to  lead  his  men  through  the 
woods  on  the  left  of  the  road,  in  order  both  to  shelter  them  from  the 
infantry  fire  and  to  flank  the  cavalry  on  the  hill.  This  movement 
was  skilfully  planned,  but  before  it  could  be  wholly  executed  part  of 

^  Really  one  mile. 

^  A  mistake.  The  troops  referred  to  were  some  of  Ashby's  dismounted 
cavalry. 


142       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSGl-62. 

the  squadron  \va.s  thrown  into  confusion  by  tlic  retreat  of  the  advance, 
which  came  down  the  liill  in  disorderly  flight,  and  nothing  wa.s  left 
but  to  retire.  .  .  .  The  regiment  lost  thirty-six  killed  and  wounded."  ^ 

Besides  Col.  Wyndham,  sixty-three  of  his  men  were  taken  pris- 
oners.^ The  Confederate  loss  was  Maj.  Green,  of  the  Sixth  Virginia 
cavalry,  severely  wounded.^ 

Gen.  Ewell,  whose  division  was  nearest  Ashby,  now  coming  on  the 
field,  the  latter  asked  for  an  infantry  support,  anticipating  confidently 
a  renewal  of  the  attack  in  stronger  force.  Gen.  Ewell  sent  him  the 
First  INIaryland  regiment.  Col.  B.  T.  Johnson,  and  the  Fifty-eighth 
Virginia,  Col.  Letcher. 

"  As  soon  as  news  of  the  repulse  of  Wyndham's  attack  was  received 
at  Fremont's  headquarters,  Gen.  Bayard  with  the  Bucktail  rifles,  four 
companies,  and  the  First  Pennsylvania  cavalry,  and  Col.  CliLseret 
with  his  brigade,  comprising  the  Sixtieth  Ohio  and  Eighth  Virginia 
(Federal)  infantry,  were  ordered  forward  to  hold  the  farther  end  of 
the  town  and  the  approaches  on  that  side."  *  When  this  force  reached 
the  vicinity  of  the  Confederates,  Col.  Cluseret  with  one  regiment  ad- 
vanced on  the  left,  while  Kane's  Bucktails,  supported  by  the  Eighth 
Virginia,  moved  forward  on  the  right. 

Maj.  Dabney,  Gen.  Jackson's  chief  of  staff,  thus  describes  the 
combat  that  followed :  "  Ashby  disposed  the  Marylandei-s  in  the 
woods  so  as  to  take  the  Federal  advance  in  flank  while  he  met  them 
in  front  at  the  head  of  the  Fifty-eiglith.  Indicating  to  Gen.  Ewell 
the  dispositions  of  the  enemy,  which  he  had  exactly  anticipated,  and 
his  own  arrangements  to  meet  them,  he  seemed  to  the  spectators  to  be 
instinct  with  unwonted  animation  and  genius.  At  this  moment  the 
enemy's  infantry  advanced,  and  a  fierce  combat  began.  They,  ap- 
proaching through  the  open  fields,  had  reached  a  heavy  fence  of  tim- 
ber, whence  under  the  partial  cover  they  poured  destructive  volleys 
into  the  ranks  of  the  Fifty-eighth  Virginia  regiment.  Ashby  seeing 
at  a  glance  their  disadvantage,  galloped  to  the  front  and  ordered  them 
to  charge  and  drive  the  Federals  from  their  vantage-ground.  At 
this  moment  his  horse  fell,  but  extricating  himself  from  the  dying 
animal,  and  leaping  to  his  feet,  he  saw  his  men  wavering.  He  shouted, 
*  Charge,  men !  for  God's  sake  charge !'  and  waved  his  sword,  when  a 
bullet  pierced  him  full  in  the  breast  and  he  fell  dead.  The  regiment 
took  up  the  command  of  their  dying  general  and  rushed  upon  the 

^  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.  p.  185.  *  Jackson's  report. 

*  Col.  Munford's  report.  *  "  New  York  Tribune."  Letter  above  quoted. 


CROSS  KEFS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  143 

enemy,  while  the  Mary  landers  dashed  upon  their  flank.  Thus  pressed, 
the  Federals  gave  way;  the  Confederates  occupied  the  fence,  and 
poured  successive  volleys  into  the  fleeing  mass  until  they  passed  out 
of  musket  range."  ^ 

While  this  was  going  on,  the  Federal  left  had  driven  in  the  Confed- 
erate skirmishers,  over  ground  that  had  been  recently  occupied  as  a 
camp,  but  without  loss  to  either  side;  and  the  defeat  of  the  Federal 
right  involved  the  retreat  of  the  whole.  In  this  attack  the  Bucktails, 
on  whom  fell  the  greatest  part  of  the  loss,  left  their  commander,  Lieut.- 
Col.  Kane,  a  prisoner,  and  had  fifty-five  (55)  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing  out  of  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  (125)  carried  into 
the  battle.^  The  Confederate  loss,  besides  Gen.  Ashby,  was  seventeen 
(17)  killed,  fifty  (50)  wounded,  and  three  (3)  missing.^  When  the 
dead  and  wounded,  as  far  as  possible,  had  been  cared  for,  the  Con- 
federate rear  guard  followed  the  army  towards  Port  Republic. 

The  interest  attaching  to  this  fight  between  Jackson's  rear  guard 
and  Fremont's  advance  does  not  grow  mainly  out  of  the  engagement 
itself,  which  was  comparatively  unimportant,  but  out  of  the  fact  that 
it  was  the  occasion  of  the  fall  of  Gen.  Turner  Ashby.*  This  gallant 
soldier  had  led  the  life  of  a  Virginia  country  gentleman  on  his  prop- 
erty in  Fauquier  county,  Virginia,  until  the  outbreak  of  the  war. 
He  at  once  took  up  arms,  and  entered  the  service  at  the  head  of  a 
company  of  horsemen  (known  as  the  Mountain  Rangers)  composed 
of  his  friends  and  neighbors.  He  soon  became  pre-eminent  for  dash 
and  courage.  Nor  for  these  alone.  In  him  the  qualities  that  most 
excite  admiration  in  a  soldier  were  happily  united  to  those  that  most 
excite  enthusiastic  aflection  and  devotion.  Insensible  to  danger,  or 
oblivious  of  it,  the  more  daring  an  enterprise  the  greater  was  its  at- 
tractiveness for  him.  Of  great  energy  and  ceaseless  activity,  he  was 
ever  on  the  alert,  and  his  name  had  become  a  dreaded  one  by  the  foe. 
With  such  qualities  were  united  the  utmost  generosity  and  unselfish- 
ness, a  delicacy  of  sentiment  and  feeling  equal  to  a  woman's,  and  a 
respect  for  the  rights  of  others  which  permitted,  within  the  limits  of 
his  authority,  no  outrage  on  friend  or  foe.  Says  Jackson  in  his  official 
report :  "  An  official  report  is  not  an  appropriate  place  for  more  than 
a  passing  notice  of  the  distinguished  dead ;  but  the  close  relation 
which  Gen.  Ashby  bore  to  my  command  for  most  of  the  previous 

^  Dabney's  Life  of  Jackson,  pp.  399,  400. 

^  Letter  in  "New  York  Tribune," 

^  Jackson's  report. 

*  Ashby  was  killed  on  the  farm  of  Mr.  Joseph  Good. 


144        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,   lSGL-62. 

twelve  months,  will  justify  nic  in  sayinj^  that  as  a  jiartisan  officer  I 
never  knew  his  superior.  His  daring  wa.s  proverbial,  his  powers  of 
endurance  almost  incredible,  his  tone  of  character  heroic,  and  his 
saga<!ity  almost  intuitive  in  divining  the  purposes  and  movements  of 
the  enemy." 

The  remains  of  Ashby  were  removed  to  Port  Republic  and  pre- 
pared for  burial.^  His  home  in  Fauquier  county  being  within  the 
Federal  lines,  it  was  resolved  to  bury  him  at  the  State  University  at 
Charlottesville,  Virginia.  On  Saturday  the  corpse  was  sent  under 
military  escort  to  AVaynesboro',  whence  it  was  carried  by  railroad  to 
the  University.  The  day  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  that  can  be 
conceived.  Summer  covered  with  glory  the  mountains  and  valleys 
of  this  beautiful  region.  The  bright  green  fields  and  darker  wood- 
lands, the  rolling  hills,  intersected  everywhere  by  the  valleys  of  the 
streams,  the  bold  mountains  towering  above  the  Shenandoah  and 
showing  in  the  distance  the  softest  and  most  delicate  of  outlines  against 
the  June  sky,  presented  a  picture  to  charm  the  dullest  imagination. 
The  storm  of  battle,  even,  seemed  to  have  ceased  out  of  respect  for 
the  dead.  No  gun  was  to  be  heard  in  the  distance.  Both  armies 
were  resting,  taking  breath,  as  it  were,  for  the  morrow's  struggle. 
Along  the  base  of  the  mountains,  up  the  valley  of  South  river,  winds 
the  road  to  Waynesboro'.  Slowly  and  sadly  the  funeral  cortege  passed 
on  its  way.  An  escort  of  the  brave  comrades  of  Ashby,  with  bowed 
heads  and  sad  mien,  their  arms  reversed,  accompanied  the  hearse. 
Behind  it  came  the  chieftain's  horse  and  trappings,  led  by  his  negro 
servant,  whose  grief  was  more  demonstrative.  His  personal  staff 
next  followed.  The  whole,  as  it  wound  along  the  quiet  country  road 
in  the  broad  sunlight,  seemed  to  recall  some  rite  of  ancient  chivalry ; 
and  surely  no  nobler,  braver,  truer  knight  was  ever  borne  by  more 
devoted  hearts  to  a  glorious  tomb. 

The  infantry  of  Jackson's  army  enjoyed  a  sorely-needed  rest  on 
the  6th  and  7th.  In  the  twenty-four  days  that  had  intervened  be- 
tween the  time  that  Jackson  had  withdrawn  from  Fremont's  front  at 
Franklin  and  his  arrival  at  Port  Republic  his  army  had  marched 
three  hundred  miles,  besides  driving  Banks  over  the  Potomac.   Lying 

^  "After  all  the  sad  rites  -were  completed  Gen.  Jackson  came  to  the  room 
where  he  lay  and  demanded  to  see  him.  They  admitted  him  alone.  He  re- 
mained for  a  time  in  silent  communion  with  the  dead,  and  then  left  him  with  a 
solemn  and  elevated  countenance.  It  requires  little  use  of  the  imagination  to 
suppose  that  his  thoughts  were  in  part  prophetic  of  a  similar  scene  when  his 
corpse  was  to  receive  the  homage  of  all  the  good  and  brave."    (Dabney,  p.  401.) 


CROSS  KEFS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  145 

on  the  north  side  of  the  Shenandoah,  along  Mill  creek,  a  few  miles 
in  front  of  Port  Republic,  these  exhausted  and  march-worn  men 
refreshed  themselves,  and  at  the  end  of  two  days  were  as  ready  as  ever 
for  battle. 

Meantime,  Jackson,  having  prevented  the  junction  of  his  two  oppo- 
nents by  burning  the  bridges  across  the  South  Fork  of  the  Shenan- 
doah, below  Port  Republic,  was  preparing  to  take  advantage  of  their 
enforced  separation.  He  adapted  his  strategy  to  the  character  of  the 
country  and  the  rivers.  About  four  miles  southwest  of  Port  Repub- 
lic the  North  and  Middle  rivers,  the  principal  tributaries  that  go  to 
form  the  Main  or  South  Fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  unite,  and  flow 
thence  in  a  northeast  direction  to  this  village.  At  this  place  the  third 
tributary,  South  river,  coming  from  the  southwest  along  the  base  of 
the  Blue  Ridge,  joins  the  stream.  It  is  smaller  than  either  of  the 
other  two,  and  is  fordable.  Port  Republic  lies  in  the  angle  formed 
by  South  river  and  the  main  stream.  (Map  No.  VII.)  The  bridge  over 
North  river,  on  the  Valley  turnpike,  was  destroyed,  and  that  river 
was  past  fording  in  its  swollen  state.  Just  above  the  junction  of  the 
main  stream  with  South  river  was  the  bridge,  now  held  by  Jackson, 
which  carried  the  road  from  Harrisonburg  to  Brown's  gap  into  Port 
Republic.  The  latter  village  is  but  twelve  miles  from  Harrisonburg, 
and  the  intervening  country  is  high  and  rolling.  This  country  ter- 
minates along  the  river  in  an  abrupt,  bluif-like  terrace,  which  con- 
tinues for  some  miles  below.  This  bluff  completely  commands  the 
bridge,  the  village,  and  the  eastern  bank  below  the  village.  For 
many  miles  the  country  on  the  eastern  side  consists  of  a  plain  from 
one  to  two  miles  broad,  sloping  in  successive  terraces  from  the  foot  of 
the  Blue  Ridge  to  the  river's  brink.  Beyond  this  a  densely-wooded 
tract  ascends  gradually  to  the  mountain-side.  The  low  grounds  were 
covered  with  cultivated  fields  or  meadows.  Through  them,  and  for 
the  most  part  not  over  half  a  mile  from  the  river,  runs  the  road  to 
Conrad's  Store  and  Luray, — the  road  Jackson  had  himself  used  when 
on  the  30th  of  April  he  had  left  his  camp  in  Elk  Run  valley  for 
Port  Republic,  and  the  road  by  which  Shields  must  now  approach. 
The  road  from  Harrisonburg,  after  crossing  the  bridge  into  Port  Re- 
public, divides,  and  while  one  branch  leads  to  Staunton,  the  other, 
crossing  the  South  river  by  afford,  leads  through  the  wooded  plain  on 
the  east  side  to  Brown's  gap,  five  miles  distant.^     (Map  No.  VII.) 

'  The  road  leads  up  Madison  run,  a  stream  so  named  from  the  ancestors  of 
President  and  of  Bishop  Madison. 


146       CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  lSOl-62. 

Frcmout  was  C(jual  to  Jackson  in  force,  Shields  was  inferior.^ 
Together  they  largely  outnumbered  him.  Jackson  determined  to 
retreat  no  farther,  but  to  fight  them  in  detail,  while  sej)arated.  To 
retire  towards  Brown's  gap  was  to  allow  his  enemies  to  unite.  To 
concentrate  on  the  east  side  at  once  agaiast  Shields  as  the  weaker,  and 
burn  the  bridge  to  keep  Fremont  back,  was  to  run  the  risk  of  having 
the  battle-field  in  the  plain  on  the  eastern  side  commanded  by  Fre- 
mont's guns,  which  would  then  crown  the  heights  on  the  left  bank. 
While  it  might  not  thus  entirely  paralyze  Fremont  in  the  struggle  with 
Shields,  it  would  certainly  prevent  Jackson  from  returning  in  case  of 
success  to  attack  Fremont.  The  Confederate  commander,  therefore, 
took  the  other  plan  remaining  to  him,  and,  having  sent  oif  hLs 
prisoners  to  the  railroad  at  Waynesboro'  and  removed  his  trains  to 
Port  Republic,  placed  his  army  in  position  on  the  north  side  of  the 
river;  Gen.  Ewell's  division^  at  Cross  Keys,  half-way  on  the  road  to 

^  Fremont's  return  for  May  30  gives  the  "  present  for  duty"  of  Schenck's,  Mil- 
roy's,  Cluseret's,  and  Blenker's  commands  as  14,672.  Yet  Gen.  Fremont,  with- 
out explaining  this  "stuliborn  fact,"  says  that  on  the  29th  of  May  he  had 
"  something  over  11,000"  effectives  (official  report  written  long  after),  and  esti- 
mates this  force  as  10,500  on  June  8.  Adding  Bayard's  cavalry,  which  he  says 
numbered  800,  and  Kane's  Bucktails  (about  125  or  150),  his  effective  strength 
by  this  estimate  was  about  11,500  at  Cross  Keys. 

Shields's  division  numbered  10,000  effectives  May  17.  See  McDowell's  re- 
turn. McDowell  did  not  send  Ord's  or  King's  divisions  farther  than  Front 
Royal,  so  that  Shields  had  but  one-third  of  the  force  that  had  been  sent  from 
Fredericksburg  against  Jackson. 

Jackson  had  moved  against  Banks,  on  May  19,  with  a  total  effective  force  of 
16,000  or  17,000  men,  and  since  that  time  his  troops  had  been  subjected  to  a 
series  of  forced  marches  far  exceeding  anything  endured  by  those  of  Shields 
or  Fremont,  and  which  had  diminished  his  strength  in  a  much  greater  degree 
than  battle.  His  effective  force  could  not  have  exceeded  13,000,  even  if  it  reached 
that  amount,  as  is  apparent  from  the  strength  of  the  commands  reported. 
Thus  Ewell  says  the  three  brigades  of  Trimble,  Elzey,  and  Steuart  numbered  less 
than  5000  on  June  8,  at  Cross  Keys.  Winder  reports  his  brigade  as  1313  rank 
and  file,  and  adding  officers  it  did  not  exceed  1450.  Patton's  (CampbelPs)  bri- 
gade had  about  800  men  present  (the  Twenty-first  Virginia  having  gone  off  as 
an  escort  to  prisoners).  There  were  besides  these  but  Taylor" s  (the  strongest 
in  the  army)  and  Taliaferro's.  Putting  Taylor's  four  and  one-half  regiments  at 
2500  effectives  and  Taliaferro's  three  regiments  at  1200,  we  have  a  total  infontry 
force  of  about  11,000.  Add  1000  for  cavalry  and  500  or  600  for  artillery,  and 
we  see  that  Jackson's  strength  for  battle  was  short  of  13,000.  The  only  addi- 
tion made  to  Jackson's  force  between  23d  May  and  8th  June  was  Carrington's 
battery  (four  guns). 

*  Ed.  Johnson's  brigade  had  been  incorporated  into  Ewell's  division,  the 
Twelfth  Georgia,  Twenty-fifth  and  Thirt^'-first  Virginia  having  been  assigned 


^ 

? 

f3 
5 

1^ 

?^ 

fs 

CV 

^ 

2 

1 
? 

) 

s-. 

1 


ft/ 


ill    0^*^:^r% 


v^'-' --vml^^ 


.  ,7  .r 


\(LL'''f\j 

f- 

"^ 

^^fc.z^;^^ 

fe 

/r^^ 

-^ 

-^ 

-^ 

^  \^ 

w 

3 

.  \  )W 

^ 

V5 


i^r^ 


m.. 


—^ 


^Wf^^ 


A^ 


si 


^  ^ 


CD  0.  H     ^    K. 


CROSS  KEYS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  147 

Harrisonburg,  and  Gen.  Winder's^  division  on  the  heights  above  the 
bridge  along  the  river.  Here  artillery  was  at  hand  to  command  the 
town  and  bridge  and  plain  by  which  Shields  must  approach.  Fre- 
mont was  well  closed  up,  and  his  vigorous  pursuit  of  the  last  few 
days  indicated  a  prompt  attack  without  waiting  for  the  co-operation 
of  Shields.  The  latter  was  not  so  well  up  as  Fremont,  but  his  ad- 
vance under  Col.  Carroll  came  within  six  miles  of  Port  Republic  on 
Saturday  evening,  June  7. 

Jackson  thus  took  a  position  where  he  might  receive  the  attack  of 
Fremont,  while  it  was  in  the  power  of  a  small  part  of  his  force  to 
hold  Shields  in  check.  His  position,  if  the  latter  attempted  to  attack 
in  aid  of  Fremont,  was  impregnable.  Gen.  Tyler  thought  it  "  one  to 
defy  an  army  of  fifty  thousand  (50,000)  men."  ^  Defeat  by  Fremont 
would  have  rendered  Jackson's  condition  precarious,  but  this  contin- 
gency he  did  not  anticipate. 

His  sagacity  was  made  manifest,  and  his  strategy  approved  by 
the  movements  of  his  adversaries.  Fremont  had  failed  to  seize  the 
Confederate  line  of  retreat  at  Strasburg  when  it  was  possible,  and 
had  permitted  Jackson,  encumbered  with  prisoners  and  captures,  to 
pass  by  him  unmolested.  His  pursuit  of  the  retreating  Confederates 
had  emboldened  him,  and  now,  having  followed  them  over  fifty  miles 
farther,  he  was  ready  to  attack,  in  a  chosen  position,  the  army  he  had 
hesitated  to  fight  when  hampered  by  its  trains  and  captures.  Then 
]\IcDowell  was  within  reach  to  aid,  now  an  impassable  river  prevented 
all  co-operation.  Shields,  on  the  other  hand,  condemned  by  the  burn- 
ing of  the  bridges  to  make  his  toilsome  way  along  the  muddy  roads 
of  the  Luray  valley,  had  halted  at  Columbia,  and  sent  forward  his 
advance  brigades  to  harass  Jackson's  flank,  with  orders  to  go  as  far 
as  Waynesboro'  and  break  the  railroad.  The  movements  of  Carroll's 
brigade  are  thus  described  by  a  northern  writer :  ^ 

"  On  the  4th  instant,  while  at  Conrad's  Store,  Col.  Carroll  received 
orders  to  go  forward  at  once,  with  cavalry  and  guns,  to  save  the  bridge 
at  Port  Republic.  At  that  time  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  move. 
The  heaAy  rains  which  had  prevailed  for  some  days  had  so  swollen 
the  streams  that  Col.  Carroll  was  entirely  separated  from  his  com- 
mand, having  with   him   only  his   staff,  fifteen   cavalry,  and  two 

to  Elzey's  brigade,  and  the  Fifty-second,  Fifty-eighth,  and  Forty-fourth  Virginia 
to  Gen.  George  II.  Steuart,  commanding  the  Maryland  line. 

^  Winder  now  commanded  Jackson's  old  division  as  senior  brigadier. 

^  Tyler's  report. 

*  "National  Intelligencer."     See  "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.  p.  113. 


148       CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

pieces  of  artillery.  His  infantry  was  five  miles  in  his  rear,  and  com- 
pelled to  remain  there,  by  the  impassable  creeks,  between  two  and 
three  days. 

"  On  Saturday,  the  7th,  Col.  Carroll  received  orders  to  move  for- 
ward to  AVaynesboro',  distant  some  thirty-five  or  thirty-seven  miles, 
by  the  way  of  Port  Republic,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  rail- 
road depot,  track,  bridge,  etc.,  at  that  place,  and  to  seize  Jackson's 
train  and  throw  his  force  upon  Jackson's  flank.  Col.  Carroll  marched, 
in  obedience  to  these  orders,  on  Saturday  afternoon.  His  infantry, 
cavalry,  and  artillery  had  in  the  mean  time  come  up,  and  he  started 
from  Connul's  Store  with  less  than  a  thousand  of  the  former,  with 
one  hundred  and  fifty  cavalry,  and  with  a  single  battery  of  six  guns. 

"Halting  in  the  night,  six  miles  before  reaching  Port  Republic,  Col. 
Carroll  sent  forward  a  party  of  scouts,  who  returned  with  the  infor- 
tion  that  Jackson's  train  was  parked  near  Port  Republic,  with  a  drove 
of  beef  cattle  herded  near  by,  and  the  whole  guarded  by  about  two  or 
three  hundred  cavalry." 

On  the  same  day  (7th)  Gen.  Tyler,  with  his  brigade,  was  ordered 
forward  from  Columbia  bridge  to  co-operate  with  Carroll.  He 
reached  the  neighborhood  of  Port  Republic  at  2  p.m.  on  the  8th. 

Jackson  had  placed  his  headquarters  on  the  southwestern  outskirts 
of  the  village,'  and  his  trains  had  been  parked  in  the  adjoining  fields. 
Carrington's  battery,  which  had  just  joined  his  command,  was  also 
camped  here ;  but  with  this  exception,  and  that  of  a  few  troopei's  and 
train-guards,  there  was  no  force  on  the  Port  Republic  side  of  the 
river.  Two  companies  of  cavalry  had  been  sent  across  South  river 
in  the  direction  from  which  Gen.  Shields  must  approach,  the  oue  to 
reconnoitre  and  the  other  to  do  picket  duty.  The  mass  of  Shields's 
forces  were  known  to  be  miles  away,  and  the  cavalry  scouts  were 
expected  to  give  timely  warning  of  his  approach. 

Smiday  morning,  June  8,  was  bright  with  all  the  glory  of  summer 
in  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah.  Quiet  reigned  throughout  the 
Confederate  camp,  and  men  and  animals  alike  seemed  to  enjoy  the 
rest  which  for  a  day  or  two  had  succeeded  to  the  excessive  toils  and 
marches  of  the  campaign.  Jackson  was  just  mounting  his  horse  to 
ride  to  the  front  when  a  bold  and  unexpected  dash  by  Col.  Carroll 
opened  the  fight  at  Port  Republic  itself,  and  for  a  few  moments 
threatened  serious  damage. 

^  Jackson's  headquarters  at  Mr.  Kemper's  were  near  the  site  of  an  old  fort 
(built  as  a  protection  against  Indians  in  early  times),  and  the  first  clerk's  office 
of  Augusta  county. 


CROSS  KEYS  AND  FORT  REPUBLIC.  149 

Col.  Carroll,  having  learned  the  evening  before,  through  renegades 
familiar  with  the  country,  the  location  of  Jackson's  trains  and  the 
sniallness  of  the  guard,  pushed  on  early  in  the  morning.  Confirm- 
ing his  previous  information  by  a  new  reconnoissance  when  within 
two  miles  of  the  town,  he  dashed  forward  with  his  cavalry  and  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  leaving  the  remainder  of  his  command  to  follow. 
The  Confederate  cavalry  pickets  are  quickly  driven  in  and  their  sup- 
ports put  to  flight.  Carroll  dashes  on  without  halting,  and  reaches 
the  bank  of  South  river,  opposite  the  village,  almost  as  soon  as  the 
flying  Confederates.  Jackson,  informed  of  the  attack,  and  followed 
by  his  staff*,  rides  rapidly  through  the  town  towards  the  bridge  and 
the  troops  stationed  a  few  hundred  yards  from  it  on  the  north-side 
hills.  Carroll  stopping  but  a  moment  at  the  South  river,  boldly 
crosses  it,  and  rides  into  the  middle  of  the  town  so  quickly  as  to  in- 
tercept the  two  hindmost  of  Jackson's  staff"  and  make  them  prisoners.^ 
One  piece  of  artillery  he  promptly  places  at  the  south  end  of  the 
bridge  so  as  to  command  the  approaches  to  it  from  the  north  side,  the 
other  he  prepares  to  use  in  attacking  the  train  lying  jiLst  outside  the 
town  to  the  southwest,  and  towards  which  he  moves.  His  unexpected 
approach  has  thrown  teamsters  and  camp-followers  into  great  confu- 
sion. The  trains  are  moving  out  from  their  park  and  taking  the  Staun- 
ton road,  A  few  minutes  more  of  unimpeded  advance  and  the  Federal 
cavalry  would  have  produced  a  general  stampede  of  the  trains.  But 
this  was  not  to  be.  A  small  company  of  disabled  soldiers  acted  as 
guard  at  headquarters.  Some  fifteen  or  twenty  of  them  are  at  hand, 
and  are  quickly  placed  at  the  angle  where  the  road  emerges  from  the 
village  into  the  fields  containing  the  trains.  A  piece  of  Carrington's 
battery  is  brought  a  few  yards  and  placed  so  as  to  rake  the  main 
street  of  the  village.  Some  of  the  Federal  troopers  reach  the  angle 
of  the  road,  and  a  volley  from  the  guard  checks  them.  Before  they 
have  time  to  recover  a  charge  from  Carrington's  gun  is  poured  into 
the  rear  of  the  column  along  the  main  street.  The  movement  is 
checked ;  the  Federal  cavalry  seek  the  middle  of  the  village.  Mean- 
time, Jackson  has  reached  the  troops  nearest  the  bridge  on  the  north 
side.  Three  batteries  are  instantly  ordered  to  the  brow  of  the  terrace 
overlooking  the  river.     Taliaferro's  brigade,  of  Winder's  division,  is 


^  Col.  Crutchfield  and  Lieut.  Willis.  Crutchfield  was  left  in  the  town  as  the 
Federals  retreated.  Willis  was  carried  over  the  river  and  placed  in  care  of  a 
soldier,  whom  he  captured  in  turn  a  few  hours  later  and  brought  back  with 
him. 


150       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

the  nearest  infantry ;  Gen.  Taliaferro  has  them  drawn  up  for  inspection. 
Ordering  them  forward,  Jackson  places  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
leading  regiment  (Thirty-seventh  Virginia,  Col.  Fulkerson)  and  the 
first  of  Poague's  guns  that  is  rea<ly,  and  rushes  at  a  doublc-(|uick 
towards  the  bridge.  Poague  is  directed  to  engage  with  his  piece  the 
enemy's  gun  near  the  south  end  of  the  bridge.  To  avoid  the  line  of 
artillery  fire  the  Thirty-seventh  regiment  is  directed  to  the  north  side 
of  the  road,  and  descends  obliquely  against  the  upper  side  of  the 
bridge.  At  the  word  from  Jackson,  Poague  fires  a  charge  Avhich 
disconcerts  the  enemy,  then  follows  a  volley  from  the  infantry  and 
an  immediate  charge  with  the  bayonet.^  In  a  moment  the  Federal 
gunners  are  down,  their  gun  is  captured,  and  the  bridge  is  again  in 
Jackson's  possession.  The  Confederates  have  lost  two  men  wouuded, 
and  the  Federals  their  chance  of  destroying  the  bridge.  Carroll, 
seeing  himself  attacked  from  both  ends  of  the  village,  rides  out  of  it 
as  rapidly  as  he  had  entered  it.     He  re-fords  South  river,  abandons 

'  A  pretty  story  has  been  often  told  about  the  recapture  of  this  bridge,  in 
■which  Jackson,  cut  off  from  his  troops,  and  on  the  Port  Republic  side,  is  made 
to  ride  up  to  the  Federal  artillery  officer  and  order  his  gun  forward.  For  a 
moment  the  officer  is  deceived,  and  prepares  to  obey,  while  Jackson,  taking 
advantage  of  the  confusion,  spurs  his  horse  forward  and  crosses  the  bridge 
unharmed  by  the  shots  fired  after  him.  The  foundation  for  this  story  is  thus 
given  by  Col.  (then  Capt.)  W.  T.  Poague,  in  a  letter  dated  February  25,  1879: 
"  I  recollect  v^'ell  the  incident  you  ask  about.  Gen.  Jackson  finding  one  of  my 
guns  ready  to  move,  directed  me  to  hasten  with  it  towards  Port  Republic,  he 
himself  going  along  and  posting  it  in  the  field  overlooking  and  commanding  the 
bridge.  I  was  surprised  to  see  a  gun  posted  at  the  farther  end  of  the  bridge. 
For  I  had  just  come  from  army  headquarters,  and,  although  I  had  met  a  cavalry- 
man who  toid  me  the  enemy  were  advancing  up  the  river,  still  I  did  not  think 
it  possible  they  could  have  gotten  any  guns  into  the  place  in  so  short  a  time.  It 
thereupon  occurred  to  me  that  the  gun  at  the  bridge  might  be  one  of  Carring- 
ton's,  who  was  on  that  side  and  whose  men  had  new  uniforms  something  like 
those  we  saw  at  the  bridge.  Upon  suggesting  this  to  the  general,  he  reflected  a 
moment,  and  then  riding  a  few  paces  to  the  left  and  front  of  our  piece,  he  called, 
in  a  tone  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  them,  '  Bring  that  gun  up  hero  ;'  but 
getting  no  reply,  he  raised  himself  in  his  stirrups  and  in  a  most  authoritative 
and  seemingly  angry  tone  he  shouted,  '  Bring  that  gun  up  here,  I  say !'  At 
this  they  began  to  move  the  trail  of  the  gun  so  as  to  bring  it  to  bear  on  us, 
which  when  the  general  perceived,  he  quickly  turned  to  the  officer  in  charge  of 
my  gun  and  said,  in  his  sharp,  quick  way,  '  Let  'em  have  it.'  The  words  had 
scarcely  left  his  lips  when  Lieut.  BroAvn,  who  had  his  piece  charged  and  aimed, 
sent  a  shot  right  among  them,  so  disconcerting  them  that  theirs  in  reply  went 
far  above  us,  and  in  a  few  minutes,  seeing  our  infantry  approaching,  they  left 
the  place,  and,  as  I  was  informed,  abandoned  their  gun  before  crossing  South 
river." 


CROSS  KEFS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  151 

another  piece  of  artillery  to  the  Confederates,  and  soon  meets  his 
infantry  advancing  to  his  support/  But  the  Confederate  batteries 
(Wooding's,  Poague's,  Carpenter's)  are  now  in  position  on  the  bluff 
on  the  north  side,  and  they  rain  fire  so  on  all  the  approaches  to  the 
town  and  bridge  from  the  south  and  east  side  that  any  further  attempt 
is  futile,  and  Carroll's  whole  force  is  obliged  to  retreat.  To  avoid 
the  galling  fire  they  move  out  some  distance  towards  the  mountain 
before  turning  down  the  river.  As  Carroll  moves  towards  LewLston  ^ 
the  Confederate  batteries  follow,  on  the  bluff,  and  continue  to  shell 
him  until  he  is  entirely  out  of  range,  some  two  and  a  half  miles  below. 
The  whole  affair  has  only  occupied  about  an  hour,  and  quiet  once 
more  replaces  the  noise  of  battle.  To  provide  against  any  repetition 
of  this  attack,  Jackson  now  stations  Taliaferro's  brigade  in  the  village 
to  hold  the  fords  of  South  river,  and  places  the  "  Stonewall"  brigade 
on  the  north  side  of  the  main  river,  opposite  Lewiston,  to  observe  the 
enemy  and  impede  by  artillery  any  renewed  advance.  The  remainder 
of  Winder's  division  is  held  in  reserve  to  assist  Ewell  if  need  be.^ 

While  these  arrangements  are  being  made  the  battle  opens  along 
Ewell's  front.  On  Saturday  evening  Fremont  had  made  a  recon- 
noissance,  and  having  found  the  Confederates  in  force  near  Cross 
Keys,  gave  orders  for  a  general  advance  the  next  morning.*     Gen. 

^  Col.  Carroll  reports  his  loss  on  this  occasion  as  40  men,  2  guns  and  limbers, 
and  14  horses. 

^  The  country-seat  of  the  Lewis  family. 

^  It  was  about  the  time  of  Carroll's  repulse  that  Shields  was  despatching 

Fremont  as  follows : 

"LuRAY,  June  8,  9^  a.m. 
"I  write  by  your  scout.  I  think  by  this  time  there  will  be  12  pieces  of 
artillery  opposite  Jackson's  train  at  Port  Republic,  if  he  has  taken  that  route. 
Some  cavalry  and  artillery  have  pushed  on  to  Waynesboro'  to  burn  the  bridge. 
I  hope  to  have  two  brigades  at  Port  Republic  to-day.  I  follow  myself  with  two 
other  brigades  from  this  place.  If  the  enemy  changes  direction  you  will  please 
keep  me  advised.  If  he  attempts  to  force  a  passage,  as  my  force  is  not  large 
there  yet,  I  hope  you  will  thunder  down  on  his  rear.  Please  send  back  informa- 
tion from  time  to  time.     I  think  Jackson  is  caught  this  time. 

"  Yours,  etc., 

"  Jas.  Shields. 
"  Maj.-Gen,  Fremont." 

*  Gen.  Fremont's  column,  June  8,  moved  as  follows : 

I.  In  advance :  Cluseret's  brigade  of  Sixtieth  Ohio  and  Eighth  Virginia 
infantry,  reinforced  by  Thirty-ninth  New  York  (Garibaldi  Guard). 

II.  Main  column,  comprising : 

1.  Dickel's  Fourth  New  York  cavalry. 

2.  Stahl's  brigade  :  Eighth,  Forty-first,  and  Forty-fifth  New  York,  and  Twenty- 
seventh  Pennsylvania  infantry,  and  Dilger's,  Buell's,  and  Schermer's  batteries. 
(Kane's  Bucktails  reported  to  Stahl  and  fought  with  him.) 


152        CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  18G1-G2. 

Ewell  has  selected  for  his  position  one  of  the  ridges  with  wliich  the 
country  is  filled,  a  short  distance  south  of  the  Keezletown  road.  In 
front  tlie  ground  declined  rapidly  to  a  small  rivulet,  and  then  rose 
into  a  lower  parallel  ridge,  which  was  occupied  by  the  Federals.  The 
ridge  held  by  Ewell  was  wooded,  with  cleared  fields  in  front,  espe- 
cially o})posite  his  centre.^  It  was  crossed  on  his  left  by  the  Keezle- 
town road,  -with  the  direction  of  which  it  makes  nearly  a  right  angle. 
The  road  from  Harrisonburg  to  Port  Republic  crosses  the  ridge 
through  the  centre  of  the  positi(Mi  held  by  Gen.  Ewell.  The  Fif- 
teenth Alabama  infantry.  Col.  Canty,  had  been  thrown  out  on  picket, 
and  while  they  were  stubbornly  resisting  Fremont's  advance,  Ewell 
carefully  disposed  his  troops  along  the  ridge,  placing  the  four  bat- 
teries of  Courtenay,  Lusk,  Brockenbrough,  and  Raines  in  the  centre, 
near  the  Harrisonburg  road,  and  near  Mill  Creek  Dunkard  church, 
and  throwing  Trimble's  brigade  to  the  right  and  Steuart's  to  the 
left,  while  Elzey  was  retained  in  rear  of  the  centre  as  a  reserve  ready 
to  reinforce  either  wing.  The  ridge  at  the  point  to  which  Gen. 
Trimble  was  ordered  was  heavily  wooded,  descended  very  abruptly 
to  the  creek,  and  was  easily  turned.  Not  deeming  this  position 
eligible,  and  seeing  one  half  a  mile  to  the  right  front  which  appeared 
better.  Gen.  Trimble  was  permitted  to  occupy  it.  The  Twenty-first 
North  Carolina  regiment  had  been  left  to  support  Courteuay's  guns, 
and  the  Sixteenth  Mississippi,  Col.  Posey,  and  the  Twenty-first 
Georgia,  Col.  Mercer,  were  now  quickly  transferred  to  the  new  posi- 
tion in  advance,  where  they  were  soon  joined  by  the  remaining  regi- 
ment of  the  brigade, — the  Fifteenth  Alabama,  Col.  Canty.  The 
latter  regiment  was  placed  on  the  extreme  right  of  Trimble's  line. 

3.  Bohlen's  brigade :  Fifty-fourth  and  Fifty-eighth  New  York  and  Seventy- 
fourth  and  Seventy-lifth  Pennsylvania  infantry,  and  AViedrich's  battery. 

4.  Milroy's  brigade  :  Twenty-fifth  Ohio  and  Second,  Third,  and  Fifth  Virginia 
infantry,  and  Ilyman's,  Johnson's,  and  Ewing's  batteries. 

5.  Schenck's  brigade :  Thirty-second,  Seventy -third,  Seventy-fifth,  and  Eighty- 
second  Ohio  infantry,  and  De  Beck's  and  Kigby's  batteries,  and  a  small  detach- 
ment of  cavalry. 

III.  Rear  guard  following  trains: 

Steinwehr's  brigade,  under  Col.  Kolte:  Twenty-ninth  and  Sixty-eighth  New 
York  and  Seventy-third  Pennsylvania  infantry,  and  Dickmann's  battery. 

IV.  Bayard's  cavalry  was  left  at  Harrisonburg  in  charge  of  trains,  but  came 
forward  later.     (Fremont's  report.) 

^  Gen.  Ewell  says :  "  The  general  features  of  the  ground  were  a  valley  and 
rivulet  in  my  front,  woods  on  both  flanks,  and  a  field  of  some  hundreds  of  acres, 
where  the  road  crossed  the  centre  of  my  line  ;  my  side  of  the  valley  being  more 
defined  and  commanding  the  other."     (Ewell' s  report.) 


CROSS  KEYS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  153 

This  new  position  of  Gen.  Trimble  was  on  a  flat  ridge,  flanked  on 
the  right  by  a  stream,  while  in  front  lay  a  narrow  valley,  from  which, 
on  the  opposite  side,  rose  a  similar  height  occupied  by  the  Federals. 
While  these  dispositions  were  being  made  on  the  right.  Gen.  George 
H.  Steuart  was  posted  on  the  Confederate  left  wing,^  following  the 
direction  of  the  ridge  from  the  batteries  towards  the  west.  His  left 
flank  approached  the  Keezletown  road  where  it  crosses  the  ridge,  and 
was  protected  by  heavy  timber. 

Fremont  disposed  his  forces  for  attack  as  follows  :  Stahl's  brigade 
(five  regiments),  of  Blenker's  division,  was  assigned  to  his  left,  oppo- 
site Trimble.  Bohlen's  brigade,  of  the  same  division,  supported 
Stahl,  while  the  remainder  of  Blenker's  troops  were  held  in  reserve. 
Milroy,  with  five  regiments,  and  Cluseret,  with  three,  were  sent 
against  the  Confederate  centre,  while  Schenck,  with  five  regiments, 
constituted  Fremont's  right,  and  was  to  operate  against  the  Confed- 
erate left  wing  and  flank.  Batteries  were  placed  on  the  spurs  of  the 
ridge  in  front  of  and  parallel  to  that  occupied  by  Gen.  Ewell.  For 
some  time  a  spirited  artillery  fire  was  maintained  between  the  oppo- 
sing batteries,  when,  though  Schenck  was  not  yet  in  position,  Fre- 
mont's left  wing  moved  forward  to  the  attack.  Stahl's  brigade 
advanced  boldly  across  the  open  space  that  separated  them  from 
Trimble,  driving  in  his  skirmishers.  Trimble  ordered  the  three 
regiments  with  him  to  "  rest  quietly  in  the  edge  of  the  open  wood" 
until  the  enemy,  after  having  crossed  "  the  field  and  hollow,  should 

^  Gen.  Steuart  had  commanded  temporarily  the  Second  and  Sixth  Virginia 
cavalry  at  Winchester,  but  was  subsequently  returned  to  the  command  of  the 
Maryland  line,  to  which  were  added  the  Forty-fourth,  Fifty-second,  and  Fifty- 
eighth  Virginia  regiments,  in  order  to  form  a  brigade. 

Ewell's  division  was  organized  as  follows  on  June  8  and  9  : 

Trimble's  brigade :  Elzey's  brigade  :         G.  H.  Steuart's  brigade :       Taylor's  brigade :  i 

2l8t  Georgia  regt.         13th  Virginiaregt.  1st  Maryland  regt.  6th  Louisiana  regt. 
21st  N.  Carolina  regt.  25th         "         "      44th  Virginia    "      7th         "  " 

15th  Alabama       '•       31st         "         "      52d         "  "      8th         "  " 

16th  Mississippi    "      12th  Georgia    "      58th       "  "      9th        "  " 

Wheat's  battalion. 

Artillery:  Courtenay's,  Brockenbrough's,  Lusk's,  Raines's,  and  Rice's  bat- 
teries. 

The  organization  of  Jackson's  (Winder's)  division  was  the  same  as  at  Win- 
chester (see  page  92,  note),  with  the  addition  of  Carrington's  battery.  After 
the  death  of  Ashby,  Col.  Munford  became  commander  of  the  cavalry. 


1  Not  engaged  on  the  8th. 
11 


154        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

come  within  fifty  stops"  of  his  line.  Stahl  continued  to  advance  until 
lie  had  come  near  enough  to  receive  Trimble's  fire.  Then  deadly 
volleys  are  poured  in  the  faces  of  the  Germans ;  their  advance  is  at 
onc«  checked,  and  in  a  few  moments  they  waver  and  break.  Their 
supports  fail  to  come  forward.  Trimble  orders  an  advance,  and 
Stahl's  troops  arc  quickly  driven  down  the  hill,  across  the  meadow, 
and  into  the  wocxls  from  which  they  had  advanced.^  Here  are  the 
reserves  on  which  they  reform.  The  Confederates  do  not  advance 
beyond  the  crest  of  the  hill  on  which  they  are  stationed,  but,  having 
driven  the  enemy  out  of  the  open  space,  remain  in  their  position 
on  the  hill  to  await  another  attack.  But  the  repulse  has  been  too 
bloody  to  invite  a  speedy  renewal.  Trimble  waits  a  short  time, 
and,  perceiving  no  indications  of  a  new  advance,  determines  to  move 
against  the  enemy.  On  the  extreme  left  of  Fremont,  and  half  a  mile 
in  front  of  the  Confederates,  is  a  battery  which  plays  on  them. 
Trimble  moves  out  to  his  right,  and,  under  cover  of  a  ravine  and 
the  woods,  approaches  Blenker's  flank.  He  is  joined  en  route  by 
Col.  Walker,  of  Elzey's  brigade,  with  two  regiments  (Thirteenth  and 
Twenty-fifth  Virginia).  Walker  moves  on  Trimble's  right  and  tries 
to  turn  the  Federal  flank.  Meanwhile,  Trimble  presses  forward.  In 
a  few  minutes  the  Federals  retreat,  taking  off  the  battery  which 
Trimble  had  hoped  to  capture.  While  this  is  doing.  Walker,  who 
has  moved  too  far  to  the  right,  is  met  and  staggered  for  the  moment 
by  a  fierce  fire  of  musketry  and  canister.^  The  confusion  produced 
is,  however,  soon  remedied.  Walker  presses  forward,  and  Trimble 
throws  his  regiments  once  more  on  the  Federal  lines.  The  struggle 
is  short  and  sharp,  the  Federals  are  forced  to  yield,  the  artillery 
limbers  up  and  retires,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  whole  Federal  left 
wing  is  retreating  towards  the  position  near  Union  church,  on  the 
Keezletown  road,  which  it  had  held  before  the  opening  of  the  battle.^ 

^  One  of  Stahl's  regiments  (Eighth  New  York)  lost  65  in  killed  alone  in  this 
attack.     (Fremont's  report.) 

^  Gen.  Walker  says  this  was  in  moving  to  the  right  of  Ever's  house  and  barn. 
(See  Map  No.  VIII.) 

^  In  a  letter  to  the  author,  dated  February,  1880,  Gen.  Trimble  thus  describes 
the  action  on  his  front :  "  .  .  .  The  enemy  had  crossed  the  valley  and  were  ad- 
vancing gallantly  up  the  slope  towards  Gen.  Trimble's  position,  thus  receiving 
'  the  full  fire  of  the  two  right  regiments  at  about  sixty  paces  distant.  They 
wavered,  and  then  fell  back  in  disorder.  .  .  .  Then  a  charge  was  ordered,  but 
before  the  men  advanced  over  the  crest  of  the  ridge  Gen.  Trimble  arrested  it, 
as  he  saw  the  enemy  reforming  with  supports  on  the  opposite  ridge.  lie  waited 
twenty  minutes  for  another  attack,  but  as  the  enemy  did  not  move,  though 


CROSS  KEFS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  155 

Meantime,  Milroy  has  advanced  against  the  Confederate  centre.  A 
fierce  artillery  duel  is  here  the  principal  feature  of  the  contest.  The 
Confederate  batteries  are  well  located,  and  in  spite  of  loss  of  horses 
and  men  in  some  of  them,  keep  up  so  spirited  a  fire  that  no  serious 
attempt  is  made  on  this  part  of  the  line.  The  Federals  drive  in  the 
Confederate  skirmishers  and  feel  the  lines  behind  them,  but  there  is 
no  reid  attack.  Thus,  at  the  centre  of  the  contending  armies,  the 
hours  pass  in  which  the  fate  of  the  day  is  being  decided  on  Blenker's 
front. 

Schenck  is  last  to  take  his  post  in  the  Federal  line.  He  arrives 
on  the  field  at  1  p.m.,  and  moves  in  rear  and  to  the  right  of  Milroy, 
to  take  position  to  attack  the  Confederate  left.  Unacquainted  with 
the  ground  he  proceeds  cautiously,  and  it  is  some  time  before  he  secures 
an  eligible  position  for  his  troops.  This  movement  is  marked  by 
artillery  firing  and  some  skirmishing,  the  Federals  driving  back  a 
part  of  the  Forty-fourth  Virginia  regiment  of  Steuart's  brigade,  and 
being  in  turn  checked  by  its  supports.  Gen.  Ewell,  seeing  the  move- 
ment of  troops  towards  his  left,  strengthens  his  line  there  with  the 
part  of  Elzey's  brigade^  yet  in  reserve,  and  subsequently  sends  Pat- 
formed  to  do  so,  he  went  to  the  right  regiment,  Col.  Canty's,  and  marched  it  by 
the  right  flank  to  the  right,  as  if  moving  from  the  field.  When  concealed  by  the 
woods  the  regiment  was  marched  to  the  left,  and  gained,  unobserved,  the  ridge 
occupied  Vjy  the  enemy  at  a  point  not  over  fifty  paces  from  his  left  flank  in  the 
woods.  Before  making  this  flank  movement  Gen.  Trimble  had  ordered  the  two 
regiments  left  on  the  ridge  to  charge  across  the  valley  as  soon  as  they  heard  a 
brisk  fire  opened  by  Col.  Canty.  As  soon  as  Col.  Canty  got  into  position  he 
was  ordered  to  charge.  A  sharp  conflict  of  a  few  minutes  ensued.  The 
Twenty-first  Georgia  charged  across  the  valley,  followed  by  Col.  Posey,  with 
the  Sixteenth  Mississippi,  when  the  enemy  were  driven  back  in  front  of  our 
whole  line.  It  was  here  that  Col.  Posey,  in  advancing,  did  not  look  to  his  left, 
and  was  attacked  on  his  flank  by  a  force  which  was  stationed  in  the  woods, 
throwing  his  regiment  into  some  disorder.  Col.  Mercer,  with  much  presence  of 
mind  and  judgment,  came  to  his  aid  with  the  Twenty-first  Georgia,  and,  by  a 
charge,  drove  off  the  enemy.  Gen.  Trimble  then  gave  orders  to  charge  a  battery 
on  a  high  plain,  but  by  the  time  the  Fifteenth  Alabama  reached  the  top  of  the 
hill  the  battery  was  moving  off  Avith  precipitation.  A  few  minutes  before  this 
Col.  J.  A.  Walker,  with  the  Thirteenth  and  Twenty-fifth  Virginia  regiments, 
had  been  sent  over  by  Gen.  Ewell,  and  was  directed  by  Gen.  Trimble  to  advance 
on  the  right  of  the  Fifteenth  Alabama.  Col.  Walker,  passing  too  far  to  the 
right,  was  observed  by  a  battery,  and  for  a  few  moments  was  under  a  warm 
fire  •,  but  his  troops  gallantly  advanced,  and  as  the  battery  drove  off  rapidly  we 
saw  the  infantry  force  in  full  retreat  towards  the  Keezletown  road.  Thus  the 
enemy's  force  in  front  of  our  right  was  driven  by  three  successive  charges  from 
the  field  to  a  mile  in  rear  of  their  first  position.  .  .  ." 

^  Twelfth  Georgia  and  Thirty-first  Virginia. 


156        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

ton's  brigade  and  two  regiments  of  Taylor's^  to  extend  liis  line  on 
the  same  flank.  Tliis  delays  Sclienck's  aggressive  movements,  and 
before  he  is  ready  to  attack  in  earnest  the  battle  has  been  decided 
by  the  defeat  of  Blcnker,  and  Fremont,  alarmed  by  the  disaster  on 
his  left  wing,  orders  both  centre  and  right  to  withdraw.  Ewell,  con- 
scions  of  his  inferiority  of  force,^  and  anticipating  an  attack  from 
Schenck  on  his  left,  has  been  content  with  tlie  advantages  already 
gained  nntil  his  enemy's  pnrposes  are  devehtped.  As  the  Federal 
right  and  centre  withdraw  he  follows,  pushing  forward  his  skirmishers 
and  occnpying  the  ground  in  front  of  the  field.  Night  is  at  hand, 
however,  and  Gen.  Ewell  decides  to  bivouac  in  the  position  he  holds 
rather  than  risk  a  night  attack  on  the  enemy .^ 

Thus  ends  the  battle  of  "  Cross  Keys."  Ewell  has  repulsed  Fre- 
mont so  decisively  on  one  wing  as  to  paralyze  his  army  and  to  secure 
all  the  advantages  of  victory.  This  has  been  done  too  with  but  a 
small  part  of  the  total  force  at  command.  The  losses  are  greatly  dis- 
proportioned.  Ewell's  total  loss  is  tw'O  hundred  and  eighty-seven 
(287).^  That  of  Fremont  is  six  hundred  and  sixty-four  (664)  (of 
which  four  hundred  and  twenty-seven  (427)  are  in  Stahl's  brigade), 
by  letter  dated  June  9,  from  his  headquarters,  to  the  Cincinnati 
"Commercial."^ 

During  this  engagement  the  advance  force  of  Gen.  Shields  con- 
tinued quiet  on  the  east  side  of  the  river.     Col.  Carroll  remained  in 

^  Seventh  and  Eighth  Louisiana.  Patton  and  Taylor  had  been  sent  up  from 
Port  Republic  to  reinforce  Gen.  Ewell.  Patton  was  in  command  of  Campbell's 
brigade  (Second  of  Jackson's  division),  and  had  but  about  800  men  for  duty. 
(See  Dabney.) 

2  Ewell's  force  was  less  than  5000  in  the  morning.  Patton  added  800  and 
Taylor  possibly  2500  more.  The  latter  was  not  engaged.  Fremont  reports  his 
force  present  at  over  11,000,  but,  as  already  said,  his  returns  show  a  much  larger 
number. 

^  Trimble  earnestly  urged  a  night  attack,  but  Ewell  decided  against  it.  (Ti-im- 
ble's  report.)  Ewell  says  :  "  I  did  not  push  my  success  at  once,  because  I  had 
no  cavalry,  and  it  was  reported  and  reaffirmed  by  Lieut.  Hinrichs,  topographical 
engineer,  sent  to  reconnoitre,  that  the  enemy  was  moving  a  large  column  two 
miles  to  my  left.  As  soon  as  I  could  determine  this  not  to  be  an  attack  I  ad- 
vanced both  my  wings,  drove  in  the  enemy's  skirmishers,  and  when  night 
closed  was  in  position  on  the  ground  previously  held  by  the  enemy,  ready  to 
attack  him  at  dawn."     (Ewell's  report.) 

*  Ewell's  report. 

^  Probably  written  by  one  of  Gen.  Schenck's  staff,  Capt.  Piatt.  It  does  not  in- 
clude the  loss  in  Von  Steinwehr's  brigade  or  in  the  cavalry.  ("  Rebellion  Record," 
vol.  V.  p.  109.)  The  "Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the  War"  reports  Fre- 
mont's loss  in  killed  and  wounded  (without  prisoners)  as  625. 


CRO'^S  KEYS  AND    PORT  REPUBLIC.  157 

the  position  beyond  Lewiston,  to  which  he  had  retired  in  the  morning, 
and  from  which  he  conld  observe,  but  not  attack,  the  Confederate 
batteries  on  the  northwest  bank  of  the  river.  Here  he  was  joined  by 
Gen.  Tyler  with  his  brigade  about  2  p.]\i.^  The  latter  deemed  the 
combined  force  still  too  small  and  the  Confederate  position  too  strong 
to  admit  of  an  aggressive  movement.^  Hence  no  diversion  in  favor 
of  Fremont  was  made. 

Jackson,  emboldened  by  the  inactivity  of  Shields's  advance,  and  the 
easy  repulse  of  Fremont,  conceived  the  audacious  design  of  attacking 
his  two  opponents  in  succession  the  next  day,  with  the  hope  of  over- 
whelming them  separately.  For  this  purpose  he  directed  that  during 
the  night  a  temporary  bridge,  composed  simply  of  planks  laid  upon  the 
running-gear  of  wagons,  should  be  constructed  over  the  South  river 
at  Port  Republic,  and  ordered  Winder  to  move  his  brigade  at  dawn 
across  both  rivers  and  against  Shields.  Ewell  was  directed  to  leave 
Trimble's  brigade  and  part  of  Patton's  to  hold  Fremont  in  check, 
and  to  move  at  an  early  hour  to  Port  Republic  to  follow  Winder. 
Taliaferro's  brigade  was  left  in  charge  of  the  batteries  along  the  river, 
and  to  protect  Trimble's  retreat  if  necessary.  The  force  left  in  Fre- 
mont's front  was  directed  to  make  all  the  show  possible,  and  to  delay 
the  Federal  advance  to  the  extent  of  its  power.  The  Confederate  com- 
mander proposed,  in  case  of  an  easy  victory  over  Shields  in  the  morn- 
ing, to  return  to  the  Harrisonburg  side  of  the  river  and  attack  Fre- 
mont in  the  afternoon.^     In  case,  however,  of  delay,  and  a  vigorous 


^  Gen.  Tyler  says  he  had  about  3000  infantry  and  IG  guns.  Gen.  Shields 
puts  this  brigade  at  2500. 

^  Tylers  report.     "Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v. 

^  "It  has  been  already  explained  that  he  did  not  arrest  the  pursuit  of  Fre- 
mont at  once  by  burning  the  bridge  across  the  Shenandoah,  because  he  was 
unwilling  to  deprive  himself  of  the  ability  to  take  the  aggressive  against  that 
general.  He  now  formed  the  bold  purpose  to  concentrate  his  army  and  fight 
both  Shields  and  him,  successively,  tlie  same  day.  Hence  his  eagerness  to  begin 
his  attack  on  the  former  at  an  early  hour.  Stronger  evidence  of  this  design 
will  be  given.  During  the  night  he  held  an  interview  with  Col.  Patton,  com- 
manding the  Second  brigade,  which  he  then  proposed  to  employ  as  a  rear  guard 
to  cover  the  withdrawal  of  Gen.  Ewell's  forces  from  the  front  of  Fremont. 
This  officer  found  him  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  9th  actively  en- 
gaged in  making  his  dispositions  for  battle.  He  immediately  proceeded  to  give 
him  particular  instructions  as  to  the  management  of  his  men  in  covering  the 
rear,  saying :  '  I  wish  you  to  throw  out  all  your  men  if  necessary  as  skir- 
mishers, and  to  make  a  great  show,  so  as  to  cause  the  enemy  to  think  the  whole 
army  are  behind  you.  Hold  your  position  as  well  as  you  can  ;  then  fall  back 
when  obliged ;  take  a  new  position  ;  hold  it  in  the  same  way ;  and  I  will  be  back 


158       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

advance  on  Fremont's  })art,  Trimble  was  to  retire  by  the  bridge  into 
Port  Republic,  and  burn  it  to  prevent  his  antagonist  from  following. 

Jackson  superintended  in  person  the  construction  of  the  foot-bridge 
over  South  river,  and  before  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  AVinder  was 
already  crossing.  Next  followed  Taylor,  and  with  these  two  brigades, 
separated  as  they  were  by  a  considerable  interval,  Jackson  moved  at 
once  against  the  Federal  troops  at  Lewiston,  leaving  orders  for  the 
remaining  troops  to  follow  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  foot-bridge 
was  defective,  and  a  good  deal  of  time  was  lost  in  getting  the  troops 
over.  Jackson,  impatient  of  delay,  without  Avaiting  for  the  remainder 
of  his  forces,  ordered  an  attack  upon  Tyler  as  soon  as  Winder  had 
reached  the  vicinity  of  the  Federals. 

The  position  occupied  by  Gen.  Tyler  was  an  admirable  one,  on 
the  second  terrace  from  the  Shenandoah.  His  centre  was  near  Gen. 
Lewis's  house,  his  right  extending  through  the  open  fields  towards  the 
river,  while  his  left  rested  in  the  dense  wood  east  of  the  main  road, 
at  the  site  of  an  old  coal-pit.  The  ground  held  by  the  left  and  centre 
was  elevated,  and  commanded  all  the  available  approaches  from  Port 
Republic.  Especially  was  this  the  case  on  his  left,  which  was  the  key 
to  the  whole  position.  Here  he  had  six  guns  planted.^  A  dense  and 
almost  impenetrable  forest  protected  this  flank,  and  made  all  direct 
approach  to  it  difficult,  while  the  batteries  there  placed  covered  a  large 
part  of  the  front,  and  enfiladed  Winder's  advance.  In  this  position 
Gen.  Tyler  disposed  his  force.  He  seems,  though  on  the  alert,  not  to 
have  been  aware  ^  of  Jackson's  rapid  approach  until  the  latter  was  de- 
ploying in  his  front,  but  he  was  altogether  ready  to  meet  the  attack. 

Winder  deployed  his  skirmishers,  and  advancing  on  both  sides 
of  the  road,  drove  in  the  outposts.  He  soon  found  that  the  Federal 
batteries  commanded  the  road  and  its  vicinity  completely.     Jaclvson 

to  join  you  in  the  morning.''  Col.  Patton  reminded  him  that  his  brigade  was 
email,  and  that  the  country  between  Cross  Keys  and  the  Shenandoah  offered 
few  advantages  for  protracting  such  manoeuvres.  lie  therefore  desired  to  know 
for  how  long  a  time  he  would  be  expected  to  hold  the  army  of  Fremont  in 
check.  He  replied :  '  By  the  blessing  of  Providence  I  hope  to  be  back  by  ten 
o'clock,' "     (Dabney.) 

^  Three  guns  of  Clark's  and  three  of  Huntington's  batteries.  One  of  Robinson's 
was  near.    (Daum's  report.    Col.  Daum  was  chief  of  artillery  for  Gen.  Shields.) 

^  Tyler's  report,  "  Rebellion  Record,"  vol.  v.  His  force  consisted  of  the 
Eighty-fourth  and  One  Hundred  and  Tenth  Pennsylvania  and  Sixty-sixth  Ohio 
on  his  left,  and  of  the  First  Virginia,  Seventh  Indiana,  and  Fifth,  Seventh,  and 
Twenty-ninth  Ohio  on  the  right,  and  of  a  detachment  of  the  First  Virginia 
cavalry,  and  16  guns. 


CROSS  KEFS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  159 

then  directed  him  to  send  a  force  to  his  right  through  the  woods  to  turn 
the  Federal  left  flank.  Two  regiments  under  Col.  J.  W.  Allen  (Second 
and  Fourth  Virginia)  ^  were  detached  for  this  purpose  with  two  guns 
of  Carpenter's.  At  the  same  time  he  placed  two  guns  of  Poague's 
battery  on  the  west  of  the  road,  supporting  them  by  the  Twenty- 
seventh  Virginia  (Col.  Grigsby)  and  the  Fifth  Virginia  (Col.  Funk), 
the  remainder  of  his  brigade  present.^  Allen  made  his  way  with 
great  difficulty  through  the  dense  thickets  opposite  the  Federal  left 
until  he  reached  the  vicinity  of  the  hostile  battery.  Here  he  found 
two  regiments  of  infantry  sent  by  Tyler  to  support  the  guns,  and  in 
a  short  time  two  more  regiments  reinforced  them.  Carpenter  was 
unable  to  get  his  guns  through  the  brush,  and  Allen's  infantry,  unable 
of  itself  to  make  headway  against  the  foe,  and  subjected  to  a  heavy 
fire  of  musketry  and  canister,  was  soon  thrown  into  confusion  and 
forced  to  retire.  Meantime,  Poague's  guns  on  the  west  of  the  road 
had  drawn  on  them  a  hea\y  fire.  Gen.  Winder  finds  it  necessary  to 
separate  them.  One  is  sent  some  distance  to  the  left,  into  the  low 
grounds,  and  Funk's  regiment  (Fifth  Virginia)  goes  to  support  it. 
The  enemy  soon  make  dispositions  to  meet  this  movement.^  Two 
gims  of  Clark's  and  two  of  Huntington's  battery  (Federal)  are  placed 
in  position  to  reply  to  Poague.  The  Seventh  Indiana  and  the 
Twenty-ninth  and  Seventh  Ohio  are  sent  to  check  the  attack  on  the 
Federal  right  wing.  Poague  has  tried  in  vain  to  find  a  good  posi- 
tion for  his  guns ;  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  unless  the  enemy  are 
driven  from  theirs.  Winder,  with  less  than  twelve  hundred  (1200) 
men,*  finds  himself  unable  to  cope  with  the  force  before  him,  and 
seeing  signs  of  an  aggressive  movement  against  his  left  near  the  river, 
sends  to  Jackson  for  reinforcements.  The  latter  is  hurrying  them 
forward  as  fast  as  possible.  Hays's  Seventh  Louisiana  regiment  is 
sent  to  the  left,  and  placed  between  Funk  (Fifth  Virginia)  and 
Grigsby  (Twenty-seventh  Virginia),  while  the  whole  of  Poague's 
and  the  section  of  Carpenter's  battery  that  had  returned  from  its  fruit- 

^  The  Fourth  numbered  317,  and  the  Second  224,  rank  and  file,  by  the  regi- 
mental reports. 

^  The  Thirty-third  Virginia,  under  Col.  NeflF,  having  been  on  picket  duty  the 
night  before,  did  not  rejoin  the  brigade  until  the  battle  was  virtually  over. 

*  Tyler's  report. 

*  Strength  of  his  four  regiments  now  in  action :  Twenty-seventh  Virginia, 
150;  Fifth  Virginia,  447;  Second  Virginia,  224;  Fourth  Virginia,  317;  total, 
rank  and  file,  1138. 

Gen.  Tyler  saya  the  Federal  forces  "  could  not  have  exceeded  3000  men." 


160        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1SG1-G2. 

less  attempt  with  Allen  are  ])lu('e(l  to  aid  a  forward  movement  by 
the  Confederate  left.  At  the  same  time  that  Hays  is  sent  to  rein- 
force the  left,  Jackson  sends  the  mass  of  Taylor's  brigade  to  make  a 
detonr  through  the  woods  on  the  Confederate  right,  and  renew  the 
attack  in  which  Allen  had  failed.  It  requires  some  time  for  Taylor 
to  get  through  the  thicket  into  position,  and  while  he  is  moving,  Win- 
der has  ordered  the  Confederate  left  wing  to  advance  and  carry  the 
enemy's  position  with  the  bayonet.  The  three  regiments  (Funk's, 
Hays's,  and  Grigsby's)  move  forward  in  fine  style,  and  the  artillery 
follows  closely.  The  Seventh  Indiana  regiment,  which  is  on  the 
extreme  Federal  right,  is  forced  back  a  short  distance,  but  soon  rein- 
forced by  the  Twenty-ninth,  Seventh,  and  Fifth  Ohio,  the  Federals, 
having  the  advantage  of  the  terrace,  hold  their  position  and  receive 
Winder's  trooi)s  with  a  storm  of  musketry  and  shell.  A  most  de- 
termined and  stubborn  conflict  now  takes  place.  The  Ohio  troops 
repel  every  attempt  to  drive  them  back,  while  the  Confederates  con- 
tinue for  a  time  their  efforts  under  a  storm  of  fire.  At  last  the  Con- 
federates begin  to  waver  and  break.  The  Thirty-first  Virginia 
regiment  (Elzey's  brigade)  reaches  Winder  at  this  moment.  Using 
it  to  cover  his  guns.  Winder  orders  them  to  the  rear,  and  tries  to  form 
his  line  again.  Stopping  one  of  Poague's  guns,  he  turns  it  on  the 
advancing  enemy,  and  for  a  moment  checks  the  disorder.  But  it  is 
only  for  a  moment;  the  enemy  dash  for^vard;  the  horses  are  shot  down 
at  the  gun,  and  the  Fifth  Ohio,  charging,  drive  back  the  half-formed 
Confederates  across  a  wheat-field  and  seize  the  piece,  which  they  carry 
oif.  Steuart's  and  Elzey's  brigades^  are  next  to  Taylor's  in  reaching 
the  battle-field.  One  regiment  of  Steuart's  (Fifty-second  Virginia) 
is  sent  to  aid  Winder,  but  arrives  only  in  time  to  be  involved  in  his 
repulse.  Two  others  (Forty-fourth  and  Fift}'-eighth  Virginia)  are 
stationed  near  the  main  road,  in  the  wood,  and  are  under  Gen.  Ewell's 
own  eye.  As  the  Federals  advance  to  drive  Winder,  they  expose 
their  flank,  and  Ewell  leads  these  two  regiments  forward.  They 
make  a  vigorous  dash  on  the  enemy,  drive  him  some  distance,  and, 
though  in  turn  driven  back  to  the  woods,  the  result  of  the  diversion 
is  to  check  the  farther  adv^ance  against  Winder,  and  give  the  latter 
an  opportunity  to  rally  a  part  of  his  troops,  and  to  plaee  two  of 
Poague's  guns  where  they  had  been  before  the  Confederate  advance. 


^  Elzey's  brigade,  except  the  Thirty-first  Virginia,  was  sent  under  Col.  Walker 
to  the  richt  to  help  Gen.  Taylor,  but  became  lost  in  the  woods,  and  only  arrived 
at  the  proper  point  after  the  enemy  had  been  broken. 


CROSS  KEYS  AND  PORT  REPUBLIC.  161 

Jackson,  finding  the  resistance  of  the  enemy  so  much  more  stub- 
born than  he  had  expected,  and  that  his  first  attaclcs  had  failed,  de- 
termined to  concentrate  his  whole  force  and  give  up  all  intention  of 
recrossing  the  river.  He  therefore  sent  orders  to  Trimble  and  Talia- 
ferro to  leave  Fremont's  front,  move  over  the  bridge,  burn  it,  and 
join  the  main  body  of  the  army  as  speedily  as  possible. 

Meantime,  Taylor  has  been  moving  as  rapidly  as  the  tangled  forest 
would  permit  towards  the  Federal  left.  He  reaches  the  point  of 
attack  at  the  time  that  the  loud  shouts  of  the  Federals  proclaim  their 
success  on  the  other  wing.  The  infantiy  supporting  the  six  guns 
that  had  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  battle  had  been  partly 
withdrawn  to  reinforce  the  troops  engaged  with  Winder,^  and  before 
they  can  be  retm^ned  to  their  former  place  Taylor  has  charged  and 
taken  the  battery.  Most  stubborn,  however,  has  been  the  resistance, 
and  so  soon  as  reinforcements  can  be  hurried  over  from  the  other 
wing,  where  the  repulse  of  Winder  relieves  the  Federals  for  a  time, 
Taylor  is  in  turn  attacked,  and  his  brave  Louisianians  are  forced  to 
yield  the  ground  they  had  won.  Once  more  the  guns  are  in  Federal 
possession.  They  attempt  to  carry  them  out  of  danger,  but  the 
horses  are  killed,  and  the  removal  requires  time.  One  piece  is  gotten 
off,  but  before  any  more  can  be  removed  Taylor  renews  the  charge. 
Ewell  leads  the  two  regiments  under  Col.  Scott,  which  had  so  oppor- 
tunely checked  the  pursuit  of  Winder,  to  Taylor's  assistance.     Win- 

^  "Additional  reinforcements  of  the  enemy  were  coming  up  on  our  right, 
having  abandoned  their  position  on  the  left,  and  I  ordered  the  Eighty-fourth  and 
One  Hundred  and  Tenth  (Pennsylvania)  down  to  the  right,  but  before  they 
reached  the  position  assigned  them  the  enemy  was  in  full  retreat  before  our 
brave  men,  and  I  at  once  ordered  them  back  into  the  wood  again.  Under  cover 
of  the  engagement  on  our  right  the  enemy  had  thrown  another  force  into  the 
woods,  and  pressed  them  down  upon  our  batteries  on  the  left.  So  rapid  was 
this  movement  that  they  passed  the  line  on  which  the  Eighty-fourth  and  One 
Hundred  and  Tenth  were  ordered,  unobserved,  making  a  dash  upon  the  battery 
so  sudden  and  unexpected  as  to  compel  the  cannoneers  to  abandon  their  pieces. 

"Col.  Candy  met  the  enemy  with  his  regiment  with  great  coolness,  his  men 
fighting  with  commendable  bravery.  The  Seventh  and  Fifth  Ohio  were  soon 
supporting  him,  driving  the  enemy  from  their  position  and  retaking  the  battery. 
The  artillery  officers  made  a  strong  eflFort,  and  used  great  exertions  to  remove 
their  guns,  but,  the  horses  having  been  killed  or  disabled,  found  it  impossible. 
The  enemy  had  given  way  along  the  whole  line,  but  I  saw  heavy  reinforcements 
crossing  from  the  town  that  would  have  been  impossible  for  us  to  resist.  After 
consulting  Gen.  Carroll,  I  ordered  the  troops  to  fall  back  under  his  direction, 
with  a  view  of  retreating  until  we  should  meet  the  reinforcements  of  Gens. 
Kimball  and  Terry."     (Tyler's  report,  "Rebellion  Record.*') 


162        CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF    VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

der  renews  the  attack  from  his  wing  with  Poague's  guas;  Chew's 
battery  arrives  and  is  placed  in  front,  and  witli  guns  from  the  bat- 
teries of  Brockcnbrough,  Raines,  and  Courtcnay,  opens  on  the  enemy. 
Once  more  Taylor,  thus  aided,  carries  the  position.  The  Federals 
have  made  a  most  gallant  fight,  both  with  the  guns  and  to  save  them, 
but  they  cannot  resist  the  combined  attack  now  made.  They  are 
pushed  back  at  every  point,  and  are  soon  in  full  retreat.  Not  a 
moment  too  soon  have  they  yielded  the  field,  for  the  remainder  of 
Jackson's  force  is  arriving,  and  in  a  short  time  they  must  have  l)een 
entirely  overwhelmed.  Taliaferro,  who  had  just  reached  the  field,  is 
sent  with  Winder  in  pursuit.  They  press  the  retreating  enemy  in  a 
confused  mass  for  several  miles,^  and  then  hand  over  the  pursuit  to 
the  cavalry  under  Munford,  who  follow  for  three  miles  more.  About 
four  hundred  and  fifty  prisoners,  a  few  wagons,  one  piece  of  aban- 
doned artillery  (in  addition  to  the  five  captured  by  Taylor  in  his  final 
charge),  and  eight  hundred  muskets  are  the  trophies  of  the  pursuit. 
Some  two  hundred  and  seventy-five  of  the  Federal  wounded  are 
paroled  in  the  hospitals  near  the  battle-field.^  About  two  hundred 
others  are  carried  off.^ 

Jackson's  losses  were,  Idlled,  wounded,  and  missing,  in  Taylor's 
brigade,  290;  Winder's,  199;  Steuart's,  199;  Elzey's,  128;  total, 
816.  The  official  reports  in  the  adjutant-general's  office  make  the 
Federal  loss  66  killed,  382  wounded,  382  missing;  total,  830.  In 
the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  History  of  the  War"  they  are  stated  as  67 
killed,  361  wounded,  574  missing ;  total,  1002.* 


^  Col.  Carroll,  who  covered  the  Federal  rear,  says :  "  As  soon  as  we  com- 
menced the  retreat  the  enemy  turned  and  opened  upon  us  portions  of  Clark's 
and  Huntington's  batteries  that  they  had  taken  from  us  on  the  left,  which  threw 
the  rear  of  our  column  in  great  disorder,  causing  them  to  take  to  the  woods  and 
making  it,  for  the  earlier  part  of  the  retreat,  apparently  a  rout.  .  .  .  Their 
cavalry  also  charged  upon  our  rear,  increasing  the  confusion." 

^  Jackson's  report. 

^  On  June  13,  Surgeon  Cox  telegraphed  the  Federal  surgeon-general  that  180 
of  the  wounded  of  Shields's  division  had  just  arrived  at  Front  Royal.  Surgeon 
Stidger,  one  of  the  surgeons  in  charge,  puts  the  number  at  "  perhaps  200.'' 
(Report  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  Part  III.,  1863,  p.  493,  etc.) 

*  In  the  series  of  engagements  on  the  6th,  8th,  and  9th  of  June,  the  losses 
were  : 

Confederate.  Federal. 

On  June  6    .         .         .         .         70     On  June  6  over  155 

"        8    ....      287  "8  704  (including  Carroll's.) 

"         9    ....       816  "9  (say)  916 

1173  1775 


CROSS  KEFS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  163 

During  the  forenoou  Fremont  had  advanced  against  Trimble  on 
the  north  side  of  the  river,  and  was  driving  him  slowly  back,  when 
the  latter  was  ordered  to  rejoin  Jackson  at  Lewiston.  He,  with 
Taliaferro,  then  withdrew  as  rapidly  as  possible,  crossed  the  bridge 
without  loss,  and  succeeded  in  burning  it  in  the  face  of  the  advancing 
Federals.  Fremont's  army  arrived  on  the  heights  overlooking  Lewis- 
ton  only  in  time  to  witness  the  retreat  of  Tyler,  and  were  prevented 
by  the  river  from  giving  him  any  assistance.  In  the  afternoon  Fre- 
mont placed  some  batteries  in  position,  and  shelled  the  parties  engaged 
in  attending  to  the  wounded  on  the  field.^ 

The  Confederate  trains  had  been  moved  in  the  course  of  the  day 
across  South  river  towards  Brown's  gap,  and  during  the  afternoon 
and  night  the  weary  Confederates  returned  from  the  battle-field  and 
pursuit,  to  camp  in  the  cove  at  the  foot  of  this  mountain-pass.  It  was 
midnight  before  some  of  them  lay  down  in  the  rain  to  rest. 

Thus  the  day  ended  with  the  complete  defeat  of  the  two  brigades 
under  Tyler.  Most  gallant  and  determined  had  been  their  resist- 
ance, and  Jacl^on's  impetuosity  had  made  his  victory  more  costly 
than  it  otherwise  would  have  been.  In  sending  in  Winder's  brigade 
before  its  supports  arrived,  he  had  hurled  this  body  of  troops  against 
more  than  twice  their  number.  Taylor  next  attacked,  but  the  repulse 
of  Winder  enabled  the  Federal  commander  to  concentrate  his  forces 
against  Taylor  and  drive  him  from  the  battery  he  had  taken.  It 
was  then  that  Jackson  renewed  the  attack  with  the  combined  forces 
of  three  brigades,  and  speedily  forced  the  enemy  from  the  field. 

^  Jackson's  report.  Fremont  thus  describes  the  scene  when  he  reached  the 
heights  overlooking  the  field  from  which  Tyler  had  been  driven;  "The  battle 
which  had  taken  place  upon  the  farther  bank  of  the  river  was  wholly  at  an  end. 
A  single  brigade  sent  forward  by  Gen.  Shields"  (there  were  two,  Tyler's  and 
Carroll's)  "  had  been  simply  cut  to  pieces.  Col.  Carroll  in  command  had  for 
his  own  reasons  failed  to  burn  the  bridge,  though  occupying  it  in  time  with  his 
guards.  Jackson  hastening  across  had  fallen  upon  the  inferior  force,  and  the 
result  was  before  us.  Of  the  bridge  nothing  remained  but  the  charred  and 
smoking  timbers.  Beyond,  at  the  edge  of  the  woods,  a  body  of  the  enemy's 
troops  was  in  position,  and  a  baggage-train  was  disappearing  in  a  pass  among 
the  hills.  Parties  gathering  the  dead  and  wounded,  together  with  a  line  of 
prisoners  awaiting  the  movements  of  the  rebel  force  near  by,  was  all  in  respect 
to  troops  of  either  side  now  to  be  seen.  A  parting  salvo  of  carefully  aimed 
rifled  guns  duly  charged  with  shell  hastened  the  departure  of  the  rebels,  with 
their  unlucky  though  most  gallant  convoy,  and  the  whole  were  speedily  out  of 
sight."  (Fremont's  report.)  In  returning  from  the  battle-field  to  Brown's  gap, 
Jackson  took  a  road  through  the  forest  and  away  from  the  river  to  avoid  Fre- 
mont's guns. 


164       CAMPAIGN  IN   THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,   lSGl-62. 

Had  he  attacked  with  this  force  at  first,  it  is  probable  that  one  charge 
would  have  given  him  the  victory  at  less  cost  of  life. 

Next  day  the  Confederates  rested  in  camp.  Exhausted  nature 
demanded  repose,  and  Jackson  now  gave  it  to  his  tired  and  battle- 
worn  troops.  His  enemies  were  effectually  disposed  of.  Shields,  who 
had  advanced  to  sup])ort  Tyler,  when  the  broken  and  defeated  brigades 
rejoined  him,'  decided  to  return  by  the  route  by  whidi  he  had  moved 
forward.  Orders  from  McDowell,  sent  on  this  day,  caused  him  to 
continue  his  retreat  to  I^uray  and  Front  Royal,^  whence  he  was  moved 
to  Manassas  to  rejoin  McDowell's  corps.  Fremont,  influenced  by  his 
own  repulse,  the  disaster  sustained  by  Shields,  and  the  retreat  of  the 
latter,  retired  from  the  vicinity  of  Port  Republic  on  the  morning  of 
the  10th.  On  the  11th,  Munford,  Avith  the  Confederate  cavalry, 
once  more  crossed  the  Shenandoah,  and  followed  the  retreating  army. 
Camping  at  INIount  Cra\vford  on  the  night  of  the  11th,  he  next  day 
moved  into  Harrisonburg,  which  Fremont  had  evacuated,  leaving 
two  hundred  wounded  in  the  hospitals,  some  medicine  and  other 
stores,  and  about  two  hundred  muskets.  Fremont  continued  his 
retreat  on  the  11th  and  12tli.  "Significant  demonstrations  of  the 
enemy,"  as  Gen.  Fremont  expresses  it,  caused  him  to  withdraw 
farther,  and  on  the  14th  of  June  he  joined  Banks  and  Sigel^  at 
Middletown.  Banks  and  Sigel  had  not  advanced  beyond  Middle- 
town  while  Fremont  and  Shields  were  pursuing  Jackson. 

Jaclison,  on  the  12th,  moved  out  from  his  confined  bivouac  at  the 
foot  of  Brown's  gap,  and,  crossing  the  South  river  near  Weyer's  cave, 
camped  in  the  noble,  park-like  forest  between  the  latter  place  and 

^  Shields  says  he  marched  on  the  night  of  the  8th,  and,  reaching  Conrad's 
Store  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  learned  that  Tyler  was  within  two  miles  of 
Port  Republic.  He  pressed  forward  as  fast  as  he  could,  and  some  miles  in 
advance  of  Conrad's  met  the  routed  and  flying  brigades. 

^  Gen.  Shields  is  disposed  to  attribute  his  immediate  retreat  from  Conrad's 
Store  not  to  the  defeat  of  Tyler,  but  to  Gen.  McDowell's  positive  orders  to  return. 
He  says  he  desired,  in  co-operation  with  Fremont,  to  again  attack  Jackson,  and 
anticipated  success  in  such  an  attempt.  McDowell's  orders  hardly  bear  Gen. 
Shields's  interpretation.  On  June  9,  McDowell's  chief  of  staff  wrote  :  "  If,  how- 
ever, you  are  in  hot  pursuit  and  about  to  fall  on  the  enemy,  and  can  do  so  with 
reasonable  chances  of  success  without  relying  on  the  troops  at  Front  Royal,  who 
are  too  far  in  rear  to  support  you  in  your  extended  movements,  the  general  is 
not  disposed  to  recall  you.  .  .  ."  Gen.  McDowell  says:  "Both  the  condition 
of  Gen.  Shields's  division  and  that  of  the  roads  and  rivers  as  represented  by  him 
indicated  anything  than  the  success  he  anticipated." 

*  Gen.  Sigel  had  superseded  Gen.  Saxton  in  command  of  the  forces  gathered  at 
Harper's  Ferry  to  oppose  Jackson. 


CROSS  KEYS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  165 

Mount  Meridian.^  Here  for  five  days  of  that  splendid  June  he  rested 
and  refreshed  his  army.  He  says :  "  For  the  purpose  of  rendering 
thanks  to  God  for  having  crowned  our  arms  with  success,  and  to 
implore  his  contiiuied  favor,  divine  service  was  held  in  the  army  on 
the  14th. 

"The  army  remained  near  Weyer's  cave  until  the  17th,  when,  in 
obedience  to  instructions  from  the  commanding  general  of  the  de- 
partment, it  moved  towards  Richmond."^ 

His  order  of  June  13  to  his  troops  is  as  follows :  "  The  fortitude 
of  the  troops  under  fatigue  and  their  valor  in  action  have  again,  under 
the  blessing  of  Divine  Providence,  placed  it  in  the  power  of  the 
commanding  general  to  congratulate  them  upon  the  victories  of  June 
8  and  9.  Beset  on  both  flanks  by  two  boastful  armies,  you  have 
escaped  their  toils,  inflicting  successively  crushing  blows  upon  each 

^  Dr.  Dabney  thus  speaks  of  this  camp :  "  The  troops  were  encamped  in  a 
range  of  woodland  groves  between  the  two  rivei-s,  surrounded  with  the  verdure 
of  early  summer  and  the  luxuriant  wheat-fields  whitening  to  the  harvest.  In 
this  smiling  paradise  they  solaced  themselves  five  days  for  their  fatigues,  the 
men  reposing  under  the  shade  or  bathing  in  the  sparkling  waters  of  the  Shen- 
andoah, and  the  horses  feeding  in  the  abundant  pastures.  The  Saturday  follow- 
ing the  battle  was  proclaimed  by  Gen.  Jackson  as  a  day  of  thanksgiving  and 
prayer,  and  all  the  troops  were  called  to  join  with  their  general  and  their  chap- 
lains in  praises  to  God  for  his  deliverances.  The  next  day  a  general  communion 
was  observed  in  the  Third  Virginia  brigade,  at  which  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
dispensed,  in  the  wood,  to  a  great  company  of  Christian  soldiers  from  all  the 
army.  At  this  solemnity  the  general  was  present  as  a  worshipper,  and  modestly 
participated  with  his  men  in  the  sacred  feast.  The  quiet  diffidence  with  which 
he  took  the  least  obtrusive  place  and  received  the  sacred  elements  from  the  hands 
of  a  regimental  chaplain  was  in  beautiful  contrast  with  the  majesty  and  authority 
of  his  bearing  in  the  crisis  of  battle." 

^  Jackson's  report.  Gen.  Lee  (now  in  immediate  command  of  the  Confederate 
forces  in  Virginia,  in  consequence  of  the  wounding  of  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  on 
May  31)  wrote  to  Jackson  as  follows  on  June  8:  "Your  letter  of  the  6th  has 
been  received.  I  congratulate  you  upon  defeating  and  then  avoiding  your 
enemy.  Your  march  to  Winchester  has  been  of  great  advantage,  and  has  been 
conducted  with  your  accustomed  skill  and  boldness.  I  hope  you  will  be  able  to 
rest  and  refresh  your  troops  for  a  few  days  before  compelled  to  enter  upon  active 
service.  I  desire  you  to  report  the  probable  intentions  of  the  enemy  and  what 
steps  you  can  take  to  thwart  them.  Should  there  be  nothing  requiring  your 
attention  in  the  A^alley  so  as  to  prevent  your  leaving  it  a  few  days,  and  you  can 
make  arrangements  to  deceive  the  enemy  and  impress  him  with  the  idea  of  your 
presence,  please  let  me  know,  that  you  may  unite  at  the  decisive  moment  with  the 
army  near  Richmond.  Make  your  arrangements  accordingly  ;  but  should  an  op- 
portunity occur  for  striking  the  enemy  a  successful  blow  do  not  let  it  escape  you." 

When  this  letter  reached  its  destination  the  "  blow"  had  been  "  struck,"  and 
Jackson  was  free  to  join  Lee. 


166       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

of  your  pursuers.  Let  a  few  more  sucih  efforts  be  made,  and  you 
may  confidently  hope  that  our  beautiful  Valley  will  be  cleansed  from 
the  j)ollution  of  the  invader's  i)resence.  The  major-general  com- 
manding invites  you  to  observe  to-morrow  evening,  June  14,  from 
3  o'clock  P.M.,  as  a  season  of  thanksgiving,  by  a  snspension  of  all 
military  exercises,  and  by  holding  divine  service  in  the  several  regi- 
ments." 

The  battles  of  Cross  Keys  and  Port  Republic  closed  the  Valley 
campaign  of  1862.  Just  three  months  had  passed  since  Jackson, 
with  about  four  thousand  six  hundred  (4600)  troops,  badly  armed 
and  equipped,  had  fallen  back  from  Winchester  before  the  ad- 
vance of  Banks  with  thirty  thousand  (30,000)  men.  So  feeble 
seemed  his  force,  and  so  powerless  for  offence,  that  when  it  had  been 
pushed  forty  miles  to  the  rear.  Banks  began  to  send  his  force  towards 
Manassas  to  execute  his  part  of  "  covering  the  Federal  capital"  in 
McClellan's  great  campaign.  While  a  large  part  of  the  Federal 
ti'oops  are  on  the  march  out  of  the  Valley,  and  their  commander  is 
himself  en  route  from  Winchester  to  Washington,  Jackson,  hastening 
from  his  resting-place  by  a  forced  march,  appears  most  unexpectedly 
at  Ivernstown,  and  hurls  his  little  army  with  incredible  force  and  fury 
against  the  part  of  Banks's  army  which  is  yet  behind.  He  is  mis- 
taken as  to  the  number  of  the  enemy.  Three  thousand  five  hundred 
(3500)  men,  worn  by  a  forced  march,  are  not  able  to  defeat  the  seven 
thousand  (7000)  of  Shields.  After  a  fierce  struggle  he  suffers  a  severe 
repulse ;  but  he  makes  such  an  impression  as  to  cause  the  recall  of 
Banks  and  his  corps,  and  to  lead  to  the  detachment  of  a  strong  force 
from  McClellan  to  protect  Washington.  The  Federal  administration 
cannot  believe  that  he  has  attacked  Shields  with  a  handful  of  men. 

Falling  back  before  his  pursuers  to  New  Market,  and  thenCe  to 
Harrisonburg,  he  there  leaves  the  main  road,  and  crossing  over  to 
Elk  Run  valley,  at  the  foot  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  he  takes  a  position  in 
which  he  cannot  be  readily  attacked,  and  which  yet  enables  him  so  to 
threaten  the  flank  of  his  opponent  as  effectually  to  check  his  further 
progress  up  the  Valley.  Here  he  gains  ten  days'  time  for  the  reor- 
ganization of  his  regiments,  tlie  time  of  service  of  most  of  which 
expired  in  April,  and  here,  too,  he  finds  that  the  return  of  furloughed 
men  and  the  accession  of  volunteers  in  the  past  mouth  has  doubled 
his  numbers. 

Finding  that  no  more  troops  could  be  obtained  besides  those  of 
Ewell  and  Edward  Johnson,  he  leaves  the  former  to  hold  Banks  in 
check,  while  he  makes  a  rapid  and  circuitous  march,  by  way  of  Port 


CROSS  KEYS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  167 

Republic  and  across  the  mountains  at  Brown's  gap,  to  Mechum's 
River  station,  on  the  Virginia  Central  railroad.  Hence  he  goes  via 
Staunton  to  Gen.  Edward  Johnson's  position  at  West  View.  Uniting 
Johnson's  force  with  his  own,  he  appears  suddenly  in  front  of  Milroy 
at  McDowell,  only  eight  days  after  having  left  Elk  Run  valley.  He 
has  marched  a  hundred  miles  and  crossed  the  Blue  Ridge  twice  in 
this  time,  and  now  repulses  Milroy  and  Schenck,  and  follows  them  up 
to  Franklin.  Then  finding  Fremont  within  supporting  distance,  he, 
on  May  12,  begins  to  retrace  his  steps.  He  hastens  on  through  Har- 
risonburg, New  Market,  Luray, — Ewell  joining  him  on  the  road  and 
swelling  his  force  to  sixteen  thousand  (16,000)  men, — and  on  May  23 
unexpectedly  appears  at  Front  Royal  (a  distance  by  his  route  of  nearly 
one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  FrankKn)  and  surprises  and  com- 
pletely overwhelms  the  force  Banks  has  stationed  there.  Next  day 
he  strikes  with  damaging  effect  at  Banks's  retreating  column  between 
Strasburg  and  Winchester,  and  follows  him  up  all  the  night.  At 
dawn  (May  25)  he  attacks  him  on  the  heights  of  Winchester,  forces 
him  from  his  position,  and  drives  him  in  confusion  and  dismay  to  the 
Potomac,  with  the  loss  of  immense  stores  and  a  large  number  of  pris- 
oners. Resting  but  two  days,  Jackson  marches  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
threatens  an  invasion  of  Maryland,  and  spreads  such  an  alarm  as  to 
paralyze  the  movement  of  McDowell's  forty  thousand  (40,000)  men 
at  Fredericksbiu'g,  and  to  cause  the  attempted  concentration  of  the 
greater  part  of  this  force,  together  with  Fremont's  command,  in  his 
rear.  The  militia  of  the  adjoining  States  is  called  out.  Troops  are 
hurried  to  Harper's  Ferry  in  his  front.  Nearly  sixty  thousand 
(60,000)  troops  in  all,  are  hastening  under  the  most  urgent  telegrams 
to  close  in  around  him.  Keeping  up  his  demonstrations  until  the  last 
moment,  until,  indeed,  the  head  of  McDowell's  column  was  already 
crossing  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  but  twelve  or  fourteen  miles  from  his 
line  of  retreat,  at  a  point  nearly  fifty  miles  in  his  rear,  he,  by  a  forced 
march  of  a  day  and  a  half,  traverses  this  distance  of  fifty  miles  and 
places  himself  at  Strasburg.  Here  he  keeps  Fremont  at  bay  until  his 
long  train  of  prisoners  and  captured  stores  has  passed  through  in  safety 
and  his  rear  guard  closed  up.  Then  he  falls  back  before  Fremont, 
while  by  burning  successively  the  bridges  over  the  Main  Fork  of 
the  Shenandoah,  he  destroys  all  co-operation  between  his  two  pur- 
suers. Arrived  at  a  point  when  he  thinks  there  is  no  further  need 
for  retreat,  he  turns  off  from  Harrisonbm-g  to  Port  Republic,  seizes 
the  only  bridge  left  south  of  Front  Royal  over  the  Shenandoah,  and 
takes  a  position  which  enables  him  to  fight  his  adversaries  in  succes- 


1(58        CAMPAIGN  IX   THE    VALLEV  OF   VIRGINIA,  1S61-62. 

sion,  wliilc  tlicy  cannot  succor  cadi  otlicr.  By  wonderful  celerity  and 
darinji;,  he  has  extricated  himself  from  tiie  dant^ers  which  a  week  be- 
fore gathered  around  him  at  Winchester.  Then,  nearly  sixty  thousand 
(60,000)  men  -were  encirclin<2^  him.  In  a  day  or  two  he  must  have 
been  overwhelmed.  Now  he  has  left  the  great  mass  of  these  troops 
fifty  miles  in  the  rear.  Fremont  alone  is  for  the  moment  within 
reach.  Jackson  deals  him  a  staggering  blow,  and  next  morning,  with- 
drawing suddenly  from  his  front  and  destroying  the  bridge  to  prevent 
his  follo^dng,  attacks  the  advance  brigades  of  Shields  and  completely 
defeats  them,  driving  them  several  miles  from  the  battle-field. 

With  a  force  at  no  time  exceeding  seventeen  thousand  (17,000) 
men  Jackson  has  beaten  all  his  adversaries  in  succession,  and,  though 
they  so  largely  exceeded  him  in  strength,  he  has  managed  every- 
where, except  at  Kernstown,  to  concentrate  equal  or  superior  num- 
bers upon  the  point  attacked.  Thus  at  McDowell  he  throws  double 
their  force  on  Milroy  and  Schenck.  AVhen  he  leaves  Fremont's  front 
at  Franklin,  on  May  12,  he  is  much  farther  from  Banks  at  Strasburg 
than  any  of  the  large  bodies  of  Federal  troops  at  Fredericksburg  or 
around  Washington,  and  yet  he  succeeds  in  overwhelming  Banks  with 
greatly  superior  numbers.  Again,  Avhen  he  has  completely  out- 
marched the  armies  which  attempt  to  surround  him  and  turns  at  bay 
at  Port  Eepublic,  he  is  ready  to  receive  Fremont's  attack  with  equal 
forces,  and  next  day  can  concentrate  two  or  three  times  their  o'«ti 
strength  against  Shields's  brigades,  if  it  be  necessary. 

Now  followed  a  week  of  rest,  the  first  since  the  army  had  left 
Swift  Run  gap  on  the  30th  of  April.  But  to  the  indefatigable  com- 
mander it  was  but  a  week  of  preparation  for  another  series  of  great 
deeds  on  a  different  theatre.  The  great  soldier  who  at  this  time  com- 
manded the  Confederate  armies  had  already  (see  note,  page  165,  Lee's 
letter,  June  8)  informed  Jackson  of  the  intended  union  of  his  forces 
with  those  near  Richmond.  On  the  11th  of  June,  in  congratulating 
him  on  his  recent  successes.  Gen.  Lee  informs  him  that  Lawi:on's  and 
Whiting's  commands  had  been  sent  to  his  assistance,  but  at  the  same 
time  du-ects  that  Jackson  move  rapidly  with  the  whole  force  to  Ash- 
land, and  thence  between  the  Chickahominy  and  Pamunky  rivers,  on 
McClellan's  communications.^ 


^  Gen.  Lee's  letter  is  as  follows  : 

"  Headquarters  near  Richmond, 
"June  11. 
"  Maj.-Gen.  Jackson,  etc.  : — Your  recent  successes  have  been  the  cause  of  the 
liveliest  joy  in  this  army  as  well  as  in   the  country.      The  admiration  excited 
by  your  skill  and  boldness  has  been  constantly  mingled  with  solicitude  for  your 


CROSS  KEFS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  169 

Eveiy  precaution  was  taken  to  deceive  the  enemy  and  produce  on 
their  part  the  expectation  of  an  advance  along  the  Valley  in  stronger 
force  than  before.  AMiiting's  and  LaA\'ton's  troops  were  sent  from 
Richmond  for  this  purpose,  and  Jackson  manoeuvred  his  cavahy  so 
as  to  create  the  same  impression.  The  prisoners  sent  to  Richmond 
by  Jackson  met  the  reinforcements  coming  up.  The  paroled  Federal, 
officers  soon  carried  this  news  to  Washington,  while  Federal  spies 
confirmed  it.  An  amusing  ruse-de-guerre  of  Col.  Munford,  command- 
ing the  cavalry,  upon  receiving  a  flag  of  truce  from  Gen.  Fremont 
asking  for  his  wounded,  strengthened  the  impression.  The  Federal 
officers  bearing  the  flag  were  brought  to  Col.  INIuuford's  quarters,  and 
while  awaiting  an  answer  from  Gen.  Jackson  it  was  arranged  that 
they  should  overhear  a  pretended  report,  brought  to  the  colonel  by 
Mr.  W.  W.  Gilmer,  who  assumed  the  role  of  orderly,  in  which  the 
road  from  Staunton  was  represented  as  being  filled  with  the  troops 
coming  to  join  Jackson.  The  news  was  spread  through  the  town 
(Harrisonburg),  and  in  the  midst  of  the  excitement  consequent  uj)on 
it  the  Federal  officers  were  returned  to  their  own  lines,  their  request 
having  been  declined.^     The  Confederate  lines  were  made  as  close  as 

situation.  The  practicability  of  reinforcing  you  has  been  the  subject  of  earnest 
consideration.  It  has  been  determined  to  do  so  at  the  expense  of  weakenino- 
this  army.  Brig.-Gen.  Lawton,  with  six  regiments  from  Georgia,  is  on  the  way 
to  you,  and  Brig.-Gen.  Whiting,  with  eight  veteran  regiments,  leaves  here  to- 
day. The  object  is  to  enable  you  to  crush  the  forces  opposed  to  you.  Leave 
your  enfeebled  troops  to  watch  the  country  and  guard  the  passes  covered  by 
your  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  with  your  main  body,  including  Ewell's  division 
and  Lawton"s  and  Whiting's  commands,  move  rapidly  to  Ashland  by  rail  or 
otherwise  as  you  may  find  more  advantageous,  sweep  down  between  the  Chicka- 
hominy  and  Pamunky  rivers,  cutting  up  the  enemy's  communications,  etc., 
while  this  ai-my  attacks  Gen.  McClellan  in  front.  He  will  thus,  I  think,  be 
forced  to  come  out  of  his  entrenchments,  where  he  is  strongly  posted  on  the 
Chickahominy,  and  apparently  preparing  to  move  by  gradual  approaches  on 
Richmond.  Keep  me  advised  of  your  movements,  and  if  practicable  precede 
your  troops,  that  we  may  confer  and  arrange  for  simultaneous  attack. 

"R.E.Lee." 

On  June  16,  Gen.  Lee  again  wrote  : 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  by  the  Hon.  Mr.  Boteler.  I  hope  you  will  be 
able  to  recruit  and  refresh  your  troops  sufiiciently  for  the  movement  proposed 
in  my  letter  of  the  11th  .  .  .  From  your  account  of  the  position  of  the  enemy, 
I  think  it  would  be  difficult  for  you  to  engage  him  in  time  to  reunite  with  this 
army  in  the  battle  for  Richmond.  Fremont  and  Shields  are  apparently  retro- 
grading, their  troops  shaken  and  disorganized  ;  some  time  will  be  required  to  set 
them  again  in  the  field.  If  this  be  so,  the  sooner  you  unite  with  this  army  the 
better.  ...  In  moving  your  troops  you  could  let  it  be  understood  that  it  was 
to  pursue  the  enemy  in  your  front.  Dispose  those  to  hold  the  Valley  so  as  to 
deceive  the  enemy.  .  .  .'' 

^  Dabney,  p.  432,  etc.     Gen.  Jackson  says,  in  a  despatch  to  Col.  Munford, 

June  13 :  "  Please  impress  the  bearers  of  the  flag  of  truce  as  much  as  possible 

12 


170       CAMPAIGN  IN  THE    VALLEY  OF   VIRGINIA,  1861-62. 

possible  to  prevent  information  getting  through,  and  all  passing  was 
prohibited.^  These  and  such  like  were  the  "  significant  demonstra- 
tions" which  caused  Gen.  Fremont  to  retreat  until  he  finally  joined 
Banks's  troops  at  Middletown,  on  June  24.  They  were  thoroughly 
effective,  for  Gen.  Banks  telegraphed  to  Washington  on  the  12th 
that  "  Jackson  is  heavily  reinforced  and  is  advancing,"  and  on  the 
19th  he  says:  "No  doubt  another  immediate  movement  down  the 
Valley  is  intended  with  a  force  of  thirty  thousand  (30,000)  or  more." 
He  opposed  the  withdrawal  of  Shields  strongly,  in  the  same  telegram. 
On  the  22d  he  is  still  on  the  alert  for  Jackson's  and  Ewell's  move- 
ments, and  on  the  28th,  when  Jackson  was  fighting  at  Richmond, 
Banks  telegraphs  that  he  believes  Jackson  meditates  an  attack  in  the 
Valley!^ 

Gen.  McDowell  had  been  ordered^  as  early  as  June  8  to  collect  his 
forces  with  a  view  to  resuming  his  march  by  way  of  Fredericksburg 
to  join  McClellau,  but  in  consequence  of  the  victories  of  Cross  Keys 
and  Port  Republic,  and  of  the  strong  conviction  wrought  in  the  minds 
of  Fremont  and  Banks  of  another  advance  by  Jackson,  he  was  delayed 
in  getting  his  troops  out  of  the  Valley ;  and  when  they  did  move,  it 
was  towards  Manassas,  and  not  Richmond.  Rickett's  division  left 
Front  Royal  for  Manassas  on  the  17th  of  June,  and  it  was  followed 
by  Shields's. 

On  this  same  day  Jackson,  having  disposed  of  his  various  enemies 
and  effected  the  permanent  withdrawal  of  the  greater  part  of  Mc- 
Dowell's corps*  from  the  forces  operating  against  Richmond,  again 

with  an  idea  of  a  heavy  advance  on  our  part,  and  let  them  return  under  such 
impression."  (See  Paper  of  Col.  Munford  in  Southern  Historical  Papers, 
November,  1879.) 

^  In  despatches  dated  June  17,  Jackson  says  to  Col.  Munford:  "Do  all  you 
can  to  cut  off  communication  across  the  lines  between  us  and  the  enemy ;  also 
let  there  be  as  little  communication  as  practicable  between  your  command  and 
that  of  the  infantry.  Let  your  couriers  be  men  whom  you  can  trust,  and  cau- 
tion them  against  carrying  news  forward,  as  it  may  reach  the  enemy."  Again  : 
"  I  will  be  at  Mount  Sidney  to-night  about  ten  o'clock.  Can  you  meet  me  there? 
I  will  be  on  my  horse  at  the  north  end  of  the  town,  so  you  need  not  inquire 
after  me.  I  do  not  desire  it  to  be  known  that  I  am  absent  from  this  point.  .  .  . 
Say  to  those  who  come  on  this  side  (the  lines)  that  for  a  few  days  they  will 
have  to  remain  on  this  side,  as  no  one  is  permitted  to  pass  the  lines  to  the 
enemy's  side."     (See  Col.  Munford's  Paper.) 

^  See  Federal  official  telegrams,  adjutant-general's  office,  Washington. 

*  McDowell's  testimony.  Report  on  Conduct  of  the  War,  Part  I.  p.  275. 

*  The  division  that  McDowell  had  left  at  Fredericksburg  (McCall's)  was  sent 
to  McClellan,  but  the  other  three  divisions  were  retained,  and  became  later  in 
the  summer  a  part  of  Gen.  John  Pope's  "  Army  of  Virginia."' 


CROSS  KEFS  AND   PORT  REPUBLIC.  171 

began  to  march,  and,  wliile  Banks,  Fremont,  and  McDoAvell  were 
di.si>osing  their  broken  or  baffled  forces  to  cover  Washington,  liastened 
to  throw  his  sword  into  the  scale  in  that  great  series  of  battles  which, 
during  the  last  days  of  June  and  the  early  ones  in  July,  resulted  in 
the  defeat  of  McClellan's  army  and  the  relief  of  the  Confederate 
capital. 

But  here  our  present  work  ends.  Brilliant  as  were  the  achieve- 
ments of  Gen.  Jackson  during  the  succeeding  months  of  his  too  brief 
career,  it  was  his  Valley  campaign  which  first  lifted  him  into  great 
fame ;  nor  do  any  of  his  subsequent  deeds  show  more  strikingly  the 
characteristics  of  his  genius. 


N  O  T  E. 


The  following  is  a  list  of  the  officers  who  served  during  parts,  or  during  the 
whole  of  the  Valley  campaign  on  Gen.  Jackson's  staflf.  They  were  not  all  on 
duty  at  the  same  time,  but  from  the  loss  of  the  order  books  of  the  command  the 
dates  of  assignment  and  the  periods  of  service  are  in  many  cases  not  known. 


As  Adjutant^General: 


As  Assistant  Adjutant-General : 
As  Inspector-General : 


As  Chief  of  Artillery  : 

As  Assistant  to  Chief  of  Artillery 

As  Engineer: 

As  Topographical  Engineer : 

As  Medical  Director : 

As  Acting  Medical  Director  : 

As  Ordnance  Officer : 


As  Chief  Quartermaster : 

As  Acting  Chief  Quartermaster; 


As  Chief  Commissary:. 
As  Aide-de-Camp : 


(Volunteer) 


Lieut.-Col.  J.  T.  L.  Preston  (to  February 

1,  1862). 
Maj.  A.  H.  Jackson. 
Maj.  R.  L.  Dabney  (assigned  April  2-i, 

1862). 
Lieut.  A.  S.  Pendleton. 
Lieut.-Col.  W.  S.  11.  Baylor  (to  April  24, 

1862). 
Col.  A.  Smead. 
Lieut.  H.  Kyd  Douglas. 
Maj.  D.  Trueheart. 
Lieut.-Col.  S.  Crutchfield. 
Lieut.  Ed.  Willis. 
Lieut.  J.  K.  Boswell. 
Mr.  Jed.  Ilotchkiss. 
Surgeon  Hunter  McGuire. 
Surgeon  II.  Black. 
Lieut.  Jas.  M.  Garnett. 
Lieut.  II.  H.  Lee. 
Lieut.  R.  II.  Meade. 
Maj.  John  A.  Harman. 
Lieut.-Col.  M.  G.  Harman  (in  January, 

1862). 
Capt.  T.  R.  Sharp  (in  January,  1862). 
Maj.  Wells  J.  Hawks. 
Lieut.  A.  S.  Pendleton  (throughout  the 

campaign). 
Lieut.  George  G.  Junkin. 
Col.  Charles  J.  Faulkeuer. 
Col.  W.  L.  Jackson. 


172 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Attack  on  Hancock  and  Cacapon  bridge.     22 
Attack  of  Federals  at  Hanging  Rock...     23 

Advance  of  Jackson  to  Kernstown 45 

Advance    of    Federals    to    Edenburg, 

April  1 58 

Affair  with  Rockingham  militia 60 

Advance  of  the  Confederates  to  McDow- 
ell      73 

Advance  of  Jackson  to  Franklin 80 

Attack  on  Federal  train  near  Middle- 
town 102 

Advance  of  Jackson  towards  Harper's 

Ferry 124 

Attack  on  Confederate  rear  guard 136 

Ashby  covering  the  rear,  June  2 138 

Attack   of   Col.   Wyndham   on   Ashby, 

June  6 140 

Attack  of  Gen.  Bayard  and  death  of 

Ashby 142 

Advance  of  Shields  towards  Port  Re- 
public   148 

Bath  occupied  by  Federals 14 

Battle  of  Camp  Alleghany {note)     17 

Bath  occupied  by  Confederates 21 

Banks  advances  across  the  Potomac 36 

Battle  of  Kernstown 46-53 

Burial  of  dead  after  Kernstown 54 

Blenker's  division  detached  from  Mc- 

Clellan 56 

Banks  thinks  Jackson  has  left  the  Val- 
ley   (uote)     62 

Battle  of  McDowell 74-79 

Banks's  position  and  plans  after  rout 

of  Kenly 99,  100 

Battle  of  Winchester 110-114 

Bridge  at  Conrad's  Store  burnt 139 

Battle  of  Cross  Keys 152-156 

Battle  of  Port  Republic 158-163 

Bridge  at  Port  Republic  burnt 161 

Cutshaw's   (Col.)   account  of  affair   at 

Hanging  Rock (note)     24 


PAGE 

Confederate  disasters  in  Februai-y 35 

Copeland's    (Maj.)    report    of    Kerns- 
town  (note)     52 

Confederate  conscription 60 

Capture  of  a  company  of  Ashby's  cav- 
alry, April  17 61 

Condition  of  affairs  on  evening  of  May 

30 131 

Destruction   of    property   at   Hanging 

Rock 25 

Departments  of  the   Shenandoah   and 

Rappahannock (note)     57 

Dispersion  of  Kenly's  command 96 

Dispersion  of  Hatch's  cavalry  near  Mid- 

dletown 104 

Death  of  Gen.  Turner  Ashby 142 

Dash  of  Col.  Carroll  into  Port  Republic.  149 

Expedition  against  Dam  No.  5 16,  17 

Evacuation  of  Romney  by  Federals 26 

Evacuation  of  AVinchester  by  Confed- 
erates, March  12 40,  41 

Ewell's  advance  along  Front  Royal  road.  107 
Effects  of  Banks's  defeat  on  McDowell 

and  McClellan 122 

Fall  of  Fort  Sumter  and   secession  of 

Virginia 10 

First  battle  of  Manassas (note)     11 

Fight  at  Bloomery  gap 34 

Federal  plan  of  campaign  in  Virginia...     42 

Fremont's  plan  of  campaign {note)  66,  67 

Fight  at  Summersville 86 

Fight  at  Front  Royal,  May  23 93-96 

Fight  at  Buckton 98 

Fight  with  Federal  rear  guard  at  New- 
town    107 

Federal  troops  hurried  forward  to  Har- 
per's Ferry 125 

Fight  at  Charlestown 125 

Fremont's  and  McDowell's  movements. 

May  31  and  June  1 134 

173 


174 


INDEX. 


Fremont's  description  of  the  field  at 

Port  Republic {note)  163 

Garnet  (Gen,  Robert  S.),  death  of. 13 

Gordon's  (Gen.  G.  H.)  account  of  the 

retreat  from  Strasburg {note)  10 

Instructions  to  Jackson  early  in  March.  38 

Jackson's  entrance  into  the  war 10 

Jackson  ordered  to  Harper's  Ferry 11 

Johnston's  (Gen.  J.  E.)  march  to  Ma- 
nassas   11 

Jackson,  major-general  and  assigned  to 

Valley  district 12 

Jackson's    plan    of    campaign    against 

West  Virginia 14 

Johnson's    (Brig.-Gen.    Edward)    com- 
mand  {note)  15 

Jackson's  notions  of  discipline....(no<e)  15 
Jackson's  letter  asking  for  Gen.  Edward 

Johnson's  forces 18 

Jackson's  report  of  Hanging  Rock.(fio<e)  24 
Jackson  relinquishes  movement  against 

New  Creek 27 

Jackson  goes  into  winter  quarters 28 

Jackson's  letter  to  Hon.  J.  P.  Benja- 
min, January  20 {note)  28 

Jackson  resigns  his  command 30 

Johnston's  (Gen.  J.  E.)  letter  to  Jack- 
son on  his  resignation {note)  30   i 

Jackson's  letter  to  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston, 

February  24 37 

Johnston's  retreat  from  Manassas 38 

Jackson's  first  and  last  council  of  war. 

{jwte) 41 

Jackson,  night  after  Kernstown...(»io<e)  64 
Jackson's  action  about  Dunkards,  etc. 

{note) 59 

Jackson  camps  at  foot  of  Swift  Run 

gap 61 

Jackson's  position  at  Swift  Run  gap 63 

Jackson's  letter  to  Gen.  Lee  from  Swift 

Run  gap {note)  63 

Jackson's  plan  of  campaign 68 

Jackson  reaches  Staunton,  May  4 71 

Jackson's  march  against  Banks 91 

Jackson's  plans  for  May  24 102 

Jackson's  order  to  his  troops  after  Win- 
chester   124 

Jackson's  plans  for  June  9 157 

Jackson's  camp  at  Mount  Meridian 165 

Jackson's  order  to  his  troops,  June  13..  165 

Kelly,  Gen.,  occupies  Romney 13 


Lee  (Gen.  R.  E.)  sent  to  command  in 

West  Virginia 13 

Loring  (Gen.)  joins  Jackson 15 

Letcher  (Gov.),  action  in  regard  to  Jack- 
son's resignation 32 

Losses  of  Confederates  and  Federals  at 

Kernstown 53 

Lee's  (Gen.  R.  E.)  reply  to  request  for 

troops 65 

Lee's  instructions  to  Jackson  and  Ewell 

early  in  May 88 

Losses  of  Confederates  and  Federals  at 

Front  Royal  and  Cedarville 97 

Losses  of  Banks  at  Winchester.... (iio<e)  117 

Losses  of  Confederates  and  Federals  at 

Cross  Keys 156 

Losses  of  Confederates  and  Federals  at 

Port  Republic 162 

Lee's  letter  of  June  8  to  Jackson. .(>io^e)  165 

Lee's  letters  of  June  11  and  16  to  Jack- 
son  {note)  168 

Movement   of  Jackson    against    Bath 

and  Romney 20 

March  from  Bath  to  Unger's 23 

McClellan's  (Gen.)  plan  of  campaign...     35 
McCleilan's     instructions     to     Banks, 

March  16 43 

Mountain  Department  (limits  of). .(note)     55 
McDowell's  corps  detached   from   Mc- 

Clellan 57 

McClellan's  instructions  to  Banks  after 

Kernstown {note)     56 

McDowell's  (Gen.  Irwin)  movements  in 

A])ril So 

Maryland  line {note)     91 

McDowell's  march  on  Richmond  coun- 
termanded    119 

Militia  called  out  by  northern  Gover- 
nors  {note)  121 

McDowell's  and  Fremont's  movements 

towards  Jackson's  rear 127 

Organization  of  militia  in  the  Valley  of 

Virginia 15 

Organization  of  Ashby's  cavalry 15 

Organization  of  Gen.  Loring's  forces....  18 

Occupation  of  Romncj'  by  Jackson 26 

Opequon  church {note)  49 

Order  of  May  27  to  McDowell  to  move 

on  Richmond 87 

Organization  of  Confederates  at  Win- 
chester  {note)  110 

Organization  of  Fremont,  June  8. .(note)  151 

Organization  of  Ewell (note)  153 


INDEX. 


175 


PAGE 

Plans  of  Gen.  Rosecrans,  January,  1862.  19 
Plans  of  Gen.  Lander,  January,  1862...  20 
Position  of  Jackson's  forces,  January  10, 

1862 (note)     25 

Position  of  Federal  troops  about  March 

6 ...{note)     36 

Position  of  Ewell  and  Edward  John- 
son at  end  of  April 66 

Position  of  Milroy  and  Schenck  at  end 

of  April 66,  67 

Position  of  Federals  at  middle  of  May.  86 
President   Lincoln's   telegrams  to  Mc- 

Clellan,  May  25... 120 

Precautions  to  deceive  the  Federals 169 

Reoccupation  of  Romney  by  Federals...     34 

Results  of  battle  of  Kernstown 55 

Retreat  of  Jackson  from  Rude's  Hill...     61 

Route  of  Jackson  against  Milroy 69 

Return  of  Jackson  from  Franklin 81 

Results  of  victory  at  Winchester,  etc....  116 
Railroads  in  United   States   taken  for 

military  purposes {note)  121 

Retreat  of  Jackson  to  Harper's  Ferry...  130 
Reoccupation  of  Front  Royal  by  Shields  130 
Retreat  of  Jackson   from  Winchester, 

May  31 132 

Retreat  of   Jackson    from    Strasburg, 

June  1 135 

Retreat  of  Jackson  towards  Port  Re- 
public   139 

Recapture  of  the  bridge  of  Port  Repub- 
lic    150 

Resume  of  the  campaign 166 

Strength  of  Jackson's  forces,  November 

and  December,  1861 {note)     15 

Strength  of  Jackson's  forces,  January 

10,  1862 {note)     18 

Strength  of  Banks,  January,  1862 19 

Strength  of  Rosecrans,  January,  1862..     19 

Strength  of  Jackson,  March  1 39 

Strength  of  Banks,  March  2 {note)     40 

Strength  of  Banks,  April  1 39 

Strength  and  organization  of  Jackson 

at  Kernstown 47 

Strength   and   organization  of  Shields 

at  Kernstown {note)     48 

Strength   of    Federal   troops   covering 

Washington 57 

Strength  of  Gen.  Edward  Johnson  in 

March,  1862 {note)     66 


PAGE 

Strength   of   Milroy    and    Schenck    in 

April,  1862 66 

Strength  of  Fremont {note)     66 

Strength  of  Jackson  at  end  of  April 68 

Strength  of  Banks  at  end  of  April 69 

Strength  and  losses  of  Jackson  at  Mc- 
Dowell  77,  78 

Strength    and    losses    of    Milroy    and 

Schenck  at  McDowell  77,  78 

Strength   and   organization   of  Ewell's 

division 91 

Strength  of  Confederates,  May  2\...{note)  92 
Strength  and  position  of  Banks's  force. 

May  23 {note)     93 

Strength  and  organization  of  Banks  at 

Winchester {note)  109 

Stampede  of  Gens.  Geary  and  Duryea 

{note)  120 
Strength  of  Jackson  and  his  enemies. 

May  30 127 

Sketch  of  Ashby 143 

Strength  of  Federals  and  Confederates, 

June  8 146 

Shields's  despatch  to  Fremont,  June  8 

{note)   151 
Strength  of  Ewell  and  Fremont  at  Cross 

Keys {note)  156 

Strength  of  Federal  forces  and  Winder's 

brigade,  June  9 {note)  159 

Shields's  and  Fremont's  retreat 164 

Transfer  of  main  Confederate  army  to 

Peninsula 62 

Transfer  of  Shields  to  McDowell 85 

Topography  of  the  Valley  of  Virginia..     89 
Trimble's  (Gen.  I.  R.)  reminiscences  of 

battle  of  Winchester 128 

Topography  of  the  vicinity  of  Port  Re- 
public   145 

Trimble's   description   of  fight  on   his 

front,  June  8 {note)  154 

Valley  district,  limits  of. 19 

Withdrawal  of  Federals  from  Stras- 
burg, March  21 44 

Withdrawal  of  Milroy's  advance  to  Mc- 
Dowell      72 

Withdrawal  of  Banks  from  Harrison- 
burg  .^ 86 

Whitehouse     and     Columbia     bridges 

burnt 137 


